This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TimeBalance: Temporally-Invariant and Temporally-Distinctive Video
Representations for Semi-Supervised Action Recognition
Ishan Rajendrakumar Dave, Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Chen Chen, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA
{ishandave, nayeemrizve}@knights.ucf.edu, {chen.chen, shah}@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Learning can be more beneficial for the
video domain compared to images because of its higher annotation cost and dimensionality. Besides, any video understanding task requires reasoning over both spatial and
temporal dimensions. In order to learn both the static
and motion related features for the semi-supervised action recognition task, existing methods rely on hard input inductive biases like using two-modalities (RGB and
Optical-flow) or two-stream of different playback rates.
Instead of utilizing unlabeled videos through diverse input streams, we rely on self-supervised video representations, particularly, we utilize temporally-invariant and
temporally-distinctive representations. We observe that
these representations complement each other depending on
the nature of the action. Based on this observation, we
propose a student-teacher semi-supervised learning framework, TimeBalance, where we distill the knowledge from a
temporally-invariant and a temporally-distinctive teacher.
Depending on the nature of the unlabeled video, we dynamically combine the knowledge of these two teachers based on a novel temporal similarity-based reweighting scheme. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on three action recognition benchmarks: UCF101,
HMDB51, and Kinetics400. Code: https://github.
com/DAVEISHAN/TimeBalance.

1. Introduction
Recent development in action recognition have opened
up a wide range of real-world applications: visual security
systems [19, 50, 56], behavioral studies [35], sports analytics [46], elderly person fall detection systems [10, 49, 85],
etc. Most of these developments are mainly courtesy of
large-scale curated datasets like Kinetics [12], HVU [21],
and HACS [87]. However, labeling such a massive video
dataset requires an enormous amount of annotation time
and human effort. At the same time, there is a vast

amount of unlabeled videos available on the internet. The
goal of semi-supervised action recognition is to use such
large-scale unlabeled dataset to provide additional supervision along with the labeled supervision of the small-scale
dataset.
Semi-supervised learning for image classification has
seen tremendous progress in recent years [1, 57, 63, 68].
In semi-supervised action recognition, recent approaches
have adapted these image-based methods by incorporating motion-related inductive biases into the setup. For
instance, some methods [77, 79] use two different input
modalities where the original RGB video promotes learning appearance-based features while optical flow/temporal
gradients promotes learning of motion-centric features. Another set of methods uses input streams of different sampling rates to achieve this [64, 70]. Although these inputlevel inductive biases are simple-yet-very-effective to provide unlabeled supervision for action recognition, they are
not suitable for large-scale datasets due to their multiplicative storage requirement and high preprocessing overhead.
Contrastive Self-supervised Learning (CSL) has
emerged as a powerful technique to learn meaningful
representations from unlabeled videos. Existing video CSL
methods deal with mainly two different kinds of objectives: (1) Learning similarities across clips of the same
video i.e temporally-invariant representations [29, 53, 55]
(2) Learning differences across clips of the video i.e.
temporally-distinctive representations [18, 36, 75]. Each
objective has its own advantages, depending on the nature
of the unlabeled videos being used.
Our experiments reveal a clear difference in the classwise performance of both methods, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The right half of the figure shows the action classes where
the temporally-invariant model is dominant. We can observe that all such action classes are atomic actions with
high repetitions, e.g., Fencing, Knitting. Any two
clips from such videos are highly similar, hence, increasing
agreement between them i.e. learning temporal-invariant
representation is more meaningful. The left half of the figure shows action classes where temporally-distinctive rep-

2341

