This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIEDOB: Semantic Image Editing by Disentangling Object and Background
Wuyang Luo1
1

Su Yang1B

Xinjian Zhang1

Weishan Zhang2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{wyluo18, suyang}@fudan.edu.cn
2

School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum

Abstract
Semantic image editing provides users with a flexible
tool to modify a given image guided by a corresponding segmentation map. In this task, the features of the
foreground objects and the backgrounds are quite different. However, all previous methods handle backgrounds
and objects as a whole using a monolithic model. Consequently, they remain limited in processing content-rich
images and suffer from generating unrealistic objects and
texture-inconsistent backgrounds. To address this issue,
we propose a novel paradigm, Semantic Image Editing
by Disentangling Object and Background (SIEDOB), the
core idea of which is to explicitly leverages several heterogeneous subnetworks for objects and backgrounds. First,
SIEDOB disassembles the edited input into background
regions and instance-level objects. Then, we feed them
into the dedicated generators. Finally, all synthesized
parts are embedded in their original locations and utilize
a fusion network to obtain a harmonized result. Moreover, to produce high-quality edited images, we propose
some innovative designs, including Semantic-Aware SelfPropagation Module, Boundary-Anchored Patch Discriminator, and Style-Diversity Object Generator, and integrate them into SIEDOB. We conduct extensive experiments on Cityscapes and ADE20K-Room datasets and exhibit that our method remarkably outperforms the baselines, especially in synthesizing realistic and diverse objects
and texture-consistent backgrounds. Code is available at
https://github.com/WuyangLuo/SIEDOB.

1. Introduction
Semantic image editing has recently gained significant
traction due to its diverse applications, including adding, altering, or removing objects and controllably inpainting, outpainting, or repainting images. Existing methods have made
impressive progress benefiting from Generative AdversarB Corresponding author

Input

SESAME

ASSET

SPMPGAN

SIEDOB

Figure 1. Existing methods struggle to deal with the compound of
backgrounds and several overlapping objects in a complex scene.
They generate distorted objects and texturally inconsistent backgrounds. The proposed method can cope well with this input.

ial Networks (GAN) [5, 14] and have demonstrated promising results in relatively content-simple scenes, such as landscapes. However, they still suffer from inferior results for
content-rich images with multiple discrepant objects, such
as cityscapes or indoor rooms. This paper aims to improve
editing performance in complex real-world scenes.
When image editing experts deal with a complex task,
they decompose the input image into multiple independent and disparate elements and handle them with different
skills. For example, when editing a photo with a congested
road, they process the cars and pedestrians individually and
then fill in the background. Inspired by this spirit, we propose a heterogeneous editing model, which mimics the experience of human experts and explicitly splits the compound content into two distinct components: Backgrounds
and objects. The background has no regular shape and may
span a large area. More importantly, the re-generated background’s texture and the existing area must be consistent.
Foregrounds objects are class-specific and appear anywhere
with various scales. Due to the significant differences between the two components, it is necessary to disentangle
them from the input and process them with different networks.
Several recent works [23, 28, 32] have been dedicated to
this task. SESAME [32] proposes a new pair of generator and discriminator based on the cGAN framework [31],
which generates edited content through a single-shot inference. ASSET [23] builds a transformer-based architecture with a sparse attention mechanism and synthesizes

1868

