This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeSTSeg: Segmentation Guided Denoising Student-Teacher for Anomaly
Detection
Xuan Zhang1 ,

Shiyu Li2 , Xi Li2 , Ping Huang2 , Jiulong Shan2 ,
1
2
Tsinghua University
Apple

x-zhang18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,

Ting Chen1

{shiyu li, weston li, huang ping, jlshan}@apple.com,

tingchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual anomaly detection, an important problem in computer vision, is usually formulated as a one-class classification and segmentation task. The student-teacher (S-T)
framework has proved to be effective in solving this challenge. However, previous works based on S-T only empirically applied constraints on normal data and fused multilevel information. In this study, we propose an improved
model called DeSTSeg, which integrates a pre-trained
teacher network, a denoising student encoder-decoder, and
a segmentation network into one framework. First, to
strengthen the constraints on anomalous data, we introduce a denoising procedure that allows the student network to learn more robust representations. From synthetically corrupted normal images, we train the student network to match the teacher network feature of the same images without corruption. Second, to fuse the multi-level S-T
features adaptively, we train a segmentation network with
rich supervision from synthetic anomaly masks, achieving a
substantial performance improvement. Experiments on the
industrial inspection benchmark dataset demonstrate that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance, 98.6%
on image-level AUC, 75.8% on pixel-level average precision, and 76.4% on instance-level average precision.

1. Introduction
Visual anomaly detection (AD) with localization is an
essential task in many computer vision applications such
as industrial inspection [24, 36], medical disease screening
[27, 32], and video surveillance [18, 20]. The objective of
these tasks is to identify both corrupted images and anomalous pixels in corrupted images. As anomalous samples occur rarely, and the number of anomaly types is enormous,
it is unlikely to acquire enough anomalous samples with all
possible anomaly types for training. Therefore, AD tasks
were usually formulated as a one-class classification and

segmentation, using only normal data for model training.
The student-teacher (S-T) framework, known as knowledge distillation, has proven effective in AD [3, 9, 26, 31,
33]. In this framework, a teacher network is pre-trained
on a large-scale dataset, such as ImageNet [10], and a
student network is trained to mimic the feature representations of the teacher network on an AD dataset with normal samples only. The primary hypothesis is that the student network will generate different feature representations
from the teacher network on anomalous samples that have
never been encountered in training. Consequently, anomalous pixels and images can be recognized in the inference
phase. Notably, [26, 31] applied knowledge distillation
at various levels of the feature pyramid so that discrepancies from multiple layers were aggregated and demonstrated
good performance. However, there is no guarantee that the
features of anomalous samples are always different between
S-T networks because there is no constraint from anomalous samples during the training. Even with anomalies, the
student network may be over-generalized [22] and output
similar feature representations as those by the teacher network. Furthermore, aggregating discrepancies from multilevel in an empirical way, such as sum or product, could be
suboptimal. For instance, in the MVTec AD dataset under
the same context of [31], we observe that for the category of
transistor, employing the representation from the last layer,
with 88.4% on pixel-level AUC, outperforms that from the
multi-level features, with 81.9% on pixel-level AUC.
To address the problem mentioned above, we propose
DeSTSeg, illustrated in Fig. 1, which consists of a denoising student network, a teacher network, and a segmentation network. We introduce random synthetic anomalies
into the normal images and then use these corrupted images1 for training. The denoising student network takes
a corrupted image as input, whereas the teacher network
takes the original clean image as input. During training,
1 All samples shown in this paper are licensed under the CC BY-NC-SA

4.0.

3914

