This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuralLift-360: Lifting An In-the-wild 2D Photo to A 3D Object with 360° Views
Dejia Xu, Yifan Jiang, Peihao Wang, Zhiwen Fan, Yi Wang, Zhangyang Wang
VITA Group, University of Texas at Austin
{dejia,atlaswang}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Virtual reality and augmented reality (XR) bring increasing demand for 3D content generation. However, creating
high-quality 3D content requires tedious work from a human expert. In this work, we study the challenging task of
lifting a single image to a 3D object and, for the first time,
demonstrate the ability to generate a plausible 3D object
with 360◦ views that corresponds well with the given reference image. By conditioning on the reference image, our
model can fulfill the everlasting curiosity for synthesizing
novel views of objects from images. Our technique sheds
light on a promising direction of easing the workflows for
3D artists and XR designers. We propose a novel framework, dubbed NeuralLift-360, that utilizes a depth-aware
neural radiance representation (NeRF) and learns to craft
the scene guided by denoising diffusion models. By introducing a ranking loss, our NeuralLift-360 can be guided
with rough depth estimation in the wild. We also adopt
a CLIP-guided sampling strategy for the diffusion prior to
provide coherent guidance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our NeuralLift-360 significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art baselines. Project page: https:
//vita-group.github.io/NeuralLift-360/

1. Introduction
Creating 3D content has been a long-standing problem
in computer vision. This problem enables various applications in game studios, home decoration, virtual reality, and
augmented reality. Over the past few decades, the manual
task has dominated real scenarios, which requires tedious
professional expert modeling. Modern artists rely on special software tools (e.g., Blender, Maya3D, 3DS Max, etc.)
and time-demanding manual adjustments to realize imaginations and transform them into virtual objects. Meanwhile, automatic 3D content creation pipelines serve as effective tools to facilitate human efforts. These pipelines typically capture hundreds of images and leverage multi-view
stereo [71] to quickly model fine-grained virtual landscapes.
More recently, researchers have started aiming at a more

ambitious goal, to create a 3D object from a single image [9, 10, 12, 21, 27, 51, 66, 68]. This enables broad applications since it greatly reduces the prerequisite to a minimal request. Existing approaches can be mainly categorized into two major directions. One line of work utilizes
learning priors from large-scale datasets with multi-view
images [10,21,51,66,68]. These approaches usually learn a
conditional neural network to predict 3D information based
on input images. However, due to their poor generalization
ability, drastic performance degradation is observed when
the testing image is out-of-distribution.
Another direction constructs the pipeline on top of the
depth estimation techniques [65]. Under the guidance of
monocular depth estimation networks [43, 44], the 2D image is firstly back-projected to a 3D data format (e.g., point
cloud or multi-plane image) and then re-projected into novel
views. After that, advanced image inpainting techniques
are then adopted to fill missing holes [52] produced during
the projection. However, most of them can be highly affected by the quality of the estimated depth maps. Though
LeRes [73] attempted to rectify the predicted depth by refining the projected 3D point cloud, their results do not generalize well to an arbitrary image in the wild. Overall, the
aforementioned approaches are either adopted in limited
scenarios (e.g. face or toy examples [4, 75]), or only produce limited viewing directions [8, 70] when being applied
to scenes in the wild. Different from all these approaches,
we focus on a more challenging task and for the first time,
show promising results by lifting a single in-the-wild image into a 3D object with 360◦ novel views.
Attracted by the dramatic progress of neural volumetric rendering on 3D reconstruction tasks, we consider
building our framework based on Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [35]. The original NeRF takes hundreds of training
views and their camera poses as inputs to learn an implicit
representation. Subsequent models dedicate tremendous efforts [8, 19, 70, 75] to apply NeRF to sparse training views.
The most similar work [70] to our method proposes to optimize a NeRF using only a single image and its corresponding depth map. However, it renders limited views from a
small range of angles, and the prerequisite of a high-quality

4479

