This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NLOST: Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging with Transformer
Yue Li* Jiayong Peng* Juntian Ye Yueyi Zhang Feihu Xu Zhiwei Xiong†
University of Science and Technology of China
{yueli65,jiayong,jt141884}@mail.ustc.edu.cn {zhyuey,feihuxu,zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Time-resolved non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is
based on the multi-bounce indirect reflections from the hidden objects for 3D sensing. Reconstruction from NLOS
measurements remains challenging especially for complicated scenes. To boost the performance, we present NLOST,
the first transformer-based neural network for NLOS reconstruction. Specifically, after extracting the shallow features
with the assistance of physics-based priors, we design two
spatial-temporal self attention encoders to explore both local and global correlations within 3D NLOS data by splitting or downsampling the features into different scales, respectively. Then, we design a spatial-temporal cross attention decoder to integrate local and global features in the
token space of transformer, resulting in deep features with
high representation capabilities. Finally, deep and shallow
features are fused to reconstruct the 3D volume of hidden
scenes. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method over existing
solutions on both synthetic data and real-world data captured by different NLOS imaging systems.

1. Introduction
Traditional imaging methods mainly focus on recovering information in line-of-sight scenarios, where there are
no obstacles on the direct light path between the target and
the camera. In contrast, non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging
targets recovering the hidden scene beyond the direct line
of the cameras’ sight, where a diffuse relay surface scatters the light from the scene with dramatic loss. Recently,
NLOS imaging has brought tremendous revolutions to autonomous driving [2, 20, 35], disaster rescue [18, 43], and
medical diagnosis [27].
The time-of-flight (ToF) based imaging scheme is a common configuration in NLOS [9,14,21, 29,36], where a laser
source projects a short-pulse light to the relay wall. The
light propagates from the relay wall to the hidden object,
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

then reflects back to the relay wall and is finally captured
with a time-resolved single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD)
detector. The hidden volume could be reconstructed by
modeling the three bounces of the traveling light, achieving “seeing around corners”.
Existing NLOS reconstruction algorithms have achieved
decent results, but are still confronted with great challenges.
Methods based on filter back projection [17, 41] or light
path transport [13, 14, 29] often impose restrictive conditions, such as an ideal diffuse surface and no occlusions behind the wall, resulting in detailed texture loss and heavy
noise. Methods based on wave propagation [21, 24] are
sensitive to the depth range of hidden objects, making distant regions indistinct. Recently, deep-learning-based methods [9, 10, 28, 36] have been introduced to NLOS reconstruction with improved detailed textures and geometries.
However, there still remains a large room for boosting their
performance on complicated scenes and generalization capabilities toward different real-world systems.
Inspired by the success of transformer [25, 40] in a variety of vision tasks including 3D reconstruction [7, 19,
39, 42, 45], we propose the first transformer-based method
for NLOS reconstruction, termed as NLOST. Our method
leverages the powerful representation capability of the
transformer for capturing local and global spatial-temporal
correlations in 3D NLOS measurements. Specifically, to
exploit these correlations, we design an end-to-end neural network with two elaborate attention mechanisms tailored for NLOS reconstruction. The network first extracts
the shallow features from the NLOS measurements with a
feature extractor incorporating physics-based priors. Then,
two spatial-temporal self attention encoders built on transformers are proposed to extract local and global information
from the shallow features, respectively. For the local encoder, the input features are split into patches, and the local
information is exploited in each patch along the spatial and
temporal dimensions, successively. For the global encoder,
the input features are downsampled to a smaller scale, and
the global information is exploited along spatial and temporal dimensions in the whole feature space. The complementary local and global information is further integrated with

13313

