This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breaching FedMD: Image Recovery via Paired-Logits Inversion Attack
Hideaki Takahashi*

Abstract
Federated Learning with Model Distillation (FedMD)
is a nascent collaborative learning paradigm, where only
output logits of public datasets are transmitted as distilled
knowledge, instead of passing on private model parameters
that are susceptible to gradient inversion attacks, a known
privacy risk in federated learning. In this paper, we found
that even though sharing output logits of public datasets is
safer than directly sharing gradients, there still exists a substantial risk of data exposure caused by carefully designed
malicious attacks. Our study shows that a malicious server
can inject a PLI (Paired-Logits Inversion) attack against
FedMD and its variants by training an inversion neural network that exploits the confidence gap between the server
and client models. Experiments on multiple facial recognition datasets validate that under FedMD-like schemes, by
using paired server-client logits of public datasets only, the
malicious server is able to reconstruct private images on all
tested benchmarks with a high success rate.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [28] is a distributed learning
paradigm, where each party sends the gradients or parameters of its locally trained model to a centralized server that
learns a global model with the aggregated gradients/parameters. While this process allows clients to hide their private datasets, a malicious server can still manage to reconstruct private data (only visible to individual client) from
the shared gradients/parameter, exposing serious privacy
risks [30, 43, 49].
One effective solution against such attacks is Federated
Learning with Model Distillation (FedMD) [21], where
each party uses both its private data and a public dataset
for local training and sends its predicted logits on the public
* The University of Tokyo
takahashi-hideaki567@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
† Institute
for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University,
jjliu@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
‡ Corresponding Author,
Institute for AI Industry Research,
Tsinghua University, Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
liuy03@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jingjing Liu†

Yang Liu‡

dataset (termed public knowledge) to the server, who then
performs aggregation and sends the aggregated logits back
to each party for next iteration. Therefore, in FedMD, the
server can only access the predicted logits on public dataset,
thus preventing leakage from gradients or parameters and
retaining data and model heterogeneity with low communication cost [26]. Prior work [4, 14, 18, 26, 29] suggests
that FedMD is a viable defense to the original FL framework, and many studies [4, 6, 14, 21, 24] consider FedMD
as a suitable solution to solving real-life problems. This has
catalyzed a broad application of FedMD-like schemes [5,6]
in industrial scenarios [16, 18, 25, 29, 37, 46, 47].
Despite its popularity, few studies have investigated the
safety of sharing public knowledge in FedMD. Contrary
to the common belief that FedMD is reliably safe, we
found that it is actually vulnerable to serious privacy threats,
where an adversary can reconstruct a party’s private data
via shared public knowledge only. Such a reconstruction
attack is nontrivial, since to guarantee that the adversary
recovers its private data strictly from public knowledge
only, the attack needs to follow two inherent principles:
Knowledge-decoupling and Gradient-free. ‘Gradient-free’
means that the adversary can recover private data without access to gradients. ‘Knowledge-decoupling’ means
that the attack ‘decouples’ private information from learned
knowledge on public data only, and directly recovers private
data. However, existing inversion attacks [11, 42, 49] fail to
meet the ‘knowledge-decoupling’ requirement as they do
not consider the case where the target model is trained on
both private and public datasets. Recent TBI [42] proposed
a gradient-free method with inversion network, but still relied on availability of private data (as shown in Tab. 1).
In this paper, we propose a novel Paired-Logits Inversion (PLI) attack that is both gradient-free and fully decouples private data from public knowledge. We observe that a
local model trained on private data will produce more confident predictions than a server model that has not seen the
private data, thus creating a ”confidence gap” between a
client’s logits and the server’s logits. Motivated by this,
we design a logit-based inversion neural network that exploits this confidence gap between the predicted logits from
an auxiliary server model and those from the client model
(paired-logits). Specifically, we first train an inversion neural network model based on public dataset. The input of the

12198

