This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CafeBoost: Causal Feature Boost to Eliminate Task-Induced Bias for Class
Incremental Learning
Benliu Qiu
Hongliang Li*
Haitao Wen
Heqian Qiu
Lanxiao Wang*
Fanman Meng
Qingbo Wu
Lili Pan
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{qbenliu, haitaowen, hqqiu, lanxiao.wang}@std.uestc.edu.cn
{hlli, fmmeng, qbwu}@uestc.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been widely applied in many fields
like computer vision, social media analytics, natural language processing, etc. The standard paradigm of deep
learning is to train models on a prepared dataset, of which
all data are accessible in the whole training stage. However,
in most real-world applications, a sequence of tasks arrives
incrementally, which requires models to learn continuously
from a new task, namely continual learning [27]. Despite
fine-tuning achieves this goal somewhat, such naı̈ve method
forgets obtained knowledge of previous tasks after learning
* Corresponding authors.

Prob.

Train
data

Train
data

Test
data

Test
data

Current Task

Previous Task

(a) Illustration of CIL
Elephant

A Task T

Leopard

T
Color

C1

C2

C1

C2

Stripe

(b) Task-induced bias between class features
A Task T
X

Prob.

Continual learning requires a model to incrementally
learn a sequence of tasks and aims to predict well on all
the learned tasks so far, which notoriously suffers from the
catastrophic forgetting problem. In this paper, we find a new
type of bias appearing in continual learning, coined as taskinduced bias. We place continual learning into a causal
framework, based on which we find the task-induced bias
is reduced naturally by two underlying mechanisms in task
and domain incremental learning. However, these mechanisms do not exist in class incremental learning (CIL), in
which each task contains a unique subset of classes. To
eliminate the task-induced bias in CIL, we devise a causal
intervention operation so as to cut off the causal path that
causes the task-induced bias, and then implement it as a
causal debias module that transforms biased features into
unbiased ones. In addition, we propose a training pipeline
to incorporate the novel module into existing methods and
jointly optimize the entire architecture. Our overall approach does not rely on data replay, and is simple and
convenient to plug into existing methods. Extensive empirical study on CIFAR-100 and ImageNet shows that our
approach can improve accuracy and reduce forgetting of
well-established methods by a large margin.

Prob.

Abstract

panlili8255@gmail.com

T

New classes

Old classes

Y

X

Y

(c) Task-induced bias between images and labels

Figure 1. Illustration of CIL, task-induced bias and their detrimental effects. (a) Illustration of CIL. (b) Task-induced bias between
class features. Two classes in a task are correlated by a task identifier. (c) Task-induced bias between images and labels. Images
and labels in a task are correlated by a task identifier. In (b)(c), the
first column describes perspectives of task-induced bias, the second shows the underlying causal effect causing task-induced bias,
and the last illustrates adverse influence of task-induced bias.

a new task, dubbed as catastrophic forgetting [18].
Much effort has been devoted as a remedy for alleviating
this problem in literature [2, 3, 11–14, 16, 33]. One general
direction is to preserve knowledge representations of previous tasks by knowledge distillation [10] and by storing a
few observed exemplars for replay [22]. [11] discovers the
class imbalance between old classes and new ones is a key
challenge of large-scale applications in class incremental
learning (CIL), in which classes of a new task never appear
in the previous tasks, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). [2,7,31,35]
all follow this direction and propose effective methods to
overcome the class imbalance. However, these methods ignore bias problems in continual learning. In this work, we

16016

