This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Source-Free Video Domain Adaptation with Spatial-Temporal-Historical
Consistency Learning
Kai Li, Deep Patel, Erik Kruus, Martin Renqiang Min
NEC Labs, America
{kaili,dpatel,kruus,renqiang}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) is an emerging
research topic that studies how to adapt a pretrained source
model using unlabeled target data. It is derived from unsupervised domain adaptation but has the advantage of not
requiring labeled source data to learn adaptive models.
This makes it particularly useful in real-world applications
where access to source data is restricted. While there has
been some SFDA work for images, little attention has been
paid to videos. Naively extending image-based methods to
videos without considering the unique properties of videos
often leads to unsatisfactory results. In this paper, we propose a simple and highly flexible method for Source-Free
Video Domain Adaptation (SFVDA), which extensively exploits consistency learning for videos from spatial, temporal, and historical perspectives. Our method is based on
the assumption that videos of the same action category are
drawn from the same low-dimensional space, regardless
of the spatio-temporal variations in the high-dimensional
space that cause domain shifts. To overcome domain shifts,
we simulate spatio-temporal variations by applying spatial
and temporal augmentations on target videos and encourage the model to make consistent predictions from a video
and its augmented versions. Due to the simple design, our
method can be applied to various SFVDA settings, and experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance for all the settings.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a crucial task in video understanding and has been receiving tremendous attention from the
vision community. In recent years, it has made significant
progress, primarily due to the development of deep learning
techniques [11, 43, 45] and the establishment of large-scale
annotated datasets [2, 13, 42]. However, it is acknowledged
that an action recognition model trained with annotated data
drawn from one distribution typically experiences a per-

formance drop when tested on out-of-distribution data [4].
This is the so-called domain shift problem.
To tackle this problem, Unsupervised Video Domain
Adaptation (UVDA) has been proposed. The goal is to
learn an adaptive model using labeled video data from one
domain (source) and unlabeled video data from another domain (target). Typical UVDA methods use videos from both
domains as input and train a model by minimizing the classification risk on labeled source videos and explicitly aligning videos from both domains in a class-agnostic fashion.
Although most image-based domain alignment techniques
can be applied to video domain alignment, such as adversarial learning [22, 37, 44], methods that align domains by
considering the richer temporal information in videos have
shown superior performance [6, 33, 36].
While UVDA methods help alleviate the domain shift
problem, their assumption that labeled source videos are
available for domain alignment can be problematic in realworld applications where access to source videos is restricted due to privacy or commercial reasons [24, 50]. This
motivates a new research topic, Source-Free Video Domain
Adaptation (SFVDA) [50], which aims to learn an adaptive action recognition model using unlabeled target videos
and a source model pre-trained with labeled source videos.
SFVDA is similar to UVDA in learning an adaptive model
using labeled source and unlabeled target videos but differs in that labeled source videos are only used for learning
the source model. Adaptation only involves target videos,
which avoids leaking annotated source videos. However,
the absence of labeled source videos makes SFVDA a more
challenging problem than UVDA since there is no reliable
supervision signal, and no data drawn from the distribution
to be aligned, which makes it even more challenging.
Very recently, Xu et al. [50] proposed a pioneering approach to SFVDA based on temporal consistency. They
adapt the source model by encouraging it to keep the capability of understanding motion dynamics despite domain
shifts. They train the model to produce features/predictions
for a video clip consistent with those of other clips within
the same video or that of the entire video. Despite im-

14643

