This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SECAD-Net: Self-Supervised CAD Reconstruction by Learning Sketch-Extrude
Operations
Pu Li1,2 Jianwei Guo1,2 * Xiaopeng Zhang1,2 Dong-Ming Yan1,2
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Figure 1. SECAD-Net for CAD reconstruction. Starting from a voxel grid (top), SECAD-Net learns Sketch-Extrude operations to
reconstruct CAD models (bottom), without any supervision of part segmentation and sketch labels.

Abstract
Reverse engineering CAD models from raw geometry
is a classic but strenuous research problem. Previous
learning-based methods rely heavily on labels due to the
supervised design patterns or reconstruct CAD shapes that
are not easily editable. In this work, we introduce SECADNet, an end-to-end neural network aimed at reconstructing
compact and easy-to-edit CAD models in a self-supervised
manner. Drawing inspiration from the modeling language
that is most commonly used in modern CAD software, we
propose to learn 2D sketches and 3D extrusion parameters from raw shapes, from which a set of extrusion cylinders can be generated by extruding each sketch from a 2D
plane into a 3D body. By incorporating the Boolean operation (i.e., union), these cylinders can be combined to
closely approximate the target geometry. We advocate the
use of implicit fields for sketch representation, which allows for creating CAD variations by interpolating latent
codes in the sketch latent space. Extensive experiments on
both ABC and Fusion 360 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, and show superiority over state-ofthe-art alternatives including the closely related method for
supervised CAD reconstruction. We further apply our ap* Corresponding author: jianwei.guo@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

proach to CAD editing and single-view CAD reconstruction. Code will be released at https://github.com/
BunnySoCrazy/SECAD-Net.

1. Introduction
CAD reconstruction is one of the most sought-after geometric modeling technologies, which plays a substantial
role in reverse engineering in case of the original design
document is missing or the CAD model of a real object is
not available. It empowers users to reproduce CAD models from other representations and supports the designer to
create new variations to facilitate various engineering and
manufacturing applications.
The advance in 3D scanning technologies has promoted
the paradigm shift from time-consuming and laborious
manual dimensions to automatic CAD reconstruction. A
typical line of works [3,6,35,47] first reconstructs a polygon
mesh from the scanned point cloud, then followed by mesh
segmentation and primitive extraction to obtain a boundary representation (B-rep). Finally, a CAD shape parser is
applied to convert the B-rep into a sequence of modeling
operations. Recently, inspired by the substantial success
of point set learning [1, 32, 49] and deep 3D representations [9, 28, 30], a number of methods have exploited neural

16816

