This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Chat2Map: Efficient Scene Mapping from Multi-Ego Conversations
Sagnik Majumder1,2,3 Hao Jiang2 Pierre Moulon2 Ethan Henderson2
Paul Calamia2 Kristen Grauman1,3 * Vamsi Krishna Ithapu2∗
1
UT Austin 2 Reality Labs Research, Meta 3 FAIR
Unmapped
3D scene

Abstract
Can conversational videos captured from multiple egocentric viewpoints reveal the map of a scene in a cost-efficient
way? We seek to answer this question by proposing a new
problem: efficiently building the map of a previously unseen 3D environment by exploiting shared information in
the egocentric audio-visual observations of participants in
a natural conversation. Our hypothesis is that as multiple people (“egos") move in a scene and talk among themselves, they receive rich audio-visual cues that can help
uncover the unseen areas of the scene. Given the high cost
of continuously processing egocentric visual streams, we
further explore how to actively coordinate the sampling of
visual information, so as to minimize redundancy and reduce power use. To that end, we present an audio-visual
deep reinforcement learning approach that works with our
shared scene mapper to selectively turn on the camera to efficiently chart out the space. We evaluate the approach using
a state-of-the-art audio-visual simulator for 3D scenes as
well as real-world video. Our model outperforms previous
state-of-the-art mapping methods, and achieves an excellent
cost-accuracy tradeoff. Project: http://vision.cs.
utexas.edu/projects/chat2map.

1. Introduction
The spatial layout of the environment around us is fundamental to understanding our physical context. By representing the walls, furniture, and other major structures in a
space, scene maps ground activity and objects in a persistent frame of reference, facilitating high-level reasoning for
many downstream applications in augmented reality (AR)
and robotics. For example, episodic memory [16, 28] aims to
relocalize lost objects observed in first-person video (where
are my keys?); floorplan estimation [10, 40, 47] aims to chart
out the area and shapes of complex buildings; navigating
agents try to discover routes in unfamiliar spaces [4, 11, 53].
While traditional computer vision approaches for mapping (e.g., visual SLAM) are highly effective when extensive
* Equal contribution

Scene
Occupancy Map

3
2

1

3
2

Legend

1

Free
Occupied

Ego 2’s observations
Ego 1’s observations
View
Speech
View1
Speech
1

View

Speech

View 2

Speech
2

View

Speech

View 3

Speech
3

Figure 1. Given egocentric audio-visual observations from multiple
people wearing AR glasses and moving and conversing (left), we
aim to accurately map the scene (right). To mitigate cost, our model
receives audio continuously but learns to selectively employ the ego
cameras only when the visual input is expected to be informative.

exposure to the environment is possible, in many real-world
scenarios only a fraction of the space is observed by the camera. Recent work shows the promise of sensing 3D spaces
with both sight and sound [8, 13, 24, 26, 52]: listening to
echoes bounce around the room can reveal the depth and
shape of surrounding surfaces, and even help extrapolate
a floorplan beyond the camera’s field of view or behind
occluded objects [52].
While we are inspired by these advances, they also have
certain limitations. Often systems will emit sounds (e.g., a
frequency sweep) into the environment to ping for spatial
information [1, 13, 14, 22, 26, 39, 52, 61], which is intrusive
if done around people. Furthermore, existing audio-visual
models assume that the camera is always on grabbing new
frames, which is wasteful if not intractable, particularly on
lightweight, low-power computing devices in AR settings.
We introduce Chat2Map, a new scene mapping task
aimed at eliminating these challenges. In the proposed setting, multiple people converse as they move casually through

10554

