This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VectorFusion: Text-to-SVG by Abstracting Pixel-Based Diffusion Models
Ajay Jain∗
Amber Xie∗
Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley {ajayj,amberxie,pabbeel}@berkeley.edu

Figure 1. Text-to-SVG with VectorFusion. When (a) raster graphics sampled from Stable Diffusion are (b) auto-traced, they lose details that
are hard to represent within the constraints of the abstraction. (c-d) VectorFusion improves fidelity and consistency with the caption by
directly optimizing paths with a distillation-based diffusion loss. Find videos and more results at https://ajayj.com/vectorfusion.

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown impressive results in textto-image synthesis. Using massive datasets of captioned
images, diffusion models learn to generate raster images
of highly diverse objects and scenes. However, designers
frequently use vector representations of images like Scalable
Vector Graphics (SVGs) for digital icons or art. Vector
graphics can be scaled to any size, and are compact. We
show that a text-conditioned diffusion model trained on pixel
representations of images can be used to generate SVGexportable vector graphics. We do so without access to large
datasets of captioned SVGs. By optimizing a differentiable
vector graphics rasterizer, our method, VectorFusion, distills
abstract semantic knowledge out of a pretrained diffusion
model. Inspired by recent text-to-3D work, we learn an SVG
consistent with a caption using Score Distillation Sampling.
To accelerate generation and improve fidelity, VectorFusion
also initializes from an image sample. Experiments show
greater quality than prior work, and demonstrate a range of
styles including pixel art and sketches.
∗ Equal contribution

1. Introduction
Graphic designers and artists often express concepts in
an abstract manner, such as composing a few shapes and
lines into a pattern that evokes the essence of a scene. Scalable Vector Graphics (SVGs) provide a declarative format
for expressing visual concepts as a collection of primitives.
Primitives include Bézier curves, polygons, circles, lines and
background colors. SVGs are the defacto format for exporting graphic designs since they can be rendered at arbitrarily
high resolution on user devices, yet are stored and transmitted with a compact size, often only tens of kilobytes. Still,
designing vector graphics is difficult, requiring knowledge
of professional design tools.
Recently, large captioned datasets and breakthroughs in
diffusion models have led to systems capable of generating
diverse images from text including DALL-E 2 [28], Imagen [33] and Latent Diffusion [31]. However, the vast
majority of images available in web-scale datasets are rasterized, expressed at a finite resolution with no decomposition
into primitive parts nor layers. For this reason, existing diffusion models can only generate raster images. In theory,

1911

