This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperReel: High-Fidelity 6-DoF Video with Ray-Conditioned Sampling
Benjamin Attal1,4
Jia-Bin Huang2,4
Christian Richardt3
Michael Zollhöfer3
4
1
Johannes Kopf
Changil Kim4
Matthew O’Toole
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

University of Maryland

3

Reality Labs Research

4

Meta

Dynamic 6-DoF rendering

https://hyperreel.github.io

t = 0.25 s

t = 0.5 s

t = 0.75 s

t = 1s

t = 1.25 s

t = 1.5 s

Static 6-DoF rendering

t = 0s

Figure 1. HyperReel: A novel 6-DoF video representation. HyperReel converts synchronized multi-view video streams into a high-fidelity,
memory efficient scene representation that can be rendered from novel views and time steps at interactive rates. HyperReel’s combination of
high rendering quality, speed, and compactness sets it apart from existing 6-DoF video representations. The upper two rows show 6-DoF
(i.e., varying viewpoint and viewing orientation) rendering of dynamic scenes [9, 46]; the lower two of static scenes [60, 61].

Abstract
Volumetric scene representations enable photorealistic view
synthesis for static scenes and form the basis of several existing 6-DoF video techniques. However, the volume rendering procedures that drive these representations necessitate
careful trade-offs in terms of quality, rendering speed, and
memory efficiency. In particular, existing methods fail to
simultaneously achieve real-time performance, small memory footprint, and high-quality rendering for challenging
real-world scenes. To address these issues, we present Hy-

perReel — a novel 6-DoF video representation. The two core
components of HyperReel are: (1) a ray-conditioned sample
prediction network that enables high-fidelity, high frame rate
rendering at high resolutions and (2) a compact and memoryefficient dynamic volume representation. Our 6-DoF video
pipeline achieves the best performance compared to prior
and contemporary approaches in terms of visual quality with
small memory requirements, while also rendering at up to
18 frames-per-second at megapixel resolution without any
custom CUDA code.

16610

