This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Manipulating Transfer Learning for Property Inference
Yulong Tian1 , Fnu Suya2 , Anshuman Suri2 , Fengyuan Xu1* , David Evans2
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
University of Virginia, USA
yulong.tian@smail.nju.edu.cn, {suya, anshuman}@virginia.edu, fengyuan.xu@nju.edu.cn, evans@virginia.edu

Abstract
Transfer learning is a popular method for tuning pretrained (upstream) models for different downstream tasks
using limited data and computational resources. We study
how an adversary with control over an upstream model used
in transfer learning can conduct property inference attacks
on a victim’s tuned downstream model. For example, to infer the presence of images of a specific individual in the
downstream training set. We demonstrate attacks in which
an adversary can manipulate the upstream model to conduct highly effective and specific property inference attacks
(AUC score > 0.9), without incurring significant performance loss on the main task. The main idea of the manipulation is to make the upstream model generate activations (intermediate features) with different distributions
for samples with and without a target property, thus enabling the adversary to distinguish easily between downstream models trained with and without training examples
that have the target property. Our code is available at
https:// github.com/ yulongt23/ Transfer-Inference .

1. Introduction
Transfer learning is a popular method for efficiently
training deep learning models [6, 21, 33, 39, 42]. In a typical transfer learning scenario, an upstream trainer trains
and releases a pretrained model. Then a downstream trainer
will reuse the parameters of some layers of the released
upstream models to tune a downstream model for a particular task. This parameter reuse reduces the amount of
data and computing resources required for training downstream models significantly, making this technique increasingly popular. However, the centralized nature of transfer
learning is open to exploitation by an adversary. Several
previous works have considered security risks associated
with transfer learning including backdoor attacks [39] and
misclassification attacks [33].
* Indicates the corresponding author.

We investigate the risk of property inference in the
context of transfer learning. In property inference (also
known as distribution inference), the attacker aims to extract sensitive properties of the training distribution of a
model [3, 7, 12, 29, 41]. We consider a transfer learning scenario where the upstream trainer is malicious and produces
a carefully crafted pretrained model with the goal of inferring a particular property about the tuning data used by the
victim to train a downstream model. For example, the attacker may be interested in knowing whether any images of
a specific individual (or group, such as seniors or Asians)
are contained in a downstream training set used to tune the
pre-trained model. Such inferences can lead to severe privacy leakage—for instance, if the adversary knows beforehand that the downstream training set consists of data of patients that have a particular disease, confirming the presence
of a specific individual in that training data is a privacy violation. Property inference may also be used to audit models for fairness issues [22]—for example, in a downstream
dataset containing data of all the employees of an organization, finding the absence of samples of a certain group of
people (e.g., older people) may be evidence that those people are underrepresented in that organization.
Contributions. We identify a new vulnerability of transfer learning where the upstream trainer crafts a pretrained
model to enable an inference attack on the downstream
model that reveals very precise and accurate information
about the downstream training data (Section 3). We develop
methods to manipulate the upstream model training to produce a model that, when used to train a downstream model,
will induce a downstream model that reveals sensitive properties of its training data in both white-box and black-box
inference settings (Section 4). We demonstrate that this
substantially increases property inference risk compared to
baseline settings where the upstream model is trained normally (Section 7). Table 1 summarizes our key results. The
inference AUC scores are below 0.65 when the upstream
models are trained normally; after manipulation, the inferences have AUC scores ≥ 0.89 even when only 0.1% (10
out of 10 000) of downstream samples have the target prop-

15975

