This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ABCD : Arbitrary Bitwise Coefficient for De-quantization
Woo Kyoung Han Byeonghun Lee Sang Hyun Park Kyong Hwan Jin*
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Korea
{cjss7894, qudgns1113, shpark13135, kyong.jin}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
Modern displays and contents support more than 8bits
image and video. However, bit-starving situations such
as compression codecs make low bit-depth (LBD) images
(<8bits), occurring banding and blurry artifacts. Previous
bit depth expansion (BDE) methods still produce unsatisfactory high bit-depth (HBD) images. To this end, we propose an implicit neural function with a bit query to recover
de-quantized images from arbitrarily quantized inputs. We
develop a phasor estimator to exploit the information of the
nearest pixels. Our method shows superior performance
against prior BDE methods on natural and animation images. We also demonstrate our model on YouTube UGC
datasets for de-banding. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/WooKyoungHan/ABCD

1. Introduction
The bit depth in digital contents means a number of binary digits representing pixel values. As humans recognize
a wide range of color and luminance, modern display devices and cameras support more than the 8-bit depth of image and video [21, 28]. Regardless of these efforts, the image and video codecs enforce HBD images to be quantized
into LBD images due to bit starvation. Thus, most contents
are under 8 bits leading to false contours and blurry artifacts. Bit depth expansion, a.k.a. de-quantization, aims to
recover missing bits caused by such quantizations.
Conventional methods such as [6, 10, 19, 24, 36–38] have
been proposed for the de-quantization problem. However, these methods suffer from blurry artifacts resulting
in distortions of details or false contours in extreme BDE.
Recently, learning-based approaches, a.k.a. deep neural
network, have shown remarkable performances in BDE
[4, 9, 18, 26, 32, 40, 43]. Most learning-based approaches
[4, 9, 32, 40, 43] reconstruct HBD images in an end-to-end
manner. Recent methods [18, 26] recover residual components corresponding to missing bits from LBD images. In
particular, the method called D16 [26], with the best per* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overview of arbitrary bit-depth expansion (dequantization) using ABCD. Our ABCD estimates dominant phasors of
images and calculates the bit-query of LBD. Then, an MLP takes
the estimated phasor information and bit-wise query (s) to predict
the bit-wise coefficient ( b
C) of HBD images.

formance so far, conducts a binary classification per each
bit plane. However, D16 requires multiple deep neural networks models for every bit-planes.
Recently, an implicit neural representation (INR) which
maps coordinates into signal values [25, 29], shows promising performances in various tasks [5, 11, 15, 22, 25, 29].
The implicit neural networks have a spectral bias problem toward low frequencies, which makes INR hard to
represent high-frequency components [27]. Fortunately,
several solutions are developed to relax the spectral bias
[15, 23, 30, 33, 41]. However, there is no INR approach for
bit depth expansion problems.
In this paper, we propose a novel model, the Arbitrary
Bit-wise Coefficient model for De-quantization (ABCD), to
recover missing bits from the randomly quantized LBD image to any HBD image. The proposed model addresses the
spectral bias of INR and improves de-quantization quality
through the use of an encoder to estimate the dominant phasors in the ground truth. As shown in Fig. 1, our encoder estimates the dominant phasors to mitigate the spectral bias of
INR. Then, the model utilizes an INR to achieve arbitrarybit reconstructions in the amplitude domain. Finally, a bit

5876

