This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Actionlet-Dependent Contrastive Learning for Unsupervised Skeleton-Based
Action Recognition
Lilang Lin, Jiahang Zhang, Jiaying Liu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China

Abstract
The self-supervised pretraining paradigm has achieved
great success in skeleton-based action recognition. However, these methods treat the motion and static parts equally,
and lack an adaptive design for different parts, which has a
negative impact on the accuracy of action recognition. To
realize the adaptive action modeling of both parts, we propose an Actionlet-Dependent Contrastive Learning method
(ActCLR). The actionlet, defined as the discriminative subset of the human skeleton, effectively decomposes motion
regions for better action modeling. In detail, by contrasting with the static anchor without motion, we extract
the motion region of the skeleton data, which serves as
the actionlet, in an unsupervised manner. Then, centering on actionlet, a motion-adaptive data transformation
method is built. Different data transformations are applied to actionlet and non-actionlet regions to introduce
more diversity while maintaining their own characteristics.
Meanwhile, we propose a semantic-aware feature pooling
method to build feature representations among motion and
static regions in a distinguished manner. Extensive experiments on NTU RGB+D and PKUMMD show that the proposed method achieves remarkable action recognition performance. More visualization and quantitative experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Our project
website is available at https : / / langlandslin .
github.io/projects/ActCLR/

1. Introduction
Skeletons represent human joints using 3D coordinate
locations. Compared with RGB videos and depth data,
skeletons are lightweight, privacy-preserving, and compact
to represent human motion. On account of being easier
and more discriminative for analysis, skeletons have been
widely used in action recognition task [19,23,31,32,46,48].
Supervised skeleton-based action recognition meth* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under contract No.62172020.

Positive

Negative

Attract

Push Away

Data

Actionlet

Figure 1. Our proposed approach (ActCLR) locates the motion
regions as actionlet to guide contrastive learning.

ods [3,27,28] have achieved impressive performance. However, their success highly depends on a large amount of labeled training data, which is expensive to obtain. To get
rid of the reliance on full supervision, self-supervised learning [16, 32, 34, 49] has been introduced into skeleton-based
action recognition. It adopts a two-stage paradigm, i.e. first
applying pretext tasks for unsupervised pretraining and then
employing downstream tasks for finetuning.
According to learning paradigms, all methods can be
classified into two categories: reconstruction-based [14, 32,
41] and contrastive learning-based. Reconstruction-based
methods capture the spatial-temporal correlation by predicting masked skeleton data. Zheng et al. [49] first proposed reconstructing masked skeletons for long-term global
motion dynamics. Besides, the contrastive learning-based
methods have shown remarkable potential recently. These
methods employ skeleton transformation to generate positive/negative samples. Rao et al. [24] applied Shear and
Crop as data augmentation. Guo et al. [8] further proposed
to use more augmentations, i.e. rotation, masking, and flippling, to improve the consistency of contrastive learning.
These contrastive learning works treat different regions
of the skeleton sequences uniformly. However, the motion
regions contain richer action information and contribute
more to action modeling. Therefore, it is sub-optimal to directly apply data transformations to all regions in the previous works, which may degrade the motion-correlated infor-

2363

