This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Imbalanced Data with Vision Transformers
Zhengzhuo Xu
Ruikang Liu
Shuo Yang
Zenghao Chai
Chun Yuan†
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
{xzzthu, liuruikang.cs, ysss9264, zenghaochai}@gmail.com

yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

ViT-Tiny ViT-Small

Abstract

ViT-Base

70

ViT-Large

1. Introduction
With the vast success in the computer vision field, Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [15, 43] get increasingly popular and
have been widely used in visual recognition [15], detection [5], and video analysis [16]. These models are heavily
dependent on large-scale and balanced data to avoid overfitting [39,52,82]. However, real-world data usually confronts
severe class-imbalance problems, i.e., most labels (tail) are
associated with limited instances while a few categories
(head) occupy dominant samples. The models simply classify images into head classes for lower error because the

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

65

The real-world data tends to be heavily imbalanced and
severely skew the data-driven deep neural networks, which
makes Long-Tailed Recognition (LTR) a massive challenging task. Existing LTR methods seldom train Vision Transformers (ViTs) with Long-Tailed (LT) data, while the offthe-shelf pretrain weight of ViTs always leads to unfair
comparisons. In this paper, we systematically investigate
the ViTs’ performance in LTR and propose LiVT to train
ViTs from scratch only with LT data. With the observation that ViTs suffer more severe LTR problems, we conduct Masked Generative Pretraining (MGP) to learn generalized features. With ample and solid evidence, we show
that MGP is more robust than supervised manners. Although Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) loss performs well with
ViTs, it struggles on the LTR tasks. We further propose
the balanced BCE to ameliorate it with strong theoretical groundings. Specially, we derive the unbiased extension of Sigmoid and compensate extra logit margins for deploying it. Our Bal-BCE contributes to the quick convergence of ViTs in just a few epochs. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that with MGP and Bal-BCE, LiVT successfully trains ViTs well without any additional data and outperforms comparable state-of-the-art methods significantly,
e.g., our ViT-B achieves 81.0% Top-1 accuracy in iNaturalist 2018 without bells and whistles. Code is available at
https://github.com/XuZhengzhuo/LiVT.

60
55
50
45

NCL
R50×3

40
35
30

RIDE-4E
R50

R50
0

20

40

60
80
100
Parameters (M)

Baseline [13]
NCL [34]
RIDE [61]
DeiT [55]
MAE [18]
LiVT(Ours)
LiVT/384(Ours)
280

300

320

Figure 1. Top-1 Acc v.s. Model Size on ImageNet-LT dataset.
We choose the Tiny / Small / Base / Large ViT and multi-expert
approaches. R50 represents the ResNet50 model. ViT-Base gets
lower Acc than ResNet50 when trained in a supervised manner.

head always overwhelms tail ones in LTR. The data paucity
also results in the model overfitting on the tail with unaccepted generalization. The aforementioned problems make
Long Tail Recognization (LTR) a challenging task.
Numerous papers [4,13,22,34,35,44,70] handle the LTR
problem with traditional supervised cross-entropy learning
based on ResNet [20] or its derivatives [68]. Some methods use ViTs with pretrained weights on ImageNet [52] (or
larger datasets), which leads to unfair comparisons with additional data, e.g. on ImageNet-LT (a subset of ImageNet1K) benchmark. Moreover, there are still limited explorations on the utilization of Long-Tailed (LT) data to train
ViTs effectively. Therefore, in this paper, we try to train
ViTs from scratch with LT data. We observe that it is particularly difficult to train ViT with LT labels’ supervision.
As Tab. 1 shows, ViTs degrade heavily when training data
become skewed. ViT-B is much worse than ResNet50 with
the same CE training manner (c.f. Fig. 1). One reasonable explanation is that ViTs require longer training to learn
the inductive bias, while CNNs offer the built-in translation
invariance implicitly. Yet another one lies in the label statistical bias in the LTR datasets, which confuses models to
make predictions with an inherent bias to the head [12, 47].
The well-trained ViTs have to overcome the above plights
simultaneously to avoid falling into dilemmas.

15793

