This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Cumulative Domain Adaptation for Foggy Scene Optical Flow
Hanyu Zhou1 , Yi Chang1 ,* Wending Yan2 , Luxin Yan1
1
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Huawei International Co. Ltd.

1. Introduction
Optical flow has made great progress under clean scenes,
but may suffer from restricted performance under foggy
scenes [15]. The main reason is that fog weakens scene
contrast, breaking the brightness and gradient constancy
assumptions, which most optical flow methods rely on.
To alleviate this, researchers start from the perspective
* Corresponding author.

Source Domain
Depth Association

fog gap
Adaptation
Intermediate：
Syn. Fog Scene

Optical flow has achieved great success under clean
scenes, but suffers from restricted performance under foggy
scenes. To bridge the clean-to-foggy domain gap, the existing methods typically adopt the domain adaptation to
transfer the motion knowledge from clean to synthetic foggy
domain. However, these methods unexpectedly neglect the
synthetic-to-real domain gap, and thus are erroneous when
applied to real-world scenes. To handle the practical optical
flow under real foggy scenes, in this work, we propose a
novel unsupervised cumulative domain adaptation optical
flow (UCDA-Flow) framework: depth-association motion
adaptation and correlation-alignment motion adaptation.
Specifically, we discover that depth is a key ingredient to influence the optical flow: the deeper depth, the inferior optical
flow, which motivates us to design a depth-association motion adaptation module to bridge the clean-to-foggy domain
gap. Moreover, we figure out that the cost volume correlation
shares similar distribution of the synthetic and real foggy images, which enlightens us to devise a correlation-alignment
motion adaptation module to distill motion knowledge of the
synthetic foggy domain to the real foggy domain. Note that
synthetic fog is designed as the intermediate domain. Under
this unified framework, the proposed cumulative adaptation
progressively transfers knowledge from clean scenes to real
foggy scenes. Extensive experiments have been performed
to verify the superiority of the proposed method.

Intermediate Domain
Correlation Alignment

style gap
Target：
Real Fog Scene

Abstract

Source：
Clean Scene

{hyzhou, yichang, yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn, yan.wending@huawei.com

Adaptation

Target Domain
Depth / Image / Flow / Correlation

Association

Figure 1. Illustration of the main idea. We propose to transfer
motion knowledge from the source domain (clean scene) to the
target domain (real foggy scene) through two-stage adaptation.
We design the synthetic foggy scene as the intermediate domain.
As for the clean-to-foggy domain gap (fog), we transfer motion
knowledge from the source domain to the intermediate domain via
depth association. As for the synthetic-to-real domain gap (style),
we distill motion knowledge of the intermediate domain to the
target domain by aligning the correlation of both the domains.

of domain adaptation, which mainly seeks the degradationinvariant features to transfer the motion knowledge from the
clean scene to the adverse weather scene [14–16, 40]. For
example, Li [15,16] attempted to learn degradation-invariant
features to enhance optical flow under rainy scenes in a supervised manner. Yan et al. [40] proposed a semi-supervised
framework for optical flow under dense foggy scenes, which
relies on the motion-invariant assumption between the paired
clean and synthetic foggy images. These pioneer works have
made a good attempt to handle the clean-to-foggy domain
gap with synthetic degraded images through one-stage domain adaptation. However, they lack the constraints to guide
the network to learn the motion pattern of real foggy domain,
and fail for real foggy scenes. In other words, they have unexpectedly neglected the synthetic-to-real domain gap, thus
limiting their performances on real-world foggy scenes. In
this work, our goal is to progressively handle the two domain
gaps: the clean-to-foggy gap and the synthetic-to-real gap in
a cumulative domain adaptation framework in Fig. 1.

9569

