This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Model-based Face Reconstruction through
Weakly-Supervised Outlier Segmentation
Chunlu Li1,2

Andreas Morel-Forster 2

lcl@seu.edu.cn
1
3

Thomas Vetter 2

bernhard.egger@fau.de

Bernhard Egger3,∗

Adam Kortylewski4,5,∗

akortyle@mpi-inf.mpg.de

2

School of Automation, Southeast University
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Basel
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg 4 University of Freiburg 5 Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Abstract
In this work, we aim to enhance model-based face reconstruction by avoiding fitting the model to outliers, i.e.
regions that cannot be well-expressed by the model such as
occluders or make-up. The core challenge for localizing
outliers is that they are highly variable and difficult to annotate. To overcome this challenging problem, we introduce a
joint Face-autoencoder and outlier segmentation approach
(FOCUS). In particular, we exploit the fact that the outliers
cannot be fitted well by the face model and hence can be
localized well given a high-quality model fitting. The main
challenge is that the model fitting and the outlier segmentation are mutually dependent on each other, and need to be
inferred jointly. We resolve this chicken-and-egg problem
with an EM-type training strategy, where a face autoencoder is trained jointly with an outlier segmentation network. This leads to a synergistic effect, in which the segmentation network prevents the face encoder from fitting to
the outliers, enhancing the reconstruction quality. The improved 3D face reconstruction, in turn, enables the segmentation network to better predict the outliers. To resolve the
ambiguity between outliers and regions that are difficult to
fit, such as eyebrows, we build a statistical prior from synthetic data that measures the systematic bias in model fitting. Experiments on the NoW testset demonstrate that FOCUS achieves SOTA 3D face reconstruction performance
among all baselines trained without 3D annotation. Moreover, our results on CelebA-HQ and AR database show that
the segmentation network can localize occluders accurately
∗ Denotes same contribution.

Codes available at: github.com/unibas-gravis/Occlusion-Robust-MoFA
C.Li is funded by the China Scholarship Council (CSC) from the Ministry of Education of P.R. China. B.Egger was supported by a PostDoc Mobility Grant, Swiss National Science Foundation P400P2 191110.
A.Kortylewski acknowledges support via his Emmy Noether Research
Group funded by the German Science Foundation (DFG) under Grant No.
468670075. Sincere gratitude to Tatsuro Koizumi and William A. P. Smith
who offered the MoFA re-implementation.

Figure 1. FOCUS conducts face reconstruction and outlier segmentation jointly under weak supervision. Top to bottom: target
images, our reconstruction images, and estimated outlier masks.

despite being trained without any segmentation annotation.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D face reconstruction aims at estimating the
pose, shape, and albedo of a face, as well as the illumination
conditions and camera parameters of the scene. Solving for
all these factors from a single image is an ill-posed problem.
Model-based face autoencoders [31] overcome this problem
through fitting a 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [1, 9] to a
target image. The 3DMM provides prior knowledge about
the face albedo and geometry such that 3D face reconstruction from a single image becomes feasible, enabling face
autoencoders to set the current state-of-the-art in 3D face
reconstruction [5]. The network architectures in the face autoencoders are devised to enable end-to-end reconstruction
and to enhance the speed compared to optimization-based
alternatives [19, 41], and sophisticated losses are designed
to stabilize the training and to get better performance [5].
A major remaining challenge for face autoencoders is
that their performance in in-the-wild environments is still
limited by nuisance factors such as model outliers, extreme
illumination, and poses. Among those nuisances, model
outliers are ubiquitous and inherently difficult to handle because of their wide variety in shape, appearance, and loca-

372

