This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-Supervised Video Inpainting with Cycle Consistency Constraints
Zhiliang Wu1 , Hanyu Xuan2 ,* Changchang Sun3 , Weili Guan4,5 , Kang Zhang1 , Yan Yan3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
School of Big Data and Statistics, Anhui University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
4
School of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

Abstract

Input

...

...

Output

...

...

...

Input

...

...

* Corresponding author

...

Video inpainting aims to fill corrupted regions of the
video with plausible contents, which is a promising yet

...

1. Introduction

...

Deep learning-based video inpainting has yielded
promising results and gained increasing attention from researchers. Generally, these methods assume that the corrupted region masks of each frame are known and easily obtained. However, the annotation of these masks are laborintensive and expensive, which limits the practical application of current methods. Therefore, we expect to relax this
assumption by defining a new semi-supervised inpainting
setting, making the networks have the ability of completing
the corrupted regions of the whole video using the annotated mask of only one frame. Specifically, in this work,
we propose an end-to-end trainable framework consisting
of completion network and mask prediction network, which
are designed to generate corrupted contents of the current
frame using the known mask and decide the regions to be
filled of the next frame, respectively. Besides, we introduce a
cycle consistency loss to regularize the training parameters
of these two networks. In this way, the completion network
and the mask prediction network can constrain each other,
and hence the overall performance of the trained model can
be maximized. Furthermore, due to the natural existence
of prior knowledge (e.g., corrupted contents and clear borders), current video inpainting datasets are not suitable in
the context of semi-supervised video inpainting. Thus, we
create a new dataset by simulating the corrupted video of
real-world scenarios. Extensive experimental results are
reported to demonstrate the superiority of our model in the
video inpainting task. Remarkably, although our model is
trained in a semi-supervised manner, it can achieve comparable performance as fully-supervised methods.

Output

(a) fully-supervised inpainting (b) semi-supervised inpainting

(c) an example of semi-supervised video inpainting

Figure 1. Existing methods perform video inpainting in a fullysupervised setting. The typical issue of such methods is the need
to elaborately annotate the corrupted regions mi of each frame xi
in the video (Fig.(a)), which is labor-intensive and expensive in
real-world applications. In this paper, we formulate a new task:
semi-supervised video inpainting, which only annotates the corrupted regions of one frame to complete the whole video (Fig.(b)).
Fig.(c) shows an example of semi-supervised video inpainting: the
top row shows sample frames with the mask, where pink denotes
the manually annotated mask of corrupted regions, and blue denotes the mask of corrupted regions predicted by the model. The
bi are shown in the bottom row.
completed results y

challenging task in computer vision. It can benefit a wide
range of practical applications, such as scratch restoration [1], undesired object removal [30], and autonomous
driving [18], etc. In essence, unlike image inpainting
which usually learns on the spatial dimension, video inpainting task pays more attention to exploiting the temporal information. Naively using image inpainting methods [13, 34, 42, 45] on individual video frame to fill corrupted regions will lose inter-frame motion continuity, resulting in flicker artifacts in the inpainted video.
Similar to the texture synthesis, traditional video inpaint-

22586

