This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Fidelity and Freely Controllable Talking Head Video Generation
Yue Gao

Yuan Zhou

Jinglu Wang

Xiao Li

Xiang Ming

Yan Lu

Microsoft Research

Input

{yuegao, zhouyuan, jinglu.wang, li.xiao, xiangming, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Yaw

Pitch

Roll

Input

Neutral

Smile

Laugh

Smile

Expressionless

Roll

PECHead

FOMM

Input

Input

(b). Free pose and expression editing

(a). Frontalization

Figure 1. Presented herein are representative results showcasing the effectiveness of our proposed method in the tasks of frontalization,
as well as free pose and expression editing. (a) FOMM [46] often produces face distortion issues, while our model PECHead generates
high-fidelity results. (b) Our proposed framework empowers the generation of talking head videos that offer free control over the head pose
and expression. More results can be found in the supplementary materials.

Abstract
Talking head generation is to generate video based on
a given source identity and target motion. However, current methods face several challenges that limit the quality
and controllability of the generated videos. First, the generated face often has unexpected deformation and severe
distortions. Second, the driving image does not explicitly
disentangle movement-relevant information, such as poses
and expressions, which restricts the manipulation of different attributes during generation. Third, the generated
videos tend to have flickering artifacts due to the inconsistency of the extracted landmarks between adjacent frames.
In this paper, we propose a novel model that produces highfidelity talking head videos with free control over head pose
and expression. Our method leverages both self-supervised
learned landmarks and 3D face model-based landmarks to

model the motion. We also introduce a novel motion-aware
multi-scale feature alignment module to effectively transfer
the motion without face distortion. Furthermore, we enhance the smoothness of the synthesized talking head videos
with a feature context adaptation and propagation module.
We evaluate our model on challenging datasets and demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance. More information is
available at https://yuegao.me/PECHead.

1. Introduction
Talking head video generation is a process of synthesizing a talking head video with a given source identity and
target motion. This process is also called face reenactment
when using a driving head to define the relative movement
to the source identity [4]. This generation technique can

5609

