This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Semantic Segmentation with Automatic Memory Sample Selection
Lanyun Zhu1 * Tianrun Chen2 * Jianxiong Yin3 Simon See3 Jun Liu1†
Singapore University of Technology and Design 1 Zhejiang University 2 NVIDIA AI Tech Centre 3
lanyun zhu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
{jianxiongy, ssee}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Continual Semantic Segmentation (CSS) extends static
semantic segmentation by incrementally introducing new
classes for training. To alleviate the catastrophic forgetting
issue in CSS, a memory buffer that stores a small number
of samples from the previous classes is constructed for replay. However, existing methods select the memory samples
either randomly or based on a single-factor-driven handcrafted strategy, which has no guarantee to be optimal. In
this work, we propose a novel memory sample selection
mechanism that selects informative samples for effective replay in a fully automatic way by considering comprehensive factors including sample diversity and class performance. Our mechanism regards the selection operation as
a decision-making process and learns an optimal selection
policy that directly maximizes the validation performance
on a reward set. To facilitate the selection decision, we design a novel state representation and a dual-stage action
space. Our extensive experiments on Pascal-VOC 2012 and
ADE 20K datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach with state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance achieved,
outperforming the second-place one by 12.54% for the 6stage setting on Pascal-VOC 2012.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an important task with a lot
of applications. The rapid development of algorithms
[11, 20, 22, 30, 32, 56] and the growing number of publicly
available large datasets [14, 55] have led to great success
in the field. However, in many scenarios, the static model
cannot always meet real-world demands, as the constantly
changing environment calls for the model to be constantly
updated to deal with new data, sometimes with new classes.
A naive solution is to apply continual learning by incrementally adding new classes to train the model. However, it
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

tianrun.chen@zju.edu.cn
jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

is not simple as it looks – almost every time, since the previous classes are inaccessible in the new stage, the model
forgets the information of them after training for the new
classes. This phenomenon, namely catastrophic forgetting,
has been a long-standing issue in the field. Furthermore,
the issue is especially severe in dense prediction tasks like
semantic segmentation.
Facing the issue, existing works [1, 4, 5, 7, 17, 25, 26, 38,
43] propose to perform exemplar replay by introducing a
memory buffer to store some samples from previous classes.
By doing so, the model can be trained with samples from
both current and previous classes, resulting in better generalization. However, since the number of selected samples
in the memory is much smaller than those within the new
classes, the selected samples are easy to be ignored or cause
overfitting when training due to the small number. Careful
selection of the samples is required, which naturally brings
the question: How to select the best samples for replay?
Some attempts have been made to answer the question,
aiming to seek the most effective samples for replay. Researchers propose different criteria that are mostly manually designed based on some heuristic factors like diversity [1, 4, 5, 25, 26, 38, 43]. For example, [33] selects the
most common samples with the lowest diversity for replay,
believing that the most representative samples will elevate
the effectiveness of replay. However, the most common
samples may not always be the samples being forgotten
in later stages. [4] proposes to save both the low-diversity
samples near the distribution center and high-diversity samples near the classification boundaries. However, new challenges arise since the memory length is limited, so it is
challenging to find the optimal quotas for the two kinds of
samples to promote replay effectiveness to the greatest extent. Moreover, most of the existing methods are designed
based on a single factor, the selection performance, however, can be influenced by many factors with complicated
relationships. For example, besides diversity, memory sample selection should also be class-dependent because the
hard classes need more samples to replay in order to alleviate the more severe catastrophic forgetting issue. Therefore,

3082

