This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Separation and Recalibration for Adversarial Robustness
Woo Jae Kim

Yoonki Cho

Junsik Jung

Sung-Eui Yoon

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
Deep neural networks are susceptible to adversarial attacks due to the accumulation of perturbations in the feature level, and numerous works have boosted model robustness by deactivating the non-robust feature activations that
cause model mispredictions. However, we claim that these
malicious activations still contain discriminative cues and
that with recalibration, they can capture additional useful information for correct model predictions. To this end,
we propose a novel, easy-to-plugin approach named Feature Separation and Recalibration (FSR) that recalibrates
the malicious, non-robust activations for more robust feature maps through Separation and Recalibration. The Separation part disentangles the input feature map into the
robust feature with activations that help the model make
correct predictions and the non-robust feature with activations that are responsible for model mispredictions upon
adversarial attack. The Recalibration part then adjusts
the non-robust activations to restore the potentially useful
cues for model predictions. Extensive experiments verify
the superiority of FSR compared to traditional deactivation
techniques and demonstrate that it improves the robustness
of existing adversarial training methods by up to 8.57%
with small computational overhead. Codes are available
at https://github.com/wkim97/FSR.

1. Introduction
Despite the advancements of deep neural networks
(DNNs) in computer vision tasks [2,10,20,39], they are vulnerable to adversarial examples [19,43] that are maliciously
crafted to subvert the decisions of these models by adding
imperceptible noise to natural images. Adversarial examples are also known to be successful in real-world cases,
including autonomous driving [17] and biometrics [27, 41],
and to be effective even when target models are unknown
to the attacker [26, 31, 43]. Thus, it has become crucial to
devise effective defense strategies against this insecurity.
To this end, numerous defense techniques have been proposed, including defensive distillation [38], input denoising [30], and attack detection [36, 54]. Among these meth-

ods, adversarial training [19, 33], which robustifies a model
by training it on a set of worst-case adversarial examples,
has been considered to be the most successful and popular.
Even with adversarial training, however, small adversarial perturbations on the pixel-level accumulate to a much
larger degree in the intermediate feature space and ruin the
final output of the model [50]. To solve this problem, recent advanced methods disentangled and deactivated the
non-robust feature activations that cause model mispredictions. Xie et al. [50] applied classical denoising techniques
to deactivate disrupted activations, and Bai et al. [4] and
Yan et al. [55] deactivated channels that are irrelevant to
correct model decisions. These approaches, however, inevitably neglect discriminative cues that potentially lie in
these non-robust activations. Ilyas et al. [22] have shown
that a model can learn discriminative information from nonrobost features in the input space. Based on this finding, we
argue that there exist potential discriminative cues in the
non-robust activations, and deactivating them could lead to
loss of these useful information that can provide the model
with better guidance for making correct predictions.
For the first time, we argue that with appropriate adjustment, the non-robust activations that lead to model mispredictions could recapture discriminative cues for correct
model decisions. To this end, we propose a novel Feature
Separation and Recalibration (FSR) module that aims to
improve the feature robustness. We first separate the intermediate feature map of a model into the malicious nonrobust activations that are responsible for model mispredictions and the robust activations that still provide useful
cues for correct model predictions even under adversarial
attacks. Exploiting only the robust feature just like the existing methods [4, 50, 55], however, could lead to loss of
potentially useful cues in the non-robust feature. Thus, we
recalibrate the non-robust activations to capture cues that
provide additional useful guidance for correct model decisions. These additional cues can better guide the model to
make correct predictions and thus boost its robustness.
Fig. 1 visualizes the attention maps [40] on the features
of natural images by a naturally trained model (fnat ) and
the robust (f + ), non-robust (f − ), and recalibrated features
(f˜− ) on adversarial examples (x′ ) obtained from an adver-

8183

