This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-GAN Auditing: Unsupervised Identification of Attribute Level Similarities
and Differences between Pretrained Generative Models
Matthew L. Olson1 , Shusen Liu2 , Rushil Anirudh2 , Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan2 , Peer-Timo Bremer2 ,
and Weng-Keen Wong1
1
Oregon State University - EECS, 2 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory - CASC
{olsomatt,wongwe}@oregonstate.edu, {liu42,anirudh1,jayaramanthi1,bremer5}@llnl.gov

(UNKNOWN)

Change age
Add beard
Make smile
Add hat

Cross-GAN Audit (xGA)
REFERENCE
Face GAN

REPORT
COMMON (present in both)
•
•

Add beard
Make smile

NOVEL (only present in Client)
•

Add glasses

MISSING (only present in Ref.)
Make smile

CLIENT
Face GAN

•
•

Change age
Add hat

MISSING

Add beard
Add glasses

Proposed Work

Toon©

CelebA®

Met Faces©

CelebA®

Disney©

CelebA®

Met Faces©

CelebA®

StyleGAN-R®

CelebA-M©

CelebA®

Client©

Ref®

NOVEL

ATTRIBUTES

COMMON

DISCOVERED ATTRIBUTE

StyleGAN3-T©

Figure 1. We introduce (xGA) an approach for fully unsupervised cross-GAN auditing and validation. Given two pre-trained GANs
(Reference & Client), xGA evaluates the client by identifying three types of semantic attributes – (a) Common: those that exist in both
models, (b) Novel: those only present in the client and (c) Missing: those that only exist in the reference. On the right, we show results
across multiple studies, that among others include notable shifts in distribution between the Reference (CelebA) to Client (Toon, Disney,
Met Faces). xGA also lends itself easily to comparing models with different properties on the same dataset as shown on the bottom right
for StyleGAN3-T vs. StyleGAN-R. And CelebA-M is a control dataset we create that does not contain glasses, ties and smiles.

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are notoriously difficult to train especially for complex distributions
and with limited data. This has driven the need for tools
to audit trained networks in human intelligible format, for
example, to identify biases or ensure fairness. Existing
GAN audit tools are restricted to coarse-grained, modeldata comparisons based on summary statistics such as FID
or recall. In this paper, we propose an alternative approach that compares a newly developed GAN against a
prior baseline. To this end, we introduce Cross-GAN Auditing (xGA) that, given an established “reference” GAN and
a newly proposed “client” GAN, jointly identifies intelligible attributes that are either common across both GANs,
novel to the client GAN, or missing from the client GAN.

This provides both users and model developers an intuitive
assessment of similarity and differences between GANs. We
introduce novel metrics to evaluate attribute-based GAN
auditing approaches and use these metrics to demonstrate
quantitatively that xGA outperforms baseline approaches.
We also include qualitative results that illustrate the common, novel and missing attributes identified by xGA from
GANs trained on a variety of image datasets1 .

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12, 19–21]
have become ubiquitous in a range of high impact commercial and scientific applications [5, 7–9, 13]. With this pro1 Source code is available at https : / / github . com /
mattolson93/cross_gan_auditing

7981

