This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deformable Mesh Transformer for 3D Human Mesh Recovery
Yusuke Yoshiyasu
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Japan
yusuke-yoshiyasu@aist.go.jp

Abstract
We present Deformable mesh transFormer (DeFormer),
a novel vertex-based approach to monocular 3D human
mesh recovery. DeFormer iteratively fits a body mesh
model to an input image via a mesh alignment feedback
loop formed within a transformer decoder that is equipped
with efficient body mesh driven attention modules: 1) body
sparse self-attention and 2) deformable mesh cross attention. As a result, DeFormer can effectively exploit highresolution image feature maps and a dense mesh model
which were computationally expensive to deal with in previous approaches using the standard transformer attention.
Experimental results show that DeFormer achieves state-ofthe-art performances on the Human3.6M and 3DPW benchmarks. Ablation study is also conducted to show the effectiveness of the DeFormer model designs for leveraging
multi-scale feature maps. Code is available at https:
//github.com/yusukey03012/DeFormer.

1. Introduction
Human mesh recovery from a single image is an important problem in computer vision, with a wide range
of applications like virtual reality, sports motion analysis
and human-computer interactions. It is a challenging problem as it requires modeling of complex nonlinear mappings
from an image to 3D body shape and pose.
In the past decade, remarkable progress has been accomplished in the field of 3D human mesh recovery based on
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [41]. A common
way used in this field is a parametric approach that employs
statistical human models parameterized by shape and pose
parameters [33]. Here, CNNs features are regressed with
body shape and pose parameters with approximately 100 dimensions. Then, a body mesh surface is obtained from these
body parameter predictions by inputting them to the human
body kinematics and statistical shape models. Leveraging
multi-scale image feature maps and iteratively refining the
body parameters based on global and local spatial contexts
in an image, the pyramidal mesh alignment feedbacks (Py-

Figure 1. Summary of this work. We propose DeFormer, a memory efficient decoder-only transformer architecture for 3D human
mesh recovery based on block sparse self-attention [16, 40, 51]
and multi-scale (MS) deformable cross attention [56]. Leveraging MS feature maps efficiently in transformer, our method outperforms previous parametric approaches using MS feature maps
[52, 53] and vertex transformer approaches using a single-scale
feature [28, 29]. Further, by learning sparse self-attention patterns
based on body mesh and skeleton connectivity, DeFormer can recover a dense mesh with 6.9K joint/vertex queries at interactive
rates. The units of the MPJPE and PA-MPJPE scores are in millimeters. The lower is better.

MAF) model [53] produces a 3D mesh recovery result wellaligned to an input image.
Another paradigm for human mesh recovery is a vertexbased approach that directly regresses 3D vertex coordinates [14, 15, 26, 28, 29, 35]. Recently, transformer architectures have been applied to vertex-based human mesh recovery and show good reconstruction performances by capturing long-range interactions between body parts via selfattentions. Furthermore, as a vertex-based approach, they
naturally possess potential in learning fine-grained effects
like facial expressions, finger poses and clothing non-rigid
deformations, if such supervisions are given. Despite their

17006

