This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeMaHand: Exploiting Mesh-Mano Interaction
for Single Image Two-Hand Reconstruction
Congyi Wang∗

Feida Zhu∗
ByteDance

Shilei Wen†

{kongyi.1990, zhufeida, zhengmin.666}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Existing methods proposed for hand reconstruction tasks
usually parameterize a generic 3D hand model or predict
hand mesh positions directly. The parametric representations consisting of hand shapes and rotational poses are
more stable, while the non-parametric methods can predict
more accurate mesh positions. In this paper, we propose to
reconstruct meshes and estimate MANO parameters of two
hands from a single RGB image simultaneously to utilize
the merits of two kinds of hand representations. To fulfill
this target, we propose novel Mesh-Mano interaction blocks
(MMIBs), which take mesh vertices positions and MANO
parameters as two kinds of query tokens. MMIB consists
of one graph residual block to aggregate local information
and two transformer encoders to model long-range dependencies. The transformer encoders are equipped with different asymmetric attention masks to model the intra-hand and
inter-hand attention, respectively. Moreover, we introduce
the mesh alignment refinement module to further enhance
the mesh-image alignment. Extensive experiments on the
InterHand2.6M benchmark demonstrate promising results
over the state-of-the-art hand reconstruction methods.

1. Introduction
Vision-based 3D hand analysis plays an important role
in many applications such as virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR). Two-hand reconstruction from a single RGB image is more challenging due to complex mutual
interactions and occlusions. Besides, the skin appearance
similarity makes it difficult for the network to align image
features to the corresponding hand.
Previous hand reconstruction works can be divided into
two categories, parametric methods [3, 7, 32, 33] and nonparametric methods [4–6, 10, 18–20]. Parametric methods typically learn to regress pose and shape parameters
of MANO model [23], where pose represents joint rota* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Input Image

GT

IntagHand

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison with the state-of-the-art method IntagHand
[16] for single-image two-hand reconstruction. The integration of
parametric and non-parametric hand representations allows us to
achieve better performance in hard cases such as severe occlusions
and challenging viewpoints.

tions in axis-angle representation and shape represents the
coefficients of shape PCA bases. The MANO prior can
yield plausible hand shapes from a single monocular image.
However, they can not produce fine-grained hand meshes
due to their limited capacity.
With the rapid progress of graph convolutional network
(GCN) and transformer techniques [10, 16, 18, 19], it is observed that direct mesh reconstruction can achieve stateof-the-art performance towards the Euclidean distances between the ground truth vertices and the predicted vertices.
Nonetheless, the non-parametric methods are less robust in
handling challenging viewpoints or severe occlusions.
In this paper, we introduce a novel single-image twohand reconstruction method designed to predict mesh vertices positions and estimate MANO parameters simultaneously to utilize the merits of two kinds of hand representations. The proposed Mesh-Mano interaction Hand
reconstruction architecture (MeMaHand) consists of three
modules: 1) the image encoder-decoder module, 2) the

564

