This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Highly Confident Local Structure Based Consensus Graph Learning for
Incomplete Multi-view Clustering
Jie Wen1† , Chengliang Liu1† , Gehui Xu1 , Zhihao Wu1 , Chao Huang2 , Lunke Fei3 , Yong Xu1,4 *
1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Visual Object Detection and Recognition, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
4
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Graph-based multi-view clustering has attracted extensive attention because of the powerful clustering-structure
representation ability and noise robustness. Considering
the reality of a large amount of incomplete data, in this paper, we propose a simple but effective method for incomplete
multi-view clustering based on consensus graph learning,
termed as HCLS CGL. Unlike existing methods that utilize graph constructed from raw data to aid in the learning of consistent representation, our method directly learns
a consensus graph across views for clustering. Specifically, we design a novel confidence graph and embed it to
form a confidence structure driven consensus graph learning model. Our confidence graph is based on an intuitive similar-nearest-neighbor hypothesis, which does not
require any additional information and can help the model
to obtain a high-quality consensus graph for better clustering. Numerous experiments are performed to confirm the
effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
In today’s world, graphs are common tools to mine the
intrinsic structure of data. Graph learning, as a powerful data analysis approach, has attracted increasing attention over the past few years [38, 42]. More and more machine learning and data mining tasks attempt to adopt graph
learning to enhance the ability of structural representation
and performance [35, 41, 43]. As an emerging data analysis and representation task, multi-view clustering also needs
to deeply mine the geometric structure information of data
samples [15,36,44]. That is also the core focus of this paper.
As we all know, multi-view data is collected from different sources or perspectives, which is a diverse description of
the target, and this diversity endows the data with stronger
* Corresponding author. † Co-first authors.

？

Confidence graph

Compute
weight

Intersection of local nearest neighbor

Figure 1. Our key motivation: A novel confidence graph whose
edges are computed by the nodes’ shared nearest neighbors.

discriminative and expressive power [19, 48]. For example,
in the webpage recommendation tasks, we can assess the
attributes of webpages from different elements such as audio, video, image, and text; in the autonomous driving scenario, ultrasonic radar, optical camera, and infrared radar
together provide data basis for road traffic analysis. These
different styles of multi-view data play an extremely important role in real-world applications and provide a decisionmaking basis for plentiful downstream tasks [4, 18]. To
better mine and utilize multi-view data, researchers have
proposed abundant multi-view learning methods. These
methods can be broadly divided into the following categories according to different technical routes: multiple kernel kmeans based methods, canonical correlation analysis
(CCA) based methods, subspace learning based methods,
spectral clustering based methods, nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) based methods, and deep learning based
methods [2, 3, 5]. However, these conventional multi-view
clustering methods are built on the premise that each sample has all complete views. Obviously, this idealized assumption is often violated in practice. Missing data is almost inevitable due to human oversight or the reasons from
the application scenario itself [17]. Numerous solutions
have been proposed for this incomplete multi-view clustering (IMC) problem. The classic PMVC (partial multi-view
clustering) [17] seeks a common space to connect two in-

15712

