This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised 3D Scene Flow Estimation Guided by Superpoints
Yaqi Shen, Le Hui, Jin Xie∗ , Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{syq, le.hui, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
3D scene flow estimation aims to estimate point-wise
motions between two consecutive frames of point clouds.
Superpoints, i.e., points with similar geometric features,
are usually employed to capture similar motions of local
regions in 3D scenes for scene flow estimation. However,
in existing methods, superpoints are generated with the
offline clustering methods, which cannot characterize local
regions with similar motions for complex 3D scenes well,
leading to inaccurate scene flow estimation. To this end,
we propose an iterative end-to-end superpoint based scene
flow estimation framework, where the superpoints can be
dynamically updated to guide the point-level flow prediction. Specifically, our framework consists of a flow guided
superpoint generation module and a superpoint guided flow
refinement module. In our superpoint generation module,
we utilize the bidirectional flow information at the previous iteration to obtain the matching points of points and
superpoint centers for soft point-to-superpoint association
construction, in which the superpoints are generated for
pairwise point clouds. With the generated superpoints,
we first reconstruct the flow for each point by adaptively
aggregating the superpoint-level flow, and then encode
the consistency between the reconstructed flow of pairwise
point clouds. Finally, we feed the consistency encoding along with the reconstructed flow into GRU to refine
point-level flow. Extensive experiments on several different
datasets show that our method can achieve promising
performance. Code is available at https://github.
com/supersyq/SPFlowNet.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation is one of the vital components
of numerous applications such as 3D reconstruction [10],
∗ Corresponding authors

Yaqi Shen, Le Hui, Jin Xie, and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab,
Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and
Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.

Offline
Clustering
not learnable

Flow
Estimation
fixed superpoints

Flow
Refinement

learnable

(a) Other clustering based methods

Flow
Estimation

learnable

Flow
Refinement

Superpoint
Generation

dynamic superpoints

(b) Our approach

Figure 1. Comparison with other clustering-based methods.
(a) Other clustering based methods utilize offline clustering
algorithms to split the point clouds into some fixed superpoints
for subsequent flow refinement, which is not learnable. (b)
Our method embeds the differentiable clustering (superpoint
generation) into our pipeline and generates dynamic superpoints at
each iteration. We visualize part of the scene in FlyingThings3D
[38] for better visualization. Different colors indicate different
superpoints and red lines indicate the ground truth flow.

autonomous driving [37], and motion segmentation [2].
Estimating scene flow from stereo videos and RGB-D
images has been studied for many years [17, 19]. Recently,
with the rapid development of 3D sensors, estimating scene
flow from two consecutive point clouds has receiving more
and more attention. However, due to the irregularity and
sparsity of point clouds, scene flow estimation from point
clouds is still a challenging problem in real scenes.
In recent years, many 3D scene flow estimation methods
have been proposed [11, 34, 37, 56, 57, 59]. Most of
these methods [34, 56] rely on dense ground truth scene
flow as supervision for model training. However, collecting point-wise scene flow annotations is expensive and
time-consuming. To avoid the expensive point-level annotations, some efforts have been dedicated to weaklysupervised and self-supervised scene flow estimation [9,
23, 46, 60]. For example, both Rigid3DSceneFlow [9]
and LiDARSceneFlow [7] propose a weakly-supervised
scene flow estimation framework, which only take the ego-

5271

