This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Benefits of 3D Pose and Tracking for Human Action Recognition
Jathushan Rajasegaran1,2 , Georgios Pavlakos1 , Angjoo Kanazawa1 , Christoph Feichtenhofer2 , Jitendra Malik1,2
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Meta AI, FAIR

Abstract
In this work we study the benefits of using tracking and
3D poses for action recognition. To achieve this, we take the
Lagrangian view on analysing actions over a trajectory of
human motion rather than at a fixed point in space. Taking
this stand allows us to use the tracklets of people to predict their actions. In this spirit, first we show the benefits of
using 3D pose to infer actions, and study person-person interactions. Subsequently, we propose a Lagrangian Action
Recognition model by fusing 3D pose and contextualized
appearance over tracklets. To this end, our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the AVA v2.2 dataset on
both pose only settings and on standard benchmark settings.
When reasoning about the action using only pose cues, our
pose model achieves +10.0 mAP gain over the corresponding state-of-the-art while our fused model has a gain of +2.8
mAP over the best state-of-the-art model. Code and results
are available at: https://brjathu.github.io/LART

1. Introduction
In fluid mechanics, it is traditional to distinguish between
the Lagrangian and Eulerian specifications of the flow field.
Quoting the Wikipedia entry, “Lagrangian specification of
the flow field is a way of looking at fluid motion where
the observer follows an individual fluid parcel as it moves
through space and time. Plotting the position of an individual parcel through time gives the pathline of the parcel.
This can be visualized as sitting in a boat and drifting down
a river. The Eulerian specification of the flow field is a way
of looking at fluid motion that focuses on specific locations
in the space through which the fluid flows as time passes.
This can be visualized by sitting on the bank of a river and
watching the water pass the fixed location.”
These concepts are very relevant to how we analyze
videos of human activity. In the Eulerian viewpoint, we
would focus on feature vectors at particular locations, either
(x, y) or (x, y, z), and consider evolution over time while
staying fixed in space at the location. In the Lagrangian
viewpoint, we would track, say a person over space-time
and track the associated feature vector across space-time.

While the older literature for activity recognition e.g.,
[11, 18, 53] typically adopted the Lagrangian viewpoint,
ever since the advent of neural networks based on 3D spacetime convolution, e.g., [50], the Eulerian viewpoint became
standard in state-of-the-art approaches such as SlowFast
Networks [16]. Even after the switch to transformer architectures [12, 52] the Eulerian viewpoint has persisted. This
is noteworthy because the tokenization step for transformers gives us an opportunity to freshly examine the question,
“What should be the counterparts of words in video analysis?”. Dosovitskiy et al. [10] suggested that image patches
were a good choice, and the continuation of that idea to
video suggests that spatiotemporal cuboids would work for
video as well.
On the contrary, in this work we take the Lagrangian
viewpoint for analysing human actions. This specifies that
we reason about the trajectory of an entity over time. Here,
the entity can be low-level, e.g., a pixel or a patch, or highlevel, e.g., a person. Since, we are interested in understanding human actions, we choose to operate on the level of
“humans-as-entities”. To this end, we develop a method
that processes trajectories of people in video and uses them
to recognize their action. We recover these trajectories by
capitalizing on a recently introduced 3D tracking method
PHALP [43] and HMR 2.0 [19]. As shown in Figure 1
PHALP recovers person tracklets from video by lifting people to 3D, which means that we can both link people over
a series of frames and get access to their 3D representation. Given these 3D representations of people (i.e., 3D
pose and 3D location), we use them as the basic content of
each token. This allows us to build a flexible system where
the model, here a transformer, takes as input tokens corresponding to the different people with access to their identity,
3D pose and 3D location. Having 3D location of the people in the scene allow us to learn interaction among people.
Our model relying on this tokenization can benefit from 3D
tracking and pose, and outperforms previous baseline that
only have access to pose information [8, 45].
While the change in human pose over time is a strong
signal, some actions require more contextual information
about the appearance and the scene. Therefore, it is important to also fuse pose with appearance information from

640

