This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Bag-of-Prototypes Representation for Dataset-Level Applications
Weijie Tu1 Weijian Deng1 Tom Gedeon2 Liang Zheng1
1
Australian National University 2 Curtin University

Abstract
This work investigates dataset vectorization for two
dataset-level tasks: assessing training set suitability and
test set difficulty. The former measures how suitable a training set is for a target domain, while the latter studies how
challenging a test set is for a learned model. Central to
the two tasks is measuring the underlying relationship between datasets. This needs a desirable dataset vectorization scheme, which should preserve as much discriminative
dataset information as possible so that the distance between
the resulting dataset vectors can reflect dataset-to-dataset
similarity. To this end, we propose a bag-of-prototypes
(BoP) dataset representation that extends the image-level
bag consisting of patch descriptors to dataset-level bag consisting of semantic prototypes. Specifically, we develop a
codebook consisting of K prototypes clustered from a reference dataset. Given a dataset to be encoded, we quantize each of its image features to a certain prototype in the
codebook and obtain a K-dimensional histogram. Without
assuming access to dataset labels, the BoP representation
provides rich characterization of the dataset semantic distribution. Furthermore, BoP representations cooperate well
with Jensen-Shannon divergence for measuring dataset-todataset similarity. Although very simple, BoP consistently
shows its advantage over existing representations on a series of benchmarks for two dataset-level tasks.

1. Introduction
Datasets are fundamental in machine learning research,
forming the basis of model training and testing [18, 51, 52,
61]. While large-scale datasets bring opportunities in algorithm design, there lack proper tools to analyze and make
the best use of them [6,51,56]. Therefore, as opposed to traditional algorithm-centric research where improving models is of primary interest, the community has seen a growing interest in understanding and analyzing the data used for
developing models [51, 56]. Recent examples of such goal
include data synthesis [29], data sculpting [25,51], and data
valuation [6, 32, 56]. These tasks typically focus on individual sample of a dataset. In this work, we aim to understand

nature of datasets from a dataset-level perspective.
This work considers two dataset-level tasks: suitability
in training and difficulty in testing. First, training set suitability denotes whether a training set is suitable for training
models for a target dataset. In real-world applications, we
are often provided with multiple training sets from various
data distributions (e.g., universities and hospitals). Due to
distribution shift, their trained models have different performance on the target dataset. Then, it is of high practical
value to select the most suitable training set for the target
dataset. Second, test set difficulty means how challenging a
test set is for a learned model. In practice, test sets are usually unlabeled and often come from different distributions
than that of the training set. Measuring the test set difficulty
for a learned model helps us understand the model reliability, thereby ensuring safe model deployment.
The core of the two dataset-level tasks is to measure the
relationship between datasets. For example, a training set
is more suitable for learning a model if it is more similar
to the target dataset. To this end, we propose a vectorization scheme to represent a dataset. Then, the relationship
between a pair of datasets can be simply reflected by the
distance between their representations. Yet, it is challenging to encode a dataset as a representative vector, because
(i) a dataset has a different cardinality (number of images)
and (ii) each image has its own semantic content (e.g., category). It is thus critical to find an effective way to aggregate
all image features to uncover dataset semantic distributions.
In the literature, some researchers use the first few moments of distributions such as feature mean and co-variance
to represent datasets [20, 62, 74, 75, 82]. While being computational friendly, these methods do not offer sufficiently
strong descriptive ability of a dataset, such as class distributions, and thus have limited effectiveness in assessing attributes related to semantics. There are also some methods
learn task-specific dataset representations [1, 63]. For example, given a dataset with labels and a task loss function,
Task2Vec [1] computes an embedding based on estimates
of the Fisher information matrix associated with a probe
network’s parameters. While these task-specific representations are able to predict task similarities, they are not suitable for characterizing dataset properties of interest. They

2881

