This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Identity Leakage:
The Stumbling Block to Improving Deepfake Detection Generalization
Shichao Dong1,∗ , Jin Wang1,∗ , Renhe Ji1,† , Jiajun Liang1 , Haoqiang Fan1 , Zheng Ge1
1
MEGVII Technology
{dongshichao,wangjin,jirenhe,liangjiajun,fhq,gezheng}@megvii.com

(a)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, face-swap abusers use different face manipulation methods [17, 29, 29, 31, 65] to generate fake images/videos. Those images/videos are then used to spread
fake news, make malicious hoaxes, and forge judicial evidence, which have caused severe consequences. In order
to alleviate such situations, an increasing number of deepfake detection methods [12,14,42,59,60,63] have been proposed to filter out manipulated images/videos from massive
online media resources, ensuring the filtered images/videos
are genuine and reliable.
Previous methods usually dealt with the task of deepfake detection with binary classifiers [1,2,10,46,51]. These
methods have achieved great detection accuracy in detecting the seen attacks learned in the training datasets (i.e. the
in-dataset evaluations). However, when confronted with
media generated from newly-proposed deepfake methods
(i.e. the cross-dataset evaluations), these methods often suffered from significant performance drops. Though plenty of
researchers have designed effective methods [32, 74, 75] to
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Source Image

Target Image

Fake Image

New Target Image

In Dataset

(b)
Target (ID-2)

Fake
Identities

Genuine
Identities

Source (ID-1)

Identity Boundary

In this paper, we analyse the generalization ability of binary classifiers for the task of deepfake detection. We find
that the stumbling block to their generalization is caused by
the unexpected learned identity representation on images.
Termed as the Implicit Identity Leakage, this phenomenon
has been qualitatively and quantitatively verified among
various DNNs. Furthermore, based on such understanding, we propose a simple yet effective method named the IDunaware Deepfake Detection Model to reduce the influence
of this phenomenon. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art in
both in-dataset and cross-dataset evaluation. The code is
available at https://github.com/megvii-research/CADDM.

Genuine

Fake
(Unseen)

ID-2
Information
ID-1
Information

Fake (ID-3)
Fake

Genuine
(Unseen)

Cross Dataset

Figure 1. The Implicit Identity Leakage phenomenon. Since the
fake image retains some features of its source image, its identity
should not be completely regarded as its target image. As a consequence, there exists an implicit gap between genuine identities and
fake identities in the training set, which is unintentionally captured
by binary classifiers. When confronted with images manipulated
by unseen face-swap methods, the classifier tends to misuse identity information and make false predictions.

improve the generalization of deepfake detection models, it
still lacks a thorough analysis of why binary classifiers fail
to perform well on the cross-dataset evaluation.
In this paper, given well-trained binary classifiers of
deepfake detection, we find that the stumbling block for
their generalization ability is caused by the mistakenly
learned identity representation on images. As shown in Fig.
1 (a), a deepfake image is usually generated by replacing
the face of the source image with the face of the target image. However, we notice that the procedure of synthesizing
the fake image [5, 17, 29] may cause the information loss
of ID representations. The identity of the fake image can
not be considered as the same as either its target image or
its source image. In particular, when the face of the target
image is swapped back with the face of the fake image, it is
noticeable that the identity of the target image is altered.
In this way, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), when learning a

3994

