This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Fuse Monocular and Multi-view Cues for
Multi-frame Depth Estimation in Dynamic Scenes
Rui Li1 , Dong Gong2 , Wei Yin3 , Hao Chen4 , Yu Zhu1 , Kaixuan Wang3 ,
Xiaozhi Chen3 , Jinqiu Sun1 , Yanning Zhang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 The University of New South Wales, 3 DJI, 4 Zhejiang University

Input

Multi-frame depth estimation generally achieves high
accuracy relying on the multi-view geometric consistency.
When applied in dynamic scenes, e.g., autonomous driving,
this consistency is usually violated in the dynamic areas,
leading to corrupted estimations. Many multi-frame methods handle dynamic areas by identifying them with explicit
masks and compensating the multi-view cues with monocular cues represented as local monocular depth or features.
The improvements are limited due to the uncontrolled quality of the masks and the underutilized benefits of the fusion of the two types of cues. In this paper, we propose a
novel method to learn to fuse the multi-view and monocular cues encoded as volumes without needing the heuristically crafted masks. As unveiled in our analyses, the multiview cues capture more accurate geometric information in
static areas, and the monocular cues capture more useful
contexts in dynamic areas. To let the geometric perception learned from multi-view cues in static areas propagate
to the monocular representation in dynamic areas and let
monocular cues enhance the representation of multi-view
cost volume, we propose a cross-cue fusion (CCF) module,
which includes the cross-cue attention (CCA) to encode the
spatially non-local relative intra-relations from each source
to enhance the representation of the other. Experiments on
real-world datasets prove the significant effectiveness and
generalization ability of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental and challenging task
for 3D scene understanding in various application scenarios, such as autonomous driving [10, 16, 27]. With the
advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [12, 18],
depth estimation methods [2, 24–26, 40, 45, 46] are capable
of predicting promising results given either single or mulCorresponding author: Y. Zhang, D. Gong, W. Yin.

GT Depth

Abs.Rel

80m

0m
0.5

Ours

Monocular
Cues

Abstract

Multi-frame
Cues

https://github.com/ruili3/dynamic-multiframe-depth

0.0

Figure 1. Depth estimation in dynamic scenes. Multi-frame predictions reserve high overall accuracy while degrading in dynamic
areas. The monocular method better handles moving areas while
suffering in static areas. Our method fuses both multi-frame and
monocular depth cues for final prediction, yielding superior performance of the whole scene.

tiple images. The single image-based methods learn the
monocular cues, e.g., the texture or object-level features,
to predict the depth [2, 42, 44] , while multi-frame methods [36,37,40] can generally obtain higher overall accuracy
relying on the multi-view geometric cues. Specifically, the
3D cost volume has been proved simple and effective for
depth estimation, which encodes the multi-frame matching
probabilities with a set of depth hypotheses [15, 37, 40].
Although multi-frame methods are widely used in scene
reconstruction [15, 34, 40], they encounter non-negligible
challenges in the dynamic scenes with dynamic areas (e.g.,
moving cars and pedestrians). The dynamic areas cause
corrupted values in the cost volume due to the violation of
multi-view consistency [9,33] and mislead the network predictions. However, depth estimation for the dynamic areas
is usually crucial in most applications [10,16,19]. As shown
in Fig. 1, multi-frame depth estimation for the dynamic cars
is more challenging than the static backgrounds.
To handle the dynamic areas violating the multi-view
consistency, a few multi-frame depth estimation methods
[9, 36, 37] try to identify and exclude the dynamic areas

21539

