This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Part-Aware Editable 3D Shapes without 3D Supervision
Konstantinos Tertikas*1,3 Despoina Paschalidou2 Boxiao Pan2
Jeong Joon Park2 Mikaela Angelina Uy2 Ioannis Emiris3,1 Yannis Avrithis4 Leonidas Guibas2
1
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens 2 Stanford University
3
Athena RC, Greece 4 Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI)

Figure 1. Part-Aware Controllable 3D Shape Generation and Editing. We address the task of part-aware 3D shape generation and
editing without explicit 3D supervision. Prior part-aware generative models [34, 40] assume 3D supervision, at training, and only allow
changing the shape of the object. In this work, we introduce PartNeRF, a generative model capable of editing the shape and appearance of
generated shapes that are parametrized as a collection of locally defined NeRFs.

Abstract
Impressive progress in generative models and implicit
representations gave rise to methods that can generate 3D
shapes of high quality. However, being able to locally control and edit shapes is another essential property that can
unlock several content creation applications. Local control
can be achieved with part-aware models, but existing methods require 3D supervision and cannot produce textures. In
this work, we devise PartNeRF, a novel part-aware generative model for editable 3D shape synthesis that does not
require any explicit 3D supervision. Our model generates
objects as a set of locally defined NeRFs, augmented with
an affine transformation. This enables several editing operations such as applying transformations on parts, mixing
* Work done during internship at Stanford.

parts from different objects etc. To ensure distinct, manipulable parts we enforce a hard assignment of rays to parts
that makes sure that the color of each ray is only determined
by a single NeRF. As a result, altering one part does not affect the appearance of the others. Evaluations on various
ShapeNet categories demonstrate the ability of our model to
generate editable 3D objects of improved fidelity, compared
to previous part-based generative approaches that require
3D supervision or models relying on NeRFs.

1. Introduction
Generating realistic and editable 3D content is a longstanding problem in computer vision and graphics that has
recently gained more attention due to the increased demand
for 3D objects in AR/VR, robotics and gaming applications.

4466

