This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Shrinkage Pyramid for Camouflaged Object Detection
with Transformers
Zhou Huang1,2† Hang Dai3† Tian-Zhu Xiang4 * Shuo Wang5
Huai-Xin Chen2 Jie Qin6 Huan Xiong7
1
Sichuan Changhong Electric Co., Ltd. 2 UESTC 3 University of Glasgow
4
G42 5 ETH Zurich 6 CCST, NUAA 7 MBZUAI
chowhuang@std.uestc.edu.cn, hang.dai@glasgow.ac.uk, {tianzhu.xiang19,

1. Introduction
Camouflage is a common defense or tactic in organisms that “perfectly” blend in with their surroundings to
deceive predators (prey) or sneak up on prey (hunters).
Camouflaged object detection (COD) [11] aims to segment
camouflaged objects in the scene and has been widely ap† Equal contributions. *Corresponding author: Tian-Zhu Xiang.

Large
Multiple

Vision transformers have recently shown strong global
context modeling capabilities in camouflaged object detection. However, they suffer from two major limitations: less
effective locality modeling and insufficient feature aggregation in decoders, which are not conducive to camouflaged object detection that explores subtle cues from indistinguishable backgrounds. To address these issues, in
this paper, we propose a novel transformer-based Feature
Shrinkage Pyramid Network (FSPNet), which aims to hierarchically decode locality-enhanced neighboring transformer features through progressive shrinking for camouflaged object detection. Specifically, we propose a nonlocal token enhancement module (NL-TEM) that employs
the non-local mechanism to interact neighboring tokens and
explore graph-based high-order relations within tokens to
enhance local representations of transformers. Moreover,
we design a feature shrinkage decoder (FSD) with adjacent interaction modules (AIM), which progressively aggregates adjacent transformer features through a layer-bylayer shrinkage pyramid to accumulate imperceptible but
effective cues as much as possible for object information
decoding. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that the proposed model significantly
outperforms the existing 24 competitors on three challenging COD benchmark datasets under six widely-used evaluation metrics. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/ZhouHuang23/FSPNet.

Uncertain Occluded

Abstract

Small

shawnwang.tech, qinjiebuaa, huan.xiong.math}@gmail.com, huaixinchen@uestc.edu.cn

Image

GT

Ours

ZoomNet

SINetV2

Figure 1. Visual comparison of COD in different challenging scenarios, including small, large, multiple, occluded and
boundary-uncertain camouflaged objects. Compared with the recently proposed ZoomNet [30] and SINet-v2 [10], our method provides superior performance with more accurate object localization
and more complete object segmentation, mainly due to the proposed locality-enhanced global context exploration and progressive shrinkage decoder.

plied in species conservation [29], medical image segmentation [5, 20], and industrial defect detection [3], etc.
Due to the high similarities between camouflaged objects
and their backgrounds, camouflaged objects are usually inconspicuous and indistinguishable, which brings great challenges to accurate detection. Recently, the development
of deep learning and the availability of large-scale COD
datasets (e.g., COD10K [11]) have significantly advanced
camouflaged object detection. Numerous deep learningbased methods have been proposed, which can be roughly
divided into three categories: targeted design of feature exploration modules, multi-task joint learning frameworks,

5557

