This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffPose: Toward More Reliable 3D Pose Estimation
Jia Gong1†

Lin Geng Foo1† Zhipeng Fan2§ Qiuhong Ke3 Hossein Rahmani4
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
New York University 3 Monash University 4 Lancaster University

Jun Liu1‡

{jia gong,lingeng foo}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, zf606@nyu.edu, qiuhong.ke@monash.edu,
h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract

Forward diffusion
Reverse diffusion

Monocular 3D human pose estimation is quite challenging due to the inherent ambiguity and occlusion, which often
lead to high uncertainty and indeterminacy. On the other
hand, diffusion models have recently emerged as an effective tool for generating high-quality images from noise. Inspired by their capability, we explore a novel pose estimation framework (DiffPose) that formulates 3D pose estimation as a reverse diffusion process. We incorporate novel designs into our DiffPose to facilitate the diffusion process for
3D pose estimation: a pose-specific initialization of pose
uncertainty distributions, a Gaussian Mixture Model-based
forward diffusion process, and a context-conditioned reverse diffusion process. Our proposed DiffPose significantly
outperforms existing methods on the widely used pose
estimation benchmarks Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP.
Project page: https://gongjia0208.github.io/Diffpose/.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation, which aims to predict the 3D
coordinates of human joints from images or videos, is an
important task with a wide range of applications, including
augmented reality [5], sign language translation [21] and
human-robot interaction [40], attracting a lot of attention
in recent years [23, 46, 50, 52]. Generally, the mainstream
approach is to conduct 3D pose estimation in two stages: the
2D pose is first obtained with a 2D pose detector, and then
2D-to-3D lifting is performed (where the lifting process is
the primary aspect that most recent works [2, 10, 16, 17, 19,
32, 54] focus on). Yet, despite the considerable progress,
monocular 3D pose estimation still remains challenging. In
particular, it can be difficult to accurately predict 3D pose
from monocular data due to many challenges, including the
inherent depth ambiguity and the potential occlusion, which
often lead to high indeterminacy and uncertainty.
† Equal contribution; § Currently at Meta; ‡ Corresponding author

2D pose sequence
Context condition

Initial Pose
Distribution

𝑯𝑲

𝝐

𝝐

𝝐

𝝐

𝒈

𝒈

𝒈

𝒈

𝑯𝒌

𝑯𝟎

Desired
3D Pose

Figure 1. Overview of our DiffPose framework. In the forward
process (denoted with blue dotted arrows), we gradually diffuse
a “ground truth” 3D pose distribution H0 with low indeterminacy towards a 3D pose distribution with high uncertainty HK
by adding noise ϵ at every step, which generates intermediate distributions to guide model training. Before the reverse process, we
first initialize the indeterminate 3D pose distribution HK from the
input. Then, during the reverse process (denoted with red solid
arrows), we use the diffusion model g, conditioned on the context
information from 2D pose sequence, to progressively transform
HK into a 3D pose distribution H0 with low indeterminacy.

On the other hand, diffusion models [12, 38] have recently become popular as an effective way to generate highquality images [33]. Generally, diffusion models are capable of generating samples that match a specified data distribution (e.g., natural images) from random (indeterminate)
noise through multiple steps where the noise is progressively removed [12, 38]. Intuitively, such a paradigm of
progressive denoising helps to break down the large gap between distributions (from a highly uncertain one to a determinate one) into smaller intermediate steps [39] and thus
successfully helps the model to converge towards smoothly
generating samples from the target data distribution.
Inspired by the strong capability of diffusion models to
generate realistic samples even from a starting point with
high uncertainty (e.g., random noise), here we aim to tackle
3D pose estimation, which also involves handling uncertainty and indeterminacy (of 3D poses), with diffusion models. In this paper, we propose DiffPose, a novel framework
that represents a new brand of diffusion-based 3D pose estimation approach, which also follows the mainstream twostage pipeline. In short, DiffPose models the 3D pose esti-

13041

