This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Accurate 3D Shape Based on Stereo Polarimetric Imaging
Tianyu Huang1 * Haoang Li1,2 * Kejing He1 Congying Sui1 Bin Li1 Yun-Hui Liu1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Technical University of Munich, Germany

Abstract
Shape from Polarization (SfP) aims to recover surface
normal using the polarization cues of light. The accuracy
of existing SfP methods is affected by two main problems.
First, the ambiguity of polarization cues partially results in
false normal estimation. Second, the widely-used assumption about orthographic projection is too ideal. To solve
these problems, we propose the first approach that combines deep learning and stereo polarization information to
recover not only normal but also disparity. Specifically,
for the ambiguity problem, we design a Shape Consistencybased Mask Prediction (SCMP) module. It exploits the inherent consistency between normal and disparity to identify the areas with false normal estimation. We replace the
unreliable features enclosed by these areas with new features extracted by global attention mechanism. As to the
orthographic projection problem, we propose a novel Viewing Direction-aided Positional Encoding (VDPE) strategy.
This strategy is based on the unique pixel-viewing direction
encoding, and thus enables our neural network to handle
the non-orthographic projection. In addition, we establish
a real-world stereo SfP dataset that contains various object categories and illumination conditions. Experiments
showed that compared with existing SfP methods, our approach is more accurate. Moreover, our approach shows
higher robustness to light variation.

1. Introduction
3D shape recovery is a fundamental problem in computer vision and has been extensively studied [15, 26, 31].
However, existing shape recovery methods have some limitations. For example, the geometry-based methods, e.g.,
structure from motion [33, 37] have difficulty in dealing
with texture-less regions and can only recover sparse point
cloud. While the photometric stereo methods [15, 18]
can recover dense surface, they need cumbersome photometric calibration. By contrast, shape from polarization
* Tianyu Huang and Haoang Li contributed equally to this work.
† Yun-Hui Liu is the corresponding author.

(SfP) [11, 20, 40] can avoid the above problems by using
the polarization cues of light. Specifically, polarization cues
can detect rich geometric details even for white wall [11].
Moreover, such cues can be easily obtained in a single shot
with the quad-Bayer polarization camera [46].
Despite the above advantages of SfP, there remain two
main problems that affect the recovery accuracy. First, the
ambiguous polarization cues are inevitable due to unidirectional measurement [10]. These cues partially result in false
normal estimation. To solve this problem, early SfP methods rely on specific assumptions about shape prior [2, 40]
and lead to unsatisfactory recovery accuracy. Recently,
some approaches use stereo [16] or multi-view [49] polarization information for disambiguation. However, the accuracy of these methods is limited by the low quality of
stereo matching for polarization cues. Second, most existing SfP approaches assume orthographic projection for
modelling simplification [35, 40]. Such assumption ignores
the influence of viewing directions, which affects the accuracy of polarimetric measurements. A representative work
for this problem is based on a perspective phase angle constraint [8], but this constraint is still insufficient.
In addition to the above attempts to solve the ambiguity and orthographic projection problems, some methods
are proposed based on deep learning [3, 12, 23, 25]. They
improve the shape recovery accuracy to some extent. However, they still partly suffer from the ambiguity problem due
to monocular imaging. By contrast, our method is based on
stereo polarimetric imaging. To the best of our knowledge,
our approach is the first one that combines stereo polarization information and deep learning to estimate both normal
and disparity.
As shown in Fig. 1, we integrate convolutional neural
network (CNN) with Vision Transformer [13, 14] to design
the feature extraction module. This module considers both
local and global contexts [34] to extract stereo feature maps.
For one thing, we use the feature map of the left view to estimate the normal map. For another thing, we exploit the
stereo feature maps to generate a polarimetric cost volume.
This cost volume aligns stereo features to estimate the disparity map. Our joint estimation of normal and disparity

17287

