This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Incompatible Knowledge Transfer in Few-shot Image Generation
Yunqing Zhao1

Chao Du2
Milad Abdollahzadeh1
Tianyu Pang2
Min Lin2 Shuicheng Yan2 Ngai-Man Cheung1
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD) 2 Sea AI Lab
yunqing zhao@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,
Church ↦ Sailboat
(c)

(a)
Resulting
generator

LSUNChurch
(126 K)

ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg
FFHQ ↦ AFHQ-Cat

Church ↦ Sailboat

FFHQ ↦ AFHQ-Cat

Gs

Gs

TGAN
Pretraining on large source dataset
(e.g., LSUN-Church, FFHQ…)

EWC
Resulting
generator

SailBoat
(10-shot)

Gt

initialize

Adaptation on few-shot target samples
(e.g., Sailboat, AFHQ-Cat…)

Transfer Learning for FSIG

(b)

AdAM

Ours
ProgressiveGAN

StyleGAN-V2

AFHQ-Cat
(10-shot)

SailBoat
(10-shot)

Figure 1. In FSIG, transfer of incompatible knowledge would cause significant degradation of the realisticness of synthetic samples,
and existing SOTA methods fail to address this issue. (a) Prior knowledge of the source GAN generator Gs is selected, preserved, and
transferred to learn the target generator Gt , given very limited target domain training samples (see 10-shot in (b)). In this work, we consider
challenging setups where the target domain could be semantically distant from the source domain, e.g., (i) Church Ñ Sailboat (ii) FFHQ
Ñ AFHQ-Cat. (c) Synthetic images from Gs , TGAN [65]; and SOTA methods: EWC [41] and AdAM [75]. Images in each column are
from the same noise input. Critically, existing FSIG methods focus on knowledge preservation, while failing to prevent the transfer of
knowledge that is incompatible with the target domain. This gives rise to unrealistic samples generated by Gt , e.g., “Trees/Buildings on
the Sea” (Red frames), or “Cats with Glasses” (Green frames). In contrast, our method (row-5 in (c)) based on knowledge truncation can
effectively prevent the transfer of incompatible knowledge. See our detailed analysis in Sec. 4. Best viewed in color with zooming in.

Abstract
Few-shot image generation (FSIG) learns to generate diverse and high-fidelity images from a target domain using a
few (e.g., 10) reference samples. Existing FSIG methods select, preserve and transfer prior knowledge from a source
generator (pretrained on a related domain) to learn the target generator. In this work, we investigate an underexplored
issue in FSIG, dubbed as incompatible knowledge transfer,
which would significantly degrade the realisticness of synthetic samples. Empirical observations show that the issue
stems from the least significant filters from the source generator. To this end, we propose knowledge truncation to
mitigate this issue in FSIG, which is a complementary operation to knowledge preservation and is implemented by a
lightweight pruning-based method. Extensive experiments
show that knowledge truncation is simple and effective, consistently achieving state-of-the-art performance, including

challenging setups where the source and target domains are
more distant. Project Page: yunqing-me.github.io/RICK.

1. Introduction
Over recent years, deep generative models [14,15,21,30,
52, 78] have made tremendous progress, enabling many intriguing tasks such as image generation [5, 27–29], image
editing [45, 63, 68, 80], and data augmentation [6, 12, 59].
In spite of their remarkable success, most research on generative models has been focusing on setups with sizeable
training datasets [24, 26, 59, 60, 69, 74], limiting its applications in many domains where data collection is difficult or
expensive [12, 13, 46] (e.g., medicine).
To address such problems, FSIG has been proposed recently [41, 50], which learns to generate images with extremely few reference samples (e.g., 10 samples) from a target domain. In these regimes, learning a generator to capture the underlying target distribution is an undetermined

7380

