This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Anomalies for Video Anomaly Detection with
Prompt-based Feature Mapping
Zuhao Liu, Xiao-Ming Wu, Dian Zheng, Kun-Yu Lin, Wei-Shi Zheng*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{liuzh327, wuxm65, zhengd35, linky5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Anomaly detection in surveillance videos is a challenging computer vision task where only normal videos are
available during training. Recent work released the first
virtual anomaly detection dataset to assist real-world detection. However, an anomaly gap exists because the anomalies are bounded in the virtual dataset but unbounded in the
real world, so it reduces the generalization ability of the
virtual dataset. There also exists a scene gap between virtual and real scenarios, including scene-specific anomalies
(events that are abnormal in one scene but normal in another) and scene-specific attributes, such as the viewpoint
of the surveillance camera. In this paper, we aim to solve
the problem of the anomaly gap and scene gap by proposing
a prompt-based feature mapping framework (PFMF). The
PFMF contains a mapping network guided by an anomaly
prompt to generate unseen anomalies with unbounded types
in the real scenario, and a mapping adaptation branch to
narrow the scene gap by applying domain classifier and
anomaly classifier. The proposed framework outperforms
the state-of-the-art on three benchmark datasets. Extensive ablation experiments also show the effectiveness of our
framework design.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) aims to identify abnormal scenarios in surveillance videos with broad applications
in public security. However, due to the small probability of
occurrence, abnormal events are difficult to be observed in
real-life surveillance. The challenge increases because of
the unconstrained nature of abnormal events. Given a specific scenario, the event different from normal events can
all be regarded as anomalies, so the anomaly type is unbounded.
* Corresponding author

Most VAD approaches address this challenge by learning the distribution of normal events in the training stage
and detecting the out-of-distribution events in the testing
stage. These methods are categorized into reconstructionbased methods [1, 14, 31] to reconstruct the current frame
and prediction-based methods [26, 27, 27, 30, 34] to predict
the upcoming frame. Significant reconstruction or prediction error is regarded as an anomaly. However, due to the
strong generalization ability of the deep networks and the
similarity between normal and abnormal events, the anomalies do not always lead to enough error to be detected. Without prior knowledge of abnormal distribution, it is difficult
for the network to detect unseen anomalies.
Therefore, instead of calculating error with the distribution of normal behaviors, some methods [11, 12, 53, 54]
try to generate pseudo anomalies to simulate the distribution of abnormal behaviors. For example, Georgescu et
al. [12] collect a large number of images from Tiny ImageNet unrelated to the detection scenario as pseudo anomalous samples. Their other work [11] tries to generate temporal anomalies by reversing the action order or motion irregularity by extracting intermittent frames. The network can
get a glimpse of the feature distribution different from normal events by manually applying pseudo anomalies. However, the main drawback of these methods is the unavoidable gap between pseudo and natural anomalies.
To solve the problem of pseudo anomalies, Acsintoae et
al. [2] released a virtual VAD dataset named Ubnormal using 3D animations and 2D background images. It contains
22 types of anomaly, such as fighting, stealing, laying down,
etc. The distribution of real anomalies can be well evaluated by applying the virtual dataset. However, applying
virtual anomalies to real scenarios is a great challenge due
to the large domain gap. Acsintoae et al. [2] train a CycleGAN [60] to achieve video-level style transfer from virtual
to the real domain to address the challenge.
However, existing methods fail to address two key challenges. Firstly, the anomalies are bounded in the virtual
dataset but unbounded in the real world, and we define

24500

