This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prefix Conditioning Unifies Language and Label Supervision
Kuniaki Saito1,2∗, Kihyuk Sohn3 , Xiang Zhang2 , Chun-Liang Li2 ,
Chen-Yu Lee2 , Kate Saenko1,4 , Tomas Pfister2
{keisaito, saenko}@bu.edu
{kihyuks,fancyzhx,chunliang,chenyulee,tpfister}@google.com
1

Boston University, 2 Google Cloud AI Research, 3 Google Research, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Pretraining visual models on web-scale image-caption
datasets has recently emerged as a powerful alternative
to traditional pretraining on image classification data.
Image-caption datasets are more “open-domain”, containing broader scene types and vocabulary words, and result in models that have strong performance in few- and
zero-shot recognition tasks. However large-scale classification datasets can provide fine-grained categories with
a balanced label distribution. In this work, we study a
pretraining strategy that uses both classification and caption datasets to unite their complementary benefits. First,
we show that naively unifying the datasets results in suboptimal performance in downstream zero-shot recognition
tasks, as the model is affected by dataset bias: the coverage
of image domains and vocabulary words is different in each
dataset. We address this problem with novel Prefix Conditioning, a simple yet effective method that helps disentangle
dataset biases from visual concepts. This is done by introducing prefix tokens that inform the language encoder of the
input data type (e.g., classification vs caption) at training
time. Our approach allows the language encoder to learn
from both datasets while also tailoring feature extraction to
each dataset. Prefix conditioning is generic and can be easily integrated into existing VL pretraining objectives, such
as CLIP or UniCL. In experiments, we show that it improves
zero-shot image recognition and robustness to image-level
distribution shift.

1. Introduction
Supervised classification datasets (e.g., ImageNet [7])
have traditionally been used to pretrain image representations for use in downstream tasks. However, web-scale
image-caption datasets have recently emerged as a powerful pretraining alternative [13, 20, 31]. Such datasets
∗ Work done during internship at Google Cloud AI Research.

Accuracy (%)
(%) on
on
Accuracy
11 standard
standard zero-shot
zero-shot benchmark
benchmark
11

CLIP

IN21K

CC12M

CLIP+
Ours

UniCL+
Ours

UniCL

IN21K + CC12M

IN21K + CC12M

Training Dataset
Training
Dataset

Figure 1. We propose Prefix Conditioning to unify image-caption
(e.g., CC12M [5]) and image classification datasets (e.g., ImageNet21K (IN21K) [7]) for training better zero-shot models. Prefix conditioning improves zero-shot recognition performance by
more than 6% on average when training on ImageNet21K and
CC12M.

are more “open-domain”, containing a wider variety of
scene types and vocabularies than traditional classification
datasets, which are biased towards specific categories in
their fixed label sets. Consequently, models trained on webscale image-caption datasets have shown stronger generalization in novel tasks [4, 31] and demonstrated remarkable performance on few and zero-shot image classification
tasks [31]. Nevertheless, classification datasets are still useful for pre-training as they have a more balanced coverage
of categories, including rare and fine-grained categories,
and a better focus on the labeled objects in each image.
Recent works [43,45] therefore propose to combine caption and classification datasets for pre-training. [43] convert
classification labels to “label-prompts” by inserting the label into a template sentence, e.g., “a photo of a <label>.”1
1 We use the term prompt to indicate a template sentence filled with a
class name.

2861

