This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human Guided Ground-truth Generation for Realistic Image Super-resolution
Du Chen1 ,* Jie Liang1,2∗ , Xindong Zhang1,2 , Ming Liu1,3 , Hui Zeng2 and Lei Zhang1,2†
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 OPPO Research Institute, 3 Harbin Institute of Technology
{csdud.chen, c-ming.liu}@connet.polyu.hk, {liang27jie, cshzeng}@gmail.com
{csxdzhang, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
How to generate the ground-truth (GT) image is a critical issue for training realistic image super-resolution (RealISR) models. Existing methods mostly take a set of highresolution (HR) images as GTs and apply various degradations to simulate their low-resolution (LR) counterparts.
Though great progress has been achieved, such an LR-HR
pair generation scheme has several limitations. First, the
perceptual quality of HR images may not be high enough,
limiting the quality of Real-ISR outputs. Second, existing
schemes do not consider much human perception in GT
generation, and the trained models tend to produce oversmoothed results or unpleasant artifacts. With the above
considerations, we propose a human guided GT generation
scheme. We first elaborately train multiple image enhancement models to improve the perceptual quality of HR images, and enable one LR image having multiple HR counterparts. Human subjects are then involved to annotate
the high quality regions among the enhanced HR images
as GTs, and label the regions with unpleasant artifacts
as negative samples. A human guided GT image dataset
with both positive and negative samples is then constructed,
and a loss function is proposed to train the Real-ISR models. Experiments show that the Real-ISR models trained
on our dataset can produce perceptually more realistic results with less artifacts. Dataset and codes can be found at
https://github.com/ChrisDud0257/HGGT.

1. Introduction
Owing to the rapid development of deep learning techniques [14, 18, 19, 22, 44], the recent years have witnessed
the great progress in image super-resolution (ISR) [2, 8–10,
12, 13, 23, 26–29, 31–33, 35, 45, 46, 48, 51, 52, 54, 56], which
aims at generating a high-resolution (HR) version of the
low-resolution (LR) input. Most of the ISR models (e.g.,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC

RIF grant (R5001-18) and the PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovation Lab.

Figure 1. From left to right and top to bottom: one original HR
image (Ori) in the DIV2K [1] dataset, two of its enhanced positive
versions (Pos-1 and Pos-2) and one negative version (Neg). The
positive versions generally have clearer details and better perceptual quality, while the negative version has some unpleasant visual
artifacts. Please zoom in for better observation.

CNN [37, 38] or transformer [5, 29] based ones) are trained
on a large amount of LR-HR image pairs, while the generation of LR-HR image pairs is critical to the real-world
performance of ISR models.
Most of the existing ISR methods take the HR images
(or after some sharpening operations [46]) as ground-truths
(GTs), and use them to synthesize the LR images to build
the LR-HR training pairs. In the early stage, bicubic downsampling is commonly used to synthesize the LR images
from their HR counterparts [8,9,23,33,42,56]. However, the
ISR models trained on such HR-LR pairs can hardly generalize to real-world images whose degradation process is
much more complex. Therefore, some researchers proposed
to collect HR-LR image pairs by using long-short camera
focal lengths [3, 4]. While such a degradation process is
more reasonable than bicubic downsampling, it only covers
a small subspace of possible image degradations. Recently,
researchers [12, 20, 30, 32, 34, 46, 50, 51, 59] have proposed

14082

