This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Granularity Archaeological Dating of Chinese Bronze Dings Based on a
Knowledge-Guided Relation Graph
Rixin Zhou1

Jiafu Wei1
Qian Zhang3
Ruihua Qi3
Xi Yang1,2, *
Chuntao Li3, *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
2
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MoE, China
3
School of Archaeology, Jilin University

Shang
Early

Western Zhou

Late

Early

Mid

Spring and Autumn

Late

Early

Mid

Late

Warring States
Early

1046B.C.

Late

342B.C.

16th Century B.C. 13th Century B.C.

15th Century B.C.

Mid

922B.C.

878B.C.

771B.C.

672B.C.

574B.C.

475B.C.

341B.C.

266B.C.

221B.C.

Figure 1. Typical examples of Chinese bronze dings from 4 dynasties and 11 periods. The columns from left to right show Shang (Early,
Late), Western Zhou (Early, Mid, Late), Spring and Autumn (Early, Mid, Late), and Warring States (Early, Mid, Late). The timeline under
the image is the time range for the corresponding periods, where B.C. indicates Before Christ.

Abstract
The archaeological dating of bronze dings has played a
critical role in the study of ancient Chinese history. Current
archaeology depends on trained experts to carry out bronze
dating, which is time-consuming and labor-intensive. For
such dating, in this study, we propose a learning-based approach to integrate advanced deep learning techniques and
archaeological knowledge. To achieve this, we first collect
a large-scale image dataset of bronze dings, which contains
richer attribute information than other existing fine-grained
datasets. Second, we introduce a multihead classifier and a
knowledge-guided relation graph to mine the relationship
between attributes and the ding era. Third, we conduct
comparison experiments with various existing methods, the
results of which show that our dating method achieves a
state-of-the-art performance. We hope that our data and

applied networks will enrich fine-grained classification research relevant to other interdisciplinary areas of expertise.
The dataset and source code used are included in our supplementary materials, and will be open after submission
owing to the anonymity policy. Source codes and data are
available at: https://github.com/zhourixin/bronze-Ding

1. Introduction
Dings are cauldrons used for cooking, storage, and ritual offerings to gods or ancestors in ancient China, and
they are the most important species used in Chinese ritual
bronzes [35]. The archaeological dating of dings has contributed to the study of ancient Chinese history. Although
the excavated bronzes are massive, dating such artifacts depends on the long-term training and accumulation of expertise in archaeological typology [58]. In addition, some

*Corresponding authors

3103

