This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation with Patch Aligned Contrastive
Learning
Jishnu Mukhoti*1,2 , Tsung-Yu Lin2 , Omid Poursaeed2 , Rui Wang2 , Ashish Shah2 ,
Philip H.S. Torr1 , Ser-Nam Lim2
1
University of Oxford, 2 Meta AI
jishnu.mukhoti@eng.ox.ac.uk, {tsungyulin,opoursaeed,raywang,ashishbshah}@meta.com
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk, sernamlim@meta.com

Abstract
We introduce Patch Aligned Contrastive Learning
(PACL), a modified compatibility function for CLIP’s contrastive loss, intending to train an alignment between the
patch tokens of the vision encoder and the CLS token of the
text encoder. With such an alignment, a model can identify
regions of an image corresponding to a given text input, and
therefore transfer seamlessly to the task of open vocabulary
semantic segmentation without requiring any segmentation
annotations during training. Using pre-trained CLIP encoders with PACL, we are able to set the state-of-the-art
on the task of open vocabulary zero-shot segmentation on
4 different segmentation benchmarks: Pascal VOC, Pascal
Context, COCO Stuff and ADE20K. Furthermore, we show
that PACL is also applicable to image-level predictions and
when used with a CLIP backbone, provides a general improvement in zero-shot classification accuracy compared to
CLIP, across a suite of 12 image classification datasets.

1. Introduction
Understanding the semantic content in visual scenes has
been one of the most important problems studied in computer vision at various levels of granularity. Work on this
problem has led to significant improvements along several
threads including image level predictions like image classification [13, 54, 58], object level predictions like object detection [33, 51, 53, 59–61], as well as pixel level predictions
like semantic segmentation [10,29,51,53]. Although in image classification we require only a single label per image
for prediction, for scene understanding at a higher level of
granularity like segmentation, supervised training requires
annotations at a pixel level. Such annotations require significant human effort and are often very expensive to obtain. This impedes training on a large scale with millions of
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. High level overview of our model. We train an alignment between the patch level embeddings from the image encoder
and the CLS embedding from the text encoder. This alignment
can then be used to perform open-vocabulary semantic segmentation in a zero-shot manner.

images.
One way to tackle this problem could be to train models in an unsupervised manner without requiring any segmentation annotations. The best methods [11, 19] in this
category exploit the similarity between internal representations of self-supervised image encoders [5]. This similarity
is then used to identify and cluster similar regions of the
image as segmentations. These models however are significantly outperformed by their fully supervised counterparts
on most segmentation benchmarks.
Recent improvements in multi-modal foundation models has led to the possibility of training on very large scale
datasets scraped off the internet [41]. These datasets contain
pairs of images and their corresponding natural language
text descriptions. Models like CLIP [41], ALIGN [23],
Florence [59] and CoCa [58] trained on such large internet
scale datasets have been shown to transfer very well to several downstream tasks. Furthermore, having been trained
on natural language textual descriptions, these models are
often expected to recognize a wide variety of real-world visual concepts which can be expressed in natural language, a
setting better known as open vocabulary prediction.
The natural question then is whether these multi-modal
models can be used for pixel level predictions, i.e., semantic

19413

