This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T-SEA: Transfer-based Self-Ensemble Attack on Object Detection
Hao Huang*
Peking University
Beijing, China

Ziyan Chen*
Peking University
Beijing, China

Huanran Chen*
Peking University
Beijing, China

huanghao@stu.pku.edu.cn

chen.ziyan@outlook.com

huanran chen@outlook.com

Yongtao Wang†
Peking University
Beijing, China

Kevin Zhang
Peking University
Beijing, China

wyt@pku.edu.cn

kevinzyz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Compared to query-based black-box attacks, transferbased black-box attacks do not require any information of
the attacked models, which ensures their secrecy. However,
most existing transfer-based approaches rely on ensembling
multiple models to boost the attack transferability, which is
time- and resource-intensive, not to mention the difficulty
of obtaining diverse models on the same task. To address
this limitation, in this work, we focus on the single-model
transfer-based black-box attack on object detection, utilizing only one model to achieve a high-transferability adversarial attack on multiple black-box detectors. Specifically, we first make observations on the patch optimization
process of the existing method and propose an enhanced
attack framework by slightly adjusting its training strategies. Then, we analogize patch optimization with regular
model optimization, proposing a series of self-ensemble approaches on the input data, the attacked model, and the adversarial patch to efficiently make use of the limited information and prevent the patch from overfitting. The experimental results show that the proposed framework can be applied with multiple classical base attack methods (e.g., PGD
and MIM) to greatly improve the black-box transferability
of the well-optimized patch on multiple mainstream detectors, meanwhile boosting white-box performance. Our code
is available at https://github.com/VDIGPKU/TSEA.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of computer vision, deep
learning-based object detectors are being widely applied to
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Object
Function 𝐿

Object
Function 𝐿

Optimizing

Optimizing

🧊 Input 𝑥

🧊 Input 𝑥
🔥 Model 𝑓

🧊 Model 𝑓

🧊 Label 𝑦
Model Opt. 🧊 Frozen
𝑥 : Data Aug.
𝑓: Drop Out

🔥 Patch 𝑝

Patch Opt.

🔥 Trained

𝑥: Data Aug. 𝑓: Shake Drop Self-Ensemble
Strategies
𝑝: Cut Out

Figure 1. Model optimization usually augments the training data
and drop out neurons to increase generalization, motivating us to
propose self-ensemble methods for adversarial patch optimization.
Specifically, inspired by data augmentation in model optimization,
we augment the data x and the model f via constrained data augmentation and model ShakeDrop, respectively. Meanwhile, inspired by drop out in model optimization, we cut out the training
patch τ to prevent it overfitting on specific models or images.

many aspects of our lives, many of which are highly related to our personal safety, including autonomous driving
and intelligent security. Unfortunately, recent works [16,19,
34, 37] have proved that adversarial examples can successfully disrupt the detectors in both digital and physical domains, posing a great threat to detector-based applications.
Hence, the mechanism of adversarial examples on detectors
should be further explored to help us improve the robustness
of detector-based AI applications.
In real scenes, attackers usually cannot obtain the details of the attacked model, so black-box attacks naturally
receive more attention from both academia and industry.

20514

