This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP for All Things Zero-Shot Sketch-Based Image Retrieval,
Fine-Grained or Not
Aneeshan Sain1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2 Subhadeep Koley1,2
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{a.sain, a.bhunia, p.chowdhury, s.koley, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

1. Introduction
Late research on sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR)
[30, 49, 51, 52] had fixated on the zero-shot setup, i.e., zeroshot SBIR (ZS-SBIR) [16, 18, 68]. This shift had become
inevitable because of data-scarcity problem plaguing the
sketch community [5, 7, 33] – there are just not enough
sketches to train a general-purpose SBIR model. It follows that the key behind a successful ZS-SBIR model lies
with how best it conducts semantic transfer cross object

Pre-trained
Encoder
Existing

0.7

0.58

0.6

35 Acc@1 (%)
28.68

25

22.6

0.52
CLIP Image
Encoder

Unseen

0.72

mAP

30

Ours

Prompt

Retrieval

In this paper, we leverage CLIP for zero-shot sketch
based image retrieval (ZS-SBIR). We are largely inspired by
recent advances on foundation models and the unparalleled
generalisation ability they seem to offer, but for the first time
tailor it to benefit the sketch community. We put forward
novel designs on how best to achieve this synergy, for both
the category setting and the fine-grained setting (“all”). At
the very core of our solution is a prompt learning setup.
First we show just via factoring in sketch-specific prompts,
we already have a category-level ZS-SBIR system that overshoots all prior arts, by a large margin (24.8%) – a great
testimony on studying the CLIP and ZS-SBIR synergy. Moving onto the fine-grained setup is however trickier, and requires a deeper dive into this synergy. For that, we come up
with two specific designs to tackle the fine-grained matching nature of the problem: (i) an additional regularisation loss to ensure the relative separation between sketches
and photos is uniform across categories, which is not the
case for the gold standard standalone triplet loss, and
(ii) a clever patch shuffling technique to help establishing
instance-level structural correspondences between sketchphoto pairs. With these designs, we again observe significant performance gains in the region of 26.9% over previous state-of-the-art. The take-home message, if any, is the
proposed CLIP and prompt learning paradigm carries great
promise in tackling other sketch-related tasks (not limited
to ZS-SBIR) where data scarcity remains a great challenge.
Project page: https:// aneeshan95.github.io/ Sketch LVM/

Unseen

Retrieval

Abstract

20

0.5
Text SBIR Ours

SOTA Ours

Figure 1. Against existing (left) ZS-SBIR methods, we adapt CLIP
model for ZS-SBIR (middle), and extend to a more practical yet
challenging setup of FG-ZS-SBIR (right), via a novel promptbased design. Our model surpasses prior arts by a high margin.

categories and between sketch-photo modalities. Despite
great strides made elsewhere on the general zero-shot literature [60, 66, 75] however, semantic transfer [47] for ZSSBIR had remained rather rudimentary, mostly using standard word embeddings directly [16, 18, 73] or indirectly
[37, 62, 65].
In this paper, we fast track ZS-SBIR research to be
aligned with the status quo of the zero-shot literature, and
for the first time, propose a synergy between foundation
models like CLIP [46] and the cross-modal problem of ZSSBIR. And to demonstrate the effectiveness of this synergy, we not only tackle the conventional category-level
ZS-SBIR, but a new and more challenging fine-grained
instance-level [44] ZS-SBIR as well.
Our motivation behind this synergy of CLIP and ZSSBIR is no different to the many latest research adapting
CLIP to vision-language pre-training [22], image and action recognition [47, 66] and especially on zero-shot tasks
[31, 39, 60, 75] – CLIP exhibits a highly enriched semantic latent space, and already encapsulates knowledge across
a myriad of cross-modal data. As for ZS-SBIR, CLIP is
therefore almost a perfect match, as (i) it already provides
a rich semantic space to conduct category transfer, and (ii)
it has an unparalleled understanding on multi-modal data,
which SBIR dictates.
At the very heart of our answer to this synergy is that
of prompt learning [29], that involves learning a set of con-

2765

