This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CHMATCH: Contrastive Hierarchical Matching and Robust Adaptive
Threshold Boosted Semi-Supervised Learning

1

Jianlong Wu1 , Haozhe Yang2 , Tian Gan2∗, Ning Ding3 , Feijun Jiang3 , Liqiang Nie1∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University 3 Alibaba Group
jlwu1992@pku.edu.cn, sailist@outlook.com, gantian@sdu.edu.cn,
{yuji.dn, feijun.jiangfj}@alibaba-inc.com, nieliqiang@gmail.com

Abstract
The recently proposed FixMatch and FlexMatch have
achieved remarkable results in the field of semi-supervised
learning. But these two methods go to two extremes as FixMatch and FlexMatch use a pre-defined constant threshold
for all classes and an adaptive threshold for each category,
respectively. By only investigating consistency regularization, they also suffer from unstable results and indiscriminative feature representation, especially under the situation of few labeled samples. In this paper, we propose a
novel CHMatch method, which can learn robust adaptive
thresholds for instance-level prediction matching as well as
discriminative features by contrastive hierarchical matching. We first present a memory-bank based robust threshold learning strategy to select highly-confident samples. In
the meantime, we make full use of the structured information in the hierarchical labels to learn an accurate affinity
graph for contrastive learning. CHMatch achieves very stable and superior results on several commonly-used benchmarks. For example, CHMatch achieves 8.44% and 9.02%
error rate reduction over FlexMatch on CIFAR-100 under
WRN-28-2 with only 4 and 25 labeled samples per class,
respectively1 .

1. Introduction
Deep learning [18, 33, 41] achieves great success in the
past decade based on large-scale labeled datasets. However,
it is generally hard to collect and expensive to manually annotate such kind of large dataset in practice, which limits its
application. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) attracts much
attention recently, since it can make full use of a few labeled
and massive unlabeled data to facilitate the classification.
For the task of SSL [9, 16, 31, 32], various methods have
∗ Corresponding authors.
1 Project address: https://github.com/sailist/CHMatch

been proposed and promising results have been achieved.
Consistency regularization [44] is one of the most influential techniques in this area. For example, pseudoensemble [3] and temporal ensembling [23] investigate
the instance-level robustness before and after perturbation.
Mean teacher [37] introduces the teacher-student framework and studies the model-level consistency. SNTG [27]
further constructs the similarity graph over the teacher
model to guide the student learning. However, the supervised signal generated by only this strategy is insufficient
for more challenging tasks.
Recently, by combining pseudo-labeling and consistency between weak and strong data augmentations, FixMatch [34] achieves significant improvement. But it relies
on a high fixed threshold for all classes, and only a few
unlabeled samples whose prediction probability is above
the threshold are selected for training, resulting in undesirable efficiency and convergence. Towards this issue, FlexMatch [42] proposes a curriculum learning [4] strategy to
learn adjustable class-specific threshold, which can well improve the results and efficiency. But it still suffers from
the following limitations: (1) The results of both FixMatch
and FlexMatch are unstable and of large variances, which is
shown in Figure 1(a), especially when there are only a small
amount of labeled samples; (2) Only instance-level consistency is investigated, which neglects inter-class relationship
and may make the learned feature indiscriminative.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel
CHMatch method based on hierarchical label and contrastive learning, which takes both the instance-level prediction matching and graph-level similarity matching into
account. Specifically, we first present a memory-bank based
robust adaptive threshold learning strategy, where we only
need one parameter to compute the near-global threshold
for all categories. We compare this strategy with FixMatch
in Figure 1(b). Then this adaptive threshold is used for
instance-level prediction matching under the similar Fix-

15762

