This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEDLAM: A Synthetic Dataset of
Bodies Exhibiting Detailed Lifelike Animated Motion
Michael J. Black1, * Priyanka Patel1, * Joachim Tesch1, * Jinlong Yang2, *,†
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

Google

Figure 1. BEDLAM is a large-scale synthetic video dataset designed to train and test algorithms on the task of 3D human pose and shape
estimation (HPS). BEDLAM contains diverse body shapes, skin tones, and motions. Beyond previous datasets, BEDLAM has SMPL-X
bodies with hair and realistic clothing animated using physics simulation. With BEDLAM’s realism and scale, we find that synthetic data
is sufficient to train regressors to achieve state-of-the-art HPS accuracy on real-image datasets without using any real training images.

Abstract
We show, for the first time, that neural networks trained
only on synthetic data achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on
the problem of 3D human pose and shape (HPS) estimation from real images. Previous synthetic datasets have
been small, unrealistic, or lacked realistic clothing. Achieving sufficient realism is non-trivial and we show how to
do this for full bodies in motion. Specifically, our BEDLAM dataset contains monocular RGB videos with groundtruth 3D bodies in SMPL-X format. It includes a diversity of body shapes, motions, skin tones, hair, and clothing. The clothing is realistically simulated on the moving
bodies using commercial clothing physics simulation. We
render varying numbers of people in realistic scenes with
varied lighting and camera motions. We then train various HPS regressors using BEDLAM and achieve state-ofthe-art accuracy on real-image benchmarks despite training with synthetic data. We use BEDLAM to gain insights
* The authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.
† This work was performed when JL was at MPI-IS.

into what model design choices are important for accuracy. With good synthetic training data, we find that a
basic method like HMR approaches the accuracy of the
current SOTA method (CLIFF). BEDLAM is useful for a
variety of tasks and all images, ground truth bodies, 3D
clothing, support code, and more are available for research
purposes. Additionally, we provide detailed information
about our synthetic data generation pipeline, enabling others to generate their own datasets. See the project page:
https://bedlam.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
The estimation of 3D human pose and shape (HPS)
from images has progressed rapidly since the introduction of HMR [32], which uses a neural network to regress
SMPL [45] pose and shape parameters from an image. A
steady stream of new methods have improved the accuracy
of the estimated 3D bodies [21, 33, 35, 38, 41, 73, 93]. The
progress, however, entangles two things: improvements to
the architecture and improvements to the training data. This
makes it difficult to know which matters most. To answer

8726

