This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Generative Targeted Attacks with Pattern Injection
Weiwei Feng1,∗ , Nanqing Xu1,∗ , Tianzhu Zhang1,2,† , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Deep Space Exploration Lab
fengww@mail.ustc.edu.cn,

xnq@mail.ustc.edu.cn,

{tzzhang, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial attacks can evaluate model robustness and
have been of great concern in recent years. Among various
attacks, targeted attacks aim at misleading victim models to
output adversary-desired predictions, which are more challenging and threatening than untargeted ones. Existing targeted attacks can be roughly divided into instance-specific
and instance-agnostic attacks. Instance-specific attacks
craft adversarial examples via iterative gradient updating
on the specific instance. In contrast, instance-agnostic attacks learn a universal perturbation or a generative model
on the global dataset to perform attacks. However, they rely
too much on the classification boundary of substitute models, ignoring the realistic distribution of the target class,
which may result in limited targeted attack performance.
And there is no attempt to simultaneously combine the information of the specific instance and the global dataset. To
deal with these limitations, we first conduct an analysis via
a causal graph and propose to craft transferable targeted
adversarial examples by injecting target patterns. Based on
this analysis, we introduce a generative attack model composed of a cross-attention guided convolution module and
a pattern injection module. Concretely, the former adopts
a dynamic convolution kernel and a static convolution kernel for the specific instance and the global dataset, respectively, which can inherit the advantages of both instancespecific and instance-agnostic attacks. And the pattern injection module utilizes a pattern prototype to encode target
patterns, which can guide the generation of targeted adversarial examples. Besides, we also provide rigorous theoretical analysis to guarantee the effectiveness of our method.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method shows
superior performance than 10 existing adversarial attacks
against 13 models.

1. Introduction
With the encouraging progress of deep neural networks
(DNNs) in various fields [6, 19, 16, 44, 42], recent studies
∗ Equal Contribution

† Corresponding Author

Perturbation

Adversarial
images

Hippopotamus
97.75%

Hippopotamus
95.47%

(a)

Hippopotamus
98.34%

Police van
45.73%

Tailed frog
37.55%

Bathing cap
53.47%

(b)

Figure 1. Visualization comparison between adversarial examples generated by our method (a) and the instance-specific method
MIM [9] (b). Our perturbations (a) not only show an underlying
dependency with the input instance, but also have strong semantic
patterns or styles of the target class (“Hippopotamus”). In contrast,
the perturbations generated by MIM perform like random noises.
The adversarial examples are generated against ResNet-152, and
labels are predicted by another unknown model (VGG-16).

[36, 29, 28, 38] have corroborated that adversarial examples
generated with small-magnitude perturbations can mislead
the DNNs to make incorrect predictions. Due to the vulnerability of DNNs, adversarial attacks expose a security threat
to real application systems based on deep neural networks,
especially in some sensitive fields such as autonomous driving [27], face verification and financial systems [43], to
name a few. Therefore, adversarial attacks have become
a research hotspot over the past decade [2, 48, 35, 3, 33],
which are significant in demonstrating the adversarial robustness and stability of deep learning models.
To further understand adversarial examples, there are
tremendous works [1, 48, 33, 4, 36, 38] focusing on adversarial attacks. Recently, it has been found that adversarial examples possess an intriguing property of transferability, which indicates that adversarial examples generated
for a white-box model can also mislead another black-box
model. Due to this inherent property, black-box attacks become workable in real-world scenarios where attackers cannot access the attacked model. Extensive methods, such as

16404

