This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to Prevent the Poor Performance Clients for Personalized Federated
Learning?
Zhe Qu1 , Xingyu Li2 *, Xiao Han3 , Rui Duan3 , Chengchao Shen1 , and Lixing Chen4
1
Central South University, 2 Mississippi State University,
3
University of South Florida, 4 Shanghai Jiaotong University
{zhe qu, scc.cs}@csu.edu.cn, xl292@msstate.edu,
{xiaoh, ruiduan}@usf.edu, lxchen@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Personalized federated learning (pFL) collaboratively
trains personalized models, which provides a customized
model solution for individual clients in the presence of heterogeneous distributed local data. Although many recent
studies have applied various algorithms to enhance personalization in pFL, they mainly focus on improving the
performance from averaging or top perspective. However, part of the clients may fall into poor performance
and are not clearly discussed. Therefore, how to prevent
these poor clients should be considered critically. Intuitively, these poor clients may come from biased universal information shared with others. To address this issue,
we propose a novel pFL strategy, called Personalize Locally, Generalize Universally (PLGU). PLGU generalizes
the fine-grained universal information and moderates its biased performance by designing a Layer-Wised Sharpness
Aware Minimization (LWSAM) algorithm while keeping the
personalization local. Specifically, we embed our proposed
PLGU strategy into two pFL schemes concluded in this paper: with/without a global model, and present the training
procedures in detail. Through in-depth study, we show that
the proposed PLGU strategy achieves competitive generalization bounds on both considered pFL schemes. Our extensive experimental results show that all the proposed PLGU
based-algorithms achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a popular collaborative research paradigm that trains an aggregated global learning
model with distributed private datasets on multiple clients
[16, 29]. This setting has achieved great accomplishments
when the local data cannot be shared due to privacy and
communication constraints [36]. However, because of the
* Corresponding author.

pFedMe
FedRep

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Poor Clients

ExE

0.0

62

64

Poor Clients
66

68

70

72

74

Figure 1. Toy example in a heterogeneous pFL on CIFAR10,
which includes 100 clients and each client obtains 3 labels.

non-IID/heterogeneous datasets, learning a single global
model to fit the “averaged distribution” may be difficult to
propose a well-generalized solution to the individual client
and slow the convergence results [24]. To address this
problem, personalized federated learning (pFL) is developed to provide a customized local model solution for each
client based on its statistical features in the private training dataset [5, 9, 11, 34]. Generally, we can divide existing
pFL algorithms into two schemes: (I) with a global model
[5, 23, 25, 40] or (II) without a global model [27, 28, 37].
Though many pFL algorithms make accomplishments
by modifying the universal learning process [41, 47] or enhancing the personalization [3, 27, 37], they may lead part
of clients to fall into poor learning performance, where the
personalization of local clients performs a large statistical
deviation from the “averaged distribution”. To the best of
our knowledge, none of the existing studies explore how
to prevent clients from falling into poor personalized performance on these two schemes. For example, the poor
medical learning models of some clients may incur serious medical malpractice. To better present our concerned
problem, we introduce a toy example in Figure 1, which
is learned by two pFL algorithms representing these two
schemes: pFedMe [40] and FedRep [3]. Though both algorithms achieve high averaged local model performance
of 66.43% and 71.35%, there also 15% of clients are less
than 64% and 14% clients are less than 69%, respectively.

12167

