This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaboration Helps Camera Overtake LiDAR in 3D Detection
Yue Hu1
1

Yifan Lu1 Runsheng Xu2 Weidi Xie1,3 Siheng Chen1,3 * Yanfeng Wang3,1
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of California, Los Angeles 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory

{18671129361, yifan lu, weidi, sihengc, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn

2

{rxx3386}@ucla.edu

Abstract
Camera-only 3D detection provides an economical solution with a simple configuration for localizing objects
in 3D space compared to LiDAR-based detection systems.
However, a major challenge lies in precise depth estimation due to the lack of direct 3D measurements in the input. Many previous methods attempt to improve depth estimation through network designs, e.g., deformable layers
and larger receptive fields. This work proposes an orthogonal direction, improving the camera-only 3D detection by introducing multi-agent collaborations. Our proposed collaborative camera-only 3D detection (CoCa3D)
enables agents to share complementary information with
each other through communication. Meanwhile, we optimize communication efficiency by selecting the most informative cues. The shared messages from multiple viewpoints disambiguate the single-agent estimated depth and
complement the occluded and long-range regions in the
single-agent view. We evaluate CoCa3D in one real-world
dataset and two new simulation datasets. Results show
that CoCa3D improves previous SOTA performances by
44.21% on DAIR-V2X, 30.60% on OPV2V+, 12.59% on
CoPerception-UAVs+ for AP@70. Our preliminary results
show a potential that with sufficient collaboration, the camera might overtake LiDAR in some practical scenarios. We
released the dataset and code.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task of computer vision, 3D object detection aims to localize objects in the 3D physical space
given an agent’s real-time sensor inputs. It is crucial in
a wide range of applications, including autonomous driving [10,33,43], surveillance systems [39], robotics [12] and
unmanned aerial vehicles [7]. Depending on sensor setups,
there are multiple technical solutions to realize 3D object
detection. In this spectrum, one extreme emphasizes raising the upper bound of detection performance, which uses
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Collaborative camera-only 3D detection can disambiguate the single-view estimated depth, address the long-range
and occlusion issues, and approach LiDAR in 3D detection.

high-end LiDAR sensor [2, 3, 10, 21, 28, 42, 45] to collect
precise 3D measurements. However, this approach is too
expensive to scale up. The other extreme solution emphasizes cost effectiveness, which tries to use thrifty sensor setups, e.g. only using cameras to detect 3D objects in realtime [1, 8, 9, 23, 25, 26, 30, 32, 41, 43]. However, cameraonly 3D detection is significantly and consistently worse
than LiDAR-based detection in most scenarios [19].
In this paper, we propose an orthogonal direction for improving camera-only 3D detection performances by introducing multi-agent collaborations. Hypothetically, empowered by advanced communication systems, multiple agents
equipped only with cameras could share visual information
with each other. This would bring three outstanding benefits. First, different viewpoints from multiple agents can
largely resolve the depth ambiguity issue in camera-only
3D detection, bridging the gap with expensive LiDARs on
depth estimation. Second, multi-agent collaboration avoids
inevitable limitations in single-agent 3D detection, such as
occlusion and long-range issues, and potentially enables
more holistic 3D detection; that is, detecting all the objects existed in the 3D scene, including those beyond visual range. Since LiDAR also suffers from limited field of
view, this potentially enables collaborative cameras to outperform LiDAR. Third, the total expense of a large fleet
of vehicles is significantly reduced as cameras are much

9243

