This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FEND: A Future Enhanced Distribution-Aware Contrastive Learning
Framework for Long-tail Trajectory Prediction
Yuning Wang 1 *, Pu Zhang 2 *, Lei Bai 3 , Jianru Xue 1 †
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
DiDi Chuxing, China
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
wangyn@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {zhangpu94,baisanshi}@gmail.com, jrxue@mails.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Predicting the future trajectories of the traffic agents is
a gordian technique in autonomous driving. However, trajectory prediction suffers from data imbalance in the prevalent datasets, and the tailed data is often more complicated
and safety-critical. In this paper, we focus on dealing with
the long-tail phenomenon in trajectory prediction. Previous methods dealing with long-tail data did not take into
account the variety of motion patterns in the tailed data.
In this paper, we put forward a future enhanced contrastive
learning framework to recognize tail trajectory patterns and
form a feature space with separate pattern clusters. Furthermore, a distribution aware hyper predictor is brought
up to better utilize the shaped feature space. Our method is
a model-agnostic framework and can be plugged into many
well-known baselines. Experimental results show that our
framework outperforms the state-of-the-art long-tail prediction method on tailed samples by 9.5% on ADE and 8.5%
on FDE, while maintaining or slightly improving the averaged performance. Our method also surpasses many longtail techniques on trajectory prediction task.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is of great importance in autonomous driving scenarios [27]. It aims to predict a series
of future positions for the agents on the road given the observed past tracks. There have been many recent methods
in trajectory prediction, both unimodal [1, 48] and multimodal [10, 37, 38, 49].
Despite the high accuracy those prediction methods have
achieved, most of them treat the samples in the datasets
equally in both training and evaluation phases. But there
is a long-tailed phenomenon in prevalent datasets [28]. For
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The long-tailed final displacement errors of the stateof-the-art prediction network: Trajectron++ EWTA [28] on ETHUCY. The long-tail part of the dataset contains various complicated motion patterns, and predicting them is challenging.

example, in real traffic scenes, most of the trajectories follow certain simple kinematic rules, while deviating and
collision-avoiding circumstances are scarce. Therefore, the
frequent cases are often simple and easy to predict, while
the tail cases are often complicated with many motion patterns and suffer from large prediction errors, which makes
them more safety-critical, as shown in Fig. 1 for the univ
dataset. Despite of its significance, the long-tail prediction
problem have been rarely discussed in literature.
It has been pointed out that the feature encoders largely
suffer from long-tail data. In the training process, the head
samples are encountered more often and dominate the latent space, while the tailed samples will be modeled insufficiently, as discussed in [24, 28, 39]. Feature embeddings
of the tailed data can even be mixed up with the ones of the
head data as discussed in [28], therefore the performances
of the tailed samples could be harmed.

1400

