This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Trustable Skin Cancer Diagnosis via Rewriting Model’s Decision
Siyuan Yan1,2 Zhen Yu1,2 Xuelin Zhang1,2 Dwarikanath Mahapatra4
Shekhar S. Chandra3 Monika Janda3 Peter Soyer3 Zongyuan Ge1,2
1
Monash University 2 Monash Medical AI Group 3 The University of Queensland
4
Inception Institute of AI, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract
Deep neural networks have demonstrated promising performance on image recognition tasks. However, they may
heavily rely on confounding factors, using irrelevant artifacts or bias within the dataset as the cue to improve performance. When a model performs decision-making based on
these spurious correlations, it can become untrustable and
lead to catastrophic outcomes when deployed in the realworld scene. In this paper, we explore and try to solve this
problem in the context of skin cancer diagnosis. We introduce a human-in-the-loop framework in the model training
process such that users can observe and correct the model’s
decision logic when confounding behaviors happen. Specifically, our method can automatically discover confounding
factors by analyzing the co-occurrence behavior of the samples. It is capable of learning confounding concepts using
easily obtained concept exemplars. By mapping the blackbox model’s feature representation onto an explainable concept space, human users can interpret the concept and intervene via first order-logic instruction. We systematically
evaluate our method on our newly crafted, well-controlled
skin lesion dataset and several public skin lesion datasets.
Experiments show that our method can effectively detect
and remove confounding factors from datasets without any
prior knowledge about the category distribution and does
not require fully annotated concept labels. We also show
that our method enables the model to focus on clinicalrelated concepts, improving the model’s performance and
trustworthiness during model inference.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved excellent performance on many visual recognition tasks [11, 14, 35]. Meanwhile, there are growing concerns about the trustworthiness
of the model’s black-box decision-making process. In medical imaging applications, one of the major issues is deep
learning models’ confounding behaviors using irrelevant artifacts (i.e. rulers, dark corners) or bias (i.e. image back-

Figure 1. Our method allows people to correct the model’s confounding behavior within the skin lesion training set via rewriting
the model’s logic.

grounds, skin tone) as the cue to make the final predictions.
These spurious correlations in the training distribution can
make models fragile when novel testing samples are presented. Therefore, transparency of decision-making and
human-guided bias correction will significantly increase the
reliability and trustworthiness of model deployments in a
life-critical application scenario like cancer diagnosis.
For instance, due to the nature of dermatoscopic images,
the skin cancer diagnosis often involves confounding factors [4, 22, 24, 40], i.e., dark corners, rulers, and air pockets. Bissoto et al. [40] shows that deep learning models
trained on common skin lesion datasets can be biased. Surprisingly, they found the model can reach an AUC of 73%,
even though lesions in images are totally occluded. To better understand the issue of confounding behaviors, we illustrate a motivating example. Fig. 1 shows a representative confounding factor “dark corners” in the ISIC20192020 [36, 38] dataset, where the presence of dark corners
is much higher in the melanoma images than in benign images. A model trained on this dataset tends to predict a lesion as melanoma when dark corners appear. This model is
undoubtedly untrustable and is catastrophic for deployment
in real clinical practice. To deal with this nuisance and improve the model’s trustworthiness, an ideal method would
be: i ) the model itself is explainable so that humans can understand the prediction logic behind it. and ii) the model has
an intervening mechanism that allows humans to correct the
model once confounding behavior happens. Through this

11568

