This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Texture-guided Saliency Distilling for Unsupervised Salient Object Detection
Huajun Zhou1 , Bo Qiao1 , Lingxiao Yang1 , Jianhuang Lai1,2,3 , Xiaohua Xie1,2,3 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China

Abstract
Deep Learning-based Unsupervised Salient Object Detection (USOD) mainly relies on the noisy saliency pseudo
labels that have been generated from traditional handcraft
methods or pre-trained networks. To cope with the noisy labels problem, a class of methods focus on only easy samples
with reliable labels but ignore valuable knowledge in hard
samples. In this paper, we propose a novel USOD method to
mine rich and accurate saliency knowledge from both easy
and hard samples. First, we propose a Confidence-aware
Saliency Distilling (CSD) strategy that scores samples conditioned on samples’ confidences, which guides the model to
distill saliency knowledge from easy samples to hard samples progressively. Second, we propose a Boundary-aware
Texture Matching (BTM) strategy to refine the boundaries
of noisy labels by matching the textures around the predicted boundaries. Extensive experiments on RGB, RGBD, RGB-T, and video SOD benchmarks prove that our
method achieves state-of-the-art USOD performance. Code
is available at www.github.com/moothes/A2S-v2.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Salient Object Detection (USOD) methods aim to correctly localize and precisely segment salient
objects simultaneously without using manual annotations.
Compared to the supervised methods, USOD methods can
easily adapt to more practical scenarios (e.g., industrial or
medical images) where a large number of labeled images
may be very hard to collect. Moreover, USOD methods also
can assist some related methods for other tasks, e.g., object
recognition [16, 44] and object detection [11, 35]. However,
diverse objects, complex backgrounds, and other challeng* Corresponding author.
This project is supported by the KeyArea Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province
(2019B010155003), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(U22A2095, 62072482, 62076258, 62206316), and the Guangdong NSF
Project (2022A1515011254).

(a) Image

(b) GT

(c) RBD

(d) HS

(e) USPS

(f) A2S

(g) Activation

(h) Ours

Figure 1. Saliency maps generated by USOD methods. Our result
is generated based on the activation map of a deep network.

ing conditions bring severe challenges to USOD methods.
Most Deep Learning-based (DL-based) methods [21, 29,
32, 55, 63, 66] base on the saliency cues extracted by traditional SOD methods (Fig. 1-c and 1-d). These handcrafted features related cues are employed as pseudo labels
to train deep networks under certain constraints, e.g., binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss. However, saliency cues by
traditional methods usually shift away from target objects,
especially in complex scenes. Moreover, conventional constraints, such as BCE loss, works well on fully-supervised
SOD methods, but is suboptimal when fitting the noisy labels for unsupervised methods (Fig. 1-e). Recently, Zhou
et al. [72] addressed the first issue by extracting saliency
cues (Fig. 1-f) based on a unsupervisedly pre-trained network (Fig. 1-g) instead of using traditional methods. During training, they focus on learning reliable saliency knowledge from easy samples, but ignore latent knowledge in
hard samples. The main reason is that hard samples may
be wrongly-labeled and corrupt the fragile saliency knowledge learned in the early training phase. Therefore, to leverage hard samples, we argue that all samples should be employed in a meaningful order (i.e., from high reliable to low
reliable), which is crucial for mining accurate knowledge
from noisy labels. Trained by such a strategy, the network
can mine valuable knowledge from hard examples without
corrupting the knowledge learned from easy samples.
Deep networks can learn to localize salient regions from

7257

