This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Automatic High Resolution Wire Segmentation and Removal
Mang Tik Chiu1,2 , Xuaner Zhang2 , Zijun Wei2 , Yuqian Zhou2 , Eli Shechtman2 ,
Connelly Barnes2 , Zhe Lin2 , Florian Kainz2 , Sohrab Amirghodsi2 , Humphrey Shi1,3
1

UIUC, 2 Adobe, 3 University of Oregon

https://github.com/adobe-research/auto-wire-removal

Figure 1. We present an automatic high-resolution wire segmentation and removal pipeline. Each triad shows the high-resolution input
image, our automatic wire segmentation result masked in red, and our full-resolution wire removal result. The visual quality of these
photographs is greatly improved with our fully-automated wire clean-up system.

Abstract
Wires and powerlines are common visual distractions
that often undermine the aesthetics of photographs. The
manual process of precisely segmenting and removing them
is extremely tedious and may take up hours, especially
on high-resolution photos where wires may span the entire space. In this paper, we present an automatic wire
clean-up system that eases the process of wire segmentation and removal/inpainting to within a few seconds. We
observe several unique challenges: wires are thin, lengthy,
and sparse. These are rare properties of subjects that common segmentation tasks cannot handle, especially in highresolution images. We thus propose a two-stage method that
leverages both global and local contexts to accurately segment wires in high-resolution images efficiently, and a tilebased inpainting strategy to remove the wires given our predicted segmentation masks. We also introduce the first wire
segmentation benchmark dataset, WireSegHR. Finally, we
demonstrate quantitatively and qualitatively that our wire
clean-up system enables fully automated wire removal with
great generalization to various wire appearances.

1. Introduction
Oftentimes wire-like objects such as powerlines and cables can cross the full width of an image and ruin an otherwise beautiful composition. Removing these “distractors”
is thus an essential step in photo retouching to improve the
visual quality of a photograph. Conventionally, removing a
wire-like object requires two steps: 1) segmenting out the
wire-like object, and 2) removing the selected wire and inpainting with plausible contents. Both steps, if done manually, are extremely tedious and error-prone, especially for
high-resolution photographs that may take photographers
up to hours to reach a high-quality retouching result.
In this paper, we explore a fully-automated wire segmentation and inpainting solution for wire-like object segmentation and removal with tailored model architecture and
data processing. For simplicity, we use wire to refer to
all wire-like objects, including powerlines, cables, supporting/connecting wires, and objects with wire-like shapes.
Wire semantic segmentation has a seemingly similar
problem setup with generic semantic segmentation tasks;
they both take in a high-resolution image and generate
dense predictions at a pixel level. However, wire semantic

2183

