This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Dub Movies via Hierarchical Prosody Models
Gaoxiang Cong1 Liang Li2,3† Yuankai Qi4 Zheng-Jun Zha5 Qi Wu4 Wenyu Wang1
Bin Jiang1 Ming-Hsuan Yang6,7 Qingming Huang2
1
Shandong University 2 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Lishui Institute of Hangzhou Dianzi University
4
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
5
University of Science and Technology of China 6 University of California 7 Yonsei University

Abstract

: I can't wait
to meet everyone!

…

Given a piece of text, a video clip and a reference
audio, the movie dubbing (also known as visual voice
clone, V2C) task aims to generate speeches that match
the speaker’s emotion presented in the video using the desired speaker voice as reference. V2C is more challenging than conventional text-to-speech tasks as it additionally
requires the generated speech to exactly match the varying emotions and speaking speed presented in the video.
Unlike previous works, we propose a novel movie dubbing architecture to tackle these problems via hierarchical prosody modeling, which bridges the visual information to corresponding speech prosody from three aspects:
lip, face, and scene. Specifically, we align lip movement to the speech duration, and convey facial expression to speech energy and pitch via attention mechanism
based on valence and arousal representations inspired by
the psychology findings. Moreover, we design an emotion booster to capture the atmosphere from global video
scenes. All these embeddings are used together to generate mel-spectrogram, which is then converted into speech
waves by an existing vocoder. Extensive experimental results on the V2C and Chem benchmark datasets demonstrate the favourable performance of the proposed method.
The code and trained models will be made available at
https://github.com/GalaxyCong/HPMDubbing.

1. Introduction
Movie dubbing, also known as visual voice clone
(V2C) [9], aims to convert a paragraph of text to a speech
with both desired voice specified by reference audio and desired emotion and speed presented in the reference video as
shown in the top panel of Figure 1. V2C is more challenging than other speech synthesis tasks in two aspects: first,
† Corresponding author.

Silent Video

📝 Text/Subtitle

Reference Audio

Speech
(a) Visual Voice Cloning (V2C)
Surprised
Scene Atmosphere

Global Emotion

Visual
Source

Prosody
Attributes
Affective Display

Pitch and Energy

Lip Movement

Tempo and Pause

(b) Hierarchical Prosody Modeling

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of the V2C tasks. (b) To generate natural
speech with proper emotions, we align the phonemes with lip motion, estimate pitch and energy based on facial expression’s arousal
and valence, and predict global emotion from video scenes.

it requires synchronization between lip motion and generated speech; second, it requires proper prosodic variations
of the generated speech to reflect the speaker’s emotion in
the video (i.e., the movie’s plot). These pose significant
challenges to existing voice cloning methods.
Although significant progress has been made, existing methods do not handle the challenges in V2C well.
Specifically, text-based dubbing methods [46–48, 54] construct speeches from given text conditioned on the different speaker embedding but do not consider audio-visual
synchronization. On the other hand, lip-referred dubbing
schemes [18,32,55] predict mel-spectrograms directly from
a sequence of lip movements typically by encoder-decoder
models. Due to high error rates in generated words, these
methods can hardly guarantee high-quality results. Further-

14687

