This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KiUT: Knowledge-injected U-Transformer for Radiology Report Generation

1

Zhongzhen Huang1,2 , Xiaofan Zhang1,2 , Shaoting Zhang 2,3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 SenseTime Research
{huangzhongzhen, xiaofan.zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhangshaoting@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Radiology images (e.g., chest X-ray) play an indispensable role in routine diagnosis and treatment, and the radiology reports of images are essential in facilitating later treatments. Getting a hand-crafted report is a time-consuming
and error-prone process. Given a radiology image, only
experienced radiologists can accurately interpret the image
and write down corresponding findings. Therefore, automatically generating high-quality radiology reports is urgently needed to help radiologists eliminate the overwhelming volume of radiology images. In recent years, radiology
report generation has attracted much attention in the deep
learning and medical domain. The encoder-decoder architecture inspired by neural machine translation [34] has been
widely adopted by most existing methods [17, 24, 40, 42].
Corresponding Author.

U
Connection

RREncoder

···
Radiology Image

Decoder

···

Injected Knowledge

···

Injected Knowledge
Distiller

BackBone

Radiology report generation aims to automatically generate a clinically accurate and coherent paragraph from
the X-ray image, which could relieve radiologists from the
heavy burden of report writing. Although various image
caption methods have shown remarkable performance in
the natural image field, generating accurate reports for
medical images requires knowledge of multiple modalities,
including vision, language, and medical terminology. We
propose a Knowledge-injected U-Transformer (KiUT) to
learn multi-level visual representation and adaptively distill the information with contextual and clinical knowledge
for word prediction. In detail, a U-connection schema between the encoder and decoder is designed to model interactions between different modalities. And a symptom
graph and an injected knowledge distiller are developed to
assist the report generation. Experimentally, we outperform state-of-the-art methods on two widely used benchmark datasets: IU-Xray and MIMIC-CXR. Further experimental results prove the advantages of our architecture and
the complementary benefits of the injected knowledge.

PA and lateral views of chest demonstrate an extensive left-sided pleural
effusion with compressive atelectasis. An underlying pneumonia cannot be
excluded. A tiny right pleural effusion may also be present. The cardiac
silhouette also appears enlarged, but it is difficult to completely assess the
left border given the large pleural effusion. The right lung is clear of focal
opacities worrisome for pneumonia. There is no pneumothorax.

Visual

Radiology
Report

Clinical

Contextual

Figure 1. A transformer architecture with U-connection is adopted
to generate reports from radiology images. The process involves
injecting and distilling visual, clinical, and contextual knowledge
The color labels in the image and report represent the different abnormal regions and their corresponding description, respectively.

With the recent advent of the attention mechanism, the architecture’s capability is greatly ameliorated.
Despite the remarkable performance, these models restrained themselves in the methodology of image caption
[6, 7, 36, 39, 43], and suffer from such data biases: 1) the
normal cases dominate the dataset over the abnormal cases;
2) the descriptions of normal regions dominate the entire
report. Recently, some methods have been proposed to either alleviate case-level bias by utilizing posterior and prior
knowledge [27] or relieve the region-level bias by distilling
the contrastive information of abnormal regions [28].
Thus, in the medical field’s cross-modal task, a model
needs to not only capture visual details of every abnormal region but also consider the interaction between the visual and textual modalities among different levels. Moreover, external clinical knowledge is required to achieve
the radiologist-like ability in radiology image understanding and report writing. The external knowledge, e.g., the
clinical entities and relationships, could be pre-defined by
experts or mined from medical documents. However, directly adopting the knowledge brings inconsistencies due to
the heterogeneous context embedding space [21]. And too
complex knowledge may be prone to distract the visual encoder and divert the representation [27].

19809

