This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Reverse Distillation for Anomaly Detection
Tran Dinh Tien1
Anh Tuan Nguyen1
Nguyen Hoang Tran1
Ta Duc Huy1
Soan T.M. Duong1,3
Chanh D. Tr. Nguyen1,2
Steven Q. H. Truong1,2
1
2
3
VinBrain JSC, Vietnam
VinUniversity, Vietnam
Le Quy Don Technical University, Vietnam

Abstract
Anomaly detection is an important application in largescale industrial manufacturing. Recent methods for this
task have demonstrated excellent accuracy but come with
a latency trade-off. Memory based approaches with dominant performances like PatchCore or Coupled-hyperspherebased Feature Adaptation (CFA) require an external memory bank, which significantly lengthens the execution time.
Another approach that employs Reversed Distillation (RD)
can perform well while maintaining low latency. In this
paper, we revisit this idea to improve its performance, establishing a new state-of-the-art benchmark on the challenging MVTec dataset for both anomaly detection and
localization. The proposed method, called RD++, runs
six times faster than PatchCore, and two times faster
than CFA but introduces a negligible latency compared
to RD. We also experiment on the BTAD and Retinal
OCT datasets to demonstrate our method’s generalizability and conduct important ablation experiments to provide
insights into its configurations. Source code will be available at https : / / github . com / tientrandinh /
Revisiting-Reverse-Distillation.

1. Introduction
Detecting anomalies is a crucial aspect of computer vision with numerous applications, such as product quality
control [4], and healthcare monitor system [21]. Unsupervised anomaly detection can help to reduce the cost of collecting abnormal samples. This task identifies and localizes anomalous regions in images without defect annotations during training. Instead, a set of abnormal-free samples is utilized. Early approaches rely on generative adversarial models to extract meaningful latent representations
on normal samples [25, 29, 31]. However, these approaches
are computationally expensive, resulting in higher latency
and potential performance limitations on unseen data. Other
approaches leverage the pre-trained Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) [19] backbones to extract comprehensive
visual features for anomaly detection systems [3, 23].

Figure 1. Comparisons of different anomaly detection methods in
terms of AUROC sample (vertical axis), inference time (horizontal
axis), and memory footprint (circle radius). Our RD++ achieves
the highest AUROC sample metric for anomaly detection while
being 6× faster than PatchCore, 4× faster than CSFlow, and 2×
faster than CFA. Additionally, RD++ requires only 4GB of memory for inference, making it one of the least memory-use methods.
The test environment was conducted on a computer with Intel(R)
Xeon(R) 2.00GHz (4 cores) and Tesla T4 GPU (15GB VRAM).

Alternative approach employs knowledge distillation
(KD) [14] based frameworks. For example, Salehi et al.
[30] set up a teacher-student network pair, and knowledge
is transferred from teacher to student. During training, the
student is learned from only normal samples. Thus, it is
expected to learn the distribution of normal samples, subsequently generating the out-of-distribution representations
when inference with anomalous query [30]. However, Deng
and Li [8] point out that the statement is not always accurate due to limitations in the similarity of network architectures and the same data flows in the teacher-student model.
To overcome these limitations, they propose a reverse flow,
called Reverse Distillation (RD), in which the teacher output is fed to the student through a One-class Bottleneck
module (OCBE). The reverse distillation approach achieves
competitive performance and also maintains low latency.
Recent research in anomaly detection, such as PatchCore [27], and CFA [20], have achieved state-of-the-art performance in detecting and localizing anomalies. However,

24511

