This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Full or Weak annotations?
An adaptive strategy for budget-constrained annotation campaigns
Javier Gamazo Tejero1 , Martin S. Zinkernagel2 , Sebastian Wolf2
Raphael Sznitman1 , Pablo Márquez Neila1
1

University of Bern, 2 Inselspital Bern, Switzerland

{javier.gamazo-tejero, raphael.sznitman, pablo.marquez}@unibe.ch
{martin.zinkernagel, sebastian.wolf}@insel.ch

Abstract
Annotating new datasets for machine learning tasks is
tedious, time-consuming, and costly. For segmentation applications, the burden is particularly high as manual delineations of relevant image content are often extremely expensive or can only be done by experts with domain-specific
knowledge. Thanks to developments in transfer learning
and training with weak supervision, segmentation models
can now also greatly benefit from annotations of different
kinds. However, for any new domain application looking
to use weak supervision, the dataset builder still needs to
define a strategy to distribute full segmentation and other
weak annotations. Doing so is challenging, however, as it
is a priori unknown how to distribute an annotation budget
for a given new dataset. To this end, we propose a novel approach to determine annotation strategies for segmentation
datasets, whereby estimating what proportion of segmentation and classification annotations should be collected
given a fixed budget. To do so, our method sequentially
determines proportions of segmentation and classification
annotations to collect for budget-fractions by modeling the
expected improvement of the final segmentation model. We
show in our experiments that our approach yields annotations that perform very close to the optimal for a number of
different annotation budgets and datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision task with applications in numerous domains such as
autonomous driving [11, 43], scene understanding [45],
surveillance [50] and medical diagnosis [9, 18]. As the advent of deep learning has significantly advanced the stateof-the-art, many new application areas have come to light

and continue to do so too. This growth has brought and
continues to bring exciting domain-specific datasets for segmentation tasks [6, 19, 29, 32, 52].
Today, the process of establishing machine learningbased segmentation models for any new application is relatively well understood and standard. Only once an image
dataset is gathered and curated, can machine learning models be trained and validated. In contrast, building appropriate datasets is known to be difficult, time-consuming, and
yet paramount. Beyond the fact that collecting images can
be tedious, a far more challenging task is producing groundtruth segmentation annotations to subsequently train (semi)
supervised machine learning models. This is mainly because producing segmentation annotations often remains a
manual task. As reported in [4], generating segmentation
annotations for a single PASCAL image [15] takes over
200 seconds on average. This implies over 250 hours of
annotation time for a dataset containing a modest 5’000
images. What often further exacerbates the problem for
domain-specific datasets is that only the dataset designer,
or a small group of individuals, have enough expertise to
produce the annotations (e.g., doctors, experts, etc.), making crowd-sourcing ill-suited.
To overcome this challenge, different paradigms have
been suggested over the years. Approaches such as Active
Learning [7, 8, 26] aim to iteratively identify subsets of images to annotate so as to yield highly performing models.
Transfer learning has also proved to be an important tool
in reducing annotation tasks [13, 17, 24, 25, 30, 36]. For instance, [37] show that training segmentation models from
scratch is often inferior to using pre-training models derived from large image classification datasets, even when
the target application domain differs from the source domain. Finally, weakly-supervised methods [2, 40] combine
pixel-wise annotations with other weak annotations that are
faster to acquire, thereby reducing the annotation burden.

11381

