This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-view Inverse Rendering for Large-scale Real-world Indoor Scenes
Zhen Li1

Lingli Wang1
1
Realsee

Mofang Cheng1
Cihui Pan1, *
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University

Jiaqi Yang2, *

yodlee@mail.nwpu.edu.cn,{wanglingli008,chengmofang001,pancihui001}@realsee.com,jqyang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

Output

• • •

Roughness Albedo

Lighting

Posed sparse-view images

We present a efficient multi-view inverse rendering
method for large-scale real-world indoor scenes that reconstructs global illumination and physically-reasonable
SVBRDFs. Unlike previous representations, where the
global illumination of large scenes is simplified as multiple
environment maps, we propose a compact representation
called Texture-based Lighting (TBL). It consists of 3D mesh
and HDR textures, and efficiently models direct and infinitebounce indirect lighting of the entire large scene. Based on
TBL, we further propose a hybrid lighting representation
with precomputed irradiance, which significantly improves
the efficiency and alleviates the rendering noise in the material optimization. To physically disentangle the ambiguity
between materials, we propose a three-stage material optimization strategy based on the priors of semantic segmentation and room segmentation. Extensive experiments show
that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art
quantitatively and qualitatively, and enables physicallyreasonable mixed-reality applications such as material
editing, editable novel view synthesis and relighting. The
project page is at https://lzleejean.github.io/TexIR.

Input

Applications

Material Editing

Editable Novel View

Relighting

Figure 1. Given a set of posed sparse-view images for a largescale scene, we reconstruct global illumination and SVBRDFs.
The recovered properties are able to produce convincing results
for several mixed-reality applications such as material editing, editable novel view synthesis and relighting. Note that we change
roughness of all walls, and albedo of all floors. The detailed specular reflectance shows that our method successfully decomposes
physically-reasonable SVBRDFs and lighting. Please refer to supplementary videos for more animations.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering aims to reconstruct geometry, material
and illumination of an object or a scene from images. These
properties are essential to downstream applications such as
scene editing, editable novel view synthesis and relighting.
However, decomposing such properties from the images
is extremely ill-posed, because different configurations of
such properties often lead to similar appearance. With recent advances in differentiable rendering and implicit neural
representation, several approaches have achieved significant
success on small-scale object-centric scenes with explicit or
implicit priors [7, 32, 34, 43, 50, 51, 55, 57, 58]. However, inverse rendering of large-scale indoor scenes has not been
well solved.
* Co-corresponding authors.

There are two main challenges for large-scale indoor
scenes. 1) Modelling the physically-correct global illumination. There are far more complex lighting effects,
e.g., inter-reflection and cast shadows, in large-scale indoor scenes than object-centric scenes due to complex occlusions, materials and local light sources. Although the
widely-used image-based lighting (IBL) is able to efficiently model direct and indirect illumination, it only represents the lighting of a certain position [13, 17, 18, 42].
The spatial consistency of per-pixel or per-voxel IBL representations [26, 29, 47, 59] is difficult to ensure. Moreover,
such incompact representations require large memory. Parameterized lights [16, 27] such as point light, area light
and directional light are naturally globally-consistent, but
modeling the expensive global light transport will be in-

12499

