This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SurfelNeRF: Neural Surfel Radiance Fields for Online Photorealistic
Reconstruction of Indoor Scenes
Yiming Gao
Yan-Pei Cao
Ying Shan
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
gaoym9@mail3.sysu.edu.cn

caoyanpei@gmail.com

…

Abstract

yingsshan@tencent.com

t
…
…

time

…

t+k

Input View
Novel View

…

1 Project website: https://gymat.github.io/SurfelNeRFweb

Novel View
Rendering
…

Large-scale scene reconstruction and rendering is a crucial but challenging task in computer vision and graphics
with many applications. Classical visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) systems [6, 12, 16, 24, 39,
41] can perform real-time 3D scene reconstruction. However, they usually represent the scene geometry as solid surfaces and appearance as vertex color or texture maps; thus,

…

1. Introduction

…

Online reconstructing and rendering of large-scale indoor scenes is a long-standing challenge. SLAM-based
methods can reconstruct 3D scene geometry progressively
in real time but can not render photorealistic results. While
NeRF-based methods produce promising novel view synthesis results, their long offline optimization time and lack
of geometric constraints pose challenges to efficiently handling online input. Inspired by the complementary advantages of classical 3D reconstruction and NeRF, we thus investigate marrying explicit geometric representation with
NeRF rendering to achieve efficient online reconstruction
and high-quality rendering. We introduce SurfelNeRF, a
variant of neural radiance field which employs a flexible
and scalable neural surfel representation to store geometric attributes and extracted appearance features from input
images. We further extend the conventional surfel-based
fusion scheme to progressively integrate incoming input
frames into the reconstructed global neural scene representation. In addition, we propose a highly-efficient differentiable rasterization scheme for rendering neural surfel radiance fields, which helps SurfelNeRF achieve 10× speedups
in training and inference time, respectively. Experimental
results show that our method achieves the state-of-the-art
23.82 PSNR and 29.58 PSNR on ScanNet in feedforward
inference and per-scene optimization settings, respectively.1

Online Input Stream

Scene Reconstruction

Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. Examples to illustrate the task of online photorealistic
reconstruction of an indoor scene. The online photorealistic reconstruction of large-scale indoor scenes: given an online input
image stream of a previously unseen scene, the goal is to progressively build and update a scene representation that allows for highquality rendering from novel views.

the reconstructed results fail to fully capture the scene content and cannot be used for photorealistic rendering. Recently, neural radiance fields (NeRF) and its variants [2, 3,
22,27,35,42] have achieved unprecedented novel view synthesis quality on both object-centric and large-scale scenes.
However, NeRFs suffer from long per-scene optimization
time and slow rendering speed, especially for large-scale
scenes. Although recent advances [7, 14, 19, 23, 33] achieve
faster optimization and rendering via incorporating explicit
representations, they still require gathering all input images
in an offline fashion before optimizing each scene.
In this paper, we target the challenging task of online
photorealistic reconstruction of large-scale indoor scenes:
given an online input image stream of a previously unseen
scene, the goal is to progressively build and update a scene
representation that allows for high-quality rendering from
novel views. The online setting can unlock a variety of realtime interactive applications, providing crucial immediate
feedback to users during 3D capture. However, this task
brings multiple extra requirements, including the scalabil-

108

