This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Domain Generalization with Generalization Adjustment
Ruipeng Zhang1,2 , Qinwei Xu1,2 , Jiangchao Yao1,2 , Ya Zhang1,2,B , Qi Tian3 , Yanfeng Wang1,2,B
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Huawei Cloud & AI
{zhangrp, qinweixu, Sunarker, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Source Domains for DG

Abstract
Federated Domain Generalization (FedDG) attempts to
learn a global model in a privacy-preserving manner that
generalizes well to new clients possibly with domain shift.
Recent exploration mainly focuses on designing an unbiased training strategy within each individual domain. However, without the support of multi-domain data jointly in
the mini-batch training, almost all methods cannot guarantee the generalization under domain shift. To overcome
this problem, we propose a novel global objective incorporating a new variance reduction regularizer to encourage
fairness. A novel FL-friendly method named Generalization Adjustment (GA) is proposed to optimize the above objective by dynamically calibrating the aggregation weights.
The theoretical analysis of GA demonstrates the possibility
to achieve a tighter generalization bound with an explicit
re-weighted aggregation, substituting the implicit multidomain data sharing that is only applicable to the conventional DG settings. Besides, the proposed algorithm is
generic and can be combined with any local client trainingbased methods. Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets have shown the effectiveness of the proposed
method, with consistent improvements over several FedDG
algorithms when used in combination. The source code
is released at https://github.com/MediaBrainSJTU/FedDG-GA

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has recently emerged as a
prevalent privacy-preserving paradigm for collaborative
learning on distributed data [32]. Existing studies mainly
investigate the problem of how to improve the convergence and performance of the source clients’ data distribution [18, 27, 44]. A more practical problem, how to make
models trained on sites of heterogeneous distributions gen-

Source Domains for FedDG

Client 1

SOTA DG requires
access multi-domains
to capture the
invariant patterns

Client 2

Client 3

Mini-Batch
Training

Aggregation
on
client models

Generalization
model

Unseen Test
Domain

DG

FedDG

Figure 1. The difference between DG and FedDG is whether the
domains are isolated in training. Specifically, previous SOTA DG
methods that require access to multiple domains in the mini-batch
training are inapplicable to FedDG.

eralize to target clients of unknown distributions, i.e. Federated Domain Generalization (FedDG) [30], remains underexplored. While label distribution shift has been considered
in traditional FL, FedDG focuses on the domain shift among
clients and considers each client as an individual domain.
The challenge lies in the domain shift [19] both among the
training clients and from training to testing clients.
While FedDG shares a similar goal as standard Domain Generalization (DG) [4,12,40], i.e., generalizing from
multi-source domains to unseen domains, it disallows direct data sharing among clients, as shown in Figure 1,
which makes most existing DG methods hardly applicable. Current methods for FedDG focus on unbiased local training within each isolated domain. As the first attempt, Liu et al. [30] propose a meta-learning framework
13954

