This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Test-Time Adaptation for Action Recognition
Wei Lin†∗1,2
1

Muhammad Jehanzeb Mirza∗1,3
Hilde Kuehne4,5

Mateusz Kozinski1
Horst Bischof1,3

Horst Possegger1

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria
2
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Semantic 3D Computer Vision
3
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning
4
Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany
5
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Although action recognition systems can achieve top performance when evaluated on in-distribution test points, they
are vulnerable to unanticipated distribution shifts in test
data. However, test-time adaptation of video action recognition models against common distribution shifts has so far
not been demonstrated. We propose to address this problem with an approach tailored to spatio-temporal models
that is capable of adaptation on a single video sample at
a step. It consists in a feature distribution alignment technique that aligns online estimates of test set statistics towards the training statistics. We further enforce prediction
consistency over temporally augmented views of the same
test video sample. Evaluations on three benchmark action recognition datasets show that our proposed technique
is architecture-agnostic and able to significantly boost the
performance on both, the state of the art convolutional architecture TANet and the Video Swin Transformer. Our proposed method demonstrates a substantial performance gain
over existing test-time adaptation approaches in both evaluations of a single distribution shift and the challenging
case of random distribution shifts. Code will be available
at https://github.com/wlin-at/ViTTA.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art neural architectures [8,40,46,48–50] are
very effective in action recognition, but recent work shows
they are not robust to shifts in the distribution of the test
data [33,51]. Unfortunately, in practical scenarios, such distribution shifts are very difficult to avoid, or account for. For
example, cameras used for recognizing motorized or pedes∗ Equally contributing authors.
† Correspondence: wei.lin@icg.tugraz.at

trian traffic events may register rare weather conditions, like
a hailstorm, and sports action recognition systems can be
affected by perturbations generated by spectators at sports
arenas, such as the smoke of flares. Shifts in the data distribution can also result from inconspicuous changes in the
video processing setup, for instance, a change of the algorithm used to compress the video feed.
In image classification, distribution shift can be mitigated by Test-Time-Adaptation (TTA) [16, 19, 21, 23, 28,
34, 38, 42], which uses the unlabeled test data to adapt the
model to the change in data distribution. However, methods
developed for image classification are not well suited for
action recognition. Most action recognition applications require running memory- and computation-hungry temporal
models online, with minimal delay, and under tight hardware constraints. Moreover, videos are more vulnerable to
distribution shifts than images [2,33,51]. Some examples of
such distribution shifts are given in Fig. 1. Due to limited
exposure times, video frames are likely to feature higher
variations of noise level, provoked by illumination changes.
They are more affected by motion blur, which varies with
the speed of motion observed in the scene. They also feature stronger compression artifacts, which change with the
compression ratio, often dynamically adjusted to the available bandwidth. Our experiments show that existing TTA
algorithms, developed for image classification, do not cope
with these challenges well, yielding marginal improvement
over networks used on corrupted data without any adaptation.
Our goal is to propose an effective method for online
test-time-adaptation of action recognition models. Operating online and with small latency can require drastically
constraining the batch size, especially when the hardware
resources are limited and the employed model is large. We
therefore focus on the scenario in which test samples are

22952

