This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inverting the Imaging Process by Learning an Implicit Camera Model
Xin Huang1 ,* Qi Zhang2†, Ying Feng2 , Hongdong Li3 , Qing Wang1†
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
2
3
Tencent AI Lab
Australian National University

Figure 1. Our method solves inverse imaging tasks by learning an implicit neural camera model. The proposed framework consists of (a)
a scene model representing scene contents and (b) a camera model simulating the camera imaging process. Given a pixel position p (2D
pixel coordinate + 1D image index) at an image stack, the scene model maps it to corresponding irradiance value r (i.e., r = f (p)), and
then the camera model maps the irradiance r to a pixel intensity c (i.e., c = g(r)). Two models are trained per scene and jointly optimized
under the supervision of (c) a set of images captured with different camera settings (multi-focus and multi-exposure). After training, the
scene irradiance have been implicitly encoded into the scene model (under an indirect supervision from the multi-setting images). We then
remove the camera model and the scene model can render (d) all-in-focus HDR images by taking pixel positions as input.

Abstract
Representing visual signals with implicit coordinatebased neural networks, as an effective replacement of the
traditional discrete signal representation, has gained considerable popularity in computer vision and graphics. In
contrast to existing implicit neural representations which
focus on modelling the scene only, this paper proposes a
novel implicit camera model which represents the physical
imaging process of a camera as a deep neural network. We
demonstrate the power of this new implicit camera model on
two inverse imaging tasks: i) generating all-in-focus pho-

tos, and ii) HDR imaging. Specifically, we devise an implicit blur generator and an implicit tone mapper to model
the aperture and exposure of the camera’s imaging process,
respectively. Our implicit camera model is jointly learned
together with implicit scene models under multi-focus stack
and multi-exposure bracket supervision. We have demonstrated the effectiveness of our new model on a large number of test images and videos, producing accurate and visually appealing all-in-focus and high dynamic range images.
In principle, our new implicit neural camera model has the
potential to benefit a wide array of other inverse imaging
tasks.

* Work was done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

21456

