This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Non-uniform Kernel Estimation with Flow-based Motion Prior
for Blind Image Deblurring
Zhenxuan Fang1

Fangfang Wu1 * Weisheng Dong1 Xin Li2 Jinjian Wu1
1
Xidian University 2 West Virginia University

zxfang@stu.xidian.edu.cn

wufangfang@xidian.edu.cn

xin.li@mail.wvu.edu

jinjian.wu@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Guangming Shi1

wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn
gmshi@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Many deep learning-based solutions to blind image deblurring estimate the blur representation and reconstruct
the target image from its blurry observation. However,
these methods suffer from severe performance degradation
in real-world scenarios because they ignore important prior
information about motion blur (e.g., real-world motion blur
is diverse and spatially varying). Some methods have attempted to explicitly estimate non-uniform blur kernels by
CNNs, but accurate estimation is still challenging due to
the lack of ground truth about spatially varying blur kernels in real-world images. To address these issues, we propose to represent the field of motion blur kernels in a latent
space by normalizing flows, and design CNNs to predict the
latent codes instead of motion kernels. To further improve
the accuracy and robustness of non-uniform kernel estimation, we introduce uncertainty learning into the process of
estimating latent codes and propose a multi-scale kernel attention module to better integrate image features with estimated kernels. Extensive experimental results, especially
on real-world blur datasets, demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art results in terms of both subjective and objective quality as well as excellent generalization performance for non-uniform image deblurring. The
code is available at https://see.xidian.edu.cn/
faculty/wsdong/Projects/UFPNet.htm.

1. Introduction
Blind single image deblurring is a classic low-level vision problem that aims to recover the unknown sharp image from its observed blurry image without knowing the
blur kernel. The uniform degradation model assumes that
a blurry image is generated by a spatially invariant convolution process, which can be mathematically formulated as
y = B(x, k) + n,
* Corresponding author

(1)

Blurry

DeepRFT

Stripformer

MSDI-Net

NAFNet

UFPNet(Ours)

Figure 1. The non-uniform kernel estimation and deblurring results of the proposed UFPNet on the RealBlur-J dataset.

where x and y are sharp image and blurry image, respectively, B(·, k) represents the blurring operator with the blur
kernel k and n denotes the additive Gaussian noise. The
simple case assumes the blur operation in Eq. (1) is uniform
and the corresponding blur kernel is shift-invariant [11, 43].
Several methods have been proposed to estimate the blur
kernel and sharp image simultaneously [6,34,42]. However,
in the real world, there are several factors that can cause blur
degradation, such as camera shake and object movement.
Although camera shake usually causes uniform and global
background blurring, fast-moving objects often produce local blurring in the situation of a stationary background [50].
Therefore, the uniform blur in Eq. (1) is inappropriate for
characterizing local blurring in the real world.

18105

