This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Autonomous Manipulation Learning for Similar Deformable Objects
via Only One Demonstration

1

Yu Ren†1,2,3 Ronghan Chen†1,2,3 Yang Cong1,2 *
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
renyu@sia.cn, chenronghan@sia.cn congyang81@gmail.com

Abstract
In comparison with most methods focusing on 3D rigid
object recognition and manipulation, deformable objects
are more common in our real life but attract less attention.
Generally, most existing methods for deformable object manipulation suffer two issues, 1) Massive demonstration: repeating thousands of robot-object demonstrations for model
training of one specific instance; 2) Poor generalization:
inevitably re-training for transferring the learned skill to
a similar/new instance from the same category. Therefore, we propose a category-level deformable 3D object manipulation framework, which could manipulate deformable
3D objects with only one demonstration and generalize the
learned skills to new similar instances without re-training.
Specifically, our proposed framework consists of two modules. The Nocs State Transform (NST) module transfers the
observed point clouds of the target to a pre-defined unified pose state (i.e., Nocs state), which is the foundation for
the category-level manipulation learning; the Neural Spatial Encoding (NSE) module generalizes the learned skill to
novel instances by encoding the category-level spatial information to pursue the expected grasping point without
re-training. The relative motion path is then planned to
achieve autonomous manipulation. Both the simulated results via our Cap40 dataset and real robotic experiments
justify the effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
Autonomous 3D object recognition and manipulation
[1, 11, 12, 36] is crucial for robots and has broad applications for our human lives, e.g., the bin-picking for industrial robot, housework for service robot. Recently, most
* This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62127807 and 62225310. The corresponding author is
Prof. Yang Cong.
† These authors contributed equally to this work

Only one demonstration for wearing cap skill learning
𝑻

step 2

step 1

step 3
𝑯
𝑻

𝑻

𝑯
𝑯

Generalize to the novel cap and plan robot trajectory
𝑻

?

𝑻

?
𝑻

?

Figure 1. The demonstration of our proposed framework for wearing the cap: 1) the manipulation skill is learned via only one
demonstration; 2) the learned manipulatin skill could be generalized to other novel caps without re-training.

state-of-the-arts focus on 3D rigid object recognition and
manipulation [9]; in contrast, less attention is concerned
on non-rigid/deformable objects, which are actually more
common in our real lives, such as clothes, animals, vegetables or even human ourselves. This is partially because
the motion space representation of rigid objects is relatively
simple and could be represented by a 6-DOF linear vector; nevertheless, the deformations of non-rigid/deformable
objects are difficult to match and get a uniform linear representation. Recently, the data-driven methods [2, 32, 39]
achieve significant progress for non-rigid/deformation object manipulation, which can estimate the states of the deformable objects and predict the appropriate manipulations
simultaneously. However, these methods suffer two issues:
1) Massive demonstration: thousands of repetitions of
robot-object demonstrations are needed to train the model

17069

