This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FAC: 3D Representation Learning via Foreground Aware Feature Contrast
Kangcheng Liu1,† , Aoran Xiao1 , Xiaoqin Zhang2 , Shijian Lu1,† , Ling Shao3
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Wenzhou University 3 UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, UCAS
Abstract
Contrastive learning has recently demonstrated great
potential for unsupervised pre-training in 3D scene understanding tasks. However, most existing work randomly selects point features as anchors while building contrast, leading to a clear bias toward background points
that often dominate in 3D scenes. Also, object awareness and foreground-to-background discrimination are neglected, making contrastive learning less effective. To
tackle these issues, we propose a general foreground-aware
feature contrast (FAC) framework to learn more effective
point cloud representations in pre-training. FAC consists
of two novel contrast designs to construct more effective
and informative contrast pairs. The first is building positive
pairs within the same foreground segment where points tend
to have the same semantics. The second is that we prevent
over-discrimination between 3D segments/objects and encourage foreground-to-background distinctions at the segment level with adaptive feature learning in a Siamese correspondence network, which adaptively learns feature correlations within and across point cloud views effectively.
Visualization with point activation maps shows that our
contrast pairs capture clear correspondences among foreground regions during pre-training. Quantitative experiments also show that FAC achieves superior knowledge
transfer and data efficiency in various downstream 3D semantic segmentation and object detection tasks. All codes,
data, and models are available.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is crucial to many tasks such
as robot grasping and autonomous navigation [12, 21, 30].
However, most existing work is fully supervised which relies heavily on large-scale annotated 3D data that is often
laborious to collect. Self-supervised learning (SSL), which
allows learning rich and meaningful representations from
large-scale unannotated data, has recently demonstrated
great potential to mitigate the annotation constraint [1, 5].
It learns with auxiliary supervision signals derived from
unannotated data, which are usually much easier to col† Corresponding Authors.

Figure 1. Constructing informative contrast pairs matters in contrastive learning: Conventional contrast requires strict point-level
correspondence. The proposed method FAC takes both foreground grouping and foreground-background distinction cues into
account, thus forming better contrast pairs to learn more informative and discriminative 3D feature representations.

lect. In particular, contrastive learning as one prevalent SSL
approach has achieved great success in various visual 2D
recognition tasks [6, 29].
Contrastive learning has also been explored for point
cloud representation learning in various downstream tasks
such as semantic segmentation [7, 18, 22, 42], instance segmentation [19, 20], and object detection [26, 44]. However,
many successful 2D contrastive learning methods [6,14,46]
do not work well for 3D point clouds, largely because
point clouds often capture wide-view scenes which consist of complex points of many irregularly distributed foreground objects as well as a large number of background
points. Several studies attempt to design specific contrast
to cater to the geometry and distribution of point clouds.
For example, [22] employ max-pooled features of two augmented scenes to form the contrast, but they tend to overemphasize holistic information and overlook informative

9476

