This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Everything Sketch-Based Image Retrieval, and in Explainable Style
Fengyin Lin1∗ Mingkang Li1∗ Da Li2† Timothy Hospedales2,3 Yi-Zhe Song4 Yonggang Qi1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge
3
University of Edinburgh 4 SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey
{fylin,lmk,qiyg}@bupt.edu.cn

dali.academic@gmail.com

t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of zero-short sketchbased image retrieval (ZS-SBIR), however with two significant differentiators to prior art (i) we tackle all variants (inter-category, intra-category, and cross datasets) of
ZS-SBIR with just one network (“everything”), and (ii)
we would really like to understand how this sketch-photo
matching operates (“explainable”). Our key innovation lies
with the realization that such a cross-modal matching problem could be reduced to comparisons of groups of key local
patches – akin to the seasoned “bag-of-words” paradigm.
Just with this change, we are able to achieve both of the
aforementioned goals, with the added benefit of no longer
requiring external semantic knowledge. Technically, ours is
a transformer-based cross-modal network, with three novel
components (i) a self-attention module with a learnable tokenizer to produce visual tokens that correspond to the most
informative local regions, (ii) a cross-attention module to
compute local correspondences between the visual tokens
across two modalities, and finally (iii) a kernel-based relation network to assemble local putative matches and produce an overall similarity metric for a sketch-photo pair.
Experiments show ours indeed delivers superior performances across all ZS-SBIR settings. The all important explainable goal is elegantly achieved by visualizing crossmodal token correspondences, and for the first time, via
sketch to photo synthesis by universal replacement of all
matched photo patches. Code and model are available at
https://github.com/buptLinfy/ZSE-SBIR.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot sketch-based image retrieval (ZS-SBIR) is a
central problem to sketch understanding [8, 16, 19, 20, 28,
34, 50, 54, 55, 57, 60, 67]. The zero-shot setting is largely
driven by the prevailing data scarcity problem of human
sketches [19,28,58] – they are much harder to acquire compared with photos. As research matures on the non zero∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Unseen category

y.song@surrey.ac.uk

Transfer Training
data

Shareable
Local
Match

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Attentive regions of self-/cross-attention and the learned
visual correspondence for tackling unseen cases. (a) The proposed
retrieval token [Ret] can attend to informative regions. Different
colors are attention maps from different heads. (b) Cross-attention
offers explainability by explicitly constructing local visual correspondence. The local matches learned from training data are
shareable knowledge, which enables ZS-SBIR to work under diverse settings (inter- / intra-category and cross datasets) with just
one model. (c) An input sketch can be transformed into its image
by the learned correspondence, i.e., sketch patches are replaced by
the closest image patches from the retrieved image.

shot [4, 25, 33, 41–43, 59, 62], and in a push to make sketchbased retrieval commercially viable, recent research efforts
had mainly focused on ZS-SBIR (or the simpler few-shot
setting) [16, 19, 28, 34, 50, 57, 60].
Great strides have been made but attempts have largely
aligned with the larger photo-based zero-shot literature,
where the key lies in leveraging external knowledge for
cross-category adaptation [19, 34]. That of conducting
cross-modal matching is, however, less studied, and most
prior art relies on a gold standard triplet loss with some
auxiliary modules [16] to learn a joint embedding. Furthermore, as problems such as domain shift and fine-grained
matching come to play, research efforts are mostly done in
silo for different settings: category-level (standard) [28, 50,
60], fine-grained [2], and cross-dataset [40]. Last but definitely not least, one can not help but wonder why many of
the proposed algorithm work – what is matched, and how is
the transfer conducted?
This paper aims to tackle all said problems associated
with the current status quo for ZS-SBIR. In particular, we
advocate for (i) a single model to tackle all three settings of

23349

