This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PVT-SSD: Single-Stage 3D Object Detector with Point-Voxel Transformer
Honghui Yang1,3∗

Wenxiao Wang2 Minghao Chen1 Binbin Lin2† Tong He3†
Hua Chen4 Xiaofei He1 Wanli Ouyang3
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
COMAC Beijing Aircraft Technology Research Institute

Abstract
Recent Transformer-based 3D object detectors learn
point cloud features either from point- or voxel-based representations. However, the former requires time-consuming
sampling while the latter introduces quantization errors.
In this paper, we present a novel Point-Voxel Transformer
for single-stage 3D detection (PVT-SSD) that takes advantage of these two representations. Specifically, we first use
voxel-based sparse convolutions for efficient feature encoding. Then, we propose a Point-Voxel Transformer (PVT)
module that obtains long-range contexts in a cheap manner
from voxels while attaining accurate positions from points.
The key to associating the two different representations is
our introduced input-dependent Query Initialization module, which could efficiently generate reference points and
content queries. Then, PVT adaptively fuses long-range
contextual and local geometric information around reference points into content queries. Further, to quickly find
the neighboring points of reference points, we design the
Virtual Range Image module, which generalizes the native
range image to multi-sensor and multi-frame. The experiments on several autonomous driving benchmarks verify the
effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method. Code
will be available.

1. Introduction
3D object detection from point clouds has become increasingly popular thanks to its wide applications, e.g.,
autonomous driving and virtual reality. To process unordered point clouds, Transformer [51] has recently attracted great interest as the self-attention is invariant to
the permutation of inputs. However, due to the quadratic
∗ This work was done when Honghui was an intern at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
† Corresponding author

complexity of self-attention, it involves extensive computation and memory budgets when processing large point
clouds. To overcome this problem, some point-based methods [29, 36, 37] perform attention on downsampled point
sets, while some voxel-based methods [10, 33, 64] employ
attention on local non-empty voxels. Nevertheless, the former requires farthest point sampling (FPS) [41] to sample point clouds, which is time-consuming on large-scale
outdoor scenes [19], while the latter inevitably introduces
quantization errors during voxelization, which loses accurate position information.
In this paper, we propose PVT-SSD that absorbs the advantages of the above two representations, i.e., voxels and
points, while overcoming their drawbacks. To this end, instead of sampling points directly, we convert points to a
small number of voxels through sparse convolutions and
sample non-empty voxels to reduce the runtime of FPS.
Then, inside the PVT-SSD, voxel features are adaptively
fused with point features to make up for the quantization error. In this way, both long-range contexts from voxels and
accurate positions from points are preserved. Specifically,
PVT-SSD consists of the following components:
Firstly, we propose an input-dependent Query Initialization module inspired by previous indoor Transformerbased detectors [29, 36], which provides queries with better initial positions and instance-related features. Unlike [29, 36], our queries originate from non-empty voxels
instead of points to reduce the sampling time. Concretely,
with the 3D voxels generated by sparse convolutions, we
first collapse 3D voxels into 2D voxels by merging voxels
along the height dimension to further reduce the number of
voxels. The sample operation is then applied to select a representative set of voxels. We finally lift sampled 2D voxels
to generate 3D reference points. Subsequently, the corresponding content queries are obtained in an efficient way
by projecting reference points onto a BEV feature map and
indexing features at the projected locations.
Secondly, we introduce a Point-Voxel Transformer

13476

