This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIC: Masked Image Consistency for Context-Enhanced Domain Adaptation
Lukas Hoyer 1 Dengxin Dai 2 Haoran Wang 2 Luc Van Gool 1,3
1
ETH Zurich 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

3

KU Leuven

{lhoyer,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, {ddai,hawang}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Target Image

Abstract
In unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), a model
trained on source data (e.g. synthetic) is adapted to target data (e.g. real-world) without access to target annotation. Most previous UDA methods struggle with classes
that have a similar visual appearance on the target domain
as no ground truth is available to learn the slight appearance differences. To address this problem, we propose a
Masked Image Consistency (MIC) module to enhance UDA
by learning spatial context relations of the target domain
as additional clues for robust visual recognition. MIC enforces the consistency between predictions of masked target
images, where random patches are withheld, and pseudolabels that are generated based on the complete image by
an exponential moving average teacher. To minimize the
consistency loss, the network has to learn to infer the predictions of the masked regions from their context. Due to
its simple and universal concept, MIC can be integrated
into various UDA methods across different visual recognition tasks such as image classification, semantic segmentation, and object detection. MIC significantly improves the
state-of-the-art performance across the different recognition
tasks for synthetic-to-real, day-to-nighttime, and clear-toadverse-weather UDA. For instance, MIC achieves an unprecedented UDA performance of 75.9 mIoU and 92.8%
on GTA→Cityscapes and VisDA-2017, respectively, which
corresponds to an improvement of +2.1 and +3.0 percent
points over the previous state of the art. The implementation
is available at https://github.com/lhoyer/MIC.

1. Introduction
In order to train state-of-the-art neural networks for visual
recognition tasks, large-scale annotated datasets are necessary. However, the collection and annotation process can be
very time-consuming and tedious. For instance, the annotation of a single image for semantic segmentation can take
more than one hour [10,66]. Therefore, it would be beneficial
to resort to existing or simulated datasets, which are easier

(a) SotA UDA Pred. (b) MIC Prediction

(c) UDA with Masked Image Consistency (MIC)
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) Method
Masked Image Consistency (MIC)

Masking

Target
Image
EMA

MIC
Loss

Figure 1. (a) Previous UDA methods such as HRDA [31] struggle with similarly looking classes on the unlabeled target domain.
Here, the interior of the sidewalk is wrongly segmented as road,
probably, due to the ambiguous local appearance. (b) The proposed
Masked Image Consistency (MIC) enhances the learning of context
relations to consider additional context clues such as the curb in
the foreground. With MIC, the adapted network is able to correctly
segment the sidewalk. (c) MIC can be plugged into most existing
UDA methods. It enforces the consistency of the predictions of a
masked target image with the pseudo-label of the original image.
So, the network is trained to better utilize context clues on the target
domain. Further details are shown in Fig. 3.

to annotate. However, a network trained on such a source
dataset usually performs worse when applied to the actual
target dataset as neural networks are sensitive to domain
gaps. To mitigate this issue, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods adapt the network to the target domain
using unlabeled target images, for instance, with adversarial
training [20, 27, 57, 73] or self-training [30, 31, 72, 79, 97].
UDA methods have remarkably progressed in the last few
years. However, there is still a noticeable performance gap
compared to supervised training. A common problem is the
confusion of classes with a similar visual appearance on the
target domain such as road/sidewalk or pedestrian/rider as

11721

