This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Thermal Spread Functions (TSF): Physics-guided Material Classification
Aniket Dashpute1,3 , Vishwanath Saragadam3 , Emma Alexander2 ,
Florian Willomitzer4 , Aggelos Katsaggelos1 , Ashok Veeraraghavan3 , Oliver Cossairt1,2
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Computer Science, Northwestern University,
3
4

Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University,

Wyant College of Optical Sciences, University of Arizona

Abstract
Robust and non-destructive material classification is a
challenging but crucial first-step in numerous vision applications. We propose a physics-guided material classification framework that relies on thermal properties of the object. Our key observation is that the rate of heating and
cooling of an object depends on the unique intrinsic properties of the material, namely the emissivity and diffusivity. We
leverage this observation by gently heating the objects in the
scene with a low-power laser for a fixed duration and then
turning it off, while a thermal camera captures measurements during the heating and cooling process. We then take
this spatial and temporal “thermal spread function” (TSF)
to solve an inverse heat equation using the finite-differences
approach, resulting in a spatially varying estimate of diffusivity and emissivity. These tuples are then used to train
a classifier that produces a fine-grained material label at
each spatial pixel. Our approach is extremely simple requiring only a small light source (low power laser) and a
thermal camera, and produces robust classification results
with 86% accuracy over 16 classes1 .

Unknown material

Diffusivity

(c)
Thermal Camera
Heat source - laser

Absorption coeff

(d)
(e)

(a)
(b)

laser dot.
TSF data
is used to (c) estimate
diffusivity
map and MaFigure
1. The
Material
classification
with thermal
properties.
terials have unique thermodynamics that enables robust classification. We propose a simple setup composed of (a) a 60mW laser as
a heat source and a thermal camera to capture the heat profile (inset). This results in a (b) stack of images we call Thermal Spread
Function (TSF) that encodes heating and cooling effect around the
laser dot. The TSF data is used to (c) estimate diffusivity map and
(d) the external heat source term using inverse Finite Difference
Method, which is then used to (e) classify the material robustly.

1. Introduction
Material classification is an important task pertinent to
a diverse set of fields including but not limited to medicine
and biology [1], chip manufacturing, recycling [2, 3], land
and weather monitoring using satellites, and vision and
robotics. Robust material classification is particularly critical in separating various parts of an object based on their
constituent materials [2,3]. Common tools for material classification span a large spectrum including simple tools such
as infrared spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging to more exotic tools such as ultrasound, and x-ray fluorescent imagers.
Material classification primarily relies on various dimensions of light including bidirectional reflectance function
1 Code: https://github.com/aniketdashpute/TSF

(BRDF) slices [4], color and NIR images [5], frequency
and depth-dependent ToF distortion [6], spectral imaging
methods [7,8], multi-modal methods [9], and thermal imaging [10]. Methods based on RGB images are popular due
to availability of RGB cameras and large labled datasets,
but suffer from lack of robustness. In contrast, spectrumbased imaging based methods enable accurate classification
but often require complex optical systems such as hyperspectral cameras, and are sensitive to external illumination
conditions.
Human perception of materials is often multi-modal,
such as relying on touch and vision to accurately classify
material. This act of touching further involves a thermodynamic exchange that relies on the material composition of

1641

