This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Step-by-Step Instructional Diagrams to Video Demonstrations
Jiahao Zhang1, * Anoop Cherian2 Yanbin Liu1
Yizhak Ben-Shabat1,3,† Cristian Rodriguez4 Stephen Gould1,‡
1
The Australian National University, 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
3
Technion Israel Institute of Technology, 4 The Australian Institute for Machine Learning
1

{first.last}@anu.edu.au 2 cherian@merl.com 3 sitzikbs@gmail.com 4 crodriguezop@gmail.com
https://davidzhang73.github.io/en/publication/zhang-cvpr-2023/

Abstract
Multimodal alignment facilitates the retrieval of instances from one modality when queried using another. In
this paper, we consider a novel setting where such an alignment is between (i) instruction steps that are depicted as
assembly diagrams (commonly seen in Ikea assembly manuals) and (ii) segments from in-the-wild videos; these videos
comprising an enactment of the assembly actions in the real
world. We introduce a supervised contrastive learning approach that learns to align videos with the subtle details of
assembly diagrams, guided by a set of novel losses. To study
this problem and evaluate the effectiveness of our method,
we introduce a new dataset: IAW—for Ikea assembly in the
wild—consisting of 183 hours of videos from diverse furniture assembly collections and nearly 8,300 illustrations
from their associated instruction manuals and annotated
for their ground truth alignments. We define two tasks on
this dataset: First, nearest neighbor retrieval between video
segments and illustrations, and, second, alignment of instruction steps and the segments for each video. Extensive
experiments on IAW demonstrate superior performance of
our approach against alternatives.

1. Introduction
The rise of Do-It-Yourself (DIY) videos on the web has
made it possible even for an unskilled person (or a skilled
robot) to imitate and follow instructions to complete complex real world tasks [4, 23, 31]. One such task that is often cumbersome to infer from instruction descriptions yet
easy to imitate from a video is the task of assembling furniture from its parts. Often times the instruction steps involved in such a task are depicted in pictorial form, so that
* Supported by an ANU-MERL PhD scholarship agreement.
† Supported by Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 893465.
‡ Supported by an ARC Future Fellowship No. FT200100421.

…

…

…

…

…

…

Figure 1. An illustration of video-diagram alignment between a
YouTube video (top) He0pCeCTJQM and an Ikea furniture manual (bottom) s49069795.

they are comprehensible beyond the boundaries of language
(e.g., Ikea assembly manuals). However, such instructional
diagrams can sometimes be ambiguous, unclear, or may not
match the furniture parts at disposal due to product variability. Having access to video sequences that demonstrate the
precise assembly process could be very useful in such cases.
Unfortunately, most DIY videos on the web are created
by amateurs and often involve content that is not necessarily
related to the task at hand. For example, such videos may
include commentary about the furniture being assembled, or
personal assembly preferences that are not captured in the
instruction manual. Further, there could be large collections
of videos on the web that demonstrate the assembly process for the same furniture but in diverse assembly settings;
watching them could consume significant time from the assembly process. Thus, it is important to have a mechanism
that can effectively align relevant video segments against
the instructions steps illustrated in a manual.
In this paper, we consider this novel task as a multimodal
alignment problem [25, 27], specifically for aligning in-thewild web videos of furniture assembly and the respective
diagrams in the instruction manuals as shown in Fig. 1. In
contrast to prior approaches for such multimodal alignment,
which usually uses audio, visual, and language modalities,

2483

