This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVA: Exploring the Limits of Masked Visual Representation Learning at Scale
Yuxin Fang1,2† Wen Wang3,2† Binhui Xie4,2† Quan Sun2 Ledell Wu2
Xinggang Wang1‡ Tiejun Huang2 Xinlong Wang2‡ Yue Cao2‡
1 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3 Zhejiang University

2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
4 Beijing Institute of Technology

Code & Models: baaivision/EVA/01

Abstract
We launch EVA, a vision-centric foundation model to
Explore the limits of Visual representation at scAle using
only publicly accessible data. EVA is a vanilla ViT pretrained to reconstruct the masked out image-text aligned
vision features conditioned on visible image patches. Via
this pretext task, we can efficiently scale up EVA to one
billion parameters, and sets new records on a broad range
of representative vision downstream tasks, such as image
recognition, video action recognition, object detection, instance segmentation and semantic segmentation without
heavy supervised training. Moreover, we observe quantitative changes in scaling EVA result in qualitative changes
in transfer learning performance that are not present in other
models. For instance, EVA takes a great leap in the challenging large vocabulary instance segmentation task: our model
achieves almost the same state-of-the-art performance on
LVIS dataset with over a thousand categories and COCO
dataset with only eighty categories. Beyond a pure vision encoder, EVA can also serve as a vision-centric, multi-modal
pivot to connect images and text. We find initializing the
vision tower of a giant CLIP from EVA can greatly stabilize the training and outperform the training from scratch
counterpart with much fewer samples and less compute, providing a new direction for scaling up and accelerating the
costly training of multi-modal foundation models.

1. Introduction
Scaling up pre-trained language models (PLMs) [9,64,76]
has revolutionized natural language processing (NLP) in the
past few years. The key to this success lies in the simple
and scalable self-supervised learning task of masked signal
† Interns

at Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).
authors: Yue Cao (caoyue10@gmail.com), Xinlong Wang (xinlong.wang96@gmail.com) and Xinggang Wang
(xgwang@hust.edu.cn).
‡ Corresponding

prediction [29, 74], with which Transformer models [99]
could be scaled up to billions of parameters using nearly
unlimited unlabelled data, and generalize well to a wide
range of downstream tasks with little tuning. With further
scaling on compute, data, and model sizes, PLMs have led
to not only continuous performance improvements [50, 75,
76], but also a surprising emergence of in-context learning
capability [9, 25, 104, 105].
Motivated by the success of model scaling in NLP, it is appealing that we can also translate this success from language
to vision, i.e., to scale up a vision-centric foundation model
that is beneficial for both vision & multi-modal downstream
tasks. Recently, masked image modeling (MIM) [5, 39, 113]
has boomed as a viable approach for vision model pretraining and scaling. However, the most competitive billionsized vision pre-trained models [31, 65, 71, 119] still heavily
rely on supervised or weakly-supervised training with hundreds of millions of (often publicly inaccessible) labeled
data. MIM is somewhat only adopted as an initialization
stage before the heavily supervised pre-training [65], or a
pure MIM pre-trained model could not achieve favorable
performance at billion-scale model sizes [114]. We regard
this gap stems from the fact that natural images are raw and
information-sparse. Meanwhile, an ideal vision pretext task
needs the abstraction of not only the low-level geometry &
structure information, but also high-level semantics, which
is hardly captured by pixel-level recovery tasks [112].
In this work, we seek a suitable MIM pretext task for
large scale vision representation learning and explore its
limits at the scale of one billion parameters with tens of
millions of unlabeled data. Recently, there are a few trials
leveraging the semantic information from image-image or
image-text contrastive learning [13, 22, 73] for MIM pretraining [43, 106, 124], which perform fairly well in vision
downstream tasks. However, there remains a debate that (i)
tokenized semantic features could provide better supervision
signal for masked modeling in vision [5, 70, 101], and (ii)
good performances could be also achieved via a simple post-

19358

