This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Principles of Forgetting in Domain-Incremental Semantic Segmentation in
Adverse Weather Conditions
Tobias Kalb
Porsche Engineering Group GmbH
Weissach, Germany

Jürgen Beyerer
Fraunhofer IOSB & Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany

tobias.kalb@porsche-engineering.de

juergen.beyerer@iosb.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
Deep neural networks for scene perception in automated
vehicles achieve excellent results for the domains they were
trained on. However, in real-world conditions, the domain of operation and its underlying data distribution are
subject to change. Adverse weather conditions, in particular, can significantly decrease model performance when
such data are not available during training. Additionally, when a model is incrementally adapted to a new domain, it suffers from catastrophic forgetting, causing a significant drop in performance on previously observed domains. Despite recent progress in reducing catastrophic
forgetting, its causes and effects remain obscure. Therefore,
we study how the representations of semantic segmentation models are affected during domain-incremental learning in adverse weather conditions. Our experiments and
representational analyses indicate that catastrophic forgetting is primarily caused by changes to low-level features in
domain-incremental learning and that learning more general features on the source domain using pre-training and
image augmentations leads to efficient feature reuse in subsequent tasks, which drastically reduces catastrophic forgetting. These findings highlight the importance of methods that facilitate generalized features for effective continual learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is widely used for environment
perception in automated driving, where it aims at recognizing and comprehending images at the pixel level. One fundamental constraint of the traditional deep learning-based
semantic segmentation models is that they are often only
trained and evaluated on data collected mostly in clear
weather conditions and that they assume that the domain of
the training data matches the domain they operate in. However, in the real world, those autonomous driving systems

Figure 1. Activation drift between models f1 to f0 measured by
relative mIoU on the first task of the models stitched together at
specific layers (horizontal axis). The layers of the encoder are
marked in the gray area, the decoder layers in the white area.
Layer-stitching reveals that during domain-incremental learning,
changes in low-level features are a major cause of forgetting. With
an improved training scheme, combining simple augmentations,
exchanging normalization layers and using pre-training, the model
is optimized to reuse low-level features during incremental learning, leading to significant reduction of catastrophic forgetting.

are faced with constantly changing driving environments
and variable input data distributions. Specifically, changing
weather conditions can have adverse effects on the performance of segmentation models.
Therefore, a semantic segmentation model needs to be
adapted to these conditions. A naive solution to this problem would be to incrementally fine-tune the model to new
domains with labeled data. However, fine-tuning a neural
network to a novel domain will, in most cases, lead to a
severe performance drop in previously observed domains.
This phenomenon is usually referred to as catastrophic forgetting and is a fundamental challenge when training a neural network on a continuous stream of data. Recently proposed methods mostly mitigate this challenge by replaying
data from previous domains, re-estimating statistics or even
in an unsupervised manner by transferring training images
in the style of the novel domain [32, 48, 52]. The focus of
our work is to study how the internal representations of se-

19508

