This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoMVSNet: Learning Multi-View Stereo with Geometry Perception
Zhe Zhang1 Rui Peng1 Yuxi Hu2 Ronggang Wang1
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
2
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
doublez@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent cascade Multi-View Stereo (MVS) methods can
efficiently estimate high-resolution depth maps through narrowing hypothesis ranges. However, previous methods ignored the vital geometric information embedded in coarse
stages, leading to vulnerable cost matching and sub-optimal
reconstruction results. In this paper, we propose a geometry awareness model, termed GeoMVSNet, to explicitly integrate geometric clues implied in coarse stages for
delicate depth estimation. In particular, we design a twobranch geometry fusion network to extract geometric priors from coarse estimations to enhance structural feature
extraction at finer stages. Besides, we embed the coarse
probability volumes, which encode valuable depth distribution attributes, into the lightweight regularization network to further strengthen depth-wise geometry intuition.
Meanwhile, we apply the frequency domain filtering to mitigate the negative impact of the high-frequency regions
and adopt the curriculum learning strategy to progressively boost the geometry integration of the model. To intensify the full-scene geometry perception of our model,
we present the depth distribution similarity loss based on
the Gaussian-Mixture Model assumption. Extensive experiments on DTU and Tanks and Temples (T&T) datasets
demonstrate that our GeoMVSNet achieves state-of-the-art
results and ranks first on the T&T-Advanced set. Code is
available at https://github.com/doubleZ0108/GeoMVSNet.

1. Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) reconstructs the dense geometry representation of a scene from multiple overlapping photographs, which is an influential branch of threedimensional (3D) computer vision and has been extensively
studied for decades. Learning-based MVS methods aggregate cost volume from different viewpoints and use neural networks for cost regularization, which achieve superior
performance compared with traditional methods.
Recently, cascade-based architectures [7, 14, 54] have

rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

been widely applied. They compute different resolution
depth maps in a coarse-to-fine manner and progressively
narrow hypothesis plane guidance to reduce computational
complexity. However, these approaches do not take advantage of valuable insight contained in early phases and
only consider the pixel-wise depth attribute. Some methods, e.g. deformable kernel-based [47] and transformerbased [4, 8, 22, 27, 46], introduce finely designed external
structures for feature extraction but do not fully exploit the
geometric clues embedded in the MVS scenarios.
Unlike existing works, we propose to explore the geometric structures embedded in coarse stages for delicate
estimations in finer stages. In particular, we build a twobranch fusion network to integrate geometric priors contained in coarse depth maps with ordinary features extracted
by the classic FPN [23], and the fused geometry awareness
features can provide solid foundations for robust aggregation. Meanwhile, coarse probability volumes with abundant
geometric structures are embedded into the regularization
network, and we replace the heavy 3D convolution with enhanced 2D regularization without degrading the quality of
depth-wise correlation, resulting in lightweight but robust
cost matching. However, MVS networks tend to produce
severe misestimation at high-frequency clutter textures due
to confused matching in coarse stages, which inevitably affects explicit geometry perception. We are inspired by the
human behavior that a nearsighted person can still perceive
a scene well without glasses, even if the texture details cannot be seen clearly. Based on the observation, we refer to
the idea of curriculum learning [2] to embed coarse geometric priors into finer stages from easy to difficult. Specifically, we utilize the frequency domain filtering strategy
to effectively alleviate redundant high-frequency textures
without producing more learning parameters and leverage
geometric structures embedded in different hierarchies of
frequency for gradually delicate depth estimation.
In addition, depth ranges of MVS scenarios are often
concentrated in several intervals, for this, we adopt the
Gaussian-Mixture Model to simulate full-scene depth distribution and PauTa Criterion [31] allows us to depict loca-

21508

