This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EvShutter: Transforming Events for Unconstrained Rolling Shutter Correction
Julius Erbach

Stepan Tulyakov
Patricia Vitoria
Alfredo Bochicchio
Yuanyou Li
Huawei Technologies, Zurich Research Center

Figure 1. Comparison of EvShutter to state-of-the-art event-based RS correction method [28]. Our method introduces a novel event
transformation, which allows us to correct RS artifacts in the presence of non-linear motion or large displacements.

Abstract
Widely used Rolling Shutter (RS) CMOS sensors capture
high resolution images at the expense of introducing distortions and artifacts in the presence of motion. In such
situations, RS distortion correction algorithms are critical.
Recent methods rely on a constant velocity assumption and
require multiple frames to predict the dense displacement
field. In this work, we introduce a new method, called
Eventful Shutter (EvShutter)1 , that corrects RS artifacts using a single RGB image and event information with high
temporal resolution. The method firstly removes blur using a novel flow-based deblurring module and then compensates RS using a double encoder hourglass network. In
contrast to previous methods, it does not rely on a constant
velocity assumption and uses a simple architecture thanks
to an event transformation dedicated to RS, called Filter
and Flip (FnF), that transforms input events to encode only
1 The evaluation code and the dataset can be found here https://
github.com/juliuserbach/EvShutter

the changes between GS and RS images. To evaluate the
proposed method and facilitate future research, we collect
the first dataset with real events and high-quality RS images with optional blur, called RS-ERGB. We generate the
RS images from GS images using a newly proposed simulator based on adaptive interpolation. The simulator permits
the use of inexpensive cameras with long exposure to capture high-quality GS images. We show that on this realistic
dataset the proposed method outperforms the state-of-theart image- and event-based methods by 9.16 dB and 0.75 dB
respectively in terms of PSNR and an improvement of 23 %
and 21 % in LPIPS.

1. Introduction
Most consumer cameras like cell phones or action cameras use a rolling shutter (RS) sensor which instead of
capturing the whole frame in a single shot as in a global
shutter (GS) camera, it acquires each row sequentially as
shown in Fig. 2. Specifically, it obtains each row y at time

13904

