This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Castling-ViT: Compressing Self-Attention via Switching
Towards Linear-Angular Attention at Vision Transformer Inference
Haoran You1,2,†, *, Yunyang Xiong2,∗ , Xiaoliang Dai2 , Bichen Wu2 , Peizhao Zhang2 ,
Haoqi Fan2 , Peter Vajda2 , Yingyan (Celine) Lin1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Meta Research
{haoran.you,celine.lin}@gatech.edu
{yunyang,xiaoliangdai,wbc,stzpz,haoqifan,vajdap}@meta.com

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have made significant
progress in image classification, object detection, and many

Image Classification on ImageNet

85

LeViT
EfficientNet
MobileNetV2
DeiT
RegNetY

80
75
0.0

mAP (%)

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have shown impressive performance but still require a high computation cost as compared to convolutional neural networks (CNNs), one reason is that ViTs’ attention measures global similarities and
thus has a quadratic complexity with the number of input tokens. Existing efficient ViTs adopt local attention or
linear attention, which sacrifice ViTs’ capabilities of capturing either global or local context. In this work, we
ask an important research question: Can ViTs learn both
global and local context while being more efficient during
inference? To this end, we propose a framework called
Castling-ViT, which trains ViTs using both linear-angular
attention and masked softmax-based quadratic attention,
but then switches to having only linear-angular attention
during inference. Our Castling-ViT leverages angular kernels to measure the similarities between queries and keys
via spectral angles. And we further simplify it with two techniques: (1) a novel linear-angular attention mechanism:
we decompose the angular kernels into linear terms and
high-order residuals, and only keep the linear terms; and
(2) we adopt two parameterized modules to approximate
high-order residuals: a depthwise convolution and an auxiliary masked softmax attention to help learn global and local information, where the masks for softmax attention are
regularized to gradually become zeros and thus incur no
overhead during inference. Extensive experiments validate
the effectiveness of our Castling-ViT, e.g., achieving up to a
1.8% higher accuracy or 40% MACs reduction on classification and 1.2 higher mAP on detection under comparable
FLOPs, as compared to ViTs with vanilla softmax-based attentions. Project page is available at here.

Top-1 Acc. (%)

Abstract

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

Swin
CSwin
MViTv2
Autoformer
Castling-ViT (Ours)

12.5

MACs (G)
Object Detection on COCO

35

15.0

17.5

×109

YOLOv5
YOLOX
MobileDet-DSP
EfficientDet
FBNetv5
Castling-ViT (Ours)

30
25
1.0

2.0

3.0

MACs (G)

4.0

5.0

6.0

×109

Figure 1. Castling-ViT over SOTA baselines on (1) ImageNet [18]
image classification and (2) COCO [36] object detection.

other applications. It is well recognized that the superior performance achieved by ViTs is largely attributed to
their self-attention modules that can better capture global
context [20, 57, 64]. Nevertheless, ViTs’ powerful selfattention module comes at the cost of quadratic complexity with the number of input tokens, causing a major efficiency bottleneck to ViTs’ achievable runtime (i.e., inference latency) [3, 8, 32, 58, 66, 69, 76]. To mitigate this issue, linear attention designs have been developed to alleviate the vanilla ViT attention’s quadratic complexity. In
particular, existing efforts can be categorized into two clusters: (1) ViTs with local attention by restricting the attention window size [38, 53], sharing the attention queries [2],
or representing the attention queries/keys with low rank matrices [58]; and (2) ViTs with kernel-based linear attention,
which approximate the non-linearity softmax function by
decomposing it into separate kernel embeddings. This enables a change in the matrix computation order for a reduced computational complexity [5, 6, 14, 29, 37, 39, 43, 66].
Despite their promise in alleviating ViTs’ complexity

* Equal contribution. † Work done while interning at Meta Research.

14431

