This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PA&DA: Jointly Sampling PAth and DAta for Consistent NAS
Shun Lu1, 2 , Yu Hu1, 2 ,* Longxing Yang1, 2 , Zihao Sun1, 2 , Jilin Mei1 , Jianchao Tan3 , Chengru Song3
1
Research Center for Intelligent Computing Systems,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Kuaishou Technology
{lushun19s, huyu, yanglongxing20b, sunzihao18z, meijilin}@ict.ac.cn,
{jianchaotan, songchengru}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
Based on the weight-sharing mechanism, one-shot NAS
methods train a supernet and then inherit the pre-trained
weights to evaluate sub-models, largely reducing the search
cost. However, several works have pointed out that the
shared weights suffer from different gradient descent directions during training. And we further find that large gradient variance occurs during supernet training, which degrades the supernet ranking consistency. To mitigate this
issue, we propose to explicitly minimize the gradient variance of the supernet training by jointly optimizing the sampling distributions of PAth and DAta (PA&DA). We theoretically derive the relationship between the gradient variance
and the sampling distributions, and reveal that the optimal
sampling probability is proportional to the normalized gradient norm of path and training data. Hence, we use the
normalized gradient norm as the importance indicator for
path and training data, and adopt an importance sampling
strategy for the supernet training. Our method only requires
negligible computation cost for optimizing the sampling distributions of path and data, but achieves lower gradient
variance during supernet training and better generalization
performance for the supernet, resulting in a more consistent
NAS. We conduct comprehensive comparisons with other
improved approaches in various search spaces. Results
show that our method surpasses others with more reliable
ranking performance and higher accuracy of searched architectures, showing the effectiveness of our method. Code
is available at https://github.com/ShunLu91/PA-DA.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) aims to automate the
process of designing architectures. Conventional NAS
* Corresponding author.

methods [2,58] separately train each sub-model to guide the
controller for better architectures, demanding prohibitive
computational complexity. ENAS [34] explores the weightsharing mechanism across sub-models and One-Shot NAS
[3] proposes to train a supernet to share weights for submodels to achieve higher efficiency. Later on, many followups [9, 18, 30, 49] adopt this vein to perform NAS.
Though the weight-sharing mechanism greatly improves
NAS efficiency, many works [19, 20, 41, 50, 53, 56, 57] point
out that the shared weights suffer from different gradient
descent directions in different sub-models, leading to large
gradient variance and poor ranking consistency. To mitigate this issue, they [20, 41, 56, 57] propose to maintain
multi-copies of supernet weights to decrease the weightsharing extent, manually elaborate a better path sampling
strategy [9, 50], or introduce additional loss regularizations
[19, 50, 53]. However, they typically require multiple computation burdens for the supernet training and obtain unsatisfying results, motivating us to explore a better solution.
Notice that significant efforts [13, 17, 22, 36, 38, 40] have
been dedicated to reducing the variance of the stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) for minimizing finite sums. Many
works [1, 5, 16, 23, 25, 45, 55] focus on optimizing the data
sampling distribution to reduce the gradient variance (GV)
for training deep models. These methods generally enjoy
faster convergence and better generalization performance,
inspiring us to improve the supernet training from the perspective of gradient variance reduction.
We conduct a toy experiment on NAS-Bench-201 [15]
using CIFAR-10 to investigate the GV for the supernet
training. We use SPOS [18] algorithm to train the supernet and gradually increase the candidate operations on each
edge to change the weight-sharing extent. We record the
average GV of all candidate operation weights during training and evaluate the supernet performance by measuring the
ranking results of the same 64 sub-models (corresponding
to the smallest search space with 2 candidate operations on

11940

