This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicNet: Semi-Supervised Multi-Organ Segmentation via Magic-Cube
Partition and Recovery
Duowen Chen1

Yunhao Bai1

Wei Shen2

Qingli Li1

Lequan Yu3

Yan Wang1 *

1

2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 The University of Hong Kong
duowen chen@hotmail.com, yhbai@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn,
qlli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, lqyu@hku.hk, ywang@cee.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel teacher-student model for semisupervised multi-organ segmentation. In teacher-student
model, data augmentation is usually adopted on unlabeled
data to regularize the consistent training between teacher
and student. We start from a key perspective that fixed relative locations and variable sizes of different organs can provide distribution information where a multi-organ CT scan
is drawn. Thus, we treat the prior anatomy as a strong tool
to guide the data augmentation and reduce the mismatch
between labeled and unlabeled images for semi-supervised
learning. More specifically, we propose a data augmentation strategy based on partition-and-recovery N3 cubes
cross- and within- labeled and unlabeled images. Our strategy encourages unlabeled images to learn organ semantics
in relative locations from the labeled images (cross-branch)
and enhances the learning ability for small organs (withinbranch). For within-branch, we further propose to refine the
quality of pseudo labels by blending the learned representations from small cubes to incorporate local attributes. Our
method is termed as MagicNet, since it treats the CT volume as a magic-cube and N3 -cube partition-and-recovery
process matches with the rule of playing a magic-cube. Extensive experiments on two public CT multi-organ datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of MagicNet, and noticeably
outperforms state-of-the-art semi-supervised medical image segmentation approaches, with +7% DSC improvement on MACT dataset with 10% labeled images. Code is
avaiable at https://github.com/DeepMed-LabECNU/MagicNet.

1. Introduction
Abdominal multi-organ segmentation in CT images is
an essential task in many clinical applications such as
* Corresponding Author.

Cross-image branch

Within-image branch

Fixed relative-location

Labeled data

Magic-cube

All data

Small-cubes

Unlabeled data
liver

duodenum

pancreas

stomach

gallbladder

aorta

adrenal gland

pancreas

veins

Figure 1. Two data augmentation strategies in MagicNet. Left:
Although labeled and unlabeled images are not aligned, the latter can be regarded as a shifted version of the former. Co-shift
of cubes transfers organ semantics in relative locations from the
labeled data to unlabeled data. Right: Segmenting small organs
from original images are difficult due to the cluttered background.
Small cubes mitigate the impact from background and focus more
on local attributes.

computer-aided intervention [25, 33]. But, training an accurate multi-organ segmentation model usually requires a
large amount of labeled data, whose acquisition process
is time-consuming and expensive. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has shown great potential to handle the scarcity
of data annotations, which attempts to transfer mass prior
knowledge learned from the labeled to unlabeled images.
SSL attracts more and more attention in the field of medical
image analysis in recent years.
Popular SSL medical image segmentation methods
mainly focus on segmenting a single target or targets in
a local region, such as segmenting pancreas or left atrium
[4, 9, 14, 15, 18, 23, 31, 35, 38, 39]. Multi-organ segmentation is more challenging than single organ segmentation,
due to the complex anatomical structures of the organs,
e.g., the fixed relative locations (duodenum is always located at the head of the pancreas), the appearances of different organs, and the large variations of the size. Transfer-

23869

