This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoSwin: a Pano-style Swin Transformer for Panorama Understanding
Zhixin Ling

Zhen Xing Xiangdong Zhou Manliang Cao Guichun Zhou
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{20212010005,zxing20,xdzhou,17110240029,19110240014}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In panorama understanding, the widely used equirectangular projection (ERP) entails boundary discontinuity and
spatial distortion. It severely deteriorates the conventional
CNNs and vision Transformers on panoramas. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective architecture named
PanoSwin to learn panorama representations with ERP. To
deal with the challenges brought by equirectangular projection, we explore a pano-style shift windowing scheme and
novel pitch attention to address the boundary discontinuity and the spatial distortion, respectively. Besides, based
on spherical distance and Cartesian coordinates, we adapt
absolute positional embeddings and relative positional biases for panoramas to enhance panoramic geometry information. Realizing that planar image understanding might
share some common knowledge with panorama understanding, we devise a novel two-stage learning framework to
facilitate knowledge transfer from the planar images to
panoramas. We conduct experiments against the state-ofthe-art on various panoramic tasks, i.e., panoramic object
detection, panoramic classification, and panoramic layout
estimation. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of PanoSwin in panorama understanding.

distant in ERP but close in sphere

shift

a. original windows
pitch attention

b. shifted windows
c. rotated panorama

Figure 1. (1). Fig. a is how a panoramic image looks, just like
a planar world map, where top/bottom regions are connected to
the earth’s poles; the right side is connected to the left. (2). Our
PanoSwin is based on window attention [19]. Fig. a also shows
the original window partition in dotted orange, where the two
windows in bold orange are separated by equirectangular projection(ERP). (3). Fig. b shows pano-style shift windowing scheme,
which brings the two departed regions together. (4). Fig. c shows
our pitch attention module, which helps a distorted window to interact with an undistorted one.

1. Introduction
Panoramas are widely used in many real applications,
such as virtual reality, autonomous driving, civil surveillance, etc. Panorama understanding has attracted increasing interest in the research community [5, 27, 34]. Among
these methods, the most popular and convenient representation of panorama is adopted via equirectangular projection (ERP), which maps the latitude and longitude of the
spherical representation to horizontal and vertical grid coordinates. However, the inherent omnidirectional vision remains the challenge of the panorama understanding. Although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [11, 14, 28]
have shown outstanding performances on planar image understanding, most CNN-based methods are unsuitable for
panoramas because of two fundamental problems entailed

by ERP: (1) polar and side boundary discontinuity and (2)
spatial distortion. Specifically, the north/south polar region
in spherical representations are closely connected. But the
converted region covers the whole top/bottom boundaries.
On this account, polar boundary continuity is destroyed by
ERP. Similarly, side boundary continuity is also destroyed
since the left and right sides are split by ERP. Meanwhile,
spatial distortion also severely deforms the image content,
especially in polar regions.
A common solution is to adapt convolution to the spherical space [4, 5, 24, 34]. However, these methods might suffer from high computation costs from the adaptation process. Besides, Spherical Transformer [2] and PanoFormer
[22] specially devise patch sampling approaches to remove

17755

