This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Multiple Reliability Measures via
Nuisance-extended Information Bottleneck

†

Jongheon Jeong† Sihyun Yu† Hankook Lee‡ * Jinwoo Shin†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) ‡ LG AI Research
{jongheonj,sihyun.yu,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

hankook.lee@lgresearch.ai

Abstract
In practical scenarios where training data is limited,
many predictive signals in the data can be rather from some
biases in data acquisition (i.e., less generalizable), so that
one cannot prevent a model from co-adapting on such (socalled) “shortcut” signals: this makes the model fragile in
various distribution shifts. To bypass such failure modes,
we consider an adversarial threat model under a mutual
information constraint to cover a wider class of perturbations in training. This motivates us to extend the standard
information bottleneck to additionally model the nuisance
information. We propose an autoencoder-based training to
implement the objective, as well as practical encoder designs
to facilitate the proposed hybrid discriminative-generative
training concerning both convolutional- and Transformerbased architectures. Our experimental results show that
the proposed scheme improves robustness of learned representations (remarkably without using any domain-specific
knowledge), with respect to multiple challenging reliability
measures. For example, our model could advance the stateof-the-art on a recent challenging OBJECTS benchmark
in novelty detection by 78.4% → 87.2% in AUROC, while
simultaneously enjoying improved corruption, background
and (certified) adversarial robustness. Code is available at
https://github.com/jh-jeong/nuisance_ib.

1. Introduction
Despite the recent breakthroughs in computer vision
in aid of deep learning, e.g., in image/video recognition [9, 20, 109], synthesis [42, 55, 96, 125], and 3D scene
rendering [85, 86, 104], deploying deep learning models to
the real-world still places a burden on contents providers as
it affects the reliability of their services. In many cases, deep
neural networks make substantially fragile predictions for
out-of-distribution inputs, i.e., samples that are not likely
* Work done at KAIST.

Figure 1. A high-level illustration of our method, nuisanceextended information bottleneck (NIB). In this paper, we focus
on scenarios when the input x can be corrupted x → x̂ in test-time
while preserving its semantics. Unlike the standard cross-entropy
training (CE), NIB aims to encode every target-correlated signal in
x, some of which can be more reliable under distribution shifts.

from the training distribution, even when the inputs are semantically close enough to in-distribution samples for humans [35, 102]. Such a vulnerability can be a significant
threat in risk-sensitive systems, such as autonomous driving,
medical imaging, and health-care applications, to name a
few [2]. Overall, the phenomena highlight that deep neural
networks tend to extract “shortcut” signals [26] from given
limited (or potentially biased) training data in practice.
To address such concerns, multiple literatures have been
independently developed based on different aspects of model
reliability. Namely, their methods use different threat models and benchmarks, depending on how a shift in input distribution happens in test-time, and how to evaluate model
performance against the shift. For example, in the context of adversarial robustness [11, 17, 82, 128], a typical
threat model is to consider the worst-case noise inside a
fixed ℓp -ball around given test samples. Another example of
corruption robustness [34, 35, 39, 116] instead assumes predefined types of common corruptions (e.g., Gaussian noise,
fog, etc.) that applies to the test samples. Lastly, novelty
detection [36, 72, 74, 76] usually tests whether a model can
detect a specific benchmark dataset as out-of-distribution
from the (in-distribution) test samples.

16206

