This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quality-aware Pre-trained Models for Blind Image Quality Assessment
Kai Zhao† , Kun Yuan† , Ming Sun, Mading Li and Xing Wen
Kuaishou Technology
{zhaokai05,yuankun03,sunming03,limading,wenxing}@kuaishou.com

Abstract
Blind image quality assessment (BIQA) aims to automatically evaluate the perceived quality of a single image,
whose performance has been improved by deep learningbased methods in recent years. However, the paucity of labeled data somewhat restrains deep learning-based BIQA
methods from unleashing their full potential. In this paper, we propose to solve the problem by a pretext task
customized for BIQA in a self-supervised learning manner,
which enables learning representations from orders of magnitude more data. To constrain the learning process, we
propose a quality-aware contrastive loss based on a simple
assumption: the quality of patches from a distorted image
should be similar, but vary from patches from the same image with different degradations and patches from different
images. Further, we improve the existing degradation process and form a degradation space with the size of roughly
2 × 107 . After pre-trained on ImageNet using our method,
models are more sensitive to image quality and perform significantly better on downstream BIQA tasks. Experimental
results show that our method obtains remarkable improvements on popular BIQA datasets.

1. Introduction
With the arrival of the mobile internet era, billions of images are generated, uploaded and shared on various social
media platforms, including Twitter, TikTok, etc [30]. As
an essential indicator, image quality can help these service
providers filter and deliver high-quality images to users,
thereby improving Quality of Experience. Therefore, huge
efforts [12,20,22,24,52,73] have been devoted to establishing an image quality assessment (IQA) method consistent
with human viewers. In real-world scenarios, there usually
exists no access to the reference images and the quality of
reference images is suspicious. Thus, blind IQA (BIQA)
methods are more attractive and applicable, despite fullreference IQA has achieved prospective results [33].
† Equal contribution.

Figure 1. The two images in the first row are sampled from BIQA
dataset CLIVE [20]. Although they have the same semantic meaning, their perceptual qualities are quite different: their mean opinion scores (MOS) are 31.83 and 86.35. The second row shows
modified versions of the first two images and their MOSs (rated
by 7 people). After different operations, the quality dramatically
changed, while semantic meaning remains unchanged.

Recently, deep learning-based BIQA methods have
made tremendous improvements on in-the-wild IQA benchmarks [17, 29, 79]. However, this problem is far from resolved and is hindered by the paucity of labeled data [34].
The largest (by far) available BIQA dataset, FLIVE [79],
contains nearly 40,000 real-world distorted images. By
comparison, the very popular entry-level image recognition
dataset, CIFAR-100 [35], contains 60,000 labeled images.
Accordingly, existing BIQA datasets are too small to train
deep learning-based models effectively.
Researchers present several methods to tackle this challenge. A straight-forward way is to sample local patches
and assign the label of the whole image (i.e., mean opinion
score, MOS) to the patches [4, 31, 32, 38, 60, 89, 90]. However, the perceived scores of local image patches tend to
differ from the score of the entire image [79, 89]. Another
common strategy is to leverage domain knowledge from
large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet [14]) for other computer vision tasks [6, 32]. Nevertheless, these pre-trained
models can be sub-optimal for BIQA tasks: images with
the same content share the same semantic label, whereas,
their quality may be different (Fig. 1). Some researchers

22302

