This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discriminative Co-Saliency and Background Mining Transformer for Co-Salient
Object Detection
Long Li1 Junwei Han1 Ni Zhang1 Nian Liu2†
Salman Khan Hisham Cholakkal2 Rao Muhammad Anwer2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,4
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Australian National University 4 CVL, Linköping University
2,3

Abstract
Most previous co-salient object detection works mainly
focus on extracting co-salient cues via mining the consistency relations across images while ignore explicit exploration of background regions. In this paper, we propose a Discriminative co-saliency and background Mining
Transformer framework (DMT) based on several economical multi-grained correlation modules to explicitly mine
both co-saliency and background information and effectively model their discrimination. Specifically, we first propose a region-to-region correlation module for introducing inter-image relations to pixel-wise segmentation features while maintaining computational efficiency. Then, we
use two types of pre-defined tokens to mine co-saliency and
background information via our proposed contrast-induced
pixel-to-token correlation and co-saliency token-to-token
correlation modules. We also design a token-guided feature refinement module to enhance the discriminability of
the segmentation features under the guidance of the learned
tokens. We perform iterative mutual promotion for the segmentation feature extraction and token construction. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method. The source code
is available at: https://github.com/dragonlee258079/DMT.

1. Introduction
Unlike standard Salient Object Detection (SOD) [13,21–
23, 37, 45], which detects salient objects in a single image, Co-Salient Object Detection (CoSOD) aims to detect
common salient objects across a group of relevant images.
It often faces the following two challenges: 1) The foreground (FG) in CoSOD refers to co-salient objects, which
are inherently hard to detect since they should satisfy both
the intra-group commonality and the intra-image saliency.
2) The background (BG) in CoSOD might contain com† Corresponding author: liunian228@gmail.com.

plex distractions, including extraneous salient objects that
are salient but not ”common”, and similar concomitant objects appearing in multiple images (e.g. performers often
appear in guitar images). Such difficult distractors can easily seduce CoSOD models to make false positive predictions. Therefore, the effective exploration of both FG and
BG and modeling their discrimination to precisely detect
co-salient objects while suppressing interference from BG
is crucial for CoSOD.
Although many works have achieved promising performance, most of them [14, 18, 25, 30, 33, 38, 40–42] devoted
to the ingenious mining of FG while ignored the explicit
exploration of BG. They mainly constructed positive relations between co-salient objects but paid less attention to
modeling negative ones between co-saliency regions and
BG. [16, 34] followed some SOD methods [4, 43] to incorporate BG features for co-saliency representation learning or contrast learning. However, these methods can be
regarded as an univariate FG&BG modeling in which the
essential optimization target is limited to FG and there is
no explicit BG modeling, thus limiting the discriminative
learning capability. To this end, this paper propose to conduct a bivariate FG&BG modeling paradigm that explicitly
models both FG and BG information and effectively facilitates their discriminative modeling.
As for co-saliency (FG) information, most previous
works [12, 16, 34, 41] detected them by exploring the interimage similarity. Calculating the Pixel-to-Pixel (P2P) correlation between 3D CNN features in a group is widely used
in many works [12, 16, 34] and has demonstrated its effectiveness. However, this method introduces heavy computation burdens and hinders sophisticated relation modeling.
To alleviate this problem, we introduce economic multigrained correlations among different images and the cosaliency and BG information, thus enabling modeling sophisticated relations to extract accurate co-saliency as well
as BG knowledge.
Specifically, we construct a Discriminative co-saliency
and BG Mining Transformer (DMT) following the

7247

