This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mutual Information-Based Temporal Difference Learning for
Human Pose Estimation in Video
Runyang Feng1,2 , Yixing Gao1,2 *, Xueqing Ma1,2 , Tze Ho Elden Tse3 , Hyung Jin Chang3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University,
2
Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence,
Ministry of Education, China, 3 School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
{fengry22, maxq21}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, gaoyixing@jlu.edu.cn,
txt994@student.bham.ac.uk, h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Temporal modeling is crucial for multi-frame human
pose estimation. Most existing methods directly employ
optical flow or deformable convolution to predict fullspectrum motion fields, which might incur numerous irrelevant cues, such as a nearby person or background. Without
further efforts to excavate meaningful motion priors, their
results are suboptimal, especially in complicated spatiotemporal interactions. On the other hand, the temporal
difference has the ability to encode representative motion
information which can potentially be valuable for pose estimation but has not been fully exploited. In this paper, we
present a novel multi-frame human pose estimation framework, which employs temporal differences across frames to
model dynamic contexts and engages mutual information
objectively to facilitate useful motion information disentanglement. To be specific, we design a multi-stage Temporal Difference Encoder that performs incremental cascaded learning conditioned on multi-stage feature difference sequences to derive informative motion representation. We further propose a Representation Disentanglement
module from the mutual information perspective, which can
grasp discriminative task-relevant motion signals by explicitly defining useful and noisy constituents of the raw motion
features and minimizing their mutual information. These
place us to rank No.1 in the Crowd Pose Estimation in Complex Events Challenge on benchmark dataset HiEve, and
achieve state-of-the-art performance on three benchmarks
PoseTrack2017, PoseTrack2018, and PoseTrack21.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation has long been a nontrivial and
fundamental problem in the computer vision community.
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Directly leveraging optical flow can be distracted by
irrelevant clues such as background and blur (a), and sometimes
fails in scenarios with fast motion and mutual occlusion (b). Our
proposed framework proceeds with temporal difference encoding
and useful information disentanglement to capture more tailored
temporal dynamics (c), yielding more robust pose estimations (d).

The goal is to localize anatomical keypoints (e.g., nose, ankle, etc.) of human bodies from images or videos. Nowadays, as more and more videos are recorded endlessly,
video-based human pose estimation has been extremely desired in enormous applications including live streaming,
augmented reality, surveillance, and movement tracking
[14, 15, 24, 35, 44].
An extensive body of literature focuses on estimating
human poses in static images, ranging from earlier methods employing pictorial structure models [43, 51, 55, 69] to
recent attempts leveraging deep convolutional neural networks [35, 49, 56, 58] or Vision Transformers [32, 61, 65].
Despite the impressive performance in still images, the extension of such methods to video-based human pose estimation still remains challenging due to the additional temporal
dimension in videos [34, 57]. By nature, the video presents
distinctive and valuable dynamic contexts (i.e., the temporal evolution in the visual content) [71]. Therefore, being
able to effectively utilize the temporal dynamics (motion
information) is fundamentally important for accurate pose

17131

