This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CIMI4D: A Large Multimodal Climbing Motion Dataset
under Human-scene Interactions
Ming Yan1,2,3∗

Xin Wang1,3∗ Yudi Dai1,3 Siqi Shen1,3† Chenglu Wen1,3
Lan Xu4 Yuexin Ma4 Cheng Wang1,3
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University
3
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging, ShanghaiTech University

Figure 1. CIMI4D is a dataset of rock climbing motions recorded using RGB cameras, LiDAR, and IMUs. CIMI4D contains 42 action
sequences of 12 actors climbing 13 climbing walls, and provides finely annotated human poses and global trajectories (orange lines). The
pictures showcase various types of complex scenes (7 of them has high-precision point cloud scan) and challenging actions in CIMI4D.

Abstract
Motion capture is a long-standing research problem. Although it has been studied for decades, the majority of research focus on ground-based movements such as walking,
sitting, dancing, etc. Off-grounded actions such as climbing are largely overlooked. As an important type of action
in sports and firefighting field, the climbing movements is
challenging to capture because of its complex back poses,
intricate human-scene interactions, and difficult global localization. The research community does not have an indepth understanding of the climbing action due to the lack
of specific datasets. To address this limitation, we collect
CIMI4D, a large rock ClImbing MotIon dataset from 12
persons climbing 13 different climbing walls. The dataset
consists of around 180,000 frames of pose inertial measurements, LiDAR point clouds, RGB videos, high-precision
static point cloud scenes, and reconstructed scene meshes.
Moreover, we frame-wise annotate touch rock holds to fa∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

cilitate a detailed exploration of human-scene interaction.
The core of this dataset is a blending optimization process, which corrects for the pose as it drifts and is affected by the magnetic conditions. To evaluate the merit
of CIMI4D, we perform four tasks which include human
pose estimations (with/without scene constraints), pose prediction, and pose generation. The experimental results
demonstrate that CIMI4D presents great challenges to existing methods and enables extensive research opportunities. We share the dataset with the research community in
http://www.lidarhumanmotion.net/cimi4d/.

1. Introduction
Capturing human motions can benefit many downstream
applications, such as AR/VR, games, movies, robotics,
etc. However, it is a challenging and long-standing problem [1,7,35,37,75] due to the diversity of human poses and
complex interactive environment. Researchers have proposed various approaches to estimate human poses from
images [15, 16, 19, 30, 67], point clouds [33], inertial mea-

12977

