This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Frequency Filtering for Domain Generalization
Shiqi Lin1 * Zhizheng Zhang2 Zhipeng Huang1 * Yan Lu2 Cuiling Lan2 Peng Chu2
Quanzeng You2 Jiang Wang2 Zicheng Liu2 Amey Parulkar2 Viraj Navkal2 Zhibo Chen1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft
{linsq047,hzp1104}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

{zhizzhang,yanlu,culan,pengchu,quyou,jiangwang,zliu,amey.parulkar,vnavkal}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Improving the generalization ability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is critical for their practical uses, which has
been a longstanding challenge. Some theoretical studies
have uncovered that DNNs have preferences for some frequency components in the learning process and indicated
that this may affect the robustness of learned features. In
this paper, we propose Deep Frequency Filtering (DFF) for
learning domain-generalizable features, which is the first
endeavour to explicitly modulate the frequency components
of different transfer difficulties across domains in the latent
space during training. To achieve this, we perform Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) for the feature maps at different
layers, then adopt a light-weight module to learn attention
masks from the frequency representations after FFT to enhance transferable components while suppressing the components not conducive to generalization. Further, we empirically compare the effectiveness of adopting different types
of attention designs for implementing DFF. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed DFF
and show that applying our DFF on a plain baseline outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on different domain
generalization tasks, including close-set classification and
open-set retrieval.

1. Introduction
Domain Generalization (DG) seeks to break through the
i.i.d. assumption that training and testing data are identically and independently distributed. This assumption does
not always hold in reality since domain gaps are commonly
seen between the training and testing data. However, collecting enough training data from all possible domains is
costly and even impossible in some practical environments.
Thus, learning generalizable feature representations is of
* This work was done when Shiqi Lin and Zhipeng Huang were interns
at Microsoft Research Asia.

high practical value for both industry and academia.
Recently, a series of research works [78] analyze deep
learning from the frequency perspective. These works,
represented by the F-Principle [75], uncover that there
are different preference degrees of DNNs for the information of different frequencies in their learning processes.
Specifically, DNNs optimized with stochastic gradientbased methods tend to capture low-frequency components
of the training data with a higher priority [74] while exploiting high-frequency components to trade the robustness (on
unseen domains) for the accuracy (on seen domains) [66].
This observation indicates that different frequency components are of different transferability across domains.
In this work, we seek to learn generalizable features from
a frequency perspective. To achieve this, we conceptualize Deep Frequency Filtering (DFF), which is a new technique capable of enhancing the transferable frequency components and suppressing the ones not conducive to generalization in the latent space. With DFF, the frequency components of different cross-domain transferability are dynamically modulated in an end-to-end manner during training.
This is conceptually simple, easy to implement, yet remarkably effective. In particular, for a given intermediate feature, we apply Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) along its spatial dimensions to obtain the corresponding frequency representations where different spatial locations correspond to
different frequency components. In such a frequency domain, we are allowed to learn a spatial attention map and
multiply it with the frequency representations to filter out
the components adverse to the generalization across domains.
The attention map above is learned in an end-to-end
manner using a lightweight module, which is instanceadaptive. As indicated in [66, 74], low-frequency components are relatively easier to be generalized than highfrequency ones while high-frequency components are commonly exploited to trade robustness for accuracy. Although
this phenomenon can be observed consistently over different instances, it does not mean that high-frequency com-

11797

