This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unifying Vision, Text, and Layout for Universal Document Processing
Zineng Tang1,2
Ziyi Yang2 *
Guoxin Wang3
Yuwei Fang2
Yang Liu2
Chenguang Zhu2
Michael Zeng2
Cha Zhang3
Mohit Bansal1⇤
1
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2
Microsoft Azure Cognitive Services Research
3
Microsoft Azure Visual Document Intelligence
Abstract
We propose Universal Document Processing (UDOP),
a foundation Document AI model which unifies text, image, and layout modalities together with varied task formats, including document understanding and generation.
UDOP leverages the spatial correlation between textual content and document image to model image, text, and layout
modalities with one uniform representation. With a novel
Vision-Text-Layout Transformer, UDOP unifies pretraining
and multi-domain downstream tasks into a prompt-based
sequence generation scheme. UDOP is pretrained on both
large-scale unlabeled document corpora using innovative
self-supervised objectives and diverse labeled data. UDOP
also learns to generate document images from text and layout modalities via masked image reconstruction. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time in the field of
document AI that one model simultaneously achieves highquality neural document editing and content customization.
Our method sets the state-of-the-art on 8 Document AI tasks,
e.g., document understanding and QA, across diverse data
domains like finance reports, academic papers, and websites. UDOP ranks first on the leaderboard of the Document
Understanding Benchmark.1

1. Introduction
Document Artificial Intelligence studies information extraction, understanding, and analysis of digital documents,
e.g., business invoices, tax forms, academic papers, etc. It is
a multimodal task where text is structurally embedded in documents, together with other vision information like symbols,
figures, and style. Different from classic vision-language
research, document data have a 2D spatial layout: text content is structurally spread around in different locations based
on diverse document types and formats (e.g., invoices vs.
* Corresp. authors: ziyiyang@microsoft.com, mbansal@cs.unc.edu
1 Code and models: https://github.com/microsoft/i-

Code/tree/main/i-Code-Doc

tax forms); formatted data such as figures, tables and plots
are laid out across the document. Hence, effectively and
efficiently modeling and understanding the layout is vital
for document information extraction and content understanding, for example, title/signature extraction, fraudulent check
detection, table processing, document classification, and
automatic data entry from documents.
Document AI has unique challenges that set it apart from
other vision-language domains. For instance, the crossmodal interactions between text and visual modalities are
much stronger here than in regular vision-language data,
because the text modality is visually-situated in an image.
Moreover, downstream tasks are diverse in domains and
paradigms, e.g., document question answering [45], layout detection [57], classification [13], information extraction [28], etc. This gives rises to two challenges: (1) how
to utilize the strong correlation between image, text and layout modalities and unify them to model the document as a
whole? (2) how can the model efficiently and effectively
learn diverse vision, text, and layout tasks across different
domains?
There has been remarkable progress in Document AI in
recent years [1, 10–12, 15, 16, 24, 26, 29, 30, 36, 37, 48, 52–55].
Most of these model paradigms are similar to traditional
vision-language frameworks: one line of work [1, 11, 29, 30,
36, 37, 52–55] inherits vision-language models that encode
images with a vision network (e.g., vision transformer) and
feed the encodings to the multimodal encoder along with
text [17, 27, 44, 47]; another line of work uses one joint encoder [22, 46] for both text and image [16]. Some models
regard documents as text-only inputs [10, 12, 15, 26, 48]. In
these works, the layout modality is represented as shallow
positional embeddings, e.g., adding a 2D positional embedding to text embeddings. The strong correlation between
modalities inherent in document data are not fully exploited.
Also to perform different tasks, many models have to use
task-specific heads, which is inefficient and requires manual
design for each task.
To address these challenges, we propose Universal Docu-

19254

