This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bidirectional Cross-Modal Knowledge Exploration for Video Recognition
with Pre-trained Vision-Language Models
Wenhao Wu1,2

Xiaohan Wang3 Haipeng Luo4 Jingdong Wang2 Yi Yang3 Wanli Ouyang5,1
2
3
The University of Sydney
Baidu Inc.
Zhejiang University
4
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai AI Laboratory
1

whwu.ucas@gmail.com

Abstract
Video

Vision-language models (VLMs) pre-trained on largescale image-text pairs have demonstrated impressive transferability on various visual tasks. Transferring knowledge
from such powerful VLMs is a promising direction for building effective video recognition models. However, current
exploration in this field is still limited. We believe that the
greatest value of pre-trained VLMs lies in building a bridge
between visual and textual domains. In this paper, we propose a novel framework called BIKE, which utilizes the
cross-modal bridge to explore bidirectional knowledge: i)
We introduce the Video Attribute Association mechanism,
which leverages the Video-to-Text knowledge to generate textual auxiliary attributes for complementing video
recognition. ii) We also present a Temporal Concept Spotting mechanism that uses the Text-to-Video expertise
to capture temporal saliency in a parameter-free manner,
leading to enhanced video representation. Extensive studies on six popular video datasets, including Kinetics-400 &
600, UCF-101, HMDB-51, ActivityNet and Charades, show
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in
various recognition scenarios, such as general, zero-shot,
and few-shot video recognition. Our best model achieves
a state-of-the-art accuracy of 88.6% on the challenging
Kinetics-400 using the released CLIP model. The code is
available at https://github.com/whwu95/BIKE.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the remarkable success of largescale pre-training in NLP (e.g., BERT [9], GPT [4, 38],
ERNIE [69] and T5 [39]) has inspired the computer vision community. Vision-language models (VLMs) leverage large-scale noisy image-text pairs with weak correspondence for contrastive learning (e.g., CLIP [37], ALIGN
[19], CoCa [65], Florence [66]), and demonstrate impressive transferability across a wide range of visual tasks.

Visual
Encoder

FC

Video

Visual
Encoder

Category

Textual
Encoder

Score

(a) Traditional video recognition.

(b) Category embedding as classifier for
video recognition.

Video Attribute Association
Video

Visual
Encoder

Video
Saliency

Category emb.

Score

Score
Attrib.
Feature

Textual
Encoder

Category

Video Concept Spotting
Score

(c) Bidirectional knowledge exploration for video recognition.

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between our paradigm (c)
with existing unimodality paradigm (a) and cross-modal paradigm
(b). Please zoom in for the best view.

Naturally, transferring knowledge from such powerful
pre-trained VLMs is emerging as a promising paradigm for
building video recognition models. Currently, exploration
in this field can be divided into two lines. As depicted in
Figure 1(a), one approach [27,35,64] follows the traditional
unimodal video recognition paradigm, initializing the video
encoder with the pre-trained visual encoder of VLM. Conversely, the other approach [21, 34, 48, 58] directly transfers
the entire VLM into a video-text learning framework that
utilizes natural language (i.e., class names) as supervision,
as shown in Figure 1(b). This leads to an question: have we
fully utilized the knowledge of VLMs for video recognition?
In our opinion, the answer is No. The greatest charm of
VLMs is their ability to build a bridge between the visual
and textual domains. Despite this, previous research employing pre-aligned vision-text features of VLMs for video
recognition has only utilized unidirectional video-to-text
matching. In this paper, we aim to facilitate bidirectional
knowledge exploration through the cross-modal bridge for
enhanced video recognition. With this in mind, we mine
Video-to-Text and Text-to-Video knowledge by
1) generating textual information from the input video and

6620

