This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Highlighter: Localizing Regions on 3D Shapes via Text Descriptions
Dale Decatur
University of Chicago

Itai Lang
University of Chicago

Rana Hanocka
University of Chicago

ddecatur@uchicago.edu

itailang@uchicago.edu

ranahanocka@uchicago.edu

Hat

Necklace

Headlights

Shoes

Eyeglasses

Figure 1. 3D Highlighter localizes semantic regions on a shape using text as input. Our technique reasons about where to place seemingly
unrelated concepts in semantically meaningful locations on the 3D shape, such as a ‘necklace’ on a horse or ‘shoes’ on an alien.

Abstract
We present 3D Highlighter, a technique for localizing semantic regions on a mesh using text as input. A key feature
of our system is the ability to interpret “out-of-domain”
localizations. Our system demonstrates the ability to reason about where to place non-obviously related concepts
on an input 3D shape, such as adding clothing to a bare
3D animal model. Our method contextualizes the text description using a neural field and colors the corresponding region of the shape using a probability-weighted blend.
Our neural optimization is guided by a pre-trained CLIP encoder, which bypasses the need for any 3D datasets or 3D
annotations. Thus, 3D Highlighter is highly flexible, general, and capable of producing localizations on a myriad of
input shapes. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/threedle/3DHighlighter.

1. Introduction
Semantic localization of regions on 3D meshes is an important problem in computer graphics and vision with broad
applications. One such application is the incorporation of
semantic information into the 3D modeling process. A particularly challenging aspect of this task emerges when 3D
geometric signals are insufficient for performing segmentation, e.g. where to add a shirt to a bare 3D human model.
We propose 3D Highlighter, a method for automatically
localizing fine-grained semantic regions on a shape based

on only a text description. Our system contextualizes the
text prompt and highlights the corresponding shape region
using the network-predicted probabilities. Using only text,
users are able to semantically identify regions on a shape.
Our system takes meshes as input, making it compatible
with 3D modeling workflows and tools.
This highlighting task requires both object-level and
part-level understanding. 3D Highlighter demonstrates the
ability to reason about where to place seemingly unrelated
concepts on the 3D shape, such as a hat on a candle (Fig. 1).
Our system localizes attributes that are geometrically absent from a shape, which we refer to as hallucinated highlighting. Understanding a part’s global shape context is
challenging even when relying on salient geometric features [17, 27], let alone without them.
We optimize the weights of a neural network to produce
probabilities that are used to color a given 3D shape in accordance with the specified text. We leverage a pre-trained
vision-language model (CLIP [31]) to guide the neural optimization towards the text-specified region. This neural optimization formulation is flexible, bypassing the need for any
3D datasets, 3D annotations, or 3D pre-training. Our system is not bound to a specific set of classes, and, as shown
in Fig. 2, is not limited to object parts defined by salient
geometric features.
We encode the part selection as a neural field [44] over
the mesh surface. Our network learns to map each point on
the surface to a probability of belonging to the text-specified
region. We translate the inferred probabilities to a visual at-

20930

