This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Generalized Stereo Matching via Hierarchical Visual Transformation
Tianyu Chang1,3 , Xun Yang1∗ , Tianzhu Zhang1 , Meng Wang2
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei University of Technology
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
cty8998@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{xyang21, tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Input (Left)

1. Introduction
Stereo Matching (SM) [7, 41, 44] aims to find the matching correspondences between a given stereo image pair and
then calculate the disparity for depth sensing in many applications, such as robot navigation and autonomous driving [1, 28]. Recently, it attracts increasing attention in the
computer vision community [4, 27, 30, 42].
With the development of deep learning [6, 18, 34–38],
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based deep SM networks have shown impressive performance benefiting from
∗ Corresponding Author

PSMNet

HVT-PSMNet

ETH3D
KITTI 2015 KITTI 2012

Recently, deep Stereo Matching (SM) networks have
shown impressive performance and attracted increasing attention in computer vision. However, existing deep SM
networks are prone to learn dataset-dependent shortcuts,
which fail to generalize well on unseen realistic datasets. This paper takes a step towards training robust models
for the domain generalized SM task, which mainly focuses
on learning shortcut-invariant representation from synthetic data to alleviate the domain shifts. Specifically, we propose a Hierarchical Visual Transformation (HVT) network
to 1) first transform the training sample hierarchically into new domains with diverse distributions from three levels:
Global, Local, and Pixel, 2) then maximize the visual discrepancy between the source domain and new domains, and
minimize the cross-domain feature inconsistency to capture
domain-invariant features. In this way, we can prevent the
model from exploiting the artifacts of synthetic stereo images as shortcut features, thereby estimating the disparity maps more effectively based on the learned robust and
shortcut-invariant representation. We integrate our proposed HVT network with SOTA SM networks and evaluate
its effectiveness on several public SM benchmark datasets.
Extensive experiments clearly show that the HVT network
can substantially enhance the performance of existing SM
networks in synthetic-to-realistic domain generalization.

GT

Middlebury

Abstract

wangmeng@hfut.edu.cn

Figure 1. Comparison of the cross-domain SM generalization.
Columns from left to right denote a sample image, ground truth
disparities, the predicted disparities of the pretrained PSMNet
model and our HVT-PSMNet model. Both models are trained on
the synthetic SceneFlow [19] dataset and evaluated on the realistic
datasets: Middlebury, ETH3D, KITTI 2012 and KITTI 2015.

their strong ability of feature representation. However, due
to the scarcity of sufficient labeled realistic training data,
existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) SM networks usually are
trained on synthetic data, e.g. SceneFlow [19], which fail
to generalize well to unseen realistic domains as shown in
Fig. 1. Generally, the generalizability of cross-domain deep
SM networks is mainly hindered by a critical issue: SM networks usually learn superficial shortcut features [5] from
synthetic data to estimate the disparity. Specifically, such
shortcut features mainly include two types of artifacts: consistent local RGB color statistics and overreliance on local
chromaticity features, which are domain-sensitive and nontransferable to unseen domain. The semantic and structural
features that are truly desirable are ignored by most existing
SM networks. Therefore, the key to addressing the challenging cross-domain SM task is how to effectively learn
the domain-invariant representations of the given stereo image pair for synthetic-to-realistic generalization.
Several attempts [3, 10, 15, 26, 45] have been made to
minimize the synthetic-to-realistic domain gap and learn
the domain-invariant representations for the SM task by
either 1) exploiting labeled target-domain realistic data to
fine-tune the SM network trained with synthetic data [3, 10]

9559

