This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAMS: CAnonicalized Manipulation Spaces for
Category-Level Functional Hand-Object Manipulation Synthesis
Juntian Zheng*,1,3 Qingyuan Zheng*,3 Lixing Fang*,1,3 Yun Liu1 Li Yi†,1,2,3
1
2
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Figure 1. Given a sequence of manipulation goals, our method can generate realistic and diverse functional manipulation motions consistent
with the goal sequence. The motions are expressed in snapshots at several keyframes. On the left side, we show a goal sequence of opening
a laptop and two different manipulation patterns that can be generated by our method. On the right side, we show our generation results of
three manipulation tasks corresponding to different object categories.

Abstract
In this work, we focus on a novel task of categorylevel functional hand-object manipulation synthesis covering both rigid and articulated object categories. Given an
object geometry, an initial human hand pose as well as a
sparse control sequence of object poses, our goal is to generate a physically reasonable hand-object manipulation sequence that performs like human beings. To address such
a challenge, we first design CAnonicalized Manipulation
Spaces (CAMS), a two-level space hierarchy that canonicalizes the hand poses in an object-centric and contactcentric view. Benefiting from the representation capability
of CAMS, we then present a two-stage framework for synthesizing human-like manipulation animations. Our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance for both rigid
and articulated categories with impressive visual effects.
Codes and video results can be found at our project homepage: https://cams-hoi.github.io/.

* Equal contribution with the order determined by rolling dice.
† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Human conducts hand-object manipulation (HOM) for
certain functional purposes commonly in daily life, e.g.
opening a laptop and using scissors to cut. Understanding how such manipulation happens and being able to
synthesize realistic hand-object manipulation has naturally
become a key problem in computer vision. A generative model that can synthesize human-like functional handobject manipulation plays an essential role in various applications, including video games, virtual reality, dexterous
robotic manipulation, and human-robot interaction.
This problem has only been studied with a very limited
scope previously. Most existing works focus on the synthesis of a static grasp either with [3] or without [17] a functional goal. Recently, there have been works started focusing on dynamic manipulation synthesis [7, 41]. However,
these works restrict their scope to rigid objects and do not
consider the fact that functional manipulation might change
the object geometry as well, such as in opening a laptop by
hand. Moreover, these works usually require a strong input,
including hand and object trajectories or a grasp reference,

585

