This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SteerNeRF: Accelerating NeRF Rendering via Smooth Viewpoint Trajectory
Sicheng Li

Hao Li

Yiyi Liao∗

Yue Wang

Lu Yu∗∗

Zhejiang University
Low Resolution
Feature

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have demonstrated superior novel view synthesis performance but are slow at rendering. To speed up the volume rendering process, many acceleration methods have been proposed at the cost of large
memory consumption. To push the frontier of the efficiencymemory trade-off, we explore a new perspective to accelerate NeRF rendering, leveraging a key fact that the viewpoint change is usually smooth and continuous in interactive viewpoint control. This allows us to leverage the information of preceding viewpoints to reduce the number of
rendered pixels as well as the number of sampled points
along the ray of the remaining pixels. In our pipeline, a
low-resolution feature map is rendered first by volume rendering, then a lightweight 2D neural renderer is applied
to generate the output image at target resolution leveraging the features of preceding and current frames. We show
that the proposed method can achieve competitive rendering quality while reducing the rendering time with little
memory overhead, enabling 30FPS at 1080P image resolution with a low memory footprint.

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) is a long-standing problem
in computer vision and computer graphics with applications
in navigation [40], telepresence [60], and free-viewpoint
video [51]. Given a set of posed images, the goal is to render the scene from unseen viewpoints to facilitate viewpoint
control interactively.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have emerged
as a popular representation for NVS due to the capacity to
render high-quality images from novel viewpoints. NeRF
represents a scene as a continuous function, parameterized
by a multilayer perceptron (MLP), that maps a continuous
3D position and a viewing direction to a density and viewdependent radiance [23]. A 2D image is then obtained via
volume rendering, i.e., accumulating colors along each ray.
∗ Corresponding author. ∗∗ Co-corresponding author.

High Resolution
Result

Smooth Viewpoint
Trajectory

Volume
Rendering

Volume
Rendering

Neural
Rendering

Neural
Rendering

Volume
Rendering

Figure 1. Illustration. We exploit smooth viewpoint trajectory to
accelerate NeRF rendering, achieved by performing volume rendering at a low resolution and recovering the target image guided
by multiple viewpoints. Our method enables fast rendering with a
low memory footprint.

However, NeRF is slow at rendering as it needs to query
the MLP millions of times to render a single image, preventing NeRF from interactive view synthesis. Many recent
works have focused on improving the rendering speed of
NeRF, yet there is a trade-off between rendering speed and
memory cost. State-of-the-art acceleration approaches typically achieve fast rendering at the expense of large memory
consumption [13, 56], e.g., by pre-caching the intermediate output of the MLP, leading to hundreds of megabytes
to represent a single scene. While there are some attempts
to accelerate NeRF rendering with a low memory footprint [16, 25], the performance has yet to reach cache-based
methods. In practice, it is desired to achieve faster rendering
at a lower memory cost.
To push the frontier of this trade-off, we propose to speed
up NeRF rendering from a new perspective, leveraging the
critical fact that the viewpoint trajectory is usually smooth
and continuous in interactive control. Unlike existing NeRF
acceleration methods that reduce the rendering time of each
viewpoint individually, we accelerate the rendering by exploiting the information overlap between multiple consecutive viewpoints. Fig. 1 illustrates our SteerNeRF, a simple
yet effective framework leveraging the SmooTh viEwpoint
trajEctoRy to speed up NeRF rendering. Here, “steer” also
refers to a user smoothly controlling the movement of a
camera during interactive real-time rendering.

20701

