This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Adaptive Dense Event Stereo from the Image Domain
Hoonhee Cho, Jegyeong Cho, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{gnsgnsgml, j2k0618, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

ADES framework
Source

1. Introduction
Stereo matching [22, 41] is one of the most widely used
methods for obtaining 3D information by establishing correspondences between stereo images. With considerable interest, learning-based stereo methods have achieved stateof-the-art performance in many benchmark datasets. However, some challenges in stereo matching still exist due
to the shortcoming of sensors (e.g., low dynamic range,
motion blur due to large exposure time). Event cameras
[3] are novel sensors that asynchronously report per-pixel
changes of intensity by imitating the human eye. Thanks

Target

Training

Different Modality
&
Domain Gap

Image Inputs

Event Inputs

Ground Truth

No Ground Truth

Target

Test

Recently, event-based stereo matching has been studied
due to its robustness in poor light conditions. However,
existing event-based stereo networks suffer severe performance degradation when domains shift. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims at resolving this problem without using the target domain ground-truth. However, traditional UDA still needs the input event data with groundtruth in the source domain, which is more challenging and
costly to obtain than image data. To tackle this issue,
we propose a novel unsupervised domain Adaptive Dense
Event Stereo (ADES), which resolves gaps between the different domains and input modalities. The proposed ADES
framework adapts event-based stereo networks from abundant image datasets with ground-truth on the source domain to event datasets without ground-truth on the target
domain, which is a more practical setup. First, we propose a self-supervision module that trains the network on
the target domain through image reconstruction, while an
artifact prediction network trained on the source domain assists in removing intermittent artifacts in the reconstructed
image. Secondly, we utilize the feature-level normalization
scheme to align the extracted features along the epipolar
line. Finally, we present the motion-invariant consistency
module to impose the consistent output between the perturbed motion. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves remarkable results in the adaptation ability
of event-based stereo matching from the image domain.

Event Inputs

Prediction

Figure 1. The proposed ADES framework for adaptive dense event
stereo network. ADES aims to exploit the existing frame-based
stereo dataset for learning the event stereo network.

to the high dynamic range and low latency, the event camera can be considered as a promising sensor for depth estimation, especially in driving scenarios. Recent works
[2,8,9,28,30,48,59] have attempted to utilize event cameras
for stereo matching even under poor light conditions.
Despite advances in event stereo, most prior works [9,
28, 48] still experience a significant degradation in performance when domains shift. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) can resolve this problem without using the
target domain ground-truth. When UDA is applied for
event stereo domain adaptation, it still needs the input event
data with ground-truth in the source domain. However,
as mentioned in [32], accurate synchronization of events
with high temporal resolution and other devices (e.g., LiDAR) requires additional hardware and post-processing,
so it is more challenging to obtain accurate ground truth
than images. In this paper, we draw attention to large image datasets with ground-truth, which are easily accessible
(e.g., DrivingStereo [57], SceneFlow [24] and KITTI [25]).
In this setup, abundant image data from diverse environments helps the event stereo network improve generalizability with high performance. To this end, as shown in

17797

