This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Static and Dynamic Vision-Language Streams
for Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding
Zihang Lin1 , Chaolei Tan1 , Jian-Fang Hu1,3,4 *, Zhi Jin1 , Tiancai Ye2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,4
1
Sun Yat-sen University, China 2 Tencent, China
3
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{linzh59, tanchlei}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {hujf5, jinzh26}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
tiancaiye@tencent.com, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding (STVG) aims to localize the target object spatially and temporally according to the given language query. It is a challenging task
in which the model should well understand dynamic visual
cues (e.g., motions) and static visual cues (e.g., object appearances) in the language description, which requires effective joint modeling of spatio-temporal visual-linguistic
dependencies. In this work, we propose a novel framework in which a static vision-language stream and a dynamic vision-language stream are developed to collaboratively reason the target tube. The static stream performs
cross-modal understanding in a single frame and learns
to attend to the target object spatially according to intraframe visual cues like object appearances. The dynamic
stream models visual-linguistic dependencies across multiple consecutive frames to capture dynamic cues like motions. We further design a novel cross-stream collaborative block between the two streams, which enables the static
and dynamic streams to transfer useful and complementary
information from each other to achieve collaborative reasoning. Experimental results show the effectiveness of the
collaboration of the two streams and our overall framework achieves new state-of-the-art performance on both
HCSTVG and VidSTG datasets.

1. Introduction
Vision-language cross-modal understanding is a challenging yet important research problem that bridges the
communication between humans and artificial intelligence
systems. It has attracted increasing attention and many
vision-language tasks were studied in recent years, like vi* Corresponding author.

sual grounding [13, 32], VQA [7, 31], image/video captioning [15, 40], etc. In this work, we focus on a challenging vision-language task named Spatio-Temporal Video
Grounding (STVG) which was recently proposed in [42].
Given a language query indicating an object (as shown in
Figure 1), STVG aims to localize the target object spatially
and temporally in the video. In this task, the input language query may express different kinds of visual concepts,
thus the model requires to well capture and understand these
concepts in both vision and language modalities.
In STVG task, dynamic visual concepts like human motion and static visual concepts like object appearance are
both important for distinguishing the target object from
other objects that occurred in the same video. For example, in the first sample in Figure 1, the two men are dressed
alike (i.e., their static appearance cues are similar), and we
can only distinguish them by motion. In the second sample,
the two women perform similar actions, they both stand up
(i.e., they have similar dynamic motion cues), here, we can
only distinguish them by their clothes. The above examples
show that static or dynamic visual cues alone cannot solve
the STVG task well. And it implies that modeling static and
dynamic visual-linguistic dependencies and collaboratively
utilizing them are important for addressing STVG task.
Humans treat static and dynamic cues differently [4, 21],
but this was overlooked in previous STVG works [22, 24,
30]. Taking the first query in Figure 1 as an example, a human would randomly or evenly click on some locations on
the video’s progress bar to find candidate frames containing
a man in blue coat. And he will play the video around that
frame and attend on the candidate man to check whether he
performs the action described in the text (i.e., “turns around
and stops by the stone”). In the above process, the human
understands static and dynamic cues in different ways (i.e.,
view a single frame and watch the video clip, respectively)
and determines the target object by jointly considering the

23100

