This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Defining and Quantifying the Emergence of Sparse Concepts in DNNs
Jie Ren∗ , Mingjie Li*, Qirui Chen, Huiqi Deng, Quanshi Zhang†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
This paper aims to illustrate the concept-emerging phenomenon in a trained DNN. Specifically, we find that the
inference score of a DNN can be disentangled into the effects
of a few interactive concepts. These concepts can be understood as causal patterns in a sparse, symbolic causal graph,
which explains the DNN. The faithfulness of using such a
causal graph to explain the DNN is theoretically guaranteed,
because we prove that the causal graph can well mimic the
DNN’s outputs on an exponential number of different masked
samples. Besides, such a causal graph can be further simplified and re-written as an And-Or graph (AOG), without
losing much explanation accuracy. The code is released at
https://github.com/sjtu-xai-lab/aog.

1. Introduction
It is widely believed that the essence of deep neural networks (DNNs) is a fitting problem, instead of explicitly formulating causality or modeling symbolic concepts like how
graphical models do. However, in this study, we surprisingly
discover that sparse and symbolic interactive relationships
between input variables emerge in various DNNs trained
for many tasks, when the DNN is sufficiently trained. In
other words, the inference score of a DNN can be faithfully
disentangled into effects of only a few interactive concepts.
In fact, the concept-emerging phenomenon does exist and
is even quite common for various DNNs, though somewhat
counter-intuitive and seeming conflicting with the DNN’s
layerwise inference. To clarify this phenomenon, let us first
define interactive concepts that emerge in the DNN. Let a
DNN have n input variables (e.g. a sentence with n words).
As Fig. 1(a) shows, given the sentence “sit down and take it
easy,” the co-appearance of a set of words S = {take, it, easy}
causes the meaning of “calm down,” which makes a considerable numerical contribution wS to the network output. Such
a combination of words is termed an interactive concept.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department

of Computer Science and Engineering, the John Hopcroft Center, at the
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn.

Each interactive concept S represents an AND relationship
between the set of words in S . In other words, only their
co-appearance will trigger this interactive concept. The absence (masking) of any words in {take, it, easy} will remove
the effect wS towards “calm down” from the network output.
Causal graph based on interactive concepts. Given an
input sample, we introduce how to extract a set of interactive
concepts Ω from a trained DNN, and how to organize all
such concepts S ∈ Ω into a three-layer causal graph in Fig.
1(b). We also prove that such a causal graph can mimic the
inference score of the DNN. Specifically, each source node
Xi (i = 1, ..., n) in the bottom layer represents the binary
state of whether the i-th input variable is masked (Xi = 0)
or not (Xi = 1). Each intermediate node CS (S ∈ Ω) in the
causal graph represents an interactive concept S that encodes
the AND relationship between input variables in S . In fact,
S can also be interpreted as a causal pattern for the DNN’s
inference, as follows. If the interactive concept appears in
the sample, then the causal pattern S is triggered CS = 1;
otherwise, CS = 0. Each triggered pattern S contributes a
causal effect wS to the causal graph’s output Y in the top
layer. Therefore, the output Y of the causal graph can be
specified by a structural causal model (SCM) [25], which
P
sums up all triggered causal effects, i.e. Y = S wS · CS .
Note that we study the mathematical causality between
the input and the output of the DNN, instead of the natural true causality potentially hidden in data.
In this study, we discover that we can always construct
a causal graph with a relatively small number of causal
patterns (interactive concepts) to faithfully and concisely
explain a DNN’s inference on an input sample.
• Faithfulness. Given an input sample with n variables,
there are 2n different ways to randomly mask input variables.
Given any one of all the 2n masked input samples, we prove
that the output Y of the causal graph can always mimic the
DNN’s output. This guarantees that the causal graph encodes
the same logic (i.e. the same set of interactive concepts) as
the DNN. Thus, we can consider such a causal graph as a
faithful explanation for the inference logic of the DNN.
• Conciseness. Theoretically, we may extract at most
2n causal patterns (interactive concepts) from a DNN with
n input variables. However, we discover that most causal

20280

