This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOTRv2: Bootstrapping End-to-End Multi-Object Tracking by Pretrained
Object Detectors

1

Yuang Zhang1* , Tiancai Wang2 , Xiangyu Zhang2,3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 MEGVII Technology 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
DanceTrack

Abstract
In this paper, we propose MOTRv2, a simple yet effective
pipeline to bootstrap end-to-end multi-object tracking with
a pretrained object detector. Existing end-to-end methods,
e.g. MOTR [43] and TrackFormer [20] are inferior to their
tracking-by-detection counterparts mainly due to their poor
detection performance. We aim to improve MOTR by elegantly incorporating an extra object detector. We first adopt
the anchor formulation of queries and then use an extra object detector to generate proposals as anchors, providing
detection prior to MOTR. The simple modification greatly
eases the conflict between joint learning detection and association tasks in MOTR. MOTRv2 keeps the query propogation feature and scales well on large-scale benchmarks.
MOTRv2 ranks the 1st place (73.4% HOTA on DanceTrack)
in the 1st Multiple People Tracking in Group Dance Challenge. Moreover, MOTRv2 reaches state-of-the-art performance on the BDD100K dataset. We hope this simple and
effective pipeline can provide some new insights to the endto-end MOT community. Code is available at https:
//github.com/megvii-research/MOTRv2.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to predict the trajectories of all objects in the streaming video. It can be divided
into two parts: detection and association. For a long time,
the state-of-the-art performance on MOT has been dominated by tracking-by-detection methods [4, 36, 44, 45] with
good detection performance to cope with various appearance distributions. These trackers [44] first employ an object detector (e.g., YOLOX [11]) to localize the objects in
each frame and associate the tracks by ReID features or IoU
matching. The superior performance of those methods partially results from the dataset and metrics biased towards
detection performance. However, as revealed by the Dance* The work was done during internship at MEGVII Technology and
supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2020AAA0105200)
and Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

73.4

73.5

BDD100K

83.7
32.3

54.2

HOTA

56.5

DetA

43.6

mMOTA

44.8

mIDF1

Figure 1. Performance comparison between MOTR (grey bar) and
MOTRv2 (orange bar) on the DanceTrack and BDD100K datasets.
MOTRv2 improves the performance of MOTR by a large margin
under different scenarios.

Track dataset [27], their association strategy remains to be
improved in complex motion.
Recently, MOTR [43], a fully end-to-end framework is
introduced for MOT. The association process is performed
by updating the tracking queries while the new-born objects are detected by the detect queries. Its association performance on DanceTrack is impressive while the detection
results are inferior to those tracking-by-detection methods,
especially on the MOT17 dataset. We attribute the inferior detection performance to the conflict between the joint
detection and association processes. Since state-of-the-art
trackers [6, 9, 44] tend to employ extra object detectors, one
natural question is how to incorporate MOTR with an extra object detector for better detection performance. One
direct way is to perform IoU matching between the predictions of track queries and extra object detector (similar to
TransTrack [28]). In our practice, it only brings marginal
improvements in object detection while disobeying the endto-end feature of MOTR.
Inspired by tracking-by-detection methods that take the
detection result as the input, we wonder if it is possible to
feed the detection result as the input and reduce the learning
of MOTR to the association. Recently, there are some ad-

22056

