This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learnable Skeleton-Aware 3D Point Cloud Sampling
Cheng Wen*
Baosheng Yu*
Dacheng Tao
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2008, Australia
cwen6671@uni.sydney.edu.au; baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au; dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Point cloud sampling is crucial for efficient large-scale
point cloud analysis, where learning-to-sample methods
have recently received increasing attention from the community for jointly training with downstream tasks. However,
the above-mentioned task-specific sampling methods usually fail to explore the geometries of objects in an explicit
manner. In this paper, we introduce a new skeleton-aware
learning-to-sample method by learning object skeletons as
the prior knowledge to preserve the object geometry and
topology information during sampling. Specifically, without labor-intensive annotations per object category, we first
learn category-agnostic object skeletons via the medial axis
transform definition in an unsupervised manner. With object skeleton, we then evaluate the histogram of the local
feature size as the prior knowledge to formulate skeletonaware sampling from a probabilistic perspective. Additionally, the proposed skeleton-aware sampling pipeline with
the task network is thus end-to-end trainable by exploring the reparameterization trick. Extensive experiments on
three popular downstream tasks, point cloud classification,
retrieval, and reconstruction, demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method for efficient point cloud analysis.

1. Introduction
With the development of 3D sensing technologies, acquiring 3D data becomes more accessible than before, and
there are a growing number of data repositories available
online, such as ModelNet [62], ShapeNet [6], ScanNet [11],
and KITTI [18]. Among popular 3D shape representations such as point cloud [41], voxel [72], mesh [55], and
multi-view images [51], the point cloud is becoming increasingly popular as the first-hand data captured by LiDAR or depth camera (e.g., Kinect), which has been widely
applied in various applications such as scene reconstruction [19, 26], autonomous driving navigation [35], and virtual reality (VR) [59]. Though a high-resolution point cloud
* Equal contribution

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Point cloud; (b) Object skeleton; (c) Random sampling; (d) Skeleton-aware sampling. Compared with random sampling, skeleton-aware sampling tends to preserve the object geometry and topology information.

can accurately capture the geometry and topology details of
complex objects, it remains challenging for those devices
with limited computation and storage resources. Therefore,
point cloud sampling, aiming to find a small set of points to
represent the object shape and topology effectively, is usually indispensable for efficient large-scale point cloud analysis [24, 29, 32, 33, 41, 42, 57, 61, 71].
Traditional point cloud sampling methods such as random sampling (RS) and farthest point sampling (FPS) [15,
42] usually select a subset of points directly using the raw
data information [7, 42, 43, 47, 68]. Specifically, RS is very
efficient but may miss sparse regions, while FPS has better
coverage on the entire point set but suffers from the latency
bottleneck in parallel computation. To improve the performances on downstream tasks, learn-to-sample methods
have been recently proposed to jointly optimize the sampling algorithm and each specific downstream task [10, 14,
20,27,56]. Though considerable progress has been achieved
in downstream tasks such as point cloud classification and
reconstruction, one critical issue remains poorly investigated: as objects usually have complex topology structures
and irregular surface morphology, it is challenging to preserve the object’s geometrical information during the point
cloud sampling process.
Skeleton is an efficient representation to capture the underlying object shape structures, which has been widely
used as the structural abstraction in many visual understanding tasks [31, 37, 53]. Inspired by this, we build our point
cloud sampling strategy on top of the object skeleton to

17671

