This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Markerless Camera-to-Robot Pose Estimation via Self-supervised Sim-to-Real
Transfer
Jingpei Lu, Florian Richter, and Michael C. Yip
University of California, San Diego
{jil360, frichter, yip}@ucsd.edu

1. Introduction
The majority of modern robotic automation utilizes cameras for rich sensory information about the environment
to infer tasks to be completed and provide feedback for
closed-loop control. The leading paradigm for converting
the valuable environment information to the robot’s frame
of reference for manipulation is position-based visual servoing (PBVS) [4]. At a high level, PBVS converts 3D environmental information inferred from the visual data (e.g.

80
AUC
70
60

Rendering-based

Keypoint-based

50

Solving the camera-to-robot pose is a fundamental requirement for vision-based robot control, and is a process
that takes considerable effort and cares to make accurate.
Traditional approaches require modification of the robot via
markers, and subsequent deep learning approaches enabled
markerless feature extraction. Mainstream deep learning
methods only use synthetic data and rely on Domain Randomization to fill the sim-to-real gap, because acquiring
the 3D annotation is labor-intensive. In this work, we
go beyond the limitation of 3D annotations for real-world
data. We propose an end-to-end pose estimation framework
that is capable of online camera-to-robot calibration and
a self-supervised training method to scale the training to
unlabeled real-world data. Our framework combines deep
learning and geometric vision for solving the robot pose,
and the pipeline is fully differentiable. To train the Camerato-Robot Pose Estimation Network (CtRNet), we leverage
foreground segmentation and differentiable rendering for
image-level self-supervision. The pose prediction is visualized through a renderer and the image loss with the input
image is back-propagated to train the neural network. Our
experimental results on two public real datasets confirm the
effectiveness of our approach over existing works. We also
integrate our framework into a visual servoing system to
demonstrate the promise of real-time precise robot pose estimation for automation tasks.

90

Abstract

≤ 1 FPS

15 FPS

30 FPS

Speed
Aruco Marker
DREAM-Q
RoboPose(online)

DREAM-F
Opt. Keypoints
Diff. Rendering

DREAM-H
RoboPose
Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of speed and accuracy (based on AUC metric) for existing image-based robot pose estimation methods.

the pose of an object to be grasped) and transforms it to
the robot coordinate frame where all the robot geometry is
known (e.g. kinematics) using the camera-to-robot pose.
Examples of robotic automation using the PBVS range from
bin sorting [35] to tissue manipulation in surgery [31].
Calibrating camera-to-robot pose typically requires a
significant amount of care and effort. Traditionally, the
camera-to-robot pose is calibrated with externally attached
fiducial markers (e.g. Aruco Marker [14], AprilTag [38]).
The 2D location of the marker can be extracted from the image and the corresponding 3D location on the robot can be
calculated with forward kinematics. Given a set 2D-3D correspondence, the camera-to-robot pose can be solved using
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) methods [13, 30]. The procedure
usually requires multiple runs with different robot configurations and once calibrated, the robot base and the camera
are assumed static. The incapability of online calibration
limits the potential applications for vision-based robot control in the real world, where minor bumps or simply shifting
due to repetitive use will cause calibrations to be thrown off,

21296

