This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Dynamic Radiance Fields
Yu-Lun Liu2 * Chen Gao1 Andreas Meuleman3 * Hung-Yu Tseng1 Ayush Saraf1
Changil Kim1 Yung-Yu Chuang2 Johannes Kopf1 Jia-Bin Huang1,4
1
Meta 2 National Taiwan University 3 KAIST 4 University of Maryland, College Park
https://robust-dynrf.github.io/

Figure 1. Robust space-time synthesis from dynamic monocular videos. Our method takes a casually captured video as input and
reconstructs the camera trajectory and dynamic radiance fields. Conventional SfM system such as COLMAP fails to recover camera poses
even when using ground truth motion masks. As a result, existing dynamic radiance field methods that require accurate pose estimation
do not work on these challenging dynamic scenes. Our work tackles this robustness problem and showcases high-fidelity dynamic view
synthesis results on a wide variety of videos.

Abstract
Dynamic radiance field reconstruction methods aim to
model the time-varying structure and appearance of a dynamic scene. Existing methods, however, assume that accurate camera poses can be reliably estimated by Structure
from Motion (SfM) algorithms. These methods, thus, are unreliable as SfM algorithms often fail or produce erroneous
poses on challenging videos with highly dynamic objects,
poorly textured surfaces, and rotating camera motion. We
address this robustness issue by jointly estimating the static
and dynamic radiance fields along with the camera parameters (poses and focal length). We demonstrate the robustness of our approach via extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments. Our results show favorable performance
over the state-of-the-art dynamic view synthesis methods.

1. Introduction
Videos capture and preserve memorable moments of our
lives. However, when watching regular videos, viewers ob* This work was done while Yu-Lun and Andreas were interns at Meta.

serve the scene from fixed viewpoints and cannot interactively navigate the scene afterward. Dynamic view synthesis techniques aim to create photorealistic novel views of
dynamic scenes from arbitrary camera angles and points
of view. These systems are essential for innovative applications such as video stabilization [33, 42], virtual reality [7, 15], and view interpolation [13, 85], which enable
free-viewpoint videos and let users interact with the video
sequence. It facilitates downstream applications like virtual
reality, virtual 3D teleportation, and 3D replays of live professional sports events.
Dynamic view synthesis systems typically rely on expensive and laborious setups, such as fixed multi-camera
capture rigs [7, 10, 15, 50, 85], which require simultaneous
capture from multiple cameras. However, recent advancements have enabled the generation of dynamic novel views
from a single stereo or RGB camera, previously limited to
human performance capture [16, 28] or small animals [65].
While some methods can handle unstructured video input [1, 3], they typically require precise camera poses estimated via SfM systems. Nonetheless, there have been

13

