This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Generative Structure Prior for Blind Text Image Super-resolution
Xiaoming Li1
Wangmeng Zuo2
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
csxmli@gmail.com

Chen Change Loy1( )
2
Harbin Institute of Technology

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

01 234152622 789

ÿ6ÿ99ÿ01ÿÿ ÿ9ÿ9ÿÿÿ

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

!ÿ6ÿ99ÿ01ÿÿ ÿ9ÿ9ÿÿ!9

Figure 1. Results obtained with TBSRN [7], TATT [41] and our approach on the segments of Chinese text image cropped from a real lowresolution invoice and a signboard. Both baselines are re-trained with elaborated degradations as in BSRGAN [75] and Real-ESRGAN [66].

Abstract
Blind text image super-resolution (SR) is challenging as
one needs to cope with diverse font styles and unknown
degradation. To address the problem, existing methods
perform character recognition in parallel to regularize the
SR task, either through a loss constraint or intermediate
feature condition. Nonetheless, the high-level prior could
still fail when encountering severe degradation. The problem is further compounded given characters of complex
structures, e.g., Chinese characters that combine multiple
pictographic or ideographic symbols into a single character. In this work, we present a novel prior that focuses
more on the character structure. In particular, we learn
to encapsulate rich and diverse structures in a StyleGAN
and exploit such generative structure priors for restoration. To restrict the generative space of StyleGAN so that
it obeys the structure of characters yet remains flexible in
handling different font styles, we store the discrete features for each character in a codebook. The code subsequently drives the StyleGAN to generate high-resolution
structural details to aid text SR. Compared to priors based
on character recognition, the proposed structure prior exerts stronger character-specific guidance to restore faithful
and precise strokes of a designated character. Extensive
experiments on synthetic and real datasets demonstrate the
compelling performance of the proposed generative structure
prior in facilitating robust text SR. Our code is available at
https://github.com/csxmli2016/MARCONet.

1. Introduction
Blind text super-resolution (SR) aims at restoring a highresolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) text image
that is corrupted by unknown degradation. The problem is
relatively less explored than SR of natural and face images.
This seemingly easy task actually possesses many unique
challenges. In particular, each character owns its unique
structure. A suboptimal restoration that destroys the structure with, e.g., distorted, missing or additional strokes, is
easily perceptible and may alter the meaning of the original
word. The task becomes more difficult when dealing with
writing systems such as Chinese, Kanji and Hanja characters,
in which the patterns of thousands of characters vary in complex ways and are mostly composed of different subunits (or
compound ideographs). A slight deviation in strokes, say
‘太’ and ‘大’ carries entirely different meanings. The problem becomes more intricate given the different typefaces.
In addition, complex and unknown degradation make the
data-driven convolutional neural networks (CNNs) incapable
of generalizing well to real-world degraded observations.
To ameliorate the difficulties in blind text SR, especially in retaining the unique structure of each character,
recent studies design new loss functions to constrain SR results semantically close to the high-resolution (HR) groundtruth [7,8,45,50,79], or incorporate the recognition prior into
the intermediate features [40, 41, 44]. Figure 1 shows several
representative results of these two types of methods, i.e., TBSRN [7] that applies content-aware constraint and TATT [41]

10103

