This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Behavioral Analysis of Vision-and-Language Navigation Agents
Zijiao Yang
Oregon State University

Arjun Majumdar
Georgia Institute of Technology

Stefan Lee
Oregon State University

yangziji@oregonstate.edu

arjun.majumdar@gatech.edu

leestef@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
To be successful, Vision-and-Language Navigation
(VLN) agents must be able to ground instructions to actions based on their surroundings. In this work, we develop
a methodology to study agent behavior on a skill-specific
basis – examining how well existing agents ground instructions about stopping, turning, and moving towards specified objects or rooms. Our approach is based on generating skill-specific interventions and measuring changes in
agent predictions. We present a detailed case study analyzing the behavior of a recent agent and then compare multiple agents in terms of skill-specific competency scores. This
analysis suggests that biases from training have lasting effects on agent behavior and that existing models are able to
ground simple referring expressions. Our comparisons between models show that skill-specific scores correlate with
improvements in overall VLN task performance.

1. Introduction
Following navigation instructions requires coordinating
observations and actions in accordance with the natural language. Stopping when told to stop. Turning when told to
turn. And appropriately grounding referring expressions
when an action is conditioned on some aspect of the environment. All three of these example are required when following the instruction “Turn left then go down the hallway
until you see a desk. Walk towards the desk and then stop.”
In this work, we examine how well current instructionfollowing agents can execute different types of these subbehaviors which we will refer to as skills.
We situate our study in the popular Vision-and-Language
Navigation (VLN) paradigm [2]. In a VLN episode, an
agent is spawned in a never-before-seen environment and
must navigate to a goal location specified by a natural
language navigation instruction. An agent’s instructionfollowing capabilities are typically measured at the episode
level – examining whether an agent reaches near the goal
(success rate [2]), how efficiently it does so (SPL [1]), or
how well its trajectory matches the ground truth path which

the human-generated instruction was based on (nDTW
[15]). These metrics are useful for comparing agents in aggregate, but take a perspective that has little to say about an
agent’s fine grained competencies or what sub-instructions
it is able to ground appropriately.
In this work, we design an experimental paradigm based
on controlled interventions to analyze fine-grained agent behaviors. We focus our study on an agent’s ability to execute unconditional instructions like stopping or turning,
as well as, conditional instructions that require more visual grounding like moving towards specified objects and
rooms. Our approach leverages annotations from RxR [13]
to produce truncated trajectory-instruction pairs that can
then be augmented with an additional skill-specific subinstruction. We carefully filter these trajectories and generate template-based sub-instructions to build non-trivial
intervention episodes that evaluate an agent’s ability to
ground skill-specific language to the appropriate actions.
To demonstrate the value of this approach, we present a
case study analyzing the behavior of a contemporary VLN
model [6]. While we find evidence that the model can reliably ground some skill-specific language, our analysis also
reveals that its errors are not random. But rather, they reflect a systematic bias towards forward actions learned during training. For object- or room-seeking skills, we find
only modest relationships between instructions and agent
actions. Finally, we derive aggregate skill-specific scores
and compare across VLN models with different overall task
performance. We find that higher skill-specific scores correlate with higher task performance; however, not all skills
share the same scale of improvement between weaker and
stronger VLN models – suggesting that improvements in
VLN may be fueled by some skills more than others.
Contributions. To summarize this work, we:
- Develop an intervention-based behavioral analysis
paradigm for evaluating the behavior of VLN agents,1
- Provide a case study on a contemporary VLN agent [6],
evaluating fine-grained competencies and biases, and
- Examine the relationships between skill-specific metrics
1 https://github.com/Yoark/vln-behave

2574

