This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pose Synchronization under Multiple Pair-wise Relative Poses
Yifan Sun
Qixing Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, Texas, 78712
yifansun12@utexas.edu

huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Pose synchronization, which seeks to estimate consistent
absolute poses among a collection of objects from noisy
relative poses estimated between pairs of objects in
isolation, is a fundamental problem in many inverse
applications. This paper studies an extreme setting where
multiple relative pose estimates exist between each object
pair, and the majority is incorrect. Popular methods
that solve pose synchronization via recovering a low-rank
matrix that encodes relative poses in block fail under this
extreme setting. We introduce a three-step algorithm for
pose synchronization under multiple relative pose inputs.
The first step performs diffusion and clustering to compute
the candidate poses of the input objects. We present
a theoretical result to justify our diffusion formulation.
The second step jointly optimizes the best pose for each
object. The final step refines the output of the second step.
Experimental results on benchmark datasets of structurefrom-motion and scan-based geometry reconstruction show
that our approach offers more accurate absolute poses than
state-of-the-art pose synchronization techniques.

1. Introduction
Pose synchronization, which seeks to estimate absolute
object poses from noisy relative poses estimated between
object pairs, is a fundamental problem in many inverse
applications in vision and graphics. Examples include
multi-view structure from motion [38], 3D reconstruction
from RGB-D scans [21], and reassembling fractured
objects [14]. This problem has received great process
during the past two decades, starting early greedy
approaches [14, 21] to recent optimization-based
approaches [2, 4, 11, 15, 17, 19, 20, 26–31, 34, 37]. However,
existing approaches assume that there is only one relative
pose for each object pair, and most relative poses are inliers.
This assumption breaks when relative pose estimation is
challenging, e.g., in 3D reconstruction from sparse views.
The correct poses may differ from the top-ranked relative
poses obtained by a pairwise matching method.
In this paper, we study a new pose synchronization

S1

S4

T14

T12

T34

T23

S2

S3
Multiple relative pose candidates

Global Poses

Figure 1. Our approach takes multiple candidate relative poses
between pairs of objects as input and outputs absolute poses of the
input objects for geometry reconstruction.

setting, where there are multiple relative pose estimates
between an object pair, and most of them may be incorrect.
This setting is quite popular, e.g., when overlapping ratios
are low, or objects possess partial symmetries. Our
approach proceeds in three simple steps. The first step
computes for each object a set of candidate poses. This
step is based on the fact that a correct relative pose
between any object and a root object shall be realized by
composing relative poses along multiple paths that connect
them. We introduce an iterative procedure that alternates
between diffusion and clustering to compute candidate
poses. The second step solves a Markov Random Field
(MRF) inference problem to jointly selects the best pose for
each object so that the induced relative pose agrees with
the input relative poses. The third step performs robust
optimization to fine-tune the absolute poses of input objects.
Our approach’s novelty is a diffusion formulation that
synchronizes potentially multiple relative poses between
object pairs into candidate poses for each object. The
formulation, which utilizes a mixture model, is accurate,
robust to noise, and theoretically justified. The resulting
candidate poses enable a simple MRF approach via the
projected power method [36]. Compared to prior MRF
formulations [8,33] that are based on uniform sampling, our
approach does not suffer from discretization errors.
We have evaluated our approach on benchmark
datasets of multi-view structure-from-motion and geometry
reconstruction from depth scans. Experimental results

13072

