This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Correctable and Adaptable Inference for
Generalizable Human Pose Estimation
Zhehan Kan1 , Shuoshuo Chen1 , Ce Zhang1 , Yushun Tang1 , Zhihai He1,2 *
1

Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{kanzh2021,chenss2021,zhangc2019,tangys2022}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, hezh@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
A central challenge in human pose estimation, as well
as in many other machine learning and prediction tasks, is
the generalization problem. The learned network does not
have the capability to characterize the prediction error, generate feedback information from the test sample, and correct the prediction error on the fly for each individual test
sample, which results in degraded performance in generalization. In this work, we introduce a self-correctable and
adaptable inference (SCAI) method to address the generalization challenge of network prediction and use human pose
estimation as an example to demonstrate its effectiveness
and performance. We learn a correction network to correct
the prediction result conditioned by a fitness feedback error. This feedback error is generated by a learned fitness
feedback network which maps the prediction result to the
original input domain and compares it against the original
input. Interestingly, we find that this self-referential feedback error is highly correlated with the actual prediction
error. This strong correlation suggests that we can use this
error as feedback to guide the correction process. It can
be also used as a loss function to quickly adapt and optimize the correction network during the inference process.
Our extensive experimental results on human pose estimation demonstrate that the proposed SCAI method is able to
significantly improve the generalization capability and performance of human pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation (HPE) aims to correctly predict
and localize human body joints. A variety of downstream
applications are based on human pose estimation, such as
motion capture [7, 27], activity recognition [1, 6, 37], person tracking [36, 41] and video surveillance [18]. Recently,
deep learning-based methods for human pose estimation
* Corresponding author.

have achieved remarkable success [2,4,12,26,28,30]. However, in complex or unseen scenarios, pose estimation remains very challenging due to occlusions, cluttered background, and large variations of appearance and scenes, especially for those distal keypoints at the end locations of
body parts, such as wrists and ankles, which have large degrees of motion freedom and often suffer from severe occlusions [13, 39].
We recognize that one major challenge in current human
pose estimation, as well as in many other prediction tasks,
is generalization. Network models, which have been well
learned on the training set, often experience significant performance degradation on the test samples which are collected from different environments or scenarios. For example, in human pose estimation, there are different types of
occlusions of body parts due to complex scene structures
and free-style motions of human bodies. More importantly,
the occlusion scenarios of the test samples could be much
different from those in the training samples. This often
leads to the significant performance degradation of human
pose estimation from the training data to the test data. For
example, in our experiment, the average prediction accuracy
on the training samples is 95.5%. However, on the test set,
this accuracy drops to 67%. For those distal keypoints at tip
locations of body parts which often experience more significant occlusions, their average performance drop is much
more significant, from 95.3% to 57%.
To address this performance degradation or generalization problem, there are two major questions that need to be
carefully answered: (1) how can we tell if the prediction
is accurate or not during testing and how to characterize
the prediction error? This is difficult because the ground
truth values of the test samples are not available during testing. Specifically, in pose estimation, we do not have the
labeled ground truth locations of the body keypoints. (2)
How to correct the prediction error based on the specific
characteristics of the test sample? Current network models,
once successfully trained with labeled samples at the training side, remain fixed during testing, performing the feed-

5537

