This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CABM: Content-Aware Bit Mapping for Single Image Super-Resolution
Network with Large Input
Senmao Tian1,2

Ming Lu3
Jiaming Liu2,4
Yandong Guo5
3
1*
Yurong Chen
Shunli Zhang
1
2
3
Beijing Jiaotong University
OPPO Research Institute
Intel Labs China
4
5
Peking University
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{smtian1204, lu199192}@gmail.com

Abstract
With the development of high-definition display devices,
the practical scenario of Super-Resolution (SR) usually
needs to super-resolve large input like 2K to higher resolution (4K/8K). To reduce the computational and memory
cost, current methods first split the large input into local
patches and then merge the SR patches into the output.
These methods adaptively allocate a subnet for each patch.
Quantization is a very important technique for network acceleration and has been used to design the subnets. Current
methods train an MLP bit selector to determine the propoer
bit for each layer. However, they uniformly sample subnets
for training, making simple subnets overfitted and complicated subnets underfitted. Therefore, the trained bit selector
fails to determine the optimal bit. Apart from this, the introduced bit selector brings additional cost to each layer of
the SR network. In this paper, we propose a novel method
named Content-Aware Bit Mapping (CABM), which can remove the bit selector without any performance loss. CABM
also learns a bit selector for each layer during training. After training, we analyze the relation between the edge information of an input patch and the bit of each layer. We
observe that the edge information can be an effective metric
for the selected bit. Therefore, we design a strategy to build
an Edge-to-Bit lookup table that maps the edge score of a
patch to the bit of each layer during inference. The bit configuration of SR network can be determined by the lookup
tables of all layers. Our strategy can find better bit configuration, resulting in more efficient mixed precision networks.
We conduct detailed experiments to demonstrate the generalization ability of our method. The code will be released.

* This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities (2022JBMC013), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61976017 and 61601021), and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (4202056). Shunli Zhang is the corresponding author.

slzhang@bjtu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) is an important
computer vision task that reconstructs a High-Resolution
(HR) image from a Low-Resolution (LR) image. With the
advent of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), lots of DNNbased SISR methods have been proposed over the past few
years [6, 17, 24, 27, 34]. While in real-world usages, the
resolutions of display devices have already reached 4K or
even 8K. Apart from normal 2D images, the resolutions
of omnidirectional images might reach even 12K or 16K.
Therefore, SR techniques with large input are becoming
crucial and have gained increasing attention from the community [4, 12, 18, 28].
Since the memory and computational cost will grow
quadratically with the input size, existing methods [4, 12,
18,28] first split the large input into patches and then merge
the SR patches to the output. They reduce the computational
cost by allocating simple subnets to those flat regions while
using heavy subnets for those detailed regions. Therefore,
how to design the subnets is very important for these methods. [4, 18] empirically decide the optimal channels after
lots of experiments to construct the subnets. [28] proposes
to train a regressor to predict the incremental capacity of
each layer. Thus they can adaptively construct the subnets
by reducing the layers. Compared with pruning the channels or layers, quantization is another promising technique
and can achieve more speedup. [12] trains an MLP bit selector to determine the proper bit for each layer given a patch.
However, the introduced MLP of each layer brings additional computational and storage cost. Besides, we observe
that [12] uniformly samples the subnets for training, making simple subnets (low average bit or flat patches) tend to
overfit the inputs while complicated subnets (high average
bit or detailed patches) tend to underfit the inputs. Therefore, uniform sampling fails to determine the optimal bit for
each layer.
To solve the limitations of [12], we propose a novel

1756

