This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Transformation Learning for Leveraging Virtual Images in Training
Yi-Ting Shen⋆,1

Hyungtae Lee⋆,2
⋆

1

Heesung Kwon2

Shuvra S. Bhattacharyya1

equal contribution

University of Maryland, College Park

2

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Code: https://gitlab.umiacs.umd.edu/dspcad/ptl-release

Abstract

Transformation
Candidate Selection

Virtual2Real
Transformation

Real images

To effectively interrogate UAV-based images for detecting objects of interest, such as humans, it is essential to
acquire large-scale UAV-based datasets that include human
instances with various poses captured from widely varying
viewing angles. As a viable alternative to laborious and
costly data curation, we introduce Progressive Transformation Learning (PTL), which gradually augments a training dataset by adding transformed virtual images with enhanced realism. Generally, a virtual2real transformation
generator in the conditional GAN framework suffers from
quality degradation when a large domain gap exists between real and virtual images. To deal with the domain gap,
PTL takes a novel approach that progressively iterates the
following three steps: 1) select a subset from a pool of virtual images according to the domain gap, 2) transform the
selected virtual images to enhance realism, and 3) add the
transformed virtual images to the training set while removing them from the pool. In PTL, accurately quantifying the
domain gap is critical. To do that, we theoretically demonstrate that the feature representation space of a given object
detector can be modeled as a multivariate Gaussian distribution from which the Mahalanobis distance between a
virtual object and the Gaussian distribution of each object
category in the representation space can be readily computed. Experiments show that PTL results in a substantial
performance increase over the baseline, especially in the
small data and the cross-domain regime.

1. Introduction
Training an object detector usually requires a large-scale
training image set so that the detector can acquire the ability to detect objects’ diverse appearances. This desire for a
large-scale training set is bound to be greater for object categories with more diverse appearances, such as the human
category whose appearances vary greatly depending on its
pose or viewing angles. Moreover, a person’s appearance

Set Update

+ : add - : subtract
Real images

+ +
generator

Virtual images select

Virtual images

-

-

generator
w/ conditional GAN

Figure 1. Overview of Progressive Transformation Learning.

becomes more varied in images captured by an unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV), leading to a wide variety of camera
viewing angles compared to ground-based cameras, making the desire for a large-scale training set even greater. In
this paper, we aim to satisfy this desire, especially when the
availability of UAV-based images to train a human detector
is scarce, where this desire is more pressing.
As an intuitive way to expand the training set, one might
consider synthesizing virtual images to imitate real-world
images by controlling the optical and physical conditions in
a virtual environment. Virtual images are particularly useful for UAV-based object detection since abundant object
instances can be rendered with varying UAV locations and
camera viewing angles along with ground-truth information (e.g., bounding boxes, segmentation masks) that comes
free of charge. Therefore, a large-scale virtual image set
covering diverse appearances of human subjects that are
rarely shown in existing UAV-based object detection benchmarks [1, 3, 53] can be conveniently acquired by controlling
entities and parameters in a virtual environment, such as
poses, camera viewing angles, and illumination conditions.
To make virtual images usable for training real-world object detection models, recent works [19, 29, 38, 39] transform virtual images to look realistic. They commonly use
the virtual2real generator [36] trained with the conditional
GAN framework to transform images in the source domain
to have the visual properties of images in the target domain. Here, virtual and real images are treated as the source
and target domains, respectively. However, the large dis-

835

