This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Video-Moment Retrieval and Step-Captioning
Abhay Zala* 1
Jaemin Cho* 1
Satwik Kottur2
Xilun Chen2
Barlas Oguz2
Yashar Mehdad2
Mohit Bansal1
1
UNC Chapel Hill
Meta AI2
{jmincho, aszala, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
There is growing interest in searching for information
from large video corpora. Prior works have studied relevant tasks, such as text-based video retrieval, moment retrieval, video summarization, and video captioning in isolation, without an end-to-end setup that can jointly search
from video corpora and generate summaries. Such an endto-end setup would allow for many interesting applications,
e.g., a text-based search that finds a relevant video from
a video corpus, extracts the most relevant moment from
that video, and segments the moment into important steps
with captions. To address this, we present the H I REST
(HIerarchical REtrieval and STep-captioning) dataset and
propose a new benchmark that covers hierarchical information retrieval and visual/textual stepwise summarization
from an instructional video corpus. H I REST consists of
3.4K text-video pairs from an instructional video dataset,
where 1.1K videos have annotations of moment spans relevant to text query and breakdown of each moment into
key instruction steps with caption and timestamps (totaling
8.6K step captions). Our hierarchical benchmark consists
of video retrieval, moment retrieval, and two novel moment
segmentation and step captioning tasks. In moment segmentation, models break down a video moment into instruction
steps and identify start-end boundaries. In step captioning, models generate a textual summary for each step. We
also present starting point task-specific and end-to-end joint
baseline models for our new benchmark. While the baseline
models show some promising results, there still exists large
room for future improvement by the community.1

1. Introduction
Encouraged by the easy access to smartphones, recording software, and video hosting platforms, people are increasingly accumulating videos of all kinds. To fuel the
* equal contribution
1 code and data: https://github.com/j-min/HiREST

{skottur, xilun, barlaso, mehdad}@fb.com

subsequent growing interest in using machine learning systems to extract and summarize important information from
these large video corpora based on text queries, progress has
been made in video retrieval [2, 17, 18, 41, 42], moment retrieval [10, 16, 17], video summarization [9, 24, 33, 34], and
video captioning [13, 20, 41, 42]. Previous works have generally focused on solving these tasks independently; however, all these tasks share the common goal of retrieving information from a video corpus, at different levels of scales
and via different modalities. Hence, in this work, we introduce a new hierarchical benchmark that combines all four
tasks to enable novel and useful real-world applications.
For example, a text-based search service that finds a relevant video from a large video corpus, extracts the most relevant moment from that video, segments the moment into
important steps, and captions them for easy indexing and
retrieval. To support this, we introduce H I REST, a hierarchical instructional video dataset for a holistic benchmark
of information retrieval from a video corpus (see Sec. 3).
H I REST consists of four annotations: 1) 3.4K pairs of text
query about open-domain instructions (e.g., ‘how to make
glow in the dark slime’) and videos, 2) relevant moment
timestamps inside the 1.1K videos, where only a part of
the video (< 75%) is relevant to the text query, 3) moment
breakdown in several instructional steps with timestamps
(7.6 steps per video, total 8.6K steps), and, 4) an manually
curated English caption for each step (e.g. ‘pour shampoo
in container’). We collect fine-grained step-wise annotations of H I REST in a two-step annotation process with online crowdworkers on instructional text-video pairs from the
HowTo100M [23] dataset (see Sec. 3.1). The instructional
videos often come with clear step-by-step instructions, allowing fine-grained segmentation of the videos into short
steps. While there are existing video datasets with step annotations, they are based on a small number of predefined
task names [36, 46] (thus step captions are not diverse), or
are limited to a single topic (e.g. cooking [45]). H I REST
covers various domains and provides diverse step captions
with timestamps written by human annotators (see Table 1),
presenting new challenging and realistic benchmarks for hi-

23056

