This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DropMAE: Masked Autoencoders with Spatial-Attention Dropout for
Tracking Tasks
Tianyu Yang2 * Ziquan Liu1 Baoyuan Wu4 Ying Shan3 Antoni B. Chan1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
3
International Digital Economy Academy
Tencent AI Lab
4
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

Qiangqiang Wu1

1

{qiangqwu2-c, ziquanliu2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, tianyu-yang@outlook.com
wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn, yingsshan@tencent.com, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

State-of-the-art Comparison on GOT-10k

Abstract
88

1. Introduction
Recently, transformers have achieved enormous success
in many research areas, such as natural language processing
(NLP) [6, 22], computer vision [97] and audio generation
[43, 73]. In NLP, masked autoencoding is commonly used
to train large-scale generalizable NLP transformers contain* Corresponding Author

86

DropTrack
(Ours)

84

Success Rate (%)

In this paper, we study masked autoencoder (MAE) pretraining on videos for matching-based downstream tasks,
including visual object tracking (VOT) and video object segmentation (VOS). A simple extension of MAE is to randomly
mask out frame patches in videos and reconstruct the frame
pixels. However, we find that this simple baseline heavily relies on spatial cues while ignoring temporal relations
for frame reconstruction, thus leading to sub-optimal temporal matching representations for VOT and VOS. To alleviate this problem, we propose DropMAE, which adaptively performs spatial-attention dropout in the frame reconstruction to facilitate temporal correspondence learning
in videos. We show that our DropMAE is a strong and efficient temporal matching learner, which achieves better finetuning results on matching-based tasks than the ImageNetbased MAE with 2× faster pre-training speed. Moreover,
we also find that motion diversity in pre-training videos
is more important than scene diversity for improving the
performance on VOT and VOS. Our pre-trained DropMAE
model can be directly loaded in existing ViT-based trackers for fine-tuning without further modifications. Notably,
DropMAE sets new state-of-the-art performance on 8 out
of 9 highly competitive video tracking and segmentation
datasets. Our code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/jimmy-dq/DropMAE.git.

OSTrack

82
AiATrack

80

MixFormer

78

SwinTrack

SimTrack

CIA50
Stark

76

AutoMatch

TransT

74
Ocean

72

SiamR-CNN
DiMP

70
60

62

64

66

68

70

72

74

76

Average Overlap (%)

Figure 1. State-of-the-art comparison on GOT-10k [39] following
the one-shot protocol. Our DropTrack with the proposed DropMAE pre-training achieves state-of-the-art performance without
using complicated pipelines such as online updating.

ing billions of parameters. Inspired by the great success of
self-supervised learning in NLP, recent advances [36, 89]
in computer vision suggest that training large-scale vision
transformers may undertake a similar trajectory with NLP.
The seminal work MAE [36] reconstructs the input image
from a small portion of patches. The learned representation in this masked autoencoder has been demonstrated to
be effective in many computer vision tasks, such as image
classification, object detection and semantic segmentation.
In video object tracking (VOT), recently two works,
SimTrack [10] and OSTrack [97], explore using an MAE
pre-trained ViT model as the tracking backbone. Notably,
these two trackers achieve state-of-the-art performance on
existing tracking benchmarks without using complicated
tracking pipelines. The key to their success is the robust
pre-training weights learned by MAE on ImageNet [68]. In
addition, [10, 97] also demonstrate that, for VOT, MAE unsupervised pre-training on ImageNet is more effective than
supervised pre-training using class labels – this is mainly
because MAE pre-training learns more fine-grained local

14561

