This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Procedure-aware Video Representation
from Instructional Videos and Their Narrations
Yiwu Zhong1 *, Licheng Yu2 , Yang Bai2 , Shangwen Li2 , Xueting Yan2†, Yin Li1†
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 Meta AI
yzhong52@wisc.edu, {lichengyu, yangbai, dylanwen, xyan18}@meta.com, yin.li@wisc.edu

Abstract

whisk eggs in bowl

Video 1

cook eggs

The abundance of instructional videos and their narrations over the Internet offers an exciting avenue for understanding procedural activities. In this work, we propose to learn video representation that encodes both action steps and their temporal ordering, based on a largescale dataset of web instructional videos and their narrations, without using human annotations. Our method jointly
learns a video representation to encode individual step concepts, and a deep probabilistic model to capture both temporal dependencies and immense individual variations in
the step ordering. We empirically demonstrate that learning temporal ordering not only enables new capabilities
for procedure reasoning, but also reinforces the recognition
of individual steps. Our model significantly advances the
state-of-the-art results on step classification (+2.8%/+3.3%
on COIN / EPIC-Kitchens) and step forecasting (+7.4%
on COIN). Moreover, our model attains promising results in zero-shot inference for step classification and forecasting, as well as in predicting diverse and plausible
steps for incomplete procedures. Our code is available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/ProcedureVRL.

1. Introduction
Many of our daily activities (e.g. cooking or crafting)
are highly structured, comprising a set of action steps conducted in a certain ordering. Yet how these activities are
performed varies among individuals. Consider the example of making scrambled eggs as shown in Fig. 1. While
most people tend to whisk eggs in a bowl, melt butter in a
pan, and cook eggs under medium heat, expert chefs have
recommended to crack eggs into the pan, add butter, and
stir them under high heat. Imagine a vision model that can
account for the individual variations and reason about the
temporal ordering of action steps in a video, so as to infer
prior missing steps, recognize the current step, and forecast
* Work done while Yiwu Zhong was an intern at Meta.
† Co-corresponding authors.

crack egg in pan
add butter

Video 2

Step Descriptions

flatten dough
Our
Model

knead dough

Our
Model

bake pizza
bake cookies

Step Classification

Step Forecasting

Figure 1. Top: During training, our model learns from procedural videos and step descriptions to understand individual steps and
capture temporal ordering and variations among steps. Bottom:
Once trained, our model supports zero-shot step classification and
forecasting, yielding multiple credible predictions.

a future step. Such a model will be immensely useful for
a wide range of applications including augmented reality,
virtual personal assistant, and human-robot interaction.
Understanding complex procedural activities has been a
long-standing challenge in the vision community [7, 18, 22,
39, 41, 46]. While many prior approaches learn from annotated videos following a fully supervised setting [13,27,69],
this paradigm is difficult to scale to a plethora of activities and their variants among individuals. A promising
solution is offered by the exciting advances in vision-andlanguage pre-training, where models learn from visual data
(images or videos) and their paired text data (captions or
narrations) [30, 43, 54, 70] in order to recognize a variety of
concepts. This idea has recently been explored to analyze
instructional videos [33, 37], yet existing methods are limited to recognize single action steps in procedural activities.
In this paper, we present a first step towards modeling
temporal ordering of action steps in procedural activities by
learning from instructional videos and their narrations. Our
key innovation lies in the joint learning of a video representation aiming to encode individual step concepts, and a
deep probabilistic model designed to capture temporal dependencies and variations among steps. The video representation, instantiated as a Transformer network, is learned by

14825

