This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POEM: Reconstructing Hand in a Point Embedded Multi-view Stereo
Lixin Yang1,2 Jian Xu3 Licheng Zhong1 Xinyu Zhan1 Zhicheng Wang3 Kejian Wu3 Cewu Lu1,2†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

3

Nreal

{siriusyang, zlicheng, kelvin34501, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
{jianxu, kejian}@nreal.ai

chgggo@gmail.com

Abstract
Enable neural networks to capture 3D geometricalaware features is essential in multi-view based vision tasks.
Previous methods usually encode the 3D information of
multi-view stereo into the 2D features. In contrast, we
present a novel method, named POEM, that directly operates on the 3D POints Embedded in the Multi-view stereo
for reconstructing hand mesh in it. Point is a natural form
of 3D information and an ideal medium for fusing features across views, as it has different projections on different views. Our method is thus in light of a simple yet
effective idea, that a complex 3D hand mesh can be represented by a set of 3D points that 1) are embedded in
the multi-view stereo, 2) carry features from the multi-view
images, and 3) encircle the hand. To leverage the power
of points, we design two operations: point-based feature
fusion and cross-set point attention mechanism. Evaluation on three challenging multi-view datasets shows that
POEM outperforms the state-of-the-art in hand mesh reconstruction. Code and models are available for research
at github.com/lixiny/POEM

1. Introduction
Hand mesh reconstruction plays a central role in the field
of augmented and mixed reality, as it can not only deliver
realistic experiences for the users in gaming but also support applications involving teleoperation, communication,
education, and fitness outside of gaming. Many significant
efforts have been made for the monocular 3D hand mesh
reconstruction [1, 5, 7, 9, 31, 32]. However, it still struggles to produce applicable results, mainly for these three
reasons. (1) Depth ambiguity. Recovery of the absolute
position in a monocular camera system is an ill-posed problem. Hence, previous methods [9, 31, 54] only recovered
the hand vertices relative to the wrist (i.e. root-relative).
(2) Unknown perspectives. The shape of the hand’s 2D
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, the member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

Figure 1. Intersection area of N cameras’ frustum spaces. The
gray dots represent the point cloud P aggregated from N frustums.
Our method: POEM, standing for the point embedded multi-view
stereo, focuses on the dark area scatted with gray dots.

projection is highly dependent on the camera’s perspective model (i.e. camera intrinsic matrix). However, the
monocular-based methods usually suggest a weak perspective projection [1, 27], which is not accurate enough to recover the hand’s 3D structure. (3) Occlusion. The occlusion between the hand and its interacting objects also challenges the accuracy of the reconstruction [32]. These issues
limit monocular-based methods from practical application,
in which the absolute and accurate position of the hand surface is required for interacting with our surroundings.
Our paper is thus focusing on reconstructing hands from
multi-view images. Motivation comes from two aspects.
First, the issues mentioned above can be alleviated by leveraging the geometrical consistency among multi-view images. Second, the prospered multi-view hand-object tracking setups [2, 4, 49, 55] and VR headsets bring us an urgent
demand and direct application of multi-view hand reconstruction in real-time. A common practice of multi-view 3D
pose estimation follows a two-stage design. It first estimates
the 2D key points of the skeleton in each view and then
back-project them to 3D space through several 2D-to-3D
lifting methods, e.g. algebraic triangulation [17,18,39], Pictorial Structures Model (PSM) [33, 38], 3D CNN [18, 43],

21108

