This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleRF: Zero-shot 3D Style Transfer of Neural Radiance Fields
Kunhao Liu1 Fangneng Zhan2 Yiwen Chen1 Jiahui Zhang1
Yingchen Yu1 Abdulmotaleb El Saddik3,5 Shijian Lu1∗ Eric Xing4,5
1

Nanyang Technological University
3

University of Ottawa

Multi-view Content Images

4

2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Carnegie Mellon University

5

MBZUAI

Reference Style Images + Stylized Novel Views

Figure 1. Zero-shot 3D Style Transfer. Given a set of Multi-view Content Images of a 3D scene, StyleRF can transfer arbitrary Reference
Styles to the 3D scene in a zero-shot manner, rendering high-quality Stylized Novel Views with superb multi-view consistency.

Abstract
3D style transfer aims to render stylized novel views of
a 3D scene with multi-view consistency. However, most existing work suffers from a three-way dilemma over accurate geometry reconstruction, high-quality stylization, and
being generalizable to arbitrary new styles. We propose
StyleRF (Style Radiance Fields), an innovative 3D style
transfer technique that resolves the three-way dilemma by
performing style transformation within the feature space
of a radiance field. StyleRF employs an explicit grid of
high-level features to represent 3D scenes, with which highfidelity geometry can be reliably restored via volume rendering. In addition, it transforms the grid features according to the reference style which directly leads to highquality zero-shot style transfer. StyleRF consists of two
innovative designs. The first is sampling-invariant content transformation that makes the transformation invari* Shijian Lu is the corresponding author.

ant to the holistic statistics of the sampled 3D points and
accordingly ensures multi-view consistency. The second is
deferred style transformation of 2D feature maps which is
equivalent to the transformation of 3D points but greatly reduces memory footprint without degrading multi-view consistency. Extensive experiments show that StyleRF achieves
superior 3D stylization quality with precise geometry reconstruction and it can generalize to various new styles in a
zero-shot manner. Project website: https://kunhaoliu.github.io/StyleRF/

1. Introduction
Given a set of multi-view images of a 3D scene and an
image capturing a target style, 3D style transfer aims to generate novel views of the 3D scene that have the target style
consistently across the generated views (Fig. 1). Neural
style transfer has been investigated extensively, and stateof-the-art methods allow transferring arbitrary styles in a

8338

