This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CCuantuMM: Cycle-Consistent Quantum-Hybrid Matching of Multiple Shapes
Harshil Bhatia1,2 Edith Tretschk2 Zorah Lähner3 Marcel Seelbach Benkner3
Michael Moeller3 Christian Theobalt2 Vladislav Golyanik2
1
Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur 2 MPI for Informatics, SIC 3 Universität Siegen

Abstract
Jointly matching multiple, non-rigidly deformed 3D
shapes is a challenging, N P-hard problem. A perfect
matching is necessarily cycle-consistent: Following the
pairwise point correspondences along several shapes must
end up at the starting vertex of the original shape. Unfortunately, existing quantum shape-matching methods do not
support multiple shapes and even less cycle consistency.
This paper addresses the open challenges and introduces
the first quantum-hybrid approach for 3D shape multimatching; in addition, it is also cycle-consistent. Its iterative formulation is admissible to modern adiabatic quantum
hardware and scales linearly with the total number of input
shapes. Both these characteristics are achieved by reducing the N -shape case to a sequence of three-shape matchings, the derivation of which is our main technical contribution. Thanks to quantum annealing, high-quality solutions
with low energy are retrieved for the intermediate N Phard objectives. On benchmark datasets, the proposed approach significantly outperforms extensions to multi-shape
matching of a previous quantum-hybrid two-shape matching method and is on-par with classical multi-matching
methods. Our source code is available at 4dqv.mpiinf.mpg.de/CCuantuMM/.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing interest in applying
quantum computers in computer vision [3, 20, 32]. Such
quantum computer vision methods rely on quantum annealing (QA) that allows to solve N P-hard quadratic unconstrained binary optimisation problems (QUBOs). While
having to formulate a problem as a QUBO is rather inflexible, QA is, in the future, widely expected to solve QUBOs at
speeds not achievable with classical hardware. Thus, casting a problem as a QUBO promises to outperform more unrestricted formulations in terms of tractable problem sizes
and attainable accuracy through sheer speed.
A recent example for such a problem is shape matching, where the goal is to estimate correspondences between

Figure 1. Our quantum-hybrid method matches all 100 shapes
of the FAUST collection [4] with guaranteed cycle consistency
(white arrows). Here, we visualise the matchings via texture
transfer between all shapes. Our method scales linearly in the
number of shapes. See the full figure in the supplement.

two shapes. Accurate shape matching is a core element of
many computer vision and graphics applications (i.e., texture transfer and statistical shape modelling). If non-rigid
deformations are allowed, even pairwise matching is N Phard, leading to a wide area of research that approximates
this problem, as a recent survey shows [15]. Matching two
shapes is one of the problems that was shown to benefit
from quantum hardware: Q-Match [39] iteratively updates
a subset of point correspondences using QA. Specifically,
its cyclic α-expansion allows to parametrise changes to permutation matrices without relaxations.
The question we ask in this work is: How can we design
a multi-shape matching algorithm in the style of Q-Match
that has the same benefits? As we show in the experiments,
where we introduce several naı̈ve multi-shape extensions of
Q-Match, this is a highly non-trivial task. Despite tweaking
them, our proposed method significantly outperforms them.
If N >2 shapes have to be matched, the computational
complexity of naı̈ve exhaustive pairwise matching increases
quadratically with N , which does not scale to large N . Furthermore, these pairwise matchings can easily turn out to be
inconsistent with each other, thereby violating cycle con-

1296

