This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanGen: Generating Human Radiance Fields with Explicit Priors
Suyi Jiang1 Haoran Jiang1 Ziyu Wang1 Haimin Luo1,3 Wenzheng Chen2
Lan Xu1
1

ShanghaiTech University

2

University of Toronto

3

LumiAni Technology

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the tremendous progress
of 3D GANs for generating view-consistent radiance fields
with photo-realism. Yet, high-quality generation of human radiance fields remains challenging, partially due to
the limited human-related priors adopted in existing methods. We present HumanGen, a novel 3D human generation
scheme with detailed geometry and 360◦ realistic free-view
rendering. It explicitly marries the 3D human generation
with various priors from the 2D generator and 3D reconstructor of humans through the design of “anchor image”.
We introduce a hybrid feature representation using the anchor image to bridge the latent space of HumanGen with
the existing 2D generator. We then adopt a pronged design to disentangle the generation of geometry and appearance. With the aid of the anchor image, we adapt a 3D reconstructor for fine-grained details synthesis and propose
a two-stage blending scheme to boost appearance generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate our effectiveness
for state-of-the-art 3D human generation regarding geometry details, texture quality, and free-view performance. Notably, HumanGen can also incorporate various off-the-shelf
2D latent editing methods, seamlessly lifting them into 3D.

1. Introduction
We are entering an era where the boundaries of real and
virtually generated worlds are dismissing. An epitome of
this revolution is the recent rise of 3D-aware and photorealistic image synthesis in the past several years [5, 6, 11,
16, 53, 63, 91], which combine 2D Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) with neural volume rendering, like
neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [43]. But such 3D GANs
mainly focus on rigid contents like human/animal faces or
CAD models. The further 3D generation of us humans with
photo-realism is more attractive, with numerous applications in VR/AR or visual effects.
High-quality 3D human generative models should ideally generate 3D-aware humans with the following characteristics: (1) detailed geometry, (2) photo-realistic appear-

z
2D Generator
2D Editing
Reconstruction
Explicit
Human Priors

Figure 1. The proposed HumanGen can generate 3D humans with
fine-detailed geometry and appearance while seamlessly lifting
various 2D latent editing tools into 3D.

ance, and (3) even supporting 360◦ free-view rendering.
Yet, it remains extremely challenging, mainly due to the
significantly higher diversity of human apparel and skeletal pose. Only very recently, a few work explore autodecoding [10] and 3D GANs [3, 22, 85] for human generation by using the parametric human model like SMPL [39]
as priors. But such parametric human prior lacks sufficient
geometry details, and the adopted neural rendering in these
methods does not guarantee that meaningful 3D geometry
can be generated, further leading to appearance artifacts.
Besides, these 3D human generators are trained with limited human datasets that lack diversity [68] or suffer from
imbalanced viewing angles (most are front views) [13, 38].
In a nutshell, existing methods fail to fulfill all the aforementioned three characteristics for 3D human generation.
We observe that 3D human generation can benefit from
more explicit priors from other research domains of human
modeling, except for the SMPL prior adopted in existing
methods. Specifically, with the recent large-scale dataset
SHHQ [13], the 2D human generators [29–31] achieve
more decent synthesis results than the 3D ones. And various downstream 2D editing tools are available by disentangling the latent spaces [55, 58, 65, 78]. These abilities of 2D
generation and subsequent can significantly benefit the 3D
human generation if their latent spaces can be bridged. Besides, recent advances in monocular 3D human reconstruction [2, 60] have achieved more fine-grained geometry de-

12543

