This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PLA: Language-Driven Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Understanding
Runyu Ding1 *† Jihan Yang1∗ Chuhui Xue2 Wenqing Zhang2 Song Bai2‡ Xiaojuan Qi1‡
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance

Abstract
Open-vocabulary scene understanding aims to localize
and recognize unseen categories beyond the annotated label space. The recent breakthrough of 2D open-vocabulary
perception is largely driven by Internet-scale paired imagetext data with rich vocabulary concepts. However, this
success cannot be directly transferred to 3D scenarios
due to the inaccessibility of large-scale 3D-text pairs. To
this end, we propose to distill knowledge encoded in pretrained vision-language (VL) foundation models through
captioning multi-view images from 3D, which allows explicitly associating 3D and semantic-rich captions. Further, to foster coarse-to-fine visual-semantic representation learning from captions, we design hierarchical 3Dcaption pairs, leveraging geometric constraints between
3D scenes and multi-view images. Finally, by employing contrastive learning, the model learns language-aware
embeddings that connect 3D and text for open-vocabulary
tasks. Our method not only remarkably outperforms baseline methods by 25.8% ∼ 44.7% hIoU and 14.5% ∼ 50.4%
hAP50 in open-vocabulary semantic and instance segmentation, but also shows robust transferability on challenging
zero-shot domain transfer tasks. See the project website at
https://dingry.github.io/projects/PLA.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is a fundamental perception
component in real-world applications such as robot manipulation, virtual reality and human-machine interaction. Deep
learning has attained remarkable success in this area [13, 38,
28]. However, deep models trained on a human-annotated
dataset are only capable of understanding semantic categories in that dataset, i.e. closet-set prediction. As a result,
they fail to recognize unseen categories in the open world
(see Fig. 1). This largely restricts their applicability in realworld scenarios with unbounded categories. Besides, heavy
annotation costs on 3D datasets (e.g. 22.3 minutes for one
scene with 20 classes [7]) further make it infeasible to rely
* Equal contribution: {ryding, jhyang}@eee.hku.hk
† Part of the work is done during an internship at ByteDance AI Lab.
‡ Corresponding authors: song.site@gmail.com, xjqi@eee.hku.hk

wall

cabinet

bookshelf

(a) Close-set classification (b) Open-vocabulary classification

bookshelf
(unseen class)

Mistake ‘bookshelf’ as ‘cabinet’
Miss ‘bookshelf’

Successfully detect ‘bookshelf’

(c) Close-set localization (d) Open-vocabulary localization

Figure 1. An example of 3D open-vocabulary scene understanding
with “bookshelf” as unseen class for ScanNet [7]. The close-set
model mistakes “bookshelf” as “cabinet” or simply misses “bookshelf” in (a) and (c). Our open-vocabulary model correctly localizes and recognizes “bookshelf” in (b) and (d).

on human labor to cover all real-world categories.
This motivates us to study open-vocabulary 3D scene understanding, which equips a model with the ability to localize and recognize open-set classes beyond the label space of
an annotated dataset (see Fig. 1). Recently, vision-language
(VL) foundation models [33, 22, 47] trained on billions of
web-crawled image data with semantic-rich captions [36]
are capable of learning adequate vision-language embeddings to connect text and image, which are further leveraged
to solve many 2D open-vocabulary tasks including object
detection [15, 35], semantic segmentation [43, 26, 51], visual question answering [31] and etc. Albeit significantly
advancing open-vocabulary image understanding tasks, this
pre-training paradigm is not directly viable in the 3D domain due to the absence of large-scale 3D-text pairs.
To this end, initial efforts [50, 20] have attempted to
project 3D data into 2D modalities, such as RGB images
and depth maps, enabling pre-trained VL foundation models to process the 2D data and achieve object-level openvocabulary recognition. Nevertheless, this line of methods
suffers from several major issues, making it suboptimal to
handle scene-level understanding tasks (e.g., instance segmentation). First, multiple RGB images and depth maps are
required to represent a 3D sample, which incurs heavy computation and memory costs during training and inference.
Second, the projection from 3D to 2D induces information

7010

