This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OCTET: Object-aware Counterfactual Explanations
Mehdi Zemni1 , Mickaël Chen1 , Éloi Zablocki1 , Hédi Ben-Younes1 , Patrick Pérez1 , Matthieu Cord1,2
1
2
Valeo.ai, Paris, France
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France

Abstract
Nowadays, deep vision models are being widely deployed in safety-critical applications, e.g., autonomous
driving, and explainability of such models is becoming a
pressing concern. Among explanation methods, counterfactual explanations aim to find minimal and interpretable
changes to the input image that would also change the
output of the model to be explained. Such explanations
point end-users at the main factors that impact the decision of the model. However, previous methods struggle to
explain decision models trained on images with many objects, e.g., urban scenes, which are more difficult to work
with but also arguably more critical to explain. In this
work, we propose to tackle this issue with an object-centric
framework for counterfactual explanation generation. Our
method, inspired by recent generative modeling works, encodes the query image into a latent space that is structured
in a way to ease object-level manipulations. Doing so, it
provides the end-user with control over which search directions (e.g., spatial displacement of objects, style modification, etc.) are to be explored during the counterfactual generation. We conduct a set of experiments on counterfactual explanation benchmarks for driving scenes, and
we show that our method can be adapted beyond classification, e.g., to explain semantic segmentation models. To
complete our analysis, we design and run a user study
that measures the usefulness of counterfactual explanations
in understanding a decision model. Code is available at
https://github.com/valeoai/OCTET.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are now being widely deployed,
notably in safety-critical applications such as autonomous
driving. In such contexts, their black-box nature is a major
concern, and explainability methods have been developed to
improve their trustworthiness. Among them, counterfactual
explanations have recently emerged to provide insights into
a model’s decision [7, 52, 55]. Given a decision model and
an input query, a counterfactual explanation is a data point
that differs minimally but meaningfully from the query in

Query image

Counterfactual Explanations w/ OCTET

Left

Left

Left

Left

targeting the yellow car

targeting the road

Figure 1. Counterfactual explanations generated by OCTET.
Given a classifier that predicts whether or not it is possible to go
left, and a query image (top left), OCTET produces a counterfactual explanation where the most influential features that led to the
decision are changed (top right). On the bottom row, we show that
OCTET can also operate under different settings that result in different focused explanations. We report the prediction made by the
decision model at the top left of each image.

a way that changes the output decision of the model. By
looking at the differences between the query and the explanation, a user is able to infer — by contrast — which elements were essential for the model to come to its decision.
However, most counterfactual methods have only shown results for explaining classifiers trained on single-object images such as face portraits [4, 28, 29, 42, 46]. Aside from
the technical difficulties of scaling up the resolution of the
images, explaining decision models trained on scenes composed of many objects also present the challenge that those
decisions are often multi-factorial. In autonomous driving,
for example, most decisions have to take into account the
position of all other road users, as well as the layout of the
road and its markings, the traffic light and signs, the overall
visibility, and many other factors.
In this paper, we present a new framework, dubbed
OCTET for Object-aware CounTerfactual ExplanaTions, to
generate counterfactual examples for autonomous driving.
We leverage recent advances in unsupervised compositional
generative modeling [14] to provide a flexible explanation
method. Exploiting such a model as our backbone, we can

15062

