This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Monocular Scene Reconstruction with Global-Sparse Local-Dense Grids
Wei Dong*

Chris Choy†

Charles Loop†

Or Litany†

Abstract
Indoor scene reconstruction from monocular images has
long been sought after by augmented reality and robotics
developers. Recent advances in neural field representations and monocular priors have led to remarkable results in scene-level surface reconstructions. The reliance
on Multilayer Perceptrons (MLP), however, significantly
limits speed in training and rendering. In this work, we
propose to directly use signed distance function (SDF) in
sparse voxel block grids for fast and accurate scene reconstruction without MLPs. Our globally sparse and locally
dense data structure exploits surfaces’ spatial sparsity, enables cache-friendly queries, and allows direct extensions
to multi-modal data such as color and semantic labels. To
apply this representation to monocular scene reconstruction, we develop a scale calibration algorithm for fast geometric initialization from monocular depth priors. We apply
differentiable volume rendering from this initialization to
refine details with fast convergence. We also introduce efficient high-dimensional Continuous Random Fields (CRFs)
to further exploit the semantic-geometry consistency between scene objects. Experiments show that our approach
is 10× faster in training and 100× faster in rendering while
achieving comparable accuracy to state-of-the-art neural
implicit methods.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing indoor spaces into 3D representations is
a key requirement for many real-world applications, including robot navigation, immersive virtual/augmented reality
experiences, and architectural design. Particularly useful is
reconstruction from monocular cameras which are the most
prevalent and accessible to causal users. While much research has been devoted to this task, several challenges remain.
Conventional monocular reconstruction from multi-view
RGB images uses patch matching [34], which takes hours
to reconstruct even a relatively small scene. Several 3D re* CMU RI. Work done during the internship at NVIDIA.
† NVIDIA Research

wall
floor

Yuke Zhu†

cabinet
chair

Anima Anandkumar†

sofa
table

door
window

picture
curtain

Figure 1. Color and semantic scene reconstruction from our system with monocular images and learned monocular priors.

construction methods [38,46] have demonstrated fast reconstruction by applying 3D convolutional neural networks to
feature volumes, but they have limited resolution and struggle to generalize to larger scenes.
Recently, unified neural radiance fields [22] and neural
implicit representations were developed for the purpose of
accurate surface reconstruction from images [29, 43, 47].
While this was successfully demonstrated on single objects,
the weak photometric constraint leads to poor reconstruction and slow convergence for large-scale scenes. Guo et
al. [14] and Yu et al. [49] improved the quality and convergence speed of neural field reconstruction on large-scale
scenes by incorporating learned geometrical cues like depth
and normal estimation [11, 31], however, training and evaluation remain inefficient. This is primarily because these
approaches rely on MLPs and feature grids [23] that encode
the entire scene rather than concentrating around surfaces.
In contrast to MLPs, an explicit SDF voxel grid can be
adaptively allocated around surfaces, and allows fast query
and sampling. However, an efficient implementation of
differentiable SDF voxel grids without MLPs is missing.
Fridovich-Keil and Yu et al. [12] used an explicit density
and color grid, but is limited to rendering small objects.
Muller et al. [23] developed a feature grid with spatial hashing for fast neural rendering, but its backbone hash map is
not collision-free, causing inevitable slow random access
and inaccurate indexing at large scales. Dong et al. [10] pro-

4263

