This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Human Mesh Recovery in 3D Scenes
Zehong Shen

Zhi Cen

Sida Peng

Qing Shuai

Hujun Bao

Xiaowei Zhou†

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
We present a novel method for recovering the absolute
pose and shape of a human in a pre-scanned scene given a
single image. Unlike previous methods that perform sceneaware mesh optimization, we propose to first estimate absolute position and dense scene contacts with a sparse 3D
CNN, and later enhance a pretrained human mesh recovery
network by cross-attention with the derived 3D scene cues.
Joint learning on images and scene geometry enables our
method to reduce the ambiguity caused by depth and occlusion, resulting in more reasonable global postures and
contacts. Encoding scene-aware cues in the network also
allows the proposed method to be optimization-free, and
opens up the opportunity for real-time applications. The experiments show that the proposed network is capable of recovering accurate and physically-plausible meshes by a single forward pass and outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in terms of both accuracy and speed. Code is available on
our project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/sahmr/.

1. Introduction
Monocular human mesh recovery (HMR), i.e., estimating pose and shape parameters of a parametric human
model from a single image, has gained significant attention in recent years. To better capture and understand human behaviors, many recent works [1–5] propose to address the problem of scene-aware HMR which involves
human-scene interaction constraints when recovering human meshes, given the 3D geometry of the scene scanned
by range sensors [5–7], as well as the camera pose of the
input image relative to the scene, which may enable more
applications in video surveillance, household robots, and
motion analysis in gyms and clinics.
Most existing methods propose using scene-aware optimization to fit the human mesh into a pre-scanned scene.
They optimize a parametric human model iteratively, e.g.,
† Corresponding author.

Optimization-based (18.4s)

Ours (0.2s)

Input

Prediction

Figure 1. Comparison between the optimization-based method
and the proposed method. Optimization-based methods typically fit a parametric human model iteratively by minimizing 2D
reprojection error and scene conflicts. In contrast, the proposed
method utilizes a single forward pass of the network to estimate
the global position (blue ball), contact scene points (colored scene
points), and a scene-aware human mesh. This design leads to improvements in both efficiency and accuracy.

SMPL [8], to minimize scene penetration, chamfer distance
of contact regions, and the 3D-2D re-projection error. However, optimization tends to be slow at inference time and is
sensitive to initialization and hyperparameters, failing to respond in low-latency applications. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
an optimization-based method PROX [5] takes 18.4s to fit
a human model into the scene, while the incorrect position
and pose still occur.
Recent works [9–13] propose to recover human mesh
with neural networks trained on large-scale datasets [14–
17]. Specifically, the networks learn a mapping from an
input image to a human mesh in the canonical coordinates. Applying these methods in the scene-aware HMR

17038

