This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Stereo Video Inpainting
Zhiliang Wu1 , Changchang Sun2 , Hanyu Xuan3 , Yan Yan2 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
3
School of Big Data and Statistics, Anhui University, China

Abstract
Stereo video inpainting aims to fill the missing regions
on the left and right views of the stereo video with plausible content simultaneously. Compared with the single video
inpainting that has achieved promising results using deep
convolutional neural networks, inpainting the missing regions of stereo video has not been thoroughly explored. In
essence, apart from the spatial and temporal consistency
that single video inpainting needs to achieve, another key
challenge for stereo video inpainting is to maintain the
stereo consistency between left and right views and hence
alleviate the 3D fatigue for viewers. In this paper, we propose a novel deep stereo video inpainting network named
SVINet, which is the first attempt for stereo video inpainting
task utilizing deep convolutional neural networks. SVINet
first utilizes a self-supervised flow-guided deformable temporal alignment module to align the features on the left
and right view branches, respectively. Then, the aligned
features are fed into a shared adaptive feature aggregation module to generate missing contents of their respective branches. Finally, the parallax attention module (PAM)
that uses the cross-view information to consider the significant stereo correlation is introduced to fuse the completed
features of left and right views. Furthermore, we develop
a stereo consistency loss to regularize the trained parameters, so that our model is able to yield high-quality stereo
video inpainting results with better stereo consistency. Experimental results demonstrate that our SVINet outperforms
state-of-the-art single video inpainting models.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting aims to fill in missing region with plausible and coherent contents for all video frames. As a fundamental task in computer vision, video inpainting is usually adopted to enhance visual quality. It has great value
in many practical applications, such as scratch restora* Corresponding author

Input

E2FGVI

FGT

Ours

Figure 1. An example of visual comparison with state-of-the-art
single video inpainting models (E2FGVI [23] and FGT [48]) on
stereo video inpainting. As shown here, directly using the single
video inpainting method to generate missing contents on the left
view (first row) and right view (second row) will lead to severe
stereo inconsistency. In contrast, the proposed method not only
generates vivid textures, but also the parallax flow (third row) between two views is closer to the ground-truth (third row of the
input column). The closer the parallax flow is to ground-truth, the
better the stereo consistency is maintained.

tion [2], undesired object removal [34], and autonomous
driving [24]. In recent years, relying on the powerful features extraction capabilities of convolutional neural network (CNN), existing deep single video inpainting methods [6, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 42, 46] have shown great success.
With the development of augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR) devices, dual-lens smartphones, and autonomous
robots, there is an increasing demand for various stereo
video processing techniques, including stereo video inpainting. For example, in some scenarios, we not only remove
objects and edit contents, but also expect to recover the
missing regions in the stereo video. Although the traditional
stereo video inpainting methods [31, 32] based on patch optimization have been preliminarily studied, the stereo video
inpainting based on deep learning has not been explored.
A naive solution of stereo video inpainting is to directly
apply the single video inpainting methods by completing
the missing regions of left and right views, respectively.
However, inpainting an individual video that only considers
the undamaged spatial-temporal statistics of one view will

5693

