This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Edge-aware Regional Message Passing Controller for
Image Forgery Localization
Dong Li∗ , Jiaying Zhu∗ , Menglu Wang, Jiawei Liu† , Xueyang Fu, Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{dongli6, zhujy53, vault}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {jwliu6, xyfu, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Digital image authenticity has promoted research on image forgery localization. Although deep learning-based
methods achieve remarkable progress, most of them usually suffer from severe feature coupling between the forged
and authentic regions. In this work, we propose a two-step
Edge-aware Regional Message Passing Controlling strategy to address the above issue. Specifically, the first step
is to account for fully exploiting the edge information. It
consists of two core designs: context-enhanced graph construction and threshold-adaptive differentiable binarization
edge algorithm. The former assembles the global semantic
information to distinguish the features between the forged
and authentic regions, while the latter stands on the output
of the former to provide the learnable edges. In the second step, guided by the learnable edges, a region message
passing controller is devised to weaken the message passing
between the forged and authentic regions. In this way, our
ERMPC is capable of explicitly modeling the inconsistency
between the forged and authentic regions and enabling it
to perform well on refined forged images. Extensive experiments on several challenging benchmarks show that our
method is superior to state-of-the-art image forgery localization methods qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
The forged or manipulated images pose risks in various fields, such as removing copyright watermarks, generating fake news, and even falsifying evidence in court [32].
The growing technology of forgery will cause a crisis of
trust and affect social equity. Therefore, the detection of
image forgery is of great significance. The crucial aspect
∗ Co-first authors contributed equally, † corresponding author. This
work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2020AAA0105702, the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC) under Grants 62225207, 62276243, 62106245 and
U19B2038, the University Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province
under Grant GXXT-2019-025.

Previous

Ours

Figure 1. The difference between previous methods and ours. Our
method controls the message passing between the forged and authentic regions, ignored by the previous method. As shown by %.

of the detection is to model the inconsistency between the
forged and authentic regions and to locate the forged regions on the suspicious image, i.e., image forgery localization (IFL). However, as post-processing techniques such
as GAN [16, 26, 63], VAE [27, 44] and homogeneous manipulation [7, 33] are wildly utilized, images can be easily tampered in a visually imperceptible way. These techniques constantly aim to couple the forged and authentic
regions’ features, making image forgery localization challenging. Therefore, in order to accurately locate the image
forgery region, it is particularly essential to decouple the
features between forged and authentic regions.
In recent years, deep-learning techniques have attracted
more attention [23, 57, 58, 65, 66]. Due to the development
of deep learning, image forgery localization has achieved
remarkable results. For example, ManTra-Net [55] treats
the forgery localization problem as a local anomaly detection problem and proposes a novel long short-term memory solution to assess local anomalies. To discriminate
between heterologous regions, SPAN employs CNNs to
extract anomalous local noise features from noise maps.
MVSS-Net [5] learns a multiview feature with multi-scale

8222

