This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A New Dataset Based on Images Taken by Blind People for Testing the
Robustness of Image Classification Models Trained for ImageNet Categories
Reza Akbarian Bafghi
University of Colorado, Boulder

Danna Gurari
University of Colorado, Boulder

reza.akbarianbafghi@colorado.edu

danna.gurari@colorado.edu

Abstract
Our goal is to improve upon the status quo for designing image classification models trained in one domain that
perform well on images from another domain. Complementing existing work in robustness testing, we introduce
the first dataset for this purpose which comes from an authentic use case where photographers wanted to learn about
the content in their images. We built a new test set using 8,900 images taken by people who are blind for which
we collected metadata to indicate the presence versus absence of 200 ImageNet object categories. We call this
dataset VizWiz-Classification. We characterize this dataset
and how it compares to the mainstream datasets for evaluating how well ImageNet-trained classification models generalize. Finally, we analyze the performance of 100 ImageNet classification models on our new test dataset. Our
fine-grained analysis demonstrates that these models struggle on images with quality issues. To enable future extensions to this work, we share our new dataset with evaluation server at: https://vizwiz.org/tasks-anddatasets/image-classification.

1. Introduction
A common approach for designing computer vision solutions is to leverage large-scale datasets to train algorithms.
Yet, for many real-world applications, it is not only inefficient to curate such training datasets but also challenging or
infeasible. To address this problem, robustness testing was
recently introduced with the focus of improving the performance of models trained for one domain on a test set in a
different domain. In this paper, we focus on robustness testing for the image classification problem.
To date, progress with classification robustness testing
has been possibly largely because of numerous publiclyavailable test datasets with distribution shifts from the original domain. While such datasets have been beneficial in
catalyzing progress, they are limited in that they originate

from contrived settings. For example, ImageNet-C [15]
consists of real images with synthetically generated corruptions to assess model robustness for corrupted images. Yet,
as shown in prior work [3], images curated from contrived
settings can lack the diversity of challenges that emerge in
real-world applications. A consequence of this lack of diversity in test datasets is that algorithm developers do not
receive feedback about whether their methods generalize to
the range of plausible real-world vision challenges.
We address the above gap for robustness testing by introducing a new test set for image classification. It consists of
8,900 images taken by people who are blind who were authentically trying to learn about images they took with their
mobile phone cameras. For each image, we asked crowdworkers to indicate which from 200 object categories were
present. We call the resulting dataset VizWiz-Classification.
Examples demonstrating how labelled images in our new
dataset compare to those in a related robustness testing
dataset are shown in Figure 1. We next analyze how our
dataset compares to six existing robustness testing datasets
and benchmark the performance of 100 modern image classification models on this dataset to highlight challenges and
opportunities that emerge for the research community.
Success on our new dataset could benefit real-world applications today. Already, a growing number of blind people
are sharing their images with services such as Microsoft’s
Seeing AI, Google’s Lookout, and TapTapSee, which recognize a small number of object categories. Success could
broaden such benefits to a longer tail of categories including those underrepresented in the developing world where it
can be laborious/infeasible to collect large, labeled datasets,
especially from such a specific population as people who
are blind. More generally, our new dataset challenge will
encourage developing algorithms that handle a larger diversity of real-world challenges. This could benefit applications with similar challenges such as robotics and wearable
lifelogging. Finally, image classification is a precursor for
many downstream tasks and so we expect progress on our
dataset to enable progress on downstream tasks such as object detection, segmentation, and tracking.

16261

