This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two-stage Co-segmentation Network Based on Discriminative Representation
for Recovering Human Mesh from Videos
Boyang Zhang† , Kehua Ma† , Suping Wu∗ , Zhixiang Yuan
School of information Engineering, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, China

Ours

TCMR

original image

boyangchang@foxmail.com; kehuamm@163.com; pswuu@nxu.edu.cn; yzxnxu@163.com

...

...

...

...

...

...

Figure 1. For complex scenes or extreme lighting conditions, our method uses human discriminative representation to recover accurate
human meshes, especially in limb estimation, outperforming the state-of-the-art method TCMR. Best viewed on-screen by zooming in.

Abstract

pressing irrelevant information (e.g., background). The second stage focuses on temporal context by segmenting the
video temporal domain, and models inter-frame discriminative representation via a dynamic integration strategy. Further, to efﬁciently generate reasonable human discriminative actions, we carefully elaborate a landmark anchor area
loss to constrain the variation of the human motion area.
Extensive experimental results on large publicly available
datasets indicate superiority in comparison with most stateof-the-art. The Code will be made public.

Recovering 3D human mesh from videos has recently
made signiﬁcant progress. However, most of the existing
methods focus on the temporal consistency of videos, while
ignoring the spatial representation in complex scenes, thus
failing to recover a reasonable and smooth human mesh
sequence under extreme illumination and chaotic backgrounds. To alleviate this problem, we propose a twostage co-segmentation network based on discriminative representation for recovering human body meshes from videos.
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst stage of the network segments the video
spatial domain to spotlight spatially ﬁne-grained information, and then learns and enhances the intra-frame discriminative representation through a dual-excitation mechanism
and a frequency domain enhancement module, while sup-

1. Introduction
3D human mesh recovery from images and videos has
been widely concerned in recent years. Existing methods
for estimating human pose and shape from a single image are based on parametric human models such as SMPL
[17] etc, which takes a set of model parameters as input

* represents corresponding author, † represents the equal contribution.

5662

