This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DetCLIPv2: Scalable Open-Vocabulary Object Detection Pre-training via
Word-Region Alignment
Lewei Yao1,2 , Jianhua Han2 , Xiaodan Liang3†, Dan Xu1 ,
Wei Zhang2 , Zhenguo Li2 , Hang Xu2†
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3

(a) Hand drawn black and white illus-

tration, flying eagle with a snake in claws.

(e) Little girl witch with black cat, owl, the

witch's cauldron, ghost spirits and text on
violet background. The concept of Halloween.

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University

(b) Fried egg on a frying pan with cherry
tomatoes and parsley

(f) The Vibrant Tattoos

(c) Curator looks on as we consider paintings
in a shared studio space

(g) Playa Esmeralda in Holguin, Cuba. The view
from the top of the beach. Beautiful Caribbean
sea turquoise.

(d) A SCUBA diver looks over his shoulder
towards a sea lion

(h) Dark eyed juvenile perched in a conifer

Figure 1. Visualizations of DetCLIPv2 for open-vocabulary word-region alignment. DetCLIPv2 is able to detect broad concepts.

Abstract
This paper presents DetCLIPv2, an efficient and scalable
training framework that incorporates large-scale imagetext pairs to achieve open-vocabulary object detection
(OVD). Unlike previous OVD frameworks that typically rely
on a pre-trained vision-language model (e.g., CLIP) or exploit image-text pairs via a pseudo labeling process, DetCLIPv2 directly learns the fine-grained word-region alignment from massive image-text pairs in an end-to-end manner. To accomplish this, we employ a maximum word-region
similarity between region proposals and textual words to
guide the contrastive objective. To enable the model to gain
localization capability while learning broad concepts, DetCLIPv2 is trained with a hybrid supervision from detection,
grounding and image-text pair data under a unified data
formulation. By jointly training with an alternating scheme
and adopting low-resolution input for image-text pairs, DetCLIPv2 exploits image-text pair data efficiently and effectively: DetCLIPv2 utilizes 13× more image-text pairs
than DetCLIP with a similar training time and improves
† Corresponding
xu.hang@huawei.com

author:

liangxd9@mail.sysu.edu.cn,

performance. With 13M image-text pairs for pre-training,
DetCLIPv2 demonstrates superior open-vocabulary detection performance, e.g., DetCLIPv2 with Swin-T backbone
achieves 40.4% zero-shot AP on the LVIS benchmark,
which outperforms previous works GLIP/GLIPv2/DetCLIP
by 14.4/11.4/4.5% AP, respectively, and even beats its fullysupervised counterpart by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Traditional object detection frameworks [6,35,36,57] are
typically trained to predict a set of predefined categories,
which fails to meet the demand of many downstream application scenarios that require to detect arbitrary categories
(denoted as open-vocabulary detection, OVD). For example, a robust autonomous driving system requires accurate
predictions for all classes of objects on the road [26]. Extending traditional object detectors to adapt these scenarios needs tremendous human effort for extra instance-level
bounding-box annotations, especially for rare classes. To
obtain an open-vocabulary detector without the expensive
annotation process, the central question we should ask is:
where does knowledge about unseen categories come from?

23497

