This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R2 Former: Unified Retrieval and Reranking Transformer for Place Recognition
Sijie Zhu1,2,† , Linjie Yang1 , Chen Chen2 , Mubarak Shah2 , Xiaohui Shen1 , Heng Wang1
1
ByteDance 2 Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
{sijiezhu,linjie.yang,heng.wang,shenxiaohui.kevin}@bytedance.com, {chen.chen,shah}@crcv.ucf.edu

Visual Place Recognition (VPR) estimates the location of
query images by matching them with images in a reference
database. Conventional methods generally adopt aggregated CNN features for global retrieval and RANSAC-based
geometric verification for reranking. However, RANSAC
only employs geometric information but ignores other possible information that could be useful for reranking, e.g. local feature correlations, and attention values. In this paper,
we propose a unified place recognition framework that handles both retrieval and reranking with a novel transformer
model, named R2 Former. The proposed reranking module
takes feature correlation, attention value, and xy coordinates into account, and learns to determine whether the
image pair is from the same location. The whole pipeline
is end-to-end trainable and the reranking module alone
can also be adopted on other CNN or transformer backbones as a generic component. Remarkably, R2 Former
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on major VPR datasets with much less inference time and memory consumption. It also achieves the state-of-the-art on
the hold-out MSLS challenge set and could serve as a simple yet strong solution for real-world large-scale applications. Experiments also show vision transformer tokens
are comparable and sometimes better than CNN local features on local matching. The code is released at https:
//github.com/Jeff-Zilence/R2Former.

1. Introduction
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) aims to localize query
images from unknown locations by matching them with a
set of reference images from known locations. It has great
potential for robotics [47], navigation [41], autonomous
driving [9], augmented reality (AR) applications. Previous works [26, 53] generally formulate VPR as a retrieval
problem with two stages, i.e. global retrieval, and reranking. The global retrieval stage usually applies aggregation
† This work was done during the first author’s internship at ByteDance

Transformer Tokens

CNN Local Features

Abstract

NetVLAD (Retrieval)

Transformers (Retrieval)

RANSAC (Reranking)

Selected
Patch Pairs

……

Transformers (Reranking)
Number of Inliers

Reranking Score

(a) Conventional Pipeline

(b) Our Unified Framework
40

70

+9.1

60

1

50

0.5

40

Patch-NetVLAD
[26]

1.5

MSLS Challenge (R@1)

0

4.7×

20

Reduction

Infer. Time (s)

4.7×

TransVPR [53]

Reduction

0

Ours
Memory (GB)

(c) Comparison with State-of-the-art Methods

Figure 1. An overview of conventional pipeline and our unified
framework. Both our global retrieval and reranking modules are
end-to-end trainable transformer layers, which achieve state-ofthe-art performance with much less computational cost.

methods (e.g. NetVLAD [3] and GeM [43]) on top of CNN
(Convolutional Neural Network) to retrieve top candidates
from a large reference database. While some works [3, 6]
only adopt global retrieval, current state-of-the-art methods [26, 53] conduct reranking (i.e. geometric verification
with RANSAC [19]) on the top-k (e.g. k = 100) candidates
to further confirm the matches, typically leading to a significant performance boost. However, geometric information
is not the only information that could be useful for reranking, and task-relevant information could be learned with a
data-driven module to further boost performance. Besides,
the current reranking process requires a relatively large inference time and memory footprint (typically over 1s and
1MB per image), which cannot scale to real-world applications with large QPS (Queries Per Second) and reference
database (> 1M images).
Recently vision transformer [17] has achieved significant performance on a wide range of vision tasks, and has
been shown to have a high potential for VPR [53] (Sec. 2).

19370

