This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Annealing-based Label-Transfer Learning for Open World Object Detection
Yuqing Ma1 , Hainan Li4 , Zhange Zhang1 , Jinyang Guo1 ,
Shanghang Zhang3 , Ruihao Gong1 , Xianglong Liu1,2,4*
1
SKLSDE Lab, Beihang University, 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory,
3
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University,
4
Institute of Data Space, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

Abstract
Open world object detection (OWOD) has attracted extensive attention due to its practicability in the real world.
Previous OWOD works manually designed unknowndiscover strategies to select unknown proposals from the
background, suffering from uncertainties without appropriate priors. In this paper, we claim the learning of object detection could be seen as an object-level featureentanglement process, where unknown traits are propagated to the known proposals through convolutional operations and could be distilled to benefit unknown recognition
without manual selection. Therefore, we propose a simple
yet effective Annealing-based Label-Transfer framework,
which sufficiently explores the known proposals to alleviate the uncertainties. Specifically, a Label-Transfer Learning paradigm is introduced to decouple the known and unknown features, while a Sawtooth Annealing Scheduling
strategy is further employed to rebuild the decision boundaries of the known and unknown classes, thus promoting
both known and unknown recognition. Moreover, previous OWOD works neglected the trade-off of known and unknown performance, and we thus introduce a metric called
Equilibrium Index to comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of the OWOD models. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first OWOD work without manual unknown selection. Extensive experiments conducted on the common-used
benchmark validate that our model achieves superior detection performance (200% unknown mAP improvement with
the even higher known detection performance) compared
to other state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DIG-Beihang/ALLOW.git.

1. Introduction
Traditional object detection models [7,19,34,35] are under an ideal closed world assumption, meaning the detected
* Corresponding author: Xianglong Liu, xlliu@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1. Comparison of the ORE [17] and Ours. ORE designed
an auto-labelling strategy to select potential unknown objects from
the background region, introducing uncertainties. In contrast, we
view object detection as an object-level feature entanglement and
explore unknown information from all the known proposals.

classes must be labeled and given during training. However,
an object detection system is highly likely to encounter unknown objects that do not appear in the training phase. To
address the above problem, Open World Object Detection
(OWOD) has been pioneeringly proposed in [17], where the
detection models should identify both known (annotated)
and unknown (unannotated) categories and incrementally
learn the unknown classes once their annotations are given.
As shown in Figure 1, to accomplish unknown identification, previous OWOD works manually designed complex unknown-discover strategies to select specific regions
from the background as unknown proposals, which will
introduce uncertainties in the open world learning. For
example, ORE [17] adopted an auto-labelling strategy in
RPN, which selected top-k background region proposals
sorted by their objectness scores as unknown objects. OWDETR [10] further designed an attention-driven pseudolabeling for selecting query boxes with high attention scores
but not matched with known class boxes. Although these
works [10, 17, 39, 42, 45] achieved promising performance
and improved the unknown recall, these unknown-discover
strategies are much likely to choose parts of the known pro-

11454

