This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Range-nullspace Video Frame Interpolation with Focalized Motion Estimation
Zhiyang Yu1,∗,

Yu Zhang2, , Dongqing Zou2,3 , Xijun Chen1 , Jimmy S. Ren2,3 , Shunqing Ren1,
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI, Beijing, China
3
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Continuous-time video frame interpolation is a fundamental technique in computer vision for its flexibility in
synthesizing motion trajectories and novel video frames at
arbitrary intermediate time steps. Yet, how to infer accurate intermediate motion and synthesize high-quality video
frames are two critical challenges. In this paper, we present
a novel VFI framework with improved treatment for these
challenges. To address the former, we propose focalized
trajectory fitting, which performs confidence-aware motion
trajectory estimation by learning to pay focus to reliable
optical flow candidates while suppressing the outliers. The
second is range-nullspace synthesis, a novel frame renderer
cast as solving an ill-posed problem addressed by learning
decoupled components in orthogonal subspaces. The proposed framework sets new records on 7 of 10 public VFI
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Continuous-time Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) aims
at upsampling the temporal resolution of low frame-rate
videos steplessly by synthesizing the missing frames at arbitrary time steps. It is a fundamental technology for various downstream video applications such as streaming [34],
stabilization [5], and compression [35].
A key challenge of this task is to find a continuous mapping from arbitrary time step to the latent scene motion to
correctly render the target frame, observing the low framerate video. Typically, it was realized via two stages: motion
trajectory fitting and frame synthesis, e.g. [1, 3, 4, 10, 13, 17,
21, 29, 36, 38, 39]. In the former, a parametric trajectory
model is fitted from the optical flows extracted from input
frames, which can be resampled at any time step to get intermediate motion. For representing such a motion model,
∗ This work is done during Zhiyang’s internship at SenseTime.

Correspondence
should
be
addressed
to
Yu
Zhang
(zhangyulb@gmail.com) and Shunqing Ren (renshunqing@hit.edu.cn).

𝑰−1

𝑰0

𝑰1

𝑰2

(a) Consecutive input frames and estimated optical flows
Resample 𝑭0→𝑡
𝑰0
Resample 𝑭1→𝑡
𝑰𝑡 Rendering
Randering
Rays

Reconstruction

𝑰1

(b) Conventional pipeline
𝑰0

Resample 𝑭0→𝑡

𝑾−1 𝑾1 𝑾2

Resample 𝑭1→𝑡

𝑰−1

𝑰2
𝑰1

Flow Confidence

𝑰0

?

𝑰𝑡

Reconstruction
Deep Range-Nullspace Solver
(c) The proposed pipeline
𝑰1

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed method. Given input frames
and extracted optical flows (a), common VFI pipeline (b) is to fit
a continuous motion trajectory model, resample flows at the target
time step, based on which rendering rays are predicted to synthesize the intermediate frame by reorganizing pixels from the input
frames. Our pipeline (c) proposes improved treatment in two aspects: 1) our focalized motion estimation assigns dynamic weights
to the extracted optical flows to suppress the outlier flows and improve fitting accuracy, and the novel range-nullspace solver treats
intermediate frame synthesis as an inverse problem instead of direct rendering. Please see text for more details.

the Taylor polynomial is often adopted with different orders [4,13,36]. However, fitting trajectory models are prone
to optical flow errors, which are inevitable due to occlusion.
Besides motion fitting, the frame synthesis step faces the
challenges of correctly inferring scene geometry. Particularly, the intermediate flows resampled from the continuous
motion model only depict partial correspondences between
the intermediate frame with input frames, while existing
methods predict complete rendering rays in a data-driven
manner to facilitate full rendering, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).

22159

