This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

À-la-carte Prompt Tuning (APT): Combining Distinct Data Via Composable
Prompting
Benjamin Bowman1,2 * Alessandro Achille1 Luca Zancato1 Matthew Trager1
Pramuditha Perera1 Giovanni Paolini1 Stefano Soatto1
AWS AI Labs1 UCLA2
benbowman314@math.ucla.edu zancato@amazon.it
{aachille,mttrager,pramudi,paoling,soattos}@amazon.com
Abstract
We introduce À-la-carte Prompt Tuning (APT), a
transformer-based scheme to tune prompts on distinct
data so that they can be arbitrarily composed at inference
time. The individual prompts can be trained in isolation,
possibly on different devices, at different times, and on different distributions or domains. Furthermore each prompt
only contains information about the subset of data it was
exposed to during training. During inference, models can
be assembled based on arbitrary selections of data sources,
which we call à-la-carte learning. À-la-carte learning
enables constructing bespoke models specific to each user’s
individual access rights and preferences. We can add or
remove information from the model by simply adding or
removing the corresponding prompts without retraining
from scratch. We demonstrate that à-la-carte built models
achieve accuracy within 5% of models trained on the union
of the respective sources, with comparable cost in terms
of training and inference time. For the continual learning
benchmarks Split CIFAR-100 and CORe50, we achieve
state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
As large neural network models make their way into commercial applications, the basic paradigm of training them on
a monolithic dataset leads to a number of challenges. First,
as new data become available, updating the whole model
can be prohibitively expensive. Even when training time is
not an issue, some users may still require access and maintenance of previous versions of the model to avoid disruptions of their downstream workflows. Second, owners of
the training data may modify their sharing preferences at
any time, leading to datasets that shrink over time (machine
unlearning) or to different subsets of the training data being
* Work done during an internship at AWS AI Labs.

usable by different users (compartmentalization). Finally,
the users themselves may want to use custom subsets of the
data to better tailor their model to their use cases (model
customization).
These challenges are well known and addressed separately
in different fields such as continual learning, forgetting, and
model adaption. However, in order for a commercial system to be viable at scale, these issues have to be tackled
concurrently. Ideally, one would have a large model that
each user can run, trained using only data the specific user
wants and has rights to, that can evolve without the need for
fine-tuning as new data becomes available, or as individual data owners exercise their right to have their data erased
(“the right to be forgotten”).
We refer to the problem of building such a model as à-lacarte learning since, depending on the data availability and
the user, the service may need to select and use different
data chunks from a menu of available training data. More
specifically, let D = {D1 , . . . , Dn } be a variable collection
of data sources (a data pool). In à-la-carte learning a user at
inference time can specify a subset S ⇢ D of training data
together with an input sample x to receive a personalized
à-la-carte output f (x, S) from the model f . Critically, the
output f (x, S) must not depend on any data source Di 2
/ S.
À-la-carte learning can be naı̈vely tackled in two ways. The
service could pre-train one model for each possible subset of the data pool, and serve each user the most powerful model they have rights to. While optimal from the user
view-point, this requires a prohibitive exponential complexity O(2|D| ) in both training time and storage. On the other
extreme, the service could train a separate model on each
data source individually and, at inference time, ensemble
all models obtained from the sources in S. This requires
only linear O(|D|) training time complexity to pre-train
each model, but still has a significant storage cost. Furthermore due to the ensembling inference time is signifi-

14984

