This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Temporal Sentence Grounding with Uncertainty-Guided
Self-training

1

Yifei Huang1,2∗ , Lijin Yang1∗ , Yoichi Sato1
The University of Tokyo, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{hyf, yang-lj, ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The task of weakly supervised temporal sentence grounding aims at finding the corresponding temporal moments of
a language description in the video, given video-language
correspondence only at video-level. Most existing works select mismatched video-language pairs as negative samples
and train the model to generate better positive proposals
that are distinct from the negative ones. However, due to
the complex temporal structure of videos, proposals distinct
from the negative ones may correspond to several video segments but not necessarily the correct ground truth. To alleviate this problem, we propose an uncertainty-guided selftraining technique to provide extra self-supervision signal
to guide the weakly-supervised learning. The self-training
process is based on teacher-student mutual learning with
weak-strong augmentation, which enables the teacher network to generate relatively more reliable outputs compared
to the student network, so that the student network can learn
from the teacher’s output. Since directly applying existing
self-training methods in this task easily causes error accumulation, we specifically design two techniques in our selftraining method: (1) we construct a Bayesian teacher network, leveraging its uncertainty as a weight to suppress the
noisy teacher supervisory signals; (2) we leverage the cycle consistency brought by temporal data augmentation to
perform mutual learning between the two networks. Experiments demonstrate our method’s superiority on CharadesSTA and ActivityNet Captions datasets. We also show in the
experiment that our self-training method can be applied to
improve the performance of multiple backbone methods.

1. Introduction
One of the most important directions in video understanding is to temporally localize the start and end timestamp of a given sentence description. Also known as temporal sentence grounding, this task has a wide range of poten* equal contribution. Author order is determined by a coin toss.

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods [70, 71] find it hard to distinguish
the two cases since they learn positive proposals purely based on
negative proposals. (b) Our method provides extra supervision signals for learning positive proposals. (c) Performance of the backbone network [71], backbone network trained with existing selftraining methods pseudo labeling [29], Mean Teacher (MT) [50],
and backbone network trained with our method. Directly applying self-training methods for semi-supervised learning negatively
influences the performance, while our self-training method can improve the backbone performance.

tial applications ranging from video summarization [45,66],
video action segmentation [23, 28, 59], to Human-computer
interaction systems [8, 22, 30, 52, 63]. While most existing
works deal with this task in a supervised manner, manually
annotating temporal labels of the starting and ending timestamps of each sentence is extremely laborious, which harms
the scalability and viability of this task in real-world applications. To escalate practicability, recent research attention
has been drawn towards weakly supervised temporal sentence grounding, where video-language correspondence is
given as annotation only at video-level for model training.
Previous weakly supervised temporal sentence grounding works [16,21,36,38] mainly adopt the multiple instance
learning (MIL) method. They generate mismatched videolanguage pairs as negative samples and train the model to
distinguish the positive/negative samples, in order to learn a
cross-modal latent space for a language feature to highlight
a certain time period of the video. Some methods find negative samples by selecting sentences that describe another

18908

