This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedDM: Iterative Distribution Matching
for Communication-Efficient Federated Learning
Ruochen Wang1 *
Yuanhao Xiong1 *
2
Minhao Cheng
Felix Yu3
Cho-Jui Hsieh1
1

UCLA

2

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has recently attracted increasing attention from academia and industry, with the ultimate
goal of achieving collaborative training under privacy and
communication constraints. Existing iterative model averaging based FL algorithms require a large number of
communication rounds to obtain a well-performed model
due to extremely unbalanced and non-i.i.d data partitioning
among different clients. Thus, we propose FedDM to build
the global training objective from multiple local surrogate
functions, which enables the server to gain a more global
view of the loss landscape. In detail, we construct synthetic sets of data on each client to locally match the loss
landscape from original data through distribution matching. FedDM reduces communication rounds and improves
model quality by transmitting more informative and smaller
synthesized data compared with unwieldy model weights.
We conduct extensive experiments on three image classification datasets, and show that our method outperforms other
FL counterparts in terms of efficiency and model performance given a limited number of communication rounds.
Moreover, we demonstrate that FedDM can be adapted to
preserve differential privacy with Gaussian mechanism and
train a better model under the same privacy budget.

1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning methods are designed with
the assumption that all training data can be accessed from
a central location. However, due to the growing data size
together with the model complexity [10, 23, 26], distributed
optimization [7, 8, 43] is necessary over different machines.
This leads to the problem of Federated Learning [32] (FL) –
multiple clients (e.g. mobile devices or local organizations)
collaboratively train a global model under the orchestration
of a central server (e.g. service provider) while the training
* Equal contribution.

3

HKUST

Google Research

data are kept decentralized and private. Such a practical setting poses two primary challenges [20,24,29,31,32]: training data of the FL system are highly unbalanced and
non-i.i.d. across downstream clients and more efficient
communication with fewer costs is expected because of
unreliable devices with limited transmission bandwidth.
Most of the existing FL methods [22,28,31,32,48] adopt
an iterative training procedure from FedAvg [32], in which
each round takes the following steps: 1) The global model
is synchronized with a selected subset of clients; 2) Each
client trains the model locally and sends its weight or gradient back to the server; 3) The server updates the global
model by aggregating messages from selected clients. This
framework works effectively for generic distributed optimization while the difficult and challenging setting of FL,
unbalanced data partition in particular, would result in statistical heterogeneity in the whole system [30] and make
the gradient from each client inconsistent. It poses a great
challenge to the training of the shared model, which requires a substantial number of communication rounds to
converge [28]. Although some improvements have been
made over FedAvg [32] including modifying loss functions [31], correcting client-shift with control variates [22]
and the like, the reduced number of communication round
is still considerable and even the amount of information required by the server rises [56].
In our paper, we propose a different iterative surrogate
minimization based method, FedDM, referred to Federated
Learning with iterative Distribution Matching. Instead of
the commonly-used scheme where each client maintains
a locally trained model respectively and sends its gradient/weight to the server for aggregation, we take a distinct
perspective at the client’s side and attempt to build a local surrogate function to approximate the local training objective. By sending those local surrogate functions to the
server, the server can then build a global surrogate function
around the current solution and conduct the update by minimizing this surrogate. The question is then how to build
local surrogate functions that are informative and with a rel-

16323

