This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TopDiG: Class-agnostic Topological Directional Graph Extraction from Remote
Sensing Images
Bingnan Yang1 , Mi Zhang1† , Zhan Zhang2 , Zhili Zhang1 , Xiangyun Hu1
1

2

School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University, China
†

Corresponding author { mizhang@whu.edu.cn }

Abstract
Rapid development in automatic vector extraction from
remote sensing images has been witnessed in recent years.
However, the vast majority of existing works concentrate
on a specific target, fragile to category variety, and hardly
achieve stable performance crossing different categories. In
this work, we propose an innovative class-agnostic model,
namely TopDiG, to directly extract topological directional
graphs from remote sensing images and solve these issues.
Firstly, TopDiG employs a topology-concentrated node detector (TCND) to detect nodes and obtain compact perception of topological components. Secondly, we propose a
dynamic graph supervision (DGS) strategy to dynamically generate adjacency graph labels from unordered nodes.
Finally, the directional graph (DiG) generator module is
designed to construct topological directional graphs from
predicted nodes. Experiments on the Inria, CrowdAI,
GID, GF2 and Massachusetts datasets empirically
demonstrate that TopDiG is class-agnostic and achieves
competitive performance on all datasets.

(a) PolyWorld

(b) Enhanced iCurb

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Visual illustrations of current and our approaches on
different targets. In contrast with PolyWorld and Enhanced iCurb
which only serve a specific category, TopDiG is class-agnostic and
can tackle both polygon-shape and line-shape targets. Yellow dots
refer to detected nodes while blue arrowed lines indicate the directional topological connection between node pairs (best viewed by
zooming in).

1. Introduction
Vector maps that are represented as topological directional graphs act as the foundation to various remote sensing applications, such as property mapping, cartographic
generalization and disaster assessment [21, 25]. Traditional
manual or semi-automatic vector map generation from remote sensing images is extremely time-consuming and expensive. In contrast, state-of-the-art approaches, including
segmentation-based [4, 9, 13, 30], contour-based [1, 16, 22,
29, 35, 39] and graph generation [3, 26, 31–34, 41] methods
have typically developed to achieve automation. However, these works are concentrated on a specific category and
can hardly achieve satisfactory performance when applied
to other classes.
Among aforementioned approaches, a dominant
paradigm is the segmentation-based method. It follows the

segmentation-vectorization pipeline and requires sophisticated vectorization procedures to binary masks. Typical
examples that fall in this scope include PolyMapper [14],
Frame Field [9] and ASIP [13]. These methods retrieve
coarse raster maps with missing details and unavoidably demand elaborate post-processing. Another paradigm mainly
adopts contour-based instance segmentation approaches,
which usually refine initial contours to obtain vector maps.
For instance, Polygon-RNN [6], Polygon-RNN++ [1],
Deep Snake [22], SharpContour [39] and E2EC [35] can
delineate the outlines of polygon-shape targets, such as
buildings and water bodies. However, it depends on the
quality of initial contours and can barely be reliable on
line-shape targets, such as roads. The flourishing graph
generation methods construct the topological graph based
on nodes and their connectivity. A few of such approaches,

1265

