This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Dense Correlation Distillation for Few-Shot Segmentation
Bohao Peng1 , Zhuotao Tian4 ,* Xiaoyang Wu2 , Chengyao Wang1 , Shu Liu4 , Jingyong Su3 , Jiaya Jia1,4
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 4 SmartMore

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation tasks [2, 3, 22, 52] have made
tremendous progress in recent years, benefiting from the
rapid development of deep learning [13,32]. However, most
existing deep networks are not scalable to previously unseen
classes and rely on annotated datasets to achieve satisfying performance. Data collection and annotation cost much
time and resources, especially for dense prediction tasks.
Few-shot learning [34, 39, 43] has been introduced into
semantic segmentation [5, 38] to build class-agnostic models quickly adapting to novel classes. Typically, fewshot segmentation (FSS) divides the input into the query
and support sets [5, 46, 48, 51] following the episode
paradigm [41]. It segments the query targets conditioned on
* Corresponding Author
1 https://github.com/Pbihao/HDMNet

Baseline

Query

Support

COCO-𝟐𝟎𝒊

Ours

Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) aims to form
class-agnostic models segmenting unseen classes with only
a handful of annotations. Previous methods limited to the
semantic feature and prototype representation suffer from
coarse segmentation granularity and train-set overfitting.
In this work, we design Hierarchically Decoupled Matching Network (HDMNet) mining pixel-level support correlation based on the transformer architecture. The selfattention modules are used to assist in establishing hierarchical dense features, as a means to accomplish the cascade
matching between query and support features. Moreover,
we propose a matching module to reduce train-set overfitting and introduce correlation distillation leveraging semantic correspondence from coarse resolution to boost finegrained segmentation. Our method performs decently in experiments. We achieve 50.0% mIoU on COCO-20i dataset
one-shot setting and 56.0% on five-shot segmentation, respectively. The code is available on the project website1 .

PASCAL-𝟓𝒊

Figure 1. Activation maps of the correlation values on both
PASCAL-5i [29] and COCO-20i [26]. The baseline is prone to
give high activation values to the categories sufficiently witnessed
during training, such as the “People” class, even with other support annotations. Then we convert it to the hierarchically decoupled matching structure and adopt correlation map distillation to
mine inner-class correlation.

the semantic clues from the support annotations with metalearning [34, 39] or feature matching [25, 41, 49].
Previous few-shot learning methods may still suffer
from coarse segmentation granularity and train-set overfitting [38] issues. As shown in Fig. 1, “people” is the
base class that has been sufficiently witnessed during training. But the model is still prone to yield high activation to “people” instead of more related novel classes with
the support samples, producing inferior results. This issue stems from framework design, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Concretely, prototype-based [38, 42] and adaptive-classifier
methods [1, 23] aim at distinguishing different categories
with global class-wise characteristics. It is challenging to
compute the correspondence of different components between query and support objects for the dense prediction
tasks. In contrast, matching-based methods [49] mine pixellevel correlation but may heavily rely on class-specific fea-

23641

