This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NewsNet: A Novel Dataset for Hierarchical Temporal Segmentation
Haoqian Wu1† , Keyu Chen1† , Haozhe Liu2† , Mingchen Zhuge2† , Bing Li2B ,
Ruizhi Qiao1B , Xiujun Shu1 , Bei Gan1 , Liangsheng Xu1 , Bo Ren1 , Mengmeng Xu2 , Wentian Zhang2
Raghavendra Ramachandra3 , Chia-Wen Lin4 , Bernard Ghanem2
Tencent 2 AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
3
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU)
4
National Tsing Hua University (NTHU)

...

...

...

...

Multiple Modality Data

<Regular News >
ASR: A CDC advisory panel has just approved a plan to give the first doses of coronavirus vaccines to healthcare workers and people living in
nursing homes... From their states will use this road map to get the vaccine in the arms of Americans which is expected...

<News Flash>
ASR: The breaking news tonight the CDC officially
decides who should get the vaccine first.

...

Multiple Granularity
Boundaries

1

Topic
Story

...

Scene
Event
00:57

01:32

08:13

24:08

Figure 1. Examples from the proposed NewsNet. The dataset provides multimodal and hierarchical labels on each video, including 4level hierarchical temporal information (i.e., event, scene, story, topic) and 3 modality-specific cues (i.e., video, audio, text). A prerequisite
motivation behind NewsNet is that long-form videos can be recursively represented into several sub-videos according to the semantics,
which is an intrinsic property of the video but rarely explored in the community. To bridge this research gap, this paper innovatively
constructs a large-scale dataset to benchmark the algorithms for hierarchical understanding like a human being.

Abstract
Temporal video segmentation is the get-to-go automatic
video analysis, which decomposes a long-form video into
https://flatuicolors.com/palette/fr
smallerHex:components
for the following-up understanding
tasks. Recent works have studied several levels of granularity to segment a video, such as shot, event, and scene.
Those segmentations can help compare the semantics in
the corresponding scales, but lack a wider view of larger
temporal spans, especially when the video is complex and
structured. Therefore, we present two abstractive levels of
temporal segmentations and study their hierarchy to the existing fine-grained levels. Accordingly, we collect NewsNet,
the largest news video dataset consisting of 1,000 videos
† Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors: Bing Li (bing.li@kaust.edu.sa) and Ruizhi
Qiao (ruizhiqiao@tencent.com).

in over 900 hours, associated with several tasks for hierarchical temporal video segmentation. Each news video is
a collection of stories on different topics, represented as
aligned audio, visual, and textual data, along with extensive frame-wise annotations in four granularities. We assert
that the study on NewsNet can advance the understanding
of complex structured video and benefit more areas such
as short-video creation, personalized advertisement, digital
instruction, and education. Our dataset and code is publicly available at https://github.com/NewsNetBenchmark/NewsNet.

1. Introduction
Temporal video segmentation is a critical problem in
video understanding, which is essential for many video applications such as video classification [10,15,37,58,59,62],

10669

