This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Task Interference in Multi-Task Learning via Explicit Task Routing
with Non-Learnable Primitives
Chuntao Ding1 *
1

Zhichao Lu2†

Shangguang Wang3

2

Ran Cheng4

Vishnu N. Boddeti5

3

Beijing Jiaotong University
Sun Yat-sen University
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4
Southern University of Science and Technology 5 Michigan State University

chuntaoding@163.com {luzhichaocn, ranchengcn}@gmail.com

Multi-task learning (MTL) seeks to learn a single model
to accomplish multiple tasks by leveraging shared information among the tasks. Existing MTL models, however,
have been known to suffer from negative interference among
tasks. Efforts to mitigate task interference have focused on
either loss/gradient balancing or implicit parameter partitioning with partial overlaps among the tasks. In this
paper, we propose ETR-NLP to mitigate task interference
through a synergistic combination of non-learnable primitives (NLPs) and explicit task routing (ETR). Our key idea
is to employ non-learnable primitives to extract a diverse
set of task-agnostic features and recombine them into a
shared branch common to all tasks and explicit task-specific
branches reserved for each task. The non-learnable primitives and the explicit decoupling of learnable parameters into shared and task-specific ones afford the flexibility
needed for minimizing task interference. We evaluate the
efficacy of ETR-NLP networks for both image-level classification and pixel-level dense prediction MTL problems.
Experimental results indicate that ETR-NLP significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art baselines with fewer learnable
parameters and similar FLOPs across all datasets. Code is
available at this URL.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is commonly employed to
improve learning efficiency and performance of multiple
tasks by using supervised signals from other related tasks
[6, 25, 37]. These models have led to impressive results
across numerous tasks. However, there is well-documented
evidence [14,21,32,39] that these models are suffering from
task interference [39], thereby limiting multi-task networks
(MTNs) from realizing their full potential.
* Work done as a visiting scholar at Michigan State University.
† Corresponding author

vishnu@msu.edu

70

% CelebA F-score

Abstract

sgwang@bupt.edu.cn

65
60
55
50
45

0

10

Standard learnable conv
Non-Learnable Primitives
(NLPs)
Explicit Task Routing
(ETR)
ETR-NLP
20
30
40

Epochs

(a) ResNet18

(b) Layer 1, 4, and 8 of ResNet18 (from left to right)

Figure 1. (a) Learning progression of multi-task networks (MTNs)
on CelebA for eight tasks. Hard-sharing models with fully learnable parameters (gray) learn rapidly and then suffer from performance degradation due to conflicting gradients from task interference. Networks with non-learnable primitives (NLPs; blue) do not
suffer from task interference by design, while explicit task routing (ETR; green), and ETR with NLPs (red) do not eliminate but
suffer less from task interference. (b) Gradient correlations measured via CKA [15] across all pairs of tasks for different layers of
a standard MTN at the end of training. Observe the acute lack of
correlation between tasks (low off-diagonal magnitude).

For instance, consider the learning progression of an
MTN with a standard learnable convolutional layer in Figure 1a (blue curve). Observe that the model learns rapidly,
we posit, by exploiting all the shared information between
the tasks, i.e., gradients pointing in similar directions. However, the performance starts degrading on further training
since the model needs to exploit dissimilar information between the tasks for further improvement, i.e., gradients
point in different directions. The latter can be verified by
observing the similarity (centered kernel alignment [15]),
or the lack thereof, between the gradients for each pair of
tasks in Figure 1b.
Several approaches were proposed for mitigating task interference in MTNs, including loss/gradient balancing [13,
17, 18, 26, 38], parameter partitioning [2, 21, 23, 29] and architectural design [7, 14, 22]. Despite the diversity of these
approaches, they share two common characteristics, (i) all
parameters are learned, either for a pre-trained task or for
the multiple tasks at hand, (ii) the learned parameters are
either fully shared across all tasks or are shared across a partial set of tasks through implicit partitioning, i.e., with no direct control over which parameters are shared across which
tasks. Both of these features limit the flexibility of existing

7756

