This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Data Geometry for Continual Learning
Zhi Gao1 , Chen Xu2* , Feng Li, Yunde Jia2,1 , Mehrtash Harandi3 , Yuwei Wu1,2*
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Eng., Monash University, and Data61, Australia
{gaozhi 2017,jiayunde,wuyuwei}@bit.edu.cn
xuchen@smbu.edu.cn, lifeng.passion@gmail.com, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract
Continual learning aims to efficiently learn from a nonstationary stream of data while avoiding forgetting the
knowledge of old data. In many practical applications,
data complies with non-Euclidean geometry. As such, the
commonly used Euclidean space cannot gracefully capture
non-Euclidean geometric structures of data, leading to inferior results. In this paper, we study continual learning
from a novel perspective by exploring data geometry for
the non-stationary stream of data. Our method dynamically expands the geometry of the underlying space to match
growing geometric structures induced by new data, and prevents forgetting by keeping geometric structures of old data
into account. In doing so, making use of the mixed curvature space, we propose an incremental search scheme,
through which the growing geometric structures are encoded. Then, we introduce an angular-regularization loss
and a neighbor-robustness loss to train the model, capable of penalizing the change of global geometric structures
and local geometric structures. Experiments show that our
method achieves better performance than baseline methods
designed in Euclidean space.

1. Introduction
Unlike humans, artificial neural networks perform
poorly to learn new knowledge in a continual manner. The
tendency to lose the knowledge previously learned, known
as catastrophic forgetting, is due to the fact that important
parameters of a neural network for old data are changed to
meet the objectives of new data. There have been many
continual learning methods [12, 14, 23, 32, 49, 53], and their
∗ Corresponding authors: Chen Xu and Yuwei Wu.

goal is to remember the knowledge from old data while effectively learning from new data. They have achieved impressive performance in alleviating catastrophic forgetting.
However, a long-lasting issue with existing methods is
that data geometry is rarely studied in continual learning.
Existing methods usually assume that data is Euclidean and
they use Euclidean geometry to process the data stream.
In fact, data in countless applications intrinsically has nonEuclidean geometric structures [2, 6]. Several studies show
that non-Euclidean geometric structures can be better captured by particular forms of Riemannian geometry [15, 35].
For example, the hyperbolic geometry has a natural expressive ability for the hierarchical structure and is hence used
successfully for fine-grained images [22, 29]. The spherical geometry is shown as a suitable choice for face images
that have the cyclical structure [27, 46]. In addition to the
geometric structures discussed above, natural data may be
diverse and irregular in structure, e.g., data exhibits hierarchical forms in some regions and cyclical forms in others [31, 40]. Overall, distortions produced when using Euclidean geometry for non-Euclidean geometric structures
are overwhelming, causing the loss of semantic information, and hence resulting in inferior performance [3]. In this
paper, we study how to attain suitable non-Euclidean geometry to capture the intrinsic geometric structures of data
during continual learning.
To achieve our goal, we have to face two challenges (see
Fig. 1). (1) Non-stationary stream of data will inevitably
increase the complexity of intrinsic geometric structures. In
other words, fixing the geometry of the underlying space
cannot always match new and unseen data in continual
learning. For example, more and more complex hierarchies
in a data stream bring more leaf nodes, requiring a faster
growing space volume with the radius, which conflicts with
a fixed geometry [17]. (2) Old data is not accessible in con-

24325

