This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tree Instance Segmentation with Temporal Contour Graph
Adnan Firoze Cameron Wingren† Raymond A. Yeh Bedrich Benes Daniel Aliaga
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
Department of Forestry and Natural Resources† , Purdue University
{afiroze, cwingren, rayyeh, bbenes, aliaga}@purdue.edu

Input

Human Annotation

Ours

Figure 1. Tree Instance Segmentation. A flyover from a UAV and the corresponding tree instance segmentation during green leaf season
when the tree crowns are most similar to their neighbors, and occlusion is complex adding to the difficulty in segmentation.

Abstract
We present a novel approach to perform instance segmentation and counting for densely packed self-similar
trees using a top-view RGB image sequence. We propose
a solution that leverages pixel content, shape, and selfocclusion. First, we perform an initial over-segmentation
of the image sequence and aggregate structural characteristics into a contour graph with temporal information incorporated. Second, using a graph convolutional network and
its inherent local messaging passing abilities, we merge adjacent tree crown patches into a final set of tree crowns. Per
various studies and comparisons, our method is superior
to all prior methods and results in high-accuracy instance
segmentation and counting despite the trees being tightly
packed. Finally, we provide various forest image sequence
datasets suitable for subsequent benchmarking and evaluation captured at different altitudes and leaf conditions.

1. Introduction
Trees in forests are tightly spaced, partially overlapping 3D objects with complex boundaries. Tree instance
segmentation is critical in several domains. For example, ecosystem services and agriculture need to segment
and count trees in large areas in order to obtain information about the ecological balance, environmental health,
and timber inventory. Counting trees from the ground per-

spective is inefficient, does not scale, and is challenging to
automate because of many occlusions with branches and
low accesibility. In this paper, we address tree instance
segmentation and counting using overhead RGB image sequences captured by unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), especially during the green-leaf season when trees are most
self-similar; see Fig. 1 for an illustration.
There is significant prior work in segmentation and
counting, particularly in the field of instance segmentation.
While some approaches make use of LiDAR or RGB-D images (see the survey paper [5]), we focus on using easierto-obtain uncalibrated RGB image sequences. Prior works
based on uncalibrated RGB images can be largely organized
into three groups. The first group seeks to count individual objects. These approaches often use density estimation and do not focus on segmentation [35, 36]. The second group of methods relies on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) applied directly to image pixels, such as
Mask R-CNN [26]. However, in the case of abutting and
self-similar objects, e.g., trees, distinguishing individual instances is hard. The third group of techniques (e.g., Ke
et al. [28], Newell and Deng [43]) model object contour as
a graph, where each pixel corresponds to a node, and makes
use of graph convolutional networks to complete individual
contours; nevertheless, abutting and self-similar instances
also hinder these methods. Yet other methods, such as those
in digital forestry research, exploit domain-specific features
such as assumed differences between tree species or fall leaf
coloring (i.e., during one brief time period of the year, the

2193

