This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Master: Meta Style Transformer for Controllable Zero-Shot and Few-Shot
Artistic Style Transfer
Hao Tang1 * Songhua Liu2 * Tianwei Lin3 Shaoli Huang4
Fu Li3 Dongliang He3 Xinchao Wang2†
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 National University of Singapore
3
VIS, Baidu Inc. 4 Tencent AI Lab
tanghao@stu.pku.edu.cn

{lintianwei01,lifu,hedongliang01}@baidu.com

(a)

(b)

Content/Style

songhua.liu@u.nus.edu
shaolihuang@tencent.com

Layer 1

Layer 3

Layer 5

xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Few Shot

“The scream by
Edvard Munch”

Figure 1. Left: With more Transformer layers, the number of parameters and training difficulty increase significantly. Right: Our method
supports test-time controlling of stylization degree via tuning the number of adopted Transformer layers. It is also readily adaptable to
few-shot style transfer, where stylization with only 1 layer can be further improved. Text-guided few-shot style transfer is achievable.

Abstract
Transformer-based models achieve favorable performance in artistic style transfer recently thanks to its
global receptive field and powerful multi-head/layer attention operations. Nevertheless, the over-paramerized multilayer structure increases parameters significantly and thus
presents a heavy burden for training. Moreover, for the
task of style transfer, vanilla Transformer that fuses content and style features by residual connections is prone to
content-wise distortion. In this paper, we devise a novel
Transformer model termed as Master specifically for style
transfer. On the one hand, in the proposed model, different Transformer layers share a common group of parameters, which (1) reduces the total number of parameters, (2)
leads to more robust training convergence, and (3) is readily to control the degree of stylization via tuning the number of stacked layers freely during inference. On the other
hand, different from the vanilla version, we adopt a learnable scaling operation on content features before contentstyle feature interaction, which better preserves the original
similarity between a pair of content features while ensuring
the stylization quality. We also propose a novel meta learning scheme for the proposed model so that it can not only
work in the typical setting of arbitrary style transfer, but
also adaptable to the few-shot setting, by only fine-tuning
the Transformer encoder layer in the few-shot stage for one
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

specific style. Text-guided few-shot style transfer is firstly
achieved with the proposed framework. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of Master under both
zero-shot and few-shot style transfer settings.

1. Introduction
Artistic style transfer aims at applying style patterns like
colors and textures of a reference image to a given content
image while preserving the semantic structure of the content. In contrast to the pioneering optimization method [9]
and early per-style-per-model methods like [17, 26], arbitrary style transfer methods [3, 13, 16, 21, 22, 24, 31] enable
real time style transfer for any style image in the test time in
a zero-shot manner. The flexibility has led to this arbitrarystyle-per-model fashion to dominate style transfer research.
Recently, to enhance the representation of global information in arbitrary style transfer, Transformer [40] is introduced to this area [4], leveraging the global receptive field
and powerful multi-head/layer structure, and achieves superior performance. Nevertheless, the over-parameterized
multi-layer structure increases model parameters significantly. As shown in Fig. 1(a), there are 25.94M learnable parameters for a 3-layer Transformer structure in
StyTr2 [4], v.s. 3.50M in AdaIN [13], a simple but effective
baseline in arbitrary style transfer. Such a large model for
standard Transformer inevitably presents a heavy burden for
training. As shown in Fig. 1(b), when there are more than

18329

