This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoGoNet: Towards Accurate 3D Object Detection with Local-to-Global
Cross-Modal Fusion
Xin Li1
Tao Ma2
Yuenan Hou3
Botian Shi3
Yuchen Yang4
Youquan Liu5
4
1
3*
3
Xingjiao Wu
Qin Chen
Yikang Li
Yu Qiao
Liang He1,6 *
1
2
East China Normal University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Fudan University
5
6
Hochschule Bremerhaven Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
{sankin0528, wuxingjiao2885}@gmail.com
{qchen, lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
{matao, shibotian, houyuenan, youquanliu, liyikang, qiaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn
Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection, which aims to localize and classify the objects in the 3D space, serves as an essential
perception task and plays a key role in safety-critical autonomous driving [1, 20, 58]. LiDAR and cameras are
two widely used sensors. Since LiDAR provides accurate depth and geometric information, a large number of
methods [24, 48, 63, 68, 72, 73] have been proposed and
achieve competitive performance in various benchmarks.
However, due to the inherent limitation of LiDAR sensors,
point clouds are usually sparse and cannot provide sufﬁcient
context to distinguish between distant regions, thus causing
suboptimal performance.
To boost the performance of 3D object detection, a natural remedy is to leverage rich semantic and texture information of images to complement the point cloud. As
shown in Fig. 1 (a), recent advanced methods introduce the
global fusion to enhance the point cloud with image features [2, 5, 7, 8, 22, 23, 25, 27, 34, 54, 55, 60, 69, 71]. They
typically fuse the point cloud features with image features
across the whole scene. Although certain progress has been
achieved, such practice lacks ﬁne-grained local information. For 3D detection, foreground objects only account for
a small percentage of the whole scene. Merely performing
global fusion brings marginal gains.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose a
novel Local-to-Global fusion Network, termed LoGoNet,
which performs LiDAR-camera fusion at both global and
local levels, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Our LoGoNet is
comprised of three novel components, i.e., Global Fusion
(GoF), Local Fusion (LoF) and Feature Dynamic Aggregation (FDA). Speciﬁcally, our GoF module is built on previous literature [8,25,34,54,55] that fuse point cloud features
and image features in the whole scene, where we use the
point centroid to more accurately represent the position of

LiDAR-camera fusion methods have shown impressive
performance in 3D object detection. Recent advanced
multi-modal methods mainly perform global fusion, where
image features and point cloud features are fused across
the whole scene. Such practice lacks ﬁne-grained regionlevel information, yielding suboptimal fusion performance.
In this paper, we present the novel Local-to-Global fusion
network (LoGoNet), which performs LiDAR-camera fusion
at both local and global levels. Concretely, the Global Fusion (GoF) of LoGoNet is built upon previous literature,
while we exclusively use point centroids to more precisely
represent the position of voxel features, thus achieving better cross-modal alignment. As to the Local Fusion (LoF),
we ﬁrst divide each proposal into uniform grids and then
project these grid centers to the images. The image features
around the projected grid points are sampled to be fused
with position-decorated point cloud features, maximally utilizing the rich contextual information around the proposals.
The Feature Dynamic Aggregation (FDA) module is further
proposed to achieve information interaction between these
locally and globally fused features, thus producing more
informative multi-modal features. Extensive experiments
on both Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) and KITTI datasets
show that LoGoNet outperforms all state-of-the-art 3D detection methods. Notably, LoGoNet ranks 1st on Waymo
3D object detection leaderboard and obtains 81.02 mAPH
(L2) detection performance. It is noteworthy that, for the
ﬁrst time, the detection performance on three classes surpasses 80 APH (L2) simultaneously. Code will be available
at https://github.com/sankin97/LoGoNet.

* Corresponding author

17524

