This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CARTO: Category and Joint Agnostic Reconstruction of ARTiculated Objects
Nick Heppert1,3 , Muhammad Zubair Irshad2 , Sergey Zakharov3 , Katherine Liu3 ,
Rares Andrei Ambrus3 , Jeannette Bohg4 , Abhinav Valada1 , Thomas Kollar3
1

University of Freiburg 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Toyota Research Institute (TRI) 4 Stanford University
Articulated Shape Reconstruction in Camera Frame

Real

Synthetic

Detection and 6D Pose Estimation

Figure 1. Visualization of CARTO on unseen object instances. We first use CARTO to jointly detect all objects in the scene and then articulate them while
keeping the predicted shape code constant.

Abstract
We present CARTO, a novel approach for reconstructing multiple articulated objects from a single stereo RGB
observation. We use implicit object-centric representations
and learn a single geometry and articulation decoder for
multiple object categories. Despite training on multiple categories, our decoder achieves a comparable reconstruction
accuracy to methods that train bespoke decoders separately
for each category. Combined with our stereo image encoder
we infer the 3D shape, 6D pose, size, joint type, and the joint
state of multiple unknown objects in a single forward pass.
Our method achieves a 20.4% absolute improvement in mAP
3D IOU50 for novel instances when compared to a two-stage
pipeline. Inference time is fast and can run on a NVIDIA
TITAN XP GPU at 1 HZ for eight or less objects present.
While only trained on simulated data, CARTO transfers to
real-world object instances. Code and evaluation data is
available at: carto.cs.uni-freiburg.de

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D shapes and inferring the 6D pose and
sizes of objects from partially observed input observations
remains a fundamental problem in computer vision with applications in Robotics [10, 11, 13, 20] and AR/VR [8, 44].

This object-centric 3D scene understanding problem is challenging and under-constrained since inferring 6D pose and
shape can be ambiguous without prior knowledge about the
object of interest. Previous work has shown that it is possible
to perform category-level 3D shape reconstruction and 6D
pose estimation in real-time [7], enabling the reconstruction
of complete, fine-grained 3D shapes and textures. However,
there are a wide variety of real-world objects that do not
have a constant shape but can be articulated according to
the object’s underlying kinematics. There has been great
progress in articulated object tracking [5,9,32,37] and reconstruction [10, 26] from a sequence of observations. However,
a sequence of observations is cumbersome since it often
requires prior interaction with the environment. In contrast,
object reconstruction from a single stereo image through
inferring latent information about an object a priori enables
both grasping and manipulation of previously unknown articulated objects. Additionally, estimates from a single image
can also serve as a good initial guess for object tracking
approaches [37].
Previous approaches to articulated object reconstruction
from a single observation use a two-stage approach [16]
where first objects are detected using, e.g., Mask-RCNN [4].
Then, based on the detection output, object properties, e.g.
part-poses and NOCS maps [35], are predicted and the object
is reconstructed using backward optimization [24]. Such an

21201

