This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Motion Ambiguity and Alignment for
High-Quality Video Frame Interpolation
1

Kun Zhou1,2 Wenbo Li3 Xiaoguang Han1 Jiangbo Lu2 *
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen, 2 SmartMore Corporation 3 CUHK
kunzhou@link.cuhk.edu.cn, wenboli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn,jiangbo.lu@gmail.com

Abstract
For video frame interpolation (VFI), existing deeplearning-based approaches strongly rely on the groundtruth (GT) intermediate frames, which sometimes ignore the
non-unique nature of motion judging from the given adjacent frames. As a result, these methods tend to produce
averaged solutions that are not clear enough. To alleviate
this issue, we propose to relax the requirement of reconstructing an intermediate frame as close to the GT as possible. Towards this end, we develop a texture consistency loss
(TCL) upon the assumption that the interpolated content
should maintain similar structures with their counterparts
in the given frames. Predictions satisfying this constraint
are encouraged, though they may differ from the predefined GT. Without the bells and whistles, our plug-and-play
TCL is capable of improving the performance of existing
VFI frameworks consistently. On the other hand, previous
methods usually adopt the cost volume or correlation map
to achieve more accurate image or feature warping. However, the O(N 2 ) (N refers to the pixel count) computational
complexity makes it infeasible for high-resolution cases. In
this work, we design a simple, efficient O(N ) yet powerful guided cross-scale pyramid alignment (GCSPA) module,
where multi-scale information is highly exploited. Extensive experiments justify the efficiency and effectiveness of
the proposed strategy.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) plays a critical role in
computer vision with numerous applications, such as video
editing and novel view synthesis. Unlike other vision tasks
that heavily rely on human annotations, VFI benefits from
the abundant off-the-shelf videos to generate high-quality
training data. The recent years have witnessed the rapid
development of VFI empowered by the success of deep
neural networks. The popular approaches can be roughly
divided into two categories: 1) optical-flow-based meth* Corresponding author

ods [1, 8, 15–17, 20, 26–28, 30, 31, 39, 44–46, 49, 51, 53] and
2) kernel-regression -based algorithms [4–6, 22, 32, 33, 37].
The optical-flow-based methods typically warp the images/features based on a linear or quadratic motion model
and then complete the interpolation by fusing the warped
results. Nevertheless, it is not flexible enough to model
the real-world motion under the linear or quadratic assumption, especially for cases with long-range correspondence or complex motion. Besides, occlusion reasoning is a
challenging problem for pixel-wise optical flow estimation.
Without the prerequisites above, the kernel-based methods
handle the reasoning and aggregation in an implicit way,
which adaptively aggregate neighboring pixels from the images/features to generate the target pixel. However, this line
stands the chance of failing to tackle the high-resolution
frame interpolation or large motion due to the limited receptive field. Thereafter, deformable convolutional networks,
a variant of kernel-based methods, are adopted to aggregate the long-term correspondence [5, 7, 22], achieving better performance. Despite many attempts, some challenging
issues remain unresolved.
First, the deep-learning-based VFI works focus on learning the predefined ground truth (GT) and ignore the inherent
motion diversity across a sequence of frames. As illustrated
in Fig. 1 (a), given the positions of a ball in frames I−1 and
I1 , we conduct a user study of choosing its most possible
position in the intermediate frame I0 . The obtained probability distribution map clearly clarifies the phenomenon of
motion ambiguity in VFI. Without considering this point,
existing methods that adopt the pixel-wise L1 or L2 supervision possibly generate blurry results, as shown in Fig. 1 (b).
To resolve this problem, we propose a novel texture consistency loss (TCL) that relaxes the rigid supervision of GT
while ensuring texture consistency across adjacent frames.
Specifically, for an estimated patch, apart from the predefined GT, we look for another texture-matched patch from
the input frames as a pseudo label to jointly optimize the
network. In this case, predictions satisfying the texture consistency are also encouraged. From the visualization com-

22169

