This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Token Turing Machines
Michael S. Ryoo, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Ted Xiao,
Kanishka Rao, Austin Stone, Yao Lu, Julian Ibarz, Anurag Arnab
Google Research
mryoo@google.com

Abstract
We propose Token Turing Machines (TTM), a sequential, autoregressive Transformer model with memory for
real-world sequential visual understanding. Our model is
inspired by the seminal Neural Turing Machine, and has an
external memory consisting of a set of tokens which summarise the previous history (i.e., frames). This memory is
efficiently addressed, read and written using a Transformer
as the processing unit/controller at each step. The model’s
memory module ensures that a new observation will only
be processed with the contents of the memory (and not the
entire history), meaning that it can efficiently process long
sequences with a bounded computational cost at each step.
We show that TTM outperforms other alternatives, such as
other Transformer models designed for long sequences and
recurrent neural networks, on two real-world sequential visual understanding tasks: online temporal activity detection
from videos and vision-based robot action policy learning.
Code is publicly available at: https://github.com/googleresearch/scenic/tree/main/scenic/projects/token turing.

1. Introduction
Processing long, sequential visual inputs in a causal manner is a problem central to numerous applications in robotics
and vision. For instance, human activity recognition models for monitoring patients and elders are required to make
real-time inference on ongoing activities from streaming
videos. As the observations grow continuously, these models
require an efficient way of summarizing and maintaining
information in their past image frames with limited compute. Similarly, robots learning their action policies from
training videos, need to abstract history of past observations
and leverage it when making its action decisions in real-time.
This is even more important if the robot is required to learn
complicated tasks with longer temporal horizons.
A traditional way of handling online observations of
variable sequence lengths is to use recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which are sequential, auto-regressive models [13, 22, 35]. As Transformers [64] have become the de

facto model architecture for a range of perception tasks, several works have proposed variants which can handle longer
sequence lengths [19, 61, 67]. However, in streaming, or
sequential inference problems, efficient attention operations
for handling longer sequence lengths themselves are often
not sufficient since we do not want to run our entire transformer model for each time step when a new observation
(e.g., a new frame) is provided. This necessitates developing
models with explicit memories, enabling a model to fuse
relevant past history with current observation to make a prediction at current time step. Another desideratum for such
models, to scale to long sequence lengths, is that the computational cost at each time step should be constant, regardless
of the length of the previous history.
In this paper, we propose Token Turing Machines (TTMs),
a sequential, auto-regressive model with external memory
and constant computational time complexity at each step.
Our model is inspired by Neural Turing Machines [30]
(NTM), an influential paper that was among the first to
propose an explicit memory and differentiable addressing
mechanism. The original NTM was notorious for being a
complex architecture that was difficult to train, and it has
therefore been largely forgotten as other modelling advances
have been made in the field. However, we show how we
can formulate an external memory as well as a processing
unit that reads and writes to this memory using Transformers
(plus other operations which are common in modern Transformer architectures). Another key component of TTMs is a
token summarization module, which provides an inductive
bias that intuitively encourages the memory to specialise to
different parts of its history during the reading and writing
operations. Moreover, this design choice ensures that the
computational cost of our network is constant irrespective
of the sequence length, enabling scalable, real-time, online
inference.
In contrast to the original NTM, our Transformer-based
modernisation is simple to implement and train. We demonstrate its capabilities by achieving substantial improvements
over strong baselines in two diverse and challenging tasks:
(1) online temporal action detection (i.e., localisation) from
videos and (2) vision-based robot action policy learning.

19070

