This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Compression with Entropy-Constrained Neural Representations
Carlos Gomes
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland

Roberto Azevedo
DisneyResearch|Studios
Zürich, Switzerland

carlosmiguel.gomes@live.com.pt

roberto.azevedo@disneyresearch.com

Christopher Schroers
DisneyResearch|Studios
Zürich, Switzerland
christopher.schroers@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Encoding videos as neural networks is a recently proposed approach that allows new forms of video processing.
However, traditional techniques still outperform such neural video representation (NVR) methods for the task of video
compression. This performance gap can be explained by
the fact that current NVR methods: i) use architectures that
do not efficiently obtain a compact representation of temporal and spatial information; and ii) minimize rate and
distortion disjointly (first overfitting a network on a video
and then using heuristic techniques such as post-training
quantization or weight pruning to compress the model). We
propose a novel convolutional architecture for video representation that better represents spatio-temporal information
and a training strategy capable of jointly optimizing rate
and distortion. All network and quantization parameters
are jointly learned end-to-end, and the post-training operations used in previous works are unnecessary. We evaluate
our method on the UVG dataset, achieving new state-ofthe-art results for video compression with NVRs. Moreover,
we deliver the first NVR-based video compression method
that improves over the typically adopted HEVC benchmark
(x265, disabled b-frames, “medium” preset), closing the
gap to autoencoder-based video compression techniques.

1. Introduction
Lossy video compression is a Rate-Distortion (R-D) optimization problem of the form min D +λR. Given a video,
the encoder’s task is to minimize the number of bits required
to represent it, R (Rate), while also minimizing any distortion brought about by the compression, D (Distortion).
λ controls the trade-off between both and defines a Pareto
frontier, where improvements in the distortion term come at

Figure 1. Compared to the previous state-of-the-art method, our
approach produces sharper frames at lower bpp. Images are labeled with PSNR @ bpp.

an increased cost in the rate term. Traditionally, heuristicbased engineered video codecs are used to encode videos
in efficient representations. Such codecs have gradually developed into complex pipelines and have been established
as powerful standards such as H.264 [26] and HEVC [30].
Inspired by the success of deep learning in many image processing tasks, over the past few years, video compression using neural networks has been the target of much
research [8, 18]. Most of the proposed methods are based

18497

