This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Domain Generalization for Face Anti-spoofing:
Separability and Alignment

Yiyou Sun2 ,* Yaojie Liu1 , Xiaoming Liu1,3 , Yixuan Li2 , Wen-Sheng Chu1
1
Google Research, 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison, 3 Michigan State University
1

{yaojieliu,xiaomingl,wschu}@google.com, 2 {sunyiyou,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu, 3 liuxm@cse.msu.edu

Abstract

Live

Spoof
Domain 1

This work studies the generalization issue of face antispoofing (FAS) models on domain gaps, such as image resolution, blurriness and sensor variations. Most prior works
regard domain-specific signals as a negative impact, and
apply metric learning or adversarial losses to remove them
from feature representation. Though learning a domaininvariant feature space is viable for the training data, we
show that the feature shift still exists in an unseen test domain, which backfires on the generalizability of the classifier. In this work, instead of constructing a domaininvariant feature space, we encourage domain separability while aligning the live-to-spoof transition (i.e., the trajectory from live to spoof) to be the same for all domains.
We formulate this FAS strategy of separability and alignment (SA-FAS) as a problem of invariant risk minimization
(IRM), and learn domain-variant feature representation but
domain-invariant classifier. We demonstrate the effectiveness of SA-FAS on challenging cross-domain FAS datasets
and establish state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at https://github.com/sunyiyou/SAFAS.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) [16] has achieved remarkable success and has been widely employed in mobile access control
and electronic payments. Despite the promise, FR systems
still suffer from presentation attacks (PAs), including print
attacks, digital replay, and 3D masks. As a result, face antispoofing (FAS) has been an important topic for almost two
decades [3, 35, 45, 47, 66, 74, 76].
In early systems like building access and border control with limited variations (e.g., lighting and poses), simple methods [6, 17, 41] have exhibited promise. These algorithms are designed for the closed-world setting, where
* This work was done during Yiyou Sun’s internship at Google.
1 In statistics, spurious correlation is a mathematical relationship in

which multiple events or variables are associated but not causally related.

Decision Factors
Live-to-Spoof
Transition

✗
Domain 1 Domain 2

Domain 2

Domain Gaps

Spurious Correlation!

(a) Common Solution With Mixed Domains

Live

Spoof
Decision Factors

Domain 1

Domain 1

Live-to-Spoof
Transition

Domain Gaps

Domain 2

Domain 2

Invariant to the
classifier!

(b) SA-FAS (Ours)

Figure 1. Cross-domain FAS: (a) Common FAS solutions aim to
remove domain-specific signals and mix domains in one cluster.
However, we empirically show domain-specific signals still exists
in the feature space, and model might pick domain-specific signals
as spurious correlation1 for classification. (b) Our SA-FAS aims
to retain domain signal. Specifically, we train a feature space with
two critical properties: (1) Separability: Samples from different domains and live/spoof classes are well-separated; (2) Alignment: Live-to-spoof transitions are aligned in the same direction
for all domains. With these two properties, our method keeps the
domain-specific signals invariant to the decision boundary.

the camera and environment are assumed to be the same between train and test. This assumption, however, rarely holds
for in-the-wild applications, e.g., mobile face unlock and
sensor-invariant ID verification. Face images in those FAS
cases may be acquired from wider angles, complex scenes,
and different devices, where it is hard for training data to
cover all the variations. These differences between training

24563

