This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Transformations To Reduce the Geometric Shift in Object Detection
Vidit Vidit1 Martin Engilberge1 Mathieu Salzmann1,2
CVLab, EPFL1 , ClearSpace SA2
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
The performance of modern object detectors drops when
the test distribution differs from the training one. Most of
the methods that address this focus on object appearance
changes caused by, e.g., different illumination conditions,
or gaps between synthetic and real images. Here, by contrast, we tackle geometric shifts emerging from variations in
the image capture process, or due to the constraints of the
environment causing differences in the apparent geometry
of the content itself. We introduce a self-training approach
that learns a set of geometric transformations to minimize
these shifts without leveraging any labeled data in the new
domain, nor any information about the cameras. We evaluate our method on two different shifts, i.e., a camera’s field
of view (FoV) change and a viewpoint change. Our results
evidence that learning geometric transformations helps detectors to perform better in the target domains.

1. Introduction
While modern object detectors [1, 2, 17, 23, 24] achieve
impressive results, their performance decreases when the
test data depart from the training distribution. This problem arises in the presence of appearance variations due to,
for example, differing illumination or weather conditions.
Considering the difficulty and cost of acquiring annotated
data in the test (i.e., target) domain, Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) has emerged as the standard strategy to
address such scenarios [3, 4, 9, 26, 38].
In this context, much effort has been made to learn domain invariant features, such that the source and target distributions in this feature space are similar. This has led to
great progress in situations where the appearance of the objects changes drastically from one domain to the other, as
in case of real-to-sketch adaptation (e.g., Pascal VOC [10]
to Comics [15]), or weather adaptation (e.g., Cityscapes [6]
to Foggy Cityscapes [27]). Nevertheless, such object appearance changes are not the only sources of domain shifts.
They can also have geometric origins. For example, as
shown in Fig. 1, they can be due to a change in camera view-

Figure 1. Geometric shifts. (Left) Due to a different FoV,
the cars highlighted in green, undergo different distortions even
though they appear in similar image regions. (Right) Different
camera viewpoints (front facing vs downward facing) yield different distortions and occlusion patterns for pedestrian detection.
(Bottom) The distributions of pedestrian bounding box sizes in
Cityscapes [6] and MOT [8] differ significantly as the pedestrians
are usually far away or in the periphery in Cityscapes. The top images are taken from Cityscapes [6], and the bottom-left and right
ones from KITTI [12] and MOT [8], respectively.

point or field-of-view (FoV), or a change of object scale due
to different scene setups. In practice, such geometric shifts
typically arise from a combination of various factors, including but not limited to the ones mentioned above.
In this paper, we introduce a domain adaptation approach
tackling such geometric shifts. To the best of our knowledge, the recent work of [13] constitutes the only attempt at
considering such geometric distortions. However, it introduces a method solely dedicated to FoV variations, assuming that the target FoV is fixed and known. Here, we de-

17441

