This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Feature-based Knowledge Distillation for Face Recognition
Jingzhi Li†, *,1 ,

Zidong Guo∗,1 ,

Hui Li1 , Seungju Han2 , Ji-won Baek2 , Min Yang1 ,
Ran Yang1 , Sungjoo Suh2
1
Samsung R&D Institute China Xi’an (SRCX)
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea

jingzhi.li, zidong.guo, hui01.li, sj75.han, jw0328.baek, min16.yang,
ran01.yang, sungjoo.suh@samsung.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite the unceasing emergence of larger and more
powerful models for face recognition (FR), industrial deployment continues to demand for accurate and lightweight solutions. Among other compression techniques like
pruning [27] and quantization [21], knowledge distillation
(KD) has been proven to be effective in producing highperforming compact model from well-trained teacher. Unlike classic KD [17] and its variants [14, 24, 43, 44] who
distill on logits, most of the existing works on FR distill on
features [11, 13] or feature-relations [8, 20, 35]. One key
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

FO

ReFO (ours)

FO In.D
6.0

66

5.5

64

5.0

62

4.5

60

Teacher's In.D

MR-all Accuracy/%

With the continual expansion of face datasets, featurebased distillation prevails for large-scale face recognition.
In this work, we attempt to remove identity supervision in
student training, to spare the GPU memory from saving
massive class centers. However, this naive removal leads to
inferior distillation result. We carefully inspect the performance degradation from the perspective of intrinsic dimension, and argue that the gap in intrinsic dimension, namely
the intrinsic gap, is intimately connected to the infamous
capacity gap problem. By constraining the teacher’s search
space with reverse distillation, we narrow the intrinsic gap
and unleash the potential of feature-only distillation. Remarkably, the proposed reverse distillation creates universally student-friendly teacher that demonstrates outstanding student improvement. We further enhance its effectiveness by designing a student proxy to better bridge the intrinsic gap. As a result, the proposed method surpasses stateof-the-art distillation techniques with identity supervision
on various face recognition benchmarks, and the improvements are consistent across different teacher-student pairs.

FI
68

IR34

IR50

IR70

IR100

4.0

Figure 1. IResNet18 (IR18) is distilled by four different teachers. Feature-only distillation (FO) shows performance degradation comparing to feature-based distillation with ID supervision
(FI). The proposed method (ReFO) significantly uplifts the performance of FO distillation. For both FI and FO, the student performance drops with larger teachers of lower intrinsic dimension. In
line plot: student performance (%) on MR-all benchmark [9]. In
bar plot: teacher’s intrinsic dimension (In.D).

reason is that the massive and still growing number of identities (IDs) in FR datasets, such as the 2 million IDs in WebFace42M [45], make it too expensive to save extra teacher’s
class centers for logits distillation.
The ground truth supervision from ID labels, which we
call ID supervision, is still retained when training student
models for better distillation results. Nonetheless, it is not
only non-trivial to find the right balancing weight [15, 33],
the obtained class centers are also not needed during inference in an open-set FR problem. This motivates the complete removal of class centers in the student training for a
number of benefits: 1) speed, the student distillation breaks
free from the need of keeping any class center, providing
further training speed-up with even lower GPU memory occupancy; 2) access to unlabeled dataset, removing the dependency on ID labels conveniently opens the door to the
vast quantity of unlabeled or uncleaned face images like
WebFace260M [45]; and 3) better focus on feature space,
which is what really matters in an open-set problem. Hence,
in this work, we are motivated to investigate feature distilla-

20156

