This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-World Multi-Task Control Through
Goal-Aware Representation Learning and Adaptive Horizon Prediction
Shaofei Cai1,2 , Zihao Wang1,2 , Xiaojian Ma3 , Anji Liu3 , Yitao Liang1,4
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
4
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
{caishaofei,zhwang}@stu.pku.edu.cn,xiaojian.ma@ucla.edu
liuanji@cs.ucla.edu,yitaol@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the problem of learning goal-conditioned policies in Minecraft, a popular, widely accessible yet challenging open-ended environment for developing human-level
multi-task agents. We first identify two main challenges of
learning such policies: 1) the indistinguishability of tasks
from the state distribution, due to the vast scene diversity,
and 2) the non-stationary nature of environment dynamics
caused by partial observability. To tackle the first challenge,
we propose Goal-Sensitive Backbone (GSB) for the policy
to encourage the emergence of goal-relevant visual state
representations. To tackle the second challenge, the policy is further fueled by an adaptive horizon prediction module that helps alleviate the learning uncertainty brought by
the non-stationary dynamics. Experiments on 20 Minecraft
tasks show that our method significantly outperforms the
best baseline so far; in many of them, we double the performance. Our ablation and exploratory studies then explain
how our approach beat the counterparts and also unveil the
surprising bonus of zero-shot generalization to new scenes
(biomes). We hope our agent could help shed some light on
learning goal-conditioned, multi-task agents in challenging, open-ended environments like Minecraft. The code is
released at https://github.com/CraftJarvis/
MC-Controller.

1. Introduction
Building agents that can accomplish a vast and diverse
suite of tasks in an open-ended world is considered a key
challenge towards devising generally capable artificial intelligence [2, 3, 6, 35]. In recent years, environments like
Minecraft have drawn much attention from the related research communities [16, 18–20, 26], since they are not only

pick-place

box-close

Meta-world

stick-push

window-open

combat pig

harvest poppy

Minecraft

combat sheep

harvest wood

Figure 1. Comparison of states between Meta-world [49] (left) and
Minecraft [24] (right) based on t-SNE visualization. The points
with the same color represent states from the trajectories that complete the same task. It can be seen that the states are much more
distinguishable in terms of tasks in Meta-world than in Minecraft,
implying the higher diversity of states and tasks in open worlds
like Minecraft over traditional multi-task agent learning environments like Meta-world.

popular, and widely accessible, but also offer an openended universe with myriad of tasks, making them great
platforms for developing human-level multi-task agents.
Although groundbreaking successes have been observed
in many challenging sequential decision-making problems
such as Atari [32], Go [39], and MOBA games [13, 44, 45],
such successes have not been transferred to those open
worlds. To understand the gap and design corresponding solutions, we need to first understand the distinct challenges
brought by these environments. Let’s take Minecraft [24]
as an example: there are over twenty types of landscapes

13734

