This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Curvilinear Editing: Commutative and Nonlinear Image Manipulation
for Pretrained Deep Generative Model
Takehiro Aoshima, Takashi Matsubara
Osaka University
1-3 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531 Japan.
aoshima@hopf.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp, matsubara@sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Semantic editing of images is the fundamental goal of
computer vision. Although deep learning methods, such
as generative adversarial networks (GANs), are capable of
producing high-quality images, they often do not have an
inherent way of editing generated images semantically. Recent studies have investigated a way of manipulating the
latent variable to determine the images to be generated.
However, methods that assume linear semantic arithmetic
have certain limitations in terms of the quality of image
editing, whereas methods that discover nonlinear semantic
pathways provide non-commutative editing, which is inconsistent when applied in different orders. This study proposes
a novel method called deep curvilinear editing (DeCurvEd)
to determine semantic commuting vector fields on the latent
space. We theoretically demonstrate that owing to commutativity, the editing of multiple attributes depends only on
the quantities and not on the order. Furthermore, we experimentally demonstrate that compared to previous methods,
the nonlinear and commutative nature of DeCurvEd facilitates the disentanglement of image attributes and provides
higher-quality editing.

1. Introduction
Generating and editing realistic images is one of the fundamental goals in computer vision. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [20] have emerged as a major image generation approach owing to the quality of generated
images [7, 33–36, 48] and provide various real-world applications [1, 13, 18, 53, 63, 68]. Other notable methods
include variational autoencoders (VAEs) [24], conditional
PixelCNN [61], and diffusion-based models [26, 56], which
are collectively called deep generative models. However,
deep generative models cannot inherently edit images semantically. They can be viewed as mappings from latent
space to image space, and the latent variables determine the

generated images. Therefore, several methods have been
developed to train deep generative models such that each
semantic attribute the user wants to edit is assigned to each
element of the latent variable [10, 45, 46] (see the first column of Table 1). However, this approach requires computationally expensive training and can conflict with the quality
of image generation. Other studies have developed imageto-image translation that translates images from one domain
to another [28,64,68]. However, this approach also requires
training from scratch and limits image editing to be discontinuous unless combined with latent variable manipulation.
Therefore, a general and promising approach is necessary to
identify manipulations on latent variables of already trained
models that edit images semantically.
A study reported that adding certain vectors to latent
variables can modify the corresponding attributes of the object in the generated images [51]. This indicates that the
latent space can be regarded as a linear vector space. Some
studies have aimed to identify attribute vectors in a supervised or an unsupervised manner [17, 19, 22, 27, 49, 50, 54,
55, 62, 69]. In any case, these studies introduce the strong
assumption of linear semantic arithmetic on the latent space
(see the second column of Table 1), which limits the quality of image editing. Other studies have proposed methods
to determine attribute vectors depending on the position in
the latent space, that is, the attribute vector fields (or local
attribute coordinates). [2, 11, 12, 17, 29, 37, 44, 52, 58, 60];
these methods edit an image attribute by moving the latent
variable nonlinearly along the corresponding attribute vector field. Although this approach is elegant, the edits of
different attributes are generally non-commutative (see the
third column of Table 1). That is, what we get is different
when we edit attributes (denoted by e1 and e2 ) one after another, or in the reverse order. This property can harm the
disentanglement between attributes considering that the relationships among attributes change at different points. In
contrast, linear arithmetic ensures that the edits of different
attributes are commutative.
To overcome this dilemma, this study proposes deep

5957

