This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient-based Uncertainty Attribution for Explainable Bayesian Deep
Learning
Hanjing Wang
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Dhiraj Joshi
IBM Research

Shiqiang Wang
IBM Research

wangh36@rpi.edu

djoshi@us.ibm.com

wangshiq@us.ibm.com

Qiang Ji
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
jiq@rpi.edu

Abstract
Predictions made by deep learning models are prone
to data perturbations, adversarial attacks, and out-ofdistribution inputs. To build a trusted AI system, it is therefore critical to accurately quantify the prediction uncertainties. While current efforts focus on improving uncertainty
quantification accuracy and efficiency, there is a need to
identify uncertainty sources and take actions to mitigate
their effects on predictions. Therefore, we propose to develop explainable and actionable Bayesian deep learning
methods to not only perform accurate uncertainty quantification but also explain the uncertainties, identify their
sources, and propose strategies to mitigate the uncertainty
impacts. Specifically, we introduce a gradient-based uncertainty attribution method to identify the most problematic
regions of the input that contribute to the prediction uncertainty. Compared to existing methods, the proposed UABackprop has competitive accuracy, relaxed assumptions,
and high efficiency. Moreover, we propose an uncertainty
mitigation strategy that leverages the attribution results as
attention to further improve the model performance. Both
qualitative and quantitative evaluations are conducted to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods.

1. Introduction
Despite significant progress in many fields, conventional
deep learning models cannot effectively quantify their prediction uncertainties, resulting in overconfidence in unknown areas and the inability to detect attacks caused by
data perturbations and out-of-distribution inputs. Left unaddressed, this may cause disastrous consequences for safetycritical applications, and lead to untrustworthy AI models.
The predictive uncertainty can be divided into epistemic
uncertainty and aleatoric uncertainty [16]. Epistemic un-

certainty reflects the model’s lack of knowledge about the
input. High epistemic uncertainty arises in regions, where
there are few or no observations. Aleatoric uncertainty measures the inherent stochasticity in the data. Inputs with high
noise are expected to have high aleatoric uncertainty. Conventional deep learning models, such as deterministic classification models that output softmax probabilities, can only
estimate the aleatoric uncertainty.
Bayesian deep learning (BDL) offers a principled framework for estimating both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties. Unlike the traditional point-estimated models, BDL
constructs the posterior distribution of model parameters.
By sampling predictions from various models derived from
the parameter posterior, BDL avoids overfitting and allows for systematic quantification of predictive uncertainties. However, current BDL methods primarily concentrate
on enhancing the accuracy and efficiency of uncertainty
quantification, while failing to explicate the precise locations of the input data that cause predictive uncertainties and
take suitable measures to reduce the effects of uncertainties
on model predictions.
Uncertainty attribution (UA) aims to generate an uncertainty map of the input data to identify the most problematic regions that contribute to the prediction uncertainty. It
evaluates the contribution of each pixel to the uncertainty,
thereby increasing the transparency and interpretability of
BDL models. Previous attribution methods are mainly developed for classification attribution (CA) with deterministic neural networks (NNs) to find the contribution of image pixels to the classification score. Unlike UA, directly
leveraging the gradient-based CA methods for detecting
problematic regions is unreliable. While CA explains the
model’s classification process, assuming its predictions are
confident, UA intends to identify the sources of input imperfections that contribute to the high predictive uncertainties. Moreover, CA methods are often class-discriminative

12044

