This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangling Writer and Character Styles for Handwriting Generation
Gang Dai1 ,* Yifan Zhang2∗ , Qingfeng Wang1 , Qing Du1 , Zhuliang Yu1 ,
Zhuoman Liu3 , Shuangping Huang1,4†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 National University of Singapore,
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 4 Pazhou Laboratory
eedaigang@mail.scut.edu.cn, yifan.zhang@u.nus.edu, eehsp@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Training machines to synthesize diverse handwritings
is an intriguing task. Recently, RNN-based methods have
been proposed to generate stylized online Chinese characters. However, these methods mainly focus on capturing
a person’s overall writing style, neglecting subtle style inconsistencies between characters written by the same person. For example, while a person’s handwriting typically
exhibits general uniformity (e.g., glyph slant and aspect
ratios), there are still small style variations in finer details (e.g., stroke length and curvature) of characters. In
light of this, we propose to disentangle the style representations at both writer and character levels from individual handwritings to synthesize realistic stylized online
handwritten characters. Specifically, we present the styledisentangled Transformer (SDT), which employs two complementary contrastive objectives to extract the style commonalities of reference samples and capture the detailed
style patterns of each sample, respectively. Extensive experiments on various language scripts demonstrate the effectiveness of SDT. Notably, our empirical findings reveal that
the two learned style representations provide information
at different frequency magnitudes, underscoring the importance of separate style extraction. Our source code is public
at: https://github.com/dailenson/SDT.

1. Introduction
As the oldest writing system, Chinese characters are
widely used across Asian countries. When compared
with Latin scripts, Chinese characters encompass an exceptionally vast lexicon (87,887 characters in GB18030-2022
charset) and have intricate structures composed of multiple
strokes. Recently, the intriguing task of generating Chinese
characters has garnered significant attention [10, 23, 32]. A
promising approach to synthesising realistic handwritings is
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of two online handwritten Chinese characters, with each color representing a stroke. The increasing numbers indicate the writing order from the start to the end.

to progressively generate online characters (i.e., the handwriting trajectory in a sequential format) [40]. As shown in
Figure 1, online characters convey richer information (e.g.,
the order of writing) and thus pave the way for various applications, including writing robots [39].
Our goal is to automatically generate online Chinese
handwritings that not only correspond to specific textual
content, but also emulate the calligraphic style of a given
exemplar writer (e.g., glyph slant, shape, stroke length, and
curvature). This task thus holds potential for a wide range of
applications, such as font design and calligraphy education.
A popular solution [18] is to extract style information from
the provided stylized samples and merge it with the content
reference. DeepImitator [44] concatenates the style vector
obtained from a CNN encoder with a character embedding,
which is then fed into the RNN decoder to generate stylized online characters. WriteLikeYou [30] adopts the largemargin softmax loss [36] to promote discriminative learning
of style features. However, these methods mainly focus on
the overall writing style, thus overlooking the detailed style
inconsistencies (e.g., the highlighted regions in Figure 2)
between characters produced by the same writer.
The observations mentioned above inspire us to disentangle style representations at the writer and character levels
from the stylized handwritings. However, accurately cap-

5977

