This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local 3D Editing via 3D Distillation of CLIP Knowledge
Junha Hyung1,2†
1

Sungwon Hwang1

KAIST AI

2

Daejin Kim3

Kakao Enterprise Corp.

Hyunji Lee1
3

Jaegul Choo1

Scatter Lab

{sharpeeee, shwang.14, alee6868, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr, daejin@scatterlab.co.kr

Figure 1. Our local editing NeRF (LENeRF) enables users to edit specific areas of 3D assets based on textual prompts by estimating a 3D
mask for tri-plane features. For instance, given an original 3D radiance field (a), users can define their desired area to edit (underlined text
prompt, e.g., ”eyes”). LENeRF then generates a 3D mask, which is employed for feature fusion, allowing for targeted modifications that
adhere to the editing prompt (e.g., ”blue eyes”) (b). Additionally, as illustrated in (c), the 3D mask itself can be rendered and visualized for
further analysis.

Abstract
3D content manipulation is an important computer vision task with many real-world applications (e.g., product design, cartoon generation, and 3D Avatar editing). Recently proposed 3D GANs can generate diverse
photorealistic 3D-aware contents using Neural Radiance
fields (NeRF). However, manipulation of NeRF still remains
a challenging problem since the visual quality tends to
degrade after manipulation and suboptimal control handles such as 2D semantic maps are used for manipulations. While text-guided manipulations have shown potential in 3D editing, such approaches often lack locality. To overcome these problems, we propose Local Editing NeRF (LENeRF), which only requires text inputs for
fine-grained and localized manipulation. Specifically, we
present three add-on modules of LENeRF, the Latent Resid-

ual Mapper, the Attention Field Network, and the Deformation Network, which are jointly used for local manipulations
of 3D features by estimating a 3D attention field. The 3D
attention field is learned in an unsupervised way, by distilling the zero-shot mask generation capability of CLIP to the
3D space with multi-view guidance. We conduct diverse experiments and thorough evaluations both quantitatively and
qualitatively.1

1. Introduction
3D content editing has many real-world applications including but not limited to product design, cartoon generation, and 3D Avatar editing. However, it often necessitates the use of sophisticated tools with complex interfaces,
which can be difficult for novice users and labor-intensive
even for seasoned professionals. While explicit 3D repre-

† This work was done during an internship at Kakao Enterprise Corp.

1 We will make our code publicly available.

12674

