This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UMat: Uncertainty-Aware Single Image High Resolution Material Capture
Carlos Rodriguez-Pardo1,2 Henar Dominguez-Elvira1,2 David Pascual-Hernandez1 Elena Garces1,2
1

SEDDI, Spain

2

Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Spain

GT

1. Introduction
Virtual design, online marketplaces, product lifecycle
workflows, AR/VR, videogames, . . . , all require lifelike
digital representations of real-world materials (i.e., digital
twins). Acquiring these digital copies is typically a cumbersome and slow process that requires expensive machines
and several manual steps, creating roadblocks for scalability, repeatability, and consistency. Among the many industries requiring digital twins of materials, the fashion industry is in a critical position; facing the demand to digitize
hundreds of samples of textiles in short periods, which cannot be achieved with the current technology.

Deterministic

High Uncertainty
𝜎𝐵𝑅𝐷𝐹
Input

We propose a learning-based method to recover normals,
specularity, and roughness from a single diffuse image of a
material, using microgeometry appearance as our primary
cue. Previous methods that work on single images tend to
produce over-smooth outputs with artifacts, operate at limited resolution, or train one model per class with little room
for generalization. In contrast, in this work, we propose a
novel capture approach that leverages a generative network
with attention and a U-Net discriminator, which shows outstanding performance integrating global information at reduced computational complexity. We showcase the performance of our method with a real dataset of digitized textile
materials and show that a commodity flatbed scanner can
produce the type of diffuse illumination required as input to
our method. Additionally, because the problem might be illposed –more than a single diffuse image might be needed to
disambiguate the specular reflection– or because the training dataset is not representative enough of the real distribution, we propose a novel framework to quantify the model’s
confidence about its prediction at test time. Our method
is the first one to deal with the problem of modeling uncertainty in material digitization, increasing the trustworthiness of the process and enabling more intelligent strategies for dataset creation, as we demonstrate with an active
learning experiment.

Deviation to GT Radiance

Low Uncertainty
𝜎𝐵𝑅𝐷𝐹
Input

Abstract

Figure 1. Our method digitizes a material taking as input a single scanned image. Further, it returns a pixel-wise metric of uncertainty σBRDF , computed at test time through probabilistic sampling, proven useful for active learning. In the plot we compare
the average deviations of the radiance of different renders in the
blue crop w.r.t the ground truth (GT) of: 1) the distribution of the
probabilistic samples of a model trained with 100% of the data;
2) the deterministic output of that model; 3) the output of a model
trained using 40% of the training dataset, sampled by active learning guided by σBRDF and; 4) a model trained using 40% of the
training dataset, randomly sampled. The material at the bottom,
for which the model shows a higher uncertainty, generates more
varied renders and differs most from the ground truth.

In this context, casual capture systems for optical digitization provide a promising path for scalability. These systems leverage handheld devices (such as smartphones), one
or more different illuminations, and learning-based priors to
estimate the material’s diffuse and specular reflection lobes.
However, existing approaches present several drawbacks
that make them unsuitable for practical digitization workflows. Generative solutions [18, 63] typically produce unrealistic artifacts. Despite recent attempts to improve tileability and controllability [73], these solutions are slow to train
and to evaluate (requiring online optimization iterations),
are limited in resolution, and present challenges for generalization (requiring one model per material class). Further,
the fact that these methods build on perceptual losses –not
pixel losses– to compare the input photo with the generated
material entails extra difficulties when it comes to guaranteeing the repeatability and consistency required for build-

5764

