This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Generalization with Domain Convex Game
Fangrui Lv1 Jian Liang Shuang Li1,∗ Jinming Zhang1 Di Liu
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, China

{fangruilv,shuangli,jinming-zhang}@bit.edu.cn

Domain generalization (DG) tends to alleviate the poor
generalization capability of deep neural networks by learning model with multiple source domains. A classical solution
to DG is domain augmentation, the common belief of which
is that diversifying source domains will be conducive to the
out-of-distribution generalization. However, these claims
are understood intuitively, rather than mathematically. Our
explorations empirically reveal that the correlation between
model generalization and the diversity of domains may be not
strictly positive, which limits the effectiveness of domain augmentation. This work therefore aim to guarantee and further
enhance the validity of this strand. To this end, we propose a
new perspective on DG that recasts it as a convex game between domains. We first encourage each diversified domain
to enhance model generalization by elaborately designing a
regularization term based on supermodularity. Meanwhile, a
sample filter is constructed to eliminate low-quality samples,
thereby avoiding the impact of potentially harmful information. Our framework presents a new avenue for the formal
analysis of DG, heuristic analysis and extensive experiments
demonstrate the rationality and effectiveness. 1

1. Introduction
Owning extraordinary representation learning ability,
deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success on a variety of tasks when the training and test data
are drawn from the same distribution [9, 11, 16]. Whereas
for out-of-distribution data, DNNs have demonstrated poor
generalization capability since the i.i.d. assumption is violated, which is common in real-world conditions [27, 28, 42].
To tackle this issue, domain generalization (DG) has become
a propulsion technology, aiming to learn a robust model from
multiple source domains so that can generalize well to any
unseen target domains with different statistics [2, 19, 22, 30].
Among extensive solutions to improve generalization, domain augmentation [39, 46, 48, 56] has been a classical and
1

∗ Corresponding author.
Code is available at "https://github.com/BIT-DA/DCG".

Accuracy (%)

Abstract

{liangjianzb12,liudi010}@gmail.com

82

84

80

80

78
Ideal (a)
Ideal (b)
BASELINE
FACT

76

Accuracy (%)

1

76
Ideal (a)
Ideal (b)
BASELINE
FACT

72

74
N N N N N N N
N
12.5%25.0%37.5%50.0%62.5%75.0%87.5%100.0%

68
N N N N N N N
N
12.5%25.0%37.5%50.0%62.5%75.0%87.5%100.0%

(a) Cartoon.

(b) Sketch.

Number of Augmented Domains

Number of Augmented Domains

Figure 1. The relation between model generalization and domain
diversity with Cartoon and Sketch on PACS dataset as the unseen target domain, respectively. N is the maximum number of
augmented domains. Note that the solid lines denote the actual results of a BASELINE method that combines DeepAll with Fourier
augmentation strategy and a SOTA domain augmentation method
FACT, while the dash lines represent the ideal relation in this work.

prevalent strategy, which focuses on exposing the model with
more diverse domains via some augmentation techniques.
A common belief is that generalizable models would become easier to learn when the training distributions become
more diverse, which has been also emphasized by a recent
work [47]. Notwithstanding the promising results shown
by this strand of approaches, the claims above are vague
and lack of theoretical justification, formal analyses of the
relation between domain diversity and model generalization
are sparse. Further, the transfer of knowledge may even hurt
the performance on target domains in some cases, which is
referred to as negative transfer [33, 41]. Thus the relation of
domain diversity and model generalization remains unclear.
In light of these points, we begin by considering the question:
The stronger the domain diversity, will it certainly help
to improve the model generalization capability?
To explore this issue, we first quantify domain diversity
as the number of augmented domains. Then we conduct a
brief experiment using Fourier augmentation strategy [48] as
a classical and representative instance. The results presented
in Fig 1 show that with the increase of domain diversity, the
model generalization (measured by the accuracy on unseen
target domain) may not necessarily increase, but sometimes
decreases instead, as the solid lines show. On the one hand,

24315

