This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneComposer: Any-Level Semantic Image Synthesis
Yu Zeng1 , Zhe Lin2 , Jianming Zhang2 , Qing Liu2 , John Collomosse2 , Jason Kuen2 , Vishal M. Patel1
{yzeng22,vpatel36}@jhu.edu, {zlin,jianmzha,qingl,collomos,kuen}@adobe.com
1

2

Johns Hopkins University

(a)

(b)

(c)

Adobe Research

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Examples of image synthesis from any-level semantic layouts. (a) The coarsest layout, i.e. at the 0-th precision level, is equivalent
to a text input; (d) the finest layout, i.e. at the highest level, is close to an accurate segmentation map; (a)-(d) intermediate level layouts
(from coarse to fine), the shape control becomes tighter with increasing levels. (e) We can specify different precision levels for different
components, e.g. to include a 0-th level style indicator while the remaining regions are of higher levels.

Abstract
We propose a new framework for conditional image synthesis from semantic layouts of any precision levels, ranging
from pure text to a 2D semantic canvas with precise shapes.
More specifically, the input layout consists of one or more
semantic regions with free-form text descriptions and adjustable precision levels, which can be set based on the
desired controllability. The framework naturally reduces to
text-to-image (T2I) at the lowest level with no shape information, and it becomes segmentation-to-image (S2I) at the highest level. By supporting the levels in-between, our framework
is flexible in assisting users of different drawing expertise
and at different stages of their creative workflow. We introduce several novel techniques to address the challenges coming with this new setup, including a pipeline for collecting
training data; a precision-encoded mask pyramid and a text
feature map representation to jointly encode precision level,
semantics, and composition information; and a multi-scale
guided diffusion model to synthesize images. To evaluate

the proposed method, we collect a test dataset containing
user-drawn layouts with diverse scenes and styles. Experimental results show that the proposed method can generate
high-quality images following the layout at given precision,
and compares favorably against existing methods. Project
page https://zengxianyu.github.io/scenec/

1. Introduction
Recently, deep generative models such as StyleGAN
[24, 25] and diffusion models [9, 19, 49] have made a significant breakthrough in generating high-quality images. Image generation and editing technologies enabled by these
models have become highly appealing to artists and designers by helping their creative workflows. To make image
generation more controllable, researchers have put a lot
of effort into conditional image synthesis and introduced
models using various types and levels of semantic input
such as object categories, text prompts, and segmentation
1
22468

