This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual-Language Prompt Tuning with Knowledge-guided Context Optimization
Hantao Yao1 ,Rui Zhang2 , Changsheng Xu1,3
1
2

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, CAS

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS; 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences(CAS),
{hantao.yao,csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn;zhangrui@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Prompt tuning is an effective way to adapt the pretrained
visual-language model (VLM) to the downstream task using task-related textual tokens. Representative CoOp-based
work combines the learnable textual tokens with the class
tokens to obtain specific textual knowledge. However, the
specific textual knowledge is worse generalization to the
unseen classes because it forgets the essential general textual knowledge having a strong generalization ability. To
tackle this issue, we introduce a novel Knowledge-guided
Context Optimization (KgCoOp) to enhance the generalization ability of the learnable prompt for unseen classes. The
key insight of KgCoOp is that the forgetting about essential knowledge can be alleviated by reducing the discrepancy between the learnable prompt and the hand-crafted
prompt. Especially, KgCoOp minimizes the discrepancy between the textual embeddings generated by learned prompts
and the hand-crafted prompts. Finally, adding the KgCoOp upon the contrastive loss can make a discriminative
prompt for both seen and unseen tasks. Extensive evaluation of several benchmarks demonstrates that the proposed Knowledge-guided Context Optimization is an efficient method for prompt tuning, i.e., achieves better performance with less training time. code.

1. Introduction
With the help of the large scale of the image-text association pairs, the trained visual-language model (VLM)
contains essential general knowledge, which has a better generalization ability for the other tasks. Recently,
many visual-language models have been proposed, such
as Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [29],
Flamingo [1], ALIGN [18], etc. Although VLM is an effective model for extracting the visual and text description,
training VLM needs a large scale of high-quality datasets.
However, collecting a large amount of data for training
a task-related model in real visual-language tasks is difficult. To address the above problem, the prompt tun-

Table 1. Compared to existing methods, the proposed KgCoOp
is an efficient method, obtaining a higher performance with less
training time.
Base

Accuracy
New

H

hand-crafted

69.34

74.22

71.70

-

textual
textual
textual+visual
textual

82.63
82.48
80.47
80.73

67.99
70.75
71.69
73.6

74.60
76.16
75.83
77.0

6ms/image
22ms/image
160ms/image
6ms/image

Methods

Prompts

CLIP
CoOp
ProGrad
CoCoOp
KgCoOp

Training-time

ing [4] [10] [19] [22] [28] [30] [33] [38] has been proposed
to adapt the pretrained VLM to downstream tasks, achieving a fantastic performance on various few-shot or zero-shot
visual recognization tasks.
The prompt tuning1 usually applies task-related textual
tokens to embed task-specific textual knowledge for prediction. The hand-crafted template “a photo of a [Class]”
in CLIP [29] is used to model the textual-based class embedding for zero-shot prediction. By defining the knowledge captured by the fixed (hand-crafted) prompts as the
general textual knowledge2 , it has a high generalization
capability on unseen tasks. However, the general textual
knowledge is less able to describe the downstream tasks
due to not consider the specific knowledge of each task.
To obtain discriminative task-specific knowledge, Context
Optimization(CoOp) [41], Conditional Context Optimization(CoCoOp) [40], and ProGrad [42] replace the handcrafted prompts with a set of learnable prompts inferred
by the labeled few-shot samples. Formally, the discriminative knowledge generated by the learned prompts is defined
as the specific textual knowledge. However, CoOp-based
methods have a worse generalization to the unseen classes
with the same task, e.g., obtaining a worse performance than
CLIP for the unseen classes (New), shown in Table 1.
As the specific textual knowledge is inferred from the
1 In this work, we only consider the textual prompt tuning and do not
involve the visual prompt tuning.
2 Inspired from [17], ‘knowledge’in this work denotes the information
contained in the trained model.

6757

