This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterative Geometry Encoding Volume for Stereo Matching
Gangwei Xu

Xianqi Wang

Xiaohuan Ding

Xin Yang†

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{gwxu, xianqiw, dingxiaohuan, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recurrent All-Pairs Field Transforms (RAFT) has shown
great potentials in matching tasks. However, all-pairs correlations lack non-local geometry knowledge and have difficulties tackling local ambiguities in ill-posed regions. In
this paper, we propose Iterative Geometry Encoding Volume
(IGEV-Stereo), a new deep network architecture for stereo
matching. The proposed IGEV-Stereo builds a combined
geometry encoding volume that encodes geometry and context information as well as local matching details, and iteratively indexes it to update the disparity map. To speed up the
convergence, we exploit GEV to regress an accurate starting
point for ConvGRUs iterations. Our IGEV-Stereo ranks 1st
on KITTI 2015 and 2012 (Reflective) among all published
methods and is the fastest among the top 10 methods. In
addition, IGEV-Stereo has strong cross-dataset generalization as well as high inference efficiency. We also extend our
IGEV to multi-view stereo (MVS), i.e. IGEV-MVS, which
achieves competitive accuracy on DTU benchmark. Code
is available at https://github.com/gangweiX/IGEV.

1. Introduction
Inferring 3D scene geometry from captured images is
a fundamental task in computer vision and graphics with
applications ranging from 3D reconstruction, robotics and
autonomous driving. Stereo matching which aims to reconstruct dense 3D representations from two images with
calibrated cameras is a key technique for reconstructing 3D
scene geometry.
Many learning-based stereo methods [5, 17, 24, 47, 48]
have been proposed in the literature. The popular representative is PSMNet [5] which apply a 3D convolutional
encoder-decoder to aggregate and regularize a 4D cost volume and then use sof t argmin to regress the disparity map
from the regularized cost volume. Such 4D cost volume
filtering-based methods can effectively explore stereo geometry information and achieve impressive performance on
† Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Comparison with state-of-the-art stereo methods
[9, 21, 25, 43, 47, 59] on KITTI 2012 and 2015 leaderboards. (b)
Performance comparison with RAFT-Stereo [24] on Scene Flow
test set as the number of iterations changes.

several benchmarks. However, it usually demands a large
amount of 3D convolutions for cost aggregation and regularization, and in turn yield high computational and memory
costs. As a result, it can hardly be applied to high-resolution
images and/or large-scale scenes.
Recently, iterative optimization-based methods [21, 24,
30, 39, 43] have exhibited attractive performance on both
high resolution images and standard benchmarks. Different
from existing methods, iterative methods bypass the computationally expensive cost aggregation operations and progressively update the disparity map by repeatedly fetching
information from a high-resolution 4D cost volume. Such
solution enables the direct usage of high-resolution cost volume and hence is applicable to high-resolution images. For
instance, RAFT-Stereo [24] exploits a multi-level Convolutional Gated Recurrent Units (ConvGRUs) [10] to recurrently update the disparity field using local cost values retrieved from all-pairs correlations (APC).
However, without cost aggregation the original cost volume lacks non-local geometry and context information (see
Fig. 2 (b)). As a result, existing iterative methods have
difficulties tackling local ambiguities in ill-posed regions,
such as occlusions, texture-less regions and repetitive structures. Even though, the ConvGRU-based updater can improve the predicted disparities by incorporating context and
geometry information from context features and hidden lay-

21919

