This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I MAGE B IND: One Embedding Space To Bind Them All
Rohit Girdhar∗
Alaaeldin El-Nouby∗
Zhuang Liu
Mannat Singh
Kalyan Vasudev Alwala
Armand Joulin
Ishan Misra∗
FAIR, Meta AI
https://facebookresearch.github.io/ImageBind

1) Cross-Modal Retrieval
Depth

Images & Videos

Audio

Text
“A fire crackles while a pan of food is frying on
the fire.”
“Fire is crackling then wind starts blowing.”
“Firewood crackles then music...”

Crackle of a Fire

“A baby is crying while a toddler is laughing.”
“A baby is laughing while an adult is laughing.”
“A baby laughs and something…”

Baby Cooing

2) Embedding-Space Arithmetic

3) Audio to Image Generation

Dog

Engine

Fire

Rain

Waves

Figure 1. I MAGE B IND’s joint embedding space enables novel multimodal capabilities. By aligning six modalities’ embedding into a
common space, I MAGE B IND enables: 1) Cross-Modal Retrieval, which shows emergent alignment of modalities such as audio, depth or
text, that aren’t observed together. 2) Adding embeddings from different modalities naturally composes their semantics. And 3) Audio-toImage generation, by using our audio embeddings with a pre-trained DALLE-2 [60] decoder designed to work with CLIP text embeddings.

Abstract
We present I MAGE B IND, an approach to learn a joint
embedding across six different modalities - images, text, audio, depth, thermal, and IMU data. We show that all combinations of paired data are not necessary to train such a joint
embedding, and only image-paired data is sufficient to bind
the modalities together. I MAGE B IND can leverage recent
large scale vision-language models, and extends their zeroshot capabilities to new modalities just by using their natural pairing with images. It enables novel emergent applications ‘out-of-the-box’ including cross-modal retrieval, composing modalities with arithmetic, cross-modal detection
and generation. The emergent capabilities improve with the
strength of the image encoder and we set a new state-of-theart on emergent zero-shot recognition tasks across modalities, outperforming specialist supervised models. Finally,
we show strong few-shot recognition results outperforming
prior work, and that I MAGE B IND serves as a new way to
evaluate vision models for visual and non-visual tasks.
∗ Equal technical contribution.

1. Introduction
A single image can bind together many experiences – an
image of a beach can remind us of the sound of waves, the
texture of the sand, a breeze, or even inspire a poem. This
‘binding’ property of images offers many sources of supervision to learn visual features, by aligning them with any
of the sensory experiences associated with images. Ideally,
for a single joint embedding space, visual features should
be learned by aligning to all of these sensors. However, this
requires acquiring all types and combinations of paired data
with the same set of images, which is infeasible.
Recently, many methods learn image features aligned
with text [1, 30, 45, 59, 63, 80, 81], audio [3, 4, 49, 54,
55, 68] etc. These methods use a single pair of modalities or, at best, a few visual modalities. However, the final embeddings are limited to the pairs of modalities used
for training. Thus, video-audio embeddings cannot directly
be used for image-text tasks and vice versa. A major obstacle in learning a true joint embedding is the absence of
large quantities of multimodal data where all modalities are
present together.

15180

