This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BASiS: Batch Aligned Spectral Embedding Space
Or Streicher Ido Cohen Guy Gilboa
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
orr.shtr@gmail.com

ido.coh@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph is a highly generic and diverse representation,
suitable for almost any data processing problem. Spectral graph theory has been shown to provide powerful algorithms, backed by solid linear algebra theory. It thus can
be extremely instrumental to design deep network building blocks with spectral graph characteristics. For instance, such a network allows the design of optimal graphs
for certain tasks or obtaining a canonical orthogonal lowdimensional embedding of the data. Recent attempts to
solve this problem were based on minimizing Rayleighquotient type losses. We propose a different approach of
directly learning the graph’s eigensapce. A severe problem of the direct approach, applied in batch-learning, is the
inconsistent mapping of features to eigenspace coordinates
in different batches. We analyze the degrees of freedom of
learning this task using batches and propose a stable alignment mechanism that can work both with batch changes and
with graph-metric changes. We show that our learnt spectral embedding is better in terms of NMI, ACC, Grassman
distnace, orthogonality and classification accuracy, compared to SOTA. In addition, the learning is more stable.

1. Introduction
Representing information by using graphs and analyzing their spectral properties has been shown to be an effective classical solution in a wide range of problems including
clustering [8, 21, 32], classification [13], segmentation [26],
dimensionality reduction [5, 10, 23] and more. In this setting, data is represented by nodes of a graph, which are embedded into the eigenspace of the graph-Laplacian, a canonical linear operator measuring local smoothness.
Incorporating analytic data structures and methods
within a deep learning framework has many advantages.
It yields better transparency and understanding of the network, allows the use of classical ideas, which were thoroughly investigated and can lead to the design of new architectures, grounded in solid theory. Spectral graph algo-

guy.gilboa@ee.technion.ac.il

rithms, however, are hard to incorporate directly in neuralnetworks since they require eigenvalue computations which
cannot be integrated in back-propagation training algorithms. Another major drawback of spectral graph tools is
their low scalability. It is not feasible to hold a large graph
containing millions of nodes and to compute its graphLaplacian eigenvectors. Moreover, updating the graph with
additional nodes is combersome and one usually resorts to
graph-interpolation techniques, referred to as Out Of Sample Extension (OOSE) methods.
An approach to solve the above problems using deep
neural networks (DNNs), firstly suggested in [24] and recently also in [9], is to train a network that approximates the
eigenspace by minimizing Rayleigh quotient type losses.
The core idea is that the Rayleigh quotient of a sum of n vectors is minimized by the n eigenvectors with the corresponding n smallest eigenvalues. As a result, given the features
of a data instance (node) as input, these networks generate
the respective coordinate in the spectral embedding space.
This space should be equivalent in some sense to the analytically calculated graph-Laplacian eigenvector space. A
common way to measure the equivalence of these spaces is
using the Grassman distance. Unfortunately, applying this
indirect approach does not guarantee convergence to the desired eigenspace and therefore the captured might not be
faithful.
An alternative approach, suggested in [18] for computing
the diffusion map embedding, is a direct supervised method.
The idea is to compute the embedding analytically, use it
as ground-truth and train the network to map features to
eigenspace coordinates in a supervised manner. In order to
compute the ground truth embedding, the authors used the
entire training set. This operation is very demanding computationally in terms of both memory and time and is not
scalable when the training set is very large.
Our proposed method is to learn directly the eigenspace
in batches. We treat each batch as sampling of the full graph
and learn the eigenvector values in a supervised manner.
A major problem of this kind of scheme is the inconsistency in the embedding coordinates. Thus, two instances

10396

