This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Camouflaged Instance Segmentation via Explicit De-camouflaging
Naisong Luo1 *, Yuwen Pan1∗ , Rui Sun1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2,3†, Zhiwei Xiong1,2 , Feng Wu1,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Deep Space Exploration Lab
{lns6, panyw, issunrui}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, zwxiong, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Camouflaged Instance Segmentation (CIS) aims at predicting the instance-level masks of camouflaged objects,
which are usually the animals in the wild adapting their appearance to match the surroundings. Previous instance segmentation methods perform poorly on this task as they are
easily disturbed by the deceptive camouflage. To address
these challenges, we propose a novel De-camouflaging Network (DCNet) including a pixel-level camouflage decoupling module and an instance-level camouflage suppression
module. The proposed DCNet enjoys several merits. First,
the pixel-level camouflage decoupling module can extract
camouflage characteristics based on the Fourier transformation. Then a difference attention mechanism is proposed
to eliminate the camouflage characteristics while reserving target object characteristics in the pixel feature. Second, the instance-level camouflage suppression module can
aggregate rich instance information from pixels by use of
instance prototypes. To mitigate the effect of background
noise during segmentation, we introduce some reliable reference points to build a more robust similarity measurement. With the aid of these two modules, our DCNet can effectively model de-camouflaging and achieve accurate segmentation for camouflaged instances. Extensive experimental results on two benchmarks demonstrate that our DCNet
performs favorably against state-of-the-art CIS methods,
e.g., with more than 5% performance gains on COD10K
and NC4K datasets in average precision.

1. Introduction
In the field of biology, camouflage is defined as a strategy
that animals use to adapt their body’s appearance (e.g., color
and pattern) to match their surroundings in order to achieve
concealing and avoid being hunted by predators [37]. Cam* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Fourier

Camouflage
Characteristics

Predict
De-camouflaging
Camouflaged Image

Difference Map

Instance Segmentation

(a) De-camouflaging Process
Similarity Distribution

Sim. = 0.8

Sim. = 0.9
Reference
Points

Prototype

(b) Pairwise Similarity

Prototype

(c) Reference Similarity (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) We propose to extract camouflage characteristics to model explicit de-camouflaging
for CIS. (b) Pairwise similarity between prototype and pixel is always erroneous. (c) The prototype-pixel correlation is based on
the prototype-reference and pixel-reference similarity distribution,
which is more accurate.

ouflaged Instance Segmentation (CIS) [22] aims at identifying the location and predicting instance-level masks of
camouflaged objects, which has attracted more and more
attention due to its widespread applications in medical image analysis [11, 44], search-and-rescue work [9] and recreational art [7], etc.
Despite the tremendous progress in instance segmentation [14, 40, 41], there are few efforts [22, 33] working
on Camouflaged Instance Segmentation, as CIS is a more
challenging task where most camouflaged instances lack
obvious contrast with the background, making general instance segmentation methods work poorly on this task. Recent CIS approaches [22, 33] are generally based on traditional instance segmentation models, either by naively fusing various general instance segmentation models [22] to
get better representations, or by directly using global in-

17918

