This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Histopathology Whole Slide Image Analysis with Heterogeneous Graph
Representation Learning
Tsai Hor Chan1,∗ , Fernando Julio Cendra1,2∗ , Lan Ma2 , Guosheng Yin1,3 , Lequan Yu1
1
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong
2
TCL Corporate Research Hong Kong
3
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London
{hchanth, fcendra}@connect.hku.hk, rubyma@tcl.com, guosheng.yin@imperial.ac.uk, lqyu@hku.hk

Abstract
Graph-based methods have been extensively applied to
whole slide histopathology image (WSI) analysis due to the
advantage of modeling the spatial relationships among different entities. However, most of the existing methods focus on modeling WSIs with homogeneous graphs (e.g., with
homogeneous node type). Despite their successes, these
works are incapable of mining the complex structural relations between biological entities (e.g., the diverse interaction among different cell types) in the WSI. We propose
a novel heterogeneous graph-based framework to leverage the inter-relationships among different types of nuclei for WSI analysis. Specifically, we formulate the WSI
as a heterogeneous graph with “nucleus-type” attribute to
each node and a semantic similarity attribute to each edge.
We then present a new heterogeneous-graph edge attribute
transformer (HEAT) to take advantage of the edge and
node heterogeneity during massage aggregating. Further,
we design a new pseudo-label-based semantic-consistent
pooling mechanism to obtain graph-level features, which
can mitigate the over-parameterization issue of conventional cluster-based pooling. Additionally, observing the
limitations of existing association-based localization methods, we propose a causal-driven approach attributing the
contribution of each node to improve the interpretability
of our framework. Extensive experiments on three public TCGA benchmark datasets demonstrate that our framework outperforms the state-of-the-art methods with considerable margins on various tasks. Our codes are available
at https://github.com/HKU-MedAI/WSI-HGNN.

1. Introduction
Histopathology slides provide rich information on diagnosis and treatment planning for many cancer diseases. The
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Left: Input WSI. Middle: A WSI with selected patches
and associated node types. (Black - no label; cyan - neoplastic;
red - inflammatory; blue - connective; yellow - dead; green - nonneoplastic epithelial). Right: Constructed heterogeneous graph
with different types of nodes and edge attributes (Illustrative).

recent technological advancements in tissue digital scanners
facilitate the development of whole slide histopathology image (WSI) analysis. However, traversing through the WSI
with diverse magnifications is time-consuming and tedious
for pathologists due to the large-scale nature of the WSI
(e.g., its typical size is 60,000 × 60,000 pixels). Hence deep
learning techniques play an important role as they introduce
accurate and automated analysis of WSIs, which can significantly relieve the workload of pathologists.
Since it is difficult to fit the complete WSI into the memory, most of the works adopt multiple instance learning
(MIL) to divide the WSI into instances and then aggregate them for WSI analysis. However, these methods operate on bags of instances that do not emphasize the interrelationships between these instances. Recently, the emergence of graph neural networks (GNNs) has made large
progress in representing the spatial relationships between
instances. As a result, there are many attempts to represent
the WSIs as graphs of instances. Figure 1 presents an example of a graph constructed from WSI. Unlike convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) that aggregate features based on
locality in the Euclidean space, GNNs focus on locality on
graph topology, which offers more flexibility in analyzing
the deep connections between features in the image data be-

15661

