This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GCFAgg: Global and Cross-view Feature Aggregation for Multi-view Clustering
Weiqing Yan1,5 , Yuanyang Zhang1 , Chenlei Lv2 , Chang Tang3 ,* Guanghui Yue4 , Liang Liao5 , Weisi Lin5
1
2

School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, China

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
3

4

School of Computer, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China

School of Biomedical Engineering, Health Science Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
5

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore.

Abstract
Multi-view clustering can partition data samples into
their categories by learning a consensus representation in
unsupervised way and has received more and more attention in recent years. However, most existing deep clustering
methods learn consensus representation or view-specific
representations from multiple views via view-wise aggregation way, where they ignore structure relationship of all
samples. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-view clustering network to address these problems, called Global
and Cross-view Feature Aggregation for Multi-View Clustering (GCFAggMVC). Specifically, the consensus data presentation from multiple views is obtained via cross-sample
and cross-view feature aggregation, which fully explores the
complementary of similar samples. Moreover, we align the
consensus representation and the view-specific representation by the structure-guided contrastive learning module,
which makes the view-specific representations from different samples with high structure relationship similar. The
proposed module is a flexible multi-view data representation module, which can be also embedded to the incomplete
multi-view data clustering task via plugging our module
into other frameworks. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed method achieves excellent performance in both
complete multi-view data clustering tasks and incomplete
multi-view data clustering tasks.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of informatization, data is
often collected by various social media or views. For instance, a 3D object can be described from different angles;
a news event is reported from different sources; and an image can be characterized by different types of feature sets,
e.g., SIFT, LBP, and HoG. Such an instance object, which is
* Corresponding author(tangchang@cug.edu.cn)

described from multiple views, is referred to as multi-view
data. Multi-view clustering (MVC) [6], i.e., unsupervisedly
fusing the multi-view data to aid differentiate crucial grouping, is a fundamental task in the fields of data mining, pattern recognition, etc, but it remains a challenging problem.
Traditional multi-view clustering methods [7] include
matrix decomposition methods, graph-based multi-view
methods, and subspace-based multi-view methods. The
goal of these methods is to obtain a high-quality consensus
graph or subspace self-representation matrix by various regularization constraints in order to improve the performance
of clustering. However, most of them directly operate on
the original multiview features or specified kernel features,
which usually include noises and redundancy information
during the collection or kernel space selection processes,
moreover harmful to the clustering tasks.
Deep neural networks have demonstrated excellent performance in data feature representation for many vision
tasks. Deep clustering methods also draw more attention
to researchers [1, 9, 40, 50–52]. These methods efficiently
learn the feature presentation of each view using a viewspecific encoder network, and fuse these learnt representations from all views to obtain a consensus representation
that can be divided into different categories by a clustering module. To reduce the influence of view-private information on clustering, these methods designed different
alignment models. For example, some methods align the
representation distributions or label distributions from different views by KL divergence [14]. They might be hard
to distinguish between clusters, since a category from one
view might be aligned with a different category in another
view. Some methods align the representation from different
views by contrastive learning. Despite these models have
achieved significant improvement in MVC task, the following issues still exist: 1) Almost all existing deep MVC
methods (such as [38,40,49]) are based on view-wise fusion
models, such as weighted-sum fusion of all views or concatenating fusion of all views, which makes it difficult to

19863

