This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fully Self-Supervised Depth Estimation from Defocus Clue
Haozhe Si1,2 *† Bin Zhao1,3† Dong Wang1‡ Yunpeng Gao3
Mulin Chen1,3
Zhigang Wang1
Xuelong Li1,3‡
1

2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University

haozhes3@illinois.edu, {zhaobin, wangdong}@pjlab.org.cn, li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Depth-from-defocus (DFD), modeling the relationship
between depth and defocus pattern in images, has demonstrated promising performance in depth estimation. Recently, several self-supervised works try to overcome the
difficulties in acquiring accurate depth ground-truth. However, they depend on the all-in-focus (AIF) images, which
cannot be captured in real-world scenarios. Such limitation discourages the applications of DFD methods. To
tackle this issue, we propose a completely self-supervised
framework that estimates depth purely from a sparse focal stack. We show that our framework circumvents the
needs for the depth and AIF image ground-truth, and receives superior predictions, thus closing the gap between
the theoretical success of DFD works and their applications in the real world. In particular, we propose (i) a
more realistic setting for DFD tasks, where no depth or
AIF image ground-truth is available; (ii) a novel selfsupervision framework that provides reliable predictions of
depth and AIF image under the challenging setting. The
proposed framework uses a neural model to predict the
depth and AIF image, and utilizes an optical model to validate and refine the prediction. We verify our framework
on three benchmark datasets with rendered focal stacks and
real focal stacks. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations
show that our method provides a strong baseline for selfsupervised DFD tasks. The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/Ehzoahis/DEReD.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental task in computer vision. Predicting depth from RGB images shows great po* The contributions by Haozhe Si have been conducted and completed during his internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) A sparse focal stack from the NYUv2 dataset [17].
(b) The ground-truth depth map and all-in-focus (AIF) image. (c)
The depth map and AIF image estimated by our self-supervised
framework from the sparse focal stack.

tential in applications like autonomous cars or robots. It
has also been used as a powerful pretext training task in
unsupervised downstream tasks including visual feature extraction [11, 20], semantic segmentation [2, 9], etc. However, collecting sufficiently diverse datasets with per-pixel
depth ground-truth for supervised learning is challenging.
To overcome this limitation, self-supervised depth estimation works exploit the consistency of 3D geometries within
stereo pairs [5, 6] or monocular videos [7, 10], and have
shown impressive results. Nevertheless collecting synchronized multi-view images or videos is resource-consuming.
Another clue for depth estimation is defocus. Defocus
blur is a measurable property of images that is associated
with the geometry of camera lens and the changes in depth.
Previous works [4, 22] prove that depth can be recovered
from a set of images with different focus distances, i.e., a focal stack, by observing their blurry amounts. With the help
of deep learning methods, supervised DFD works [15, 27]

9140

