This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Balancing Logit Variation for Long-tailed Semantic Segmentation
Yuchao Wang1†
Tianpeng Bao2

Jingjing Fei2 Haochen Wang3† Wei Li2
Liwei Wu2 Rui Zhao1,2‡ Yujun Shen4

1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 SenseTime Research
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 CUHK
ycw991216@163.com

shenyujun0302@gmail.com

wanghaochen2022@ia.ac.cn

{feijingjing1, liwei1, baotianpeng, wuliwei, zhaorui}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation usually suffers from a long-tail
data distribution. Due to the imbalanced number of samples
across categories, the features of those tail classes may get
squeezed into a narrow area in the feature space. Towards
a balanced feature distribution, we introduce category-wise
variation into the network predictions in the training phase
such that an instance is no longer projected to a feature
point, but a small region instead. Such a perturbation
is highly dependent on the category scale, which appears
as assigning smaller variation to head classes and larger
variation to tail classes. In this way, we manage to close
the gap between the feature areas of different categories,
resulting in a more balanced representation. It is noteworthy that the introduced variation is discarded at the
inference stage to facilitate a confident prediction. Although
with an embarrassingly simple implementation, our method
manifests itself in strong generalizability to various datasets
and task settings. Extensive experiments suggest that our
plug-in design lends itself well to a range of state-of-the-art
approaches and boosts the performance on top of them.1

1. Introduction
The success of deep models in semantic segmentation [12, 58, 71, 109] benefits from large-scale datasets.
However, popular datasets for segmentation, such as PASCAL VOC [24] and Cityscapes [18], usually follow a
long-tail distribution, where some categories may have far
fewer samples than others. Considering the particularity of
this task, which targets assigning labels to pixels instead
of images, it is quite difficult to balance the distribution
1 Code: https://github.com/grantword8/BLV.
† This work was done during the internship at SenseTime Research.
‡ Rui Zhao is also with Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University.

Category 1

Category 2

(a) w/o Logit Variation

Category 3

Category 4

Decision boundary

(b) w/ Balanced Logit Variation

Figure 1. Illustration of logit variation from the feature space,
where each point corresponds to an instance and different colors
stand for different categories. (a) Without logit variation, the
features of tail classes (e.g., the blue one) may get squeezed into
a narrow area. (b) After introducing logit variation, which is
controlled by the category scale (i.e., number of training samples
belonging to a particular category), we expand each feature point
to a feature region with random perturbation, resulting in a more
category-balanced feature distribution.

from the aspect of data collection. Taking the scenario
of autonomous driving as an example, a bike is typically
tied to a smaller image region (i.e., fewer pixels) than a
car, and trains appear more rarely than pedestrians in a
city. Therefore, learning a decent model from long tail data
distributions becomes critical.
A common practice to address such a challenge is to
make better use of the limited samples from tail classes. For
this purpose, previous attempts either balance the sample
quantity (e.g., oversample the tail classes when organizing
the training batch) [8, 28, 36, 46, 75], or balance the persample importance (e.g., assign the training penalties regarding tail classes with higher loss weights) [19,51,67,69].
Given existing advanced techniques, however, performance
degradation can still be observed in those tail categories.
This works provides a new perspective on improving
long-tailed semantic segmentation. Recall that, in modern
pipelines based on neural networks [12,14,58,92,108,110],
instances are projected to representative features before

19561

