This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing Through the Glass: Neural 3D Reconstruction of Object Inside a
Transparent Container
Jinguang Tong1,2 , Sundaram Muthu2 , Fahira Afzal Maken2 , Chuong Nguyen1,2 , Hongdong Li1
1
The Australian National University 2 Data61, CSIRO
{jinguang.tong, chuong.nguyen, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au
{sundaram.muthu, fahira.afzalmaken, chuong.nguyen}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
In this paper, we define a new problem of recovering
the 3D geometry of an object confined in a transparent enclosure. We also propose a novel method for solving this
challenging problem. Transparent enclosures pose challenges of multiple light reflections and refractions at the
interface between different propagation media e.g. air or
glass. These multiple reflections and refractions cause serious image distortions which invalidate the single viewpoint
assumption. Hence the 3D geometry of such objects cannot be reliably reconstructed using existing methods, such
as traditional structure from motion or modern neural reconstruction methods. We solve this problem by explicitly
modeling the scene as two distinct sub-spaces, inside and
outside the transparent enclosure. We use an existing neural reconstruction method (NeuS) that implicitly represents
the geometry and appearance of the inner subspace. In order to account for complex light interactions, we develop a
hybrid rendering strategy that combines volume rendering
with ray tracing. We then recover the underlying geometry and appearance of the model by minimizing the difference between the real and rendered images. We evaluate
our method on both synthetic and real data. Experiment
results show that our method outperforms the state-of-theart (SOTA) methods. Codes and data will be available at
https://github.com/hirotong/ReNeuS

1. Introduction
Digitization of museum collections is an emerging topic
of increasing interest, especially with the advancement of
virtual reality and Metaverse technology. Many famous museums around the world have been building up their own
digital collections 1 2 for online exhibitions. Among these
collections, there is a kind of special but important collec1 https://collections.louvre.fr/en/
2 https://www.metmuseum.org/

(a) Reference Image

(b) COLMAP [26]

(c) NeuS [31]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. We propose a new research problem of recovering shape
of objects inside a transparent container as shown in (a) and solve it
by a physically-based neural reconstruction solution. Other methods (b) and (c) without consideration of the optical effects fail to
reconstruct, (d) our proposed ReNeuS can retrieve high-quality
mesh of the insect object.

tions such as insects [7, 23], human tissues [30], aquatic
creatures [6] and other fragile specimens that need to be
preserved inside some hard but transparent materials (e.g.
resin, glass) as shown in Fig. 1a. In order to digitize such
collections, we abstract a distinct research problem which is
seeing through the glassy outside and recovering the geometry of the object inside. To be specific, the task is to reconstruct the 3D geometry of an object of interest from multiple
2D views of the scene. The object of interest is usually con-

12555

