This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-view Adversarial Discriminator: Mine the Non-causal Factors for Object
Detection in Unseen Domains
Mingjun Xu, Lingyun Qin, Weijie Chen, Shiliang Pu, Lei Zhang*
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{mingjunxu, lingyunQin}@cqu.edu.cn, {chenweijie5, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com,
leizhang@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain shift degrades the performance of object detection models in practical applications. To alleviate the
influence of domain shift, plenty of previous work try to
decouple and learn the domain-invariant (common) features from source domains via domain adversarial learning (DAL). However, inspired by causal mechanisms, we
find that previous methods ignore the implicit insignificant
non-causal factors hidden in the common features. This is
mainly due to the single-view nature of DAL. In this work,
we present an idea to remove non-causal factors from common features by multi-view adversarial training on source
domains, because we observe that such insignificant noncausal factors may still be significant in other latent spaces
(views) due to the multi-mode structure of data. To summarize, we propose a Multi-view Adversarial Discriminator
(MAD) based domain generalization model, consisting of a
Spurious Correlations Generator (SCG) that increases the
diversity of source domain by random augmentation and a
Multi-View Domain Classifier (MVDC) that maps features
to multiple latent spaces, such that the non-causal factors
are removed and the domain-invariant features are purified.
Extensive experiments on six benchmarks show our MAD
obtains state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
The problem of how to adapt object detectors to unknown target domains in real world has drawn increasing
attention. Traditional object detection methods [11, 12, 25,
29, 30] are based on independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) hypothesis, which assume that the training and testing datasets have the same distribution. However, the target
distribution can hardly be estimated in real world and differs from the source domains, which is coined as domain
* Corresponding author (Lei Zhang)

Domain classifier
Sunny

Feature
Extractor

Resnet Domain
block classifier

Foggy

Figure 1. Illustration of the biased learning of conventional DAL.
The domain classifier easily encounters early stop and fails.

shift [38]. And the performance of object detection models
will sharply drop when facing the domain shift problem.
Domain adaptation (DA) [3, 6, 17, 34, 40, 44, 52] is proposed to deal with the domain shift problem, which enables
the model to be adapted to the target distribution by aligning
features extracted from the source and unlabeled target domains. However, the requirement of target domain datasets
still limits the applicability of DA methods in reality. Domain generalization (DG) [49] goes one step further, aiming
to train a model from single or multiple source domains that
can generalize to unknown target domains.
Although lots of DG methods have been proposed in the
image classification field, there are still some unresolved
problems. In our opinion, the common features extracted by
previous DG methods are still not pure enough. The main
reason is that through a single-view domain discriminator in
DAL, only the significant domain style information can be
removed, while some implicit and insignificant non-causal
factors in source domains may be absorbed by the feature
extractor as a part of common features. This has never been
noticed. This implies the multi-mode structure of data and
single-view domain discriminator cannot fully interpret the
data. There is a piece of evidence to support our claim.
To confirm our suspicions on the domain discriminator,
we designed a validation experiment. As is shown in Fig. 1,

8103

