This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Image Super Resolution from
Long-Tailed Distribution Learning Perspective
Yuanbiao Gou1 , Peng Hu1 , Jiancheng Lv1 , Hongyuan Zhu2 , Xi Peng1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
{gouyuanbiao, penghu.ml, hongyuanzhu.cn, pengx.gm}@gmail.com; lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing studies have empirically observed that the resolution of the low-frequency region is easier to enhance than
that of the high-frequency one. Although plentiful works
have been devoted to alleviating this problem, little understanding is given to explain it. In this paper, we try to give
a feasible answer from a machine learning perspective, i.e.,
the twin fitting problem caused by the long-tailed pixel distribution in natural images. With this explanation, we reformulate image super resolution (SR) as a long-tailed distribution learning problem and solve it by bridging the gaps
of the problem between in low- and high-level vision tasks.
As a result, we design a long-tailed distribution learning solution, that rebalances the gradients from the pixels in the
low- and high-frequency region, by introducing a static and
a learnable structure prior. The learned SR model achieves
better balance on the fitting of the low- and high-frequency
region so that the overall performance is improved. In the
experiments, we evaluate the solution on four CNN- and one
Transformer-based SR models w.r.t. six datasets and three
tasks, and experimental results demonstrate its superiority.

1. Introduction
Image super resolution aims to restore a high-resolution
(HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) one, which is an
important technique in image processing [13,26,27,52] and
computer vision [7,14,18,45,51]. In the past decades, plentiful SR methods have been proposed [19, 53], and applied
to a wide range of real-world applications [21, 47, 49, 54].
Among existing studies, the learning-based methods that
learn a mapping between LR and HR image spaces have
achieved the state-of-the-art performance [17,39,43,58,59].
Nonetheless, they have empirically observed that the highfrequency regions are harder to be super-resolved than the
∗ Corresponding author

~20% pixels with >0.1

~4% pixels with >0.1

~17% pixels with >0.1

Figure 1. The long-tailed pixel distribution in the natural image.
For given a HR image I HR , we take ×4 LR version I LR as a
showcase, and utilize Bicubic Interpolation (BI) and MSRResSR
SR
and IM
Net [25] (MSRRN) to super-resolve it, i.e., IBI
SRRN , respectively. The top row shows the absolute difference (AD) in the
luminance channel, and the bottom row shows the pixel number at
different AD intervals. From the top row, one could observe that i)
both BI and MSRRN achieve better results in the low- than highfrequency regions; ii) MSRRN performs significantly better than
BI in the high-frequency regions while slightly better in the low
ones. From the bottom row, one could see that iii) the pixel distribution w.r.t. the low- and high-frequency region is long-tailed,
i.e., the number of pixels in the low-frequency regions is far more
than that in the high-frequency ones. Clearly, such an imbalanced
pixel distribution necessarily results in the twin fitting problem,
i.e., overfitting majority pixels in the low-frequency region while
underfitting minority pixels in the high-frequency one.

low-frequency ones in the natural image. To alleviate that,
various SR methods have been proposed following the below two paradigms, i.e., developing generalized models
with larger capacities [31, 36] or specific models with highfrequency enhancements [37,48]. The former obtains better
results in both the high- and low-frequency regions via constantly enlarging the capacities, while the latter enhances
the high-frequency regions through specific auxiliary subnetworks, loss functions, training strategies, etc. Although
the promising results have been obtained, they involve the
following three limitations. First, the large capacity models
take a lot of time and computations in the training and infer-

14327

