This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Persistent Nature: A Generative Model of Unbounded 3D Worlds
Lucy Chai1 , Richard Tucker2 , Zhengqi Li2 , Phillip Isola1 , Noah Snavely23
1

1.
6.

2.

4.
5.

MIT

2

Google Research

3

Cornell Tech

1.

2.

3.

6.

5.

4.

w/o persistence
Li et al. [43]

3.

camera trajectory

persistent terrain representation

Figure 1. Our approach enables unconditional synthesis of unbounded 3D nature scenes with a persistent scene representation (left), using
a scene layout grid representing a large-scale terrain model (depicted above as the checkered ground plane). This representation enables
us to generate arbitrary camera trajectories, such as the six numbered views shown along a cyclic camera path (center). The persistence
inherent to our representation stands in contrast to prior auto-regressive methods [42] that do not preserve consistency under circular camera
trajectories (right); while the two images shown on the right are at the start and end of a cyclic path, the terrain depicted is completely
different. Our method is trained solely from unposed, single-view landscape photos.

Abstract
Despite increasingly realistic image quality, recent 3D
image generative models often operate on 3D volumes of
fixed extent with limited camera motions. We investigate
the task of unconditionally synthesizing unbounded nature
scenes, enabling arbitrarily large camera motion while maintaining a persistent 3D world model. Our scene representation consists of an extendable, planar scene layout grid,
which can be rendered from arbitrary camera poses via a
3D decoder and volume rendering, and a panoramic skydome. Based on this representation, we learn a generative
world model solely from single-view internet photos. Our
method enables simulating long flights through 3D landscapes, while maintaining global scene consistency—for
instance, returning to the starting point yields the same
view of the scene. Our approach enables scene extrapolation beyond the fixed bounds of current 3D generative models, while also supporting a persistent, cameraindependent world representation that stands in contrast
to auto-regressive 3D prediction models. Our project page:
https://chail.github.io/persistent-nature/.

1. Introduction
Generative image and video models have achieved remarkable levels of realism, but are still far from presenting a convincing, explorable world. Moving a virtual camera through these models—either in their latent
space [3, 23, 29, 72] or via explicit conditioning [35]—is not
like walking about in the real world. Movement is either very
limited (for example, in object-centric models [5]), or else
camera motion is unlimited but quickly reveals the lack of a
persistent world model. Auto-regressive 3D synthesis methods exemplify this lack of persistence [42, 45]; parts of the
scene may change unexpectedly as the camera moves, and
you may find that the scene is entirely different when returning to previous positions. The lack of spatial and temporal
consistency can give the output of these models a strange,
dream-like quality. In contrast, machines that can generate
unbounded, persistent 3D worlds could be used to develop
agents that plan within a world model [21], or to build virtual reality experiences that feel closer to the natural world,
rather than appearing as ephemeral hallucinations [42].
We therefore aim to develop a unconditional generative
model capable of generating unbounded 3D scenes with a

20863

