This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spring: A High-Resolution High-Detail Dataset and Benchmark
for Scene Flow, Optical Flow and Stereo
Lukas Mehl

Jenny Schmalfuss
Azin Jahedi
Yaroslava Nalivayko
Andrés Bruhn
Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems, University of Stuttgart
firstname.lastname@vis.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract
While recent methods for motion and stereo estimation
recover an unprecedented amount of details, such highly
detailed structures are neither adequately reflected in the
data of existing benchmarks nor their evaluation methodology. Hence, we introduce Spring – a large, high-resolution,
high-detail, computer-generated benchmark for scene flow,
optical flow, and stereo. Based on rendered scenes from
the open-source Blender movie “Spring”, it provides photorealistic HD datasets with state-of-the-art visual effects and
ground truth training data. Furthermore, we provide a website to upload, analyze and compare results. Using a novel
evaluation methodology based on a super-resolved UHD
ground truth, our Spring benchmark can assess the quality
of fine structures and provides further detailed performance
statistics on different image regions. Regarding the number of ground truth frames, Spring is 60× larger than the
only scene flow benchmark, KITTI 2015, and 15× larger
than the well-established MPI Sintel optical flow benchmark. Initial results for recent methods on our benchmark
show that estimating fine details is indeed challenging, as
their accuracy leaves significant room for improvement.
The Spring benchmark and the corresponding datasets are
available at http://spring-benchmark.org.

1. Introduction
The estimation of dense correspondences in terms of
scene flow, optical flow and disparity is the basis for numerous tasks in computer vision. Amongst others, such
tasks include action recognition, driver assistance, robot
navigation, visual odometry, medical image registration,
video processing, stereo reconstruction and structure-frommotion. Given this multitude of applications and their fundamental importance, datasets and benchmarks that allow
quantitative evaluations have ever since driven the improvement of dense matching methods. The introduction of suitable datasets and benchmarks did not only enable the com-

Rendered Image

1920×1080

Zoom 3.6×

3840×2160

Zoom 7.2×

3840×2160

Zoom 5.4×

Disparity

Optical Flow

Figure 1. Illustration of the high amount of details in the Spring
dataset. The dataset consists of HD images with super-resolved
UHD ground truth for disparities and optical flow.

parison and analysis of novel methods, but also triggered
the transition from classical discrete [12, 21, 47] and continuous [3, 4, 13, 15, 31] optimization frameworks to current learning based approaches relying on neural networks
[7, 8, 25, 42, 45, 46, 53]. The available benchmarks focus on
distinct aspects like automotive scenarios [10, 22, 30, 34],
differing complexity of motion [1, 2, 5] or (un)controlled illumination [35, 38]. However, none of these benchmarks
provides a combination of high-quality data and a large
number of frames, to assess a method’s quality in regions
with fine details and to simultaneously satisfy the training
needs of current neural networks. Furthermore, with KITTI
2015 [30], only a single benchmark that goes back to the

4981

