This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCADE: NeRFs from Space Carving with Ambiguity-Aware Depth Estimates
Mikaela Angelina Uy1,2 Ricardo Martin-Brualla2 Leonidas Guibas1,2 Ke Li2,3
1

Stanford University

2

3

Google

Simon Fraser University

Input Image

Vanilla
Ambiguity-Aware Depth Estimates

DDP

…

…

SCADE

Figure 1. SCADE Overview. We present SCADE, a novel technique for NeRF reconstruction under sparse, unconstrained views for
in-the-wild indoor scenes. We leverage on generalizable monocular depth priors and address to represent the inherent ambiguities of
monocular depth by exploiting our ambiguity-aware depth estimates (left). Our approach accounts for multimodality of both distributions
using our novel space carving loss that seeks to disambiguate and find the common mode to fuse the information between different views
(middle). SCADE enables better photometric reconstruction especially in highly ambiguous scenes, e.g. non-opaque surfaces (right).

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have enabled high fidelity
3D reconstruction from multiple 2D input views. However,
a well-known drawback of NeRFs is the less-than-ideal performance under a small number of views, due to insufficient
constraints enforced by volumetric rendering. To address this
issue, we introduce SCADE, a novel technique that improves
NeRF reconstruction quality on sparse, unconstrained input views for in-the-wild indoor scenes. To constrain NeRF
reconstruction, we leverage geometric priors in the form
of per-view depth estimates produced with state-of-the-art
monocular depth estimation models, which can generalize
across scenes. A key challenge is that monocular depth estimation is an ill-posed problem, with inherent ambiguities.
To handle this issue, we propose a new method that learns
to predict, for each view, a continuous, multimodal distribution of depth estimates using conditional Implicit Maximum
Likelihood Estimation (cIMLE). In order to disambiguate
exploiting multiple views, we introduce an original space
carving loss that guides the NeRF representation to fuse
multiple hypothesized depth maps from each view and distill
from them a common geometry that is consistent with all
views. Experiments show that our approach enables higher
fidelity novel view synthesis from sparse views. Our project
page can be found at scade-spacecarving-nerfs.github.io.

1. Introduction
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) [24] have enabled high
fidelity novel view synthesis from dozens of input views.
Such number of views are difficult to obtain in practice,
however. When given only a small number of sparse views,
vanilla NeRF tends to struggle with reconstructing shape
accurately, due to inadequate constraints enforced by the
volume rendering loss alone.
Shape priors can help remedy this problem. Various forms
of shape priors have been proposed for NeRFs, such as object
category-level priors [13], and handcrafted data-independent
priors [25]. The former requires knowledge of category
labels and is not applicable to scenes, and the latter is agnostic to the specifics of the scene and only encodes low-level
regularity (e.g., local smoothness). A form of prior that
is both scene-dependent and category-agnostic is per-view
monocular depth estimates, which have been explored in
prior work [6,32]. Unfortunately, monocular depth estimates
are often inaccurate, due to estimation errors and inherent
ambiguities, such as albedo vs. shading (cf. check shadow
illusion), concavity vs. convexity (cf. hollow face illusion),
distance vs. scale (cf. miniature cinematography), etc. As a
result, the incorrect or inconsistent priors imposed by such
depth estimates may mislead the NeRF into reconstructing
incorrect shape and produce artifacts in the generated views.
In this paper, we propose a method that embraces the
uncertainty and ambiguities present in monocular depth esti-

16518

