This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Edges to Shapes to Concepts: Adversarial Augmentation for Robust Vision
Rishubh Singh2
Anirban Chakraborty1
Pradeep Shenoy2
Aditay Tripathi1 *
1
2
CDS, Indian Institute of Science
Google Research India
shenoypradeep@google.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
A growing body of research catalogues and analyzes apparent failure modes of deep vision models. For instance,
work on texture bias [1,7,12] suggests that image classifiers
are overdependent on textural cues and fail against simple
(adversarial) texture substitutions. Relatedly, the idea of
simplicity bias [25] captures the tendency of deep models
to use weakly predictive “simple” features such as color or
texture, even in the presence of strongly predictive complex features. In psychology & neuroscience, too, evidence
* Work done at Google Research India.

R50

R101

R50(T)

ImageNet-C mCE
(Lower is Better)

R152

R101(T)

R50(E)

R152(T)

R152(E)
ViT-S

R101(E)

ViT-S(T)
ViT-S(E)

ViT-S(T)

ImageNet-A Accuracy
(Higher is Better)

Recent work has shown that deep vision models tend
to be overly dependent on low-level or “texture” features,
leading to poor generalization. Various data augmentation
strategies have been proposed to overcome this so-called
texture bias in DNNs. We propose a simple, lightweight
adversarial augmentation technique that explicitly incentivizes the network to learn holistic shapes for accurate
prediction in an object classification setting. Our augmentations superpose edgemaps from one image onto another
image with shuffled patches, using a randomly determined
mixing proportion, with the image label of the edgemap image. To classify these augmented images, the model needs to
not only detect and focus on edges but distinguish between
relevant and spurious edges. We show that our augmentations significantly improve classification accuracy and robustness measures on a range of datasets and neural architectures. As an example, for ViT-S, We obtain absolute
gains on classification accuracy gains up to 6%. We also
obtain gains of up to 28% and 8.5% on natural adversarial
and out-of-distribution datasets like ImageNet-A (for ViTB) and ImageNet-R (for ViT-S), respectively. Analysis using a range of probe datasets shows substantially increased
shape sensitivity in our trained models, explaining the observed improvement in robustness and classification accuracy.

ViT-S(E)

ViT-S

R152(E)
R152(T)
R101(E)
R152
R50

R50(T)

R50(E)

R101(T)

R101

Shape Factor

Figure 1. Comparison of the models on robustness and shapebias. The shape factor gives the fraction of dimensions that encode shape cues [17]. Backbone(T) denotes texture shape debiased
(TSD) models [21]. In comparison, EL EA S denoted by Backbone(E) is more shape biased and shows better performance on
ImageNet-C and ImageNet-A datasets.

suggests that deep networks focus more on “local” features
rather than global features and differ from human behavior in related tasks [19]. More broadly speaking, there is
a mismatch between the cognitive concepts and associated
world knowledge implied by the category labels in image
datasets such as Imagenet and the actual information content made available to a model via one-hot vectors encoding these labels. In the face of under-determined learning
problems, we need to introduce inductive biases to guide

24470

