This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Discontinuity for Video Frame Interpolation
Sangjin Lee∗,1

Hyeongmin Lee∗,1 Chajin Shin1 Hanbin Son1 Sangyoun Lee1,2
1
Yonsei University
2
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{sglee97, minimonia, chajin, hbson, syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is the task that synthesizes the intermediate frame given two consecutive frames.
Most of the previous studies have focused on appropriate
frame warping operations and refinement modules for the
warped frames. These studies have been conducted on
natural videos containing only continuous motions. However, many practical videos contain various unnatural objects with discontinuous motions such as logos, user interfaces and subtitles. We propose three techniques that
can make the existing deep learning-based VFI architectures robust to these elements. First is a novel data augmentation strategy called figure-text mixing (FTM) which
can make the models learn discontinuous motions during
training stage without any extra dataset. Second, we propose a simple but effective module that predicts a map
called discontinuity map (D-map), which densely distinguishes between areas of continuous and discontinuous motions. Lastly, we propose loss functions to give supervisions of the discontinuous motion areas which can be applied along with FTM and D-map. We additionally collect
a special test benchmark called Graphical Discontinuous
Motion (GDM) dataset consisting of some mobile games
and chatting videos. Applied to the various state-of-the-art
VFI networks, our method significantly improves the interpolation qualities on the videos from not only GDM dataset,
but also the existing benchmarks containing only continuous motions such as Vimeo90K, UCF101, and DAVIS.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) task is to generate the
intermediate frame given some consecutive frames from a
video. When the time interval of each input frames is fixed,
we can get smoother video, and when the frame rate is fixed,
we can get slow-motion video. This can also be applied to
other vision tasks such as video compression [2, 34], view
* Both authors contributed equally to this work.

[Continuous Motion]

[Discontinuous Motion]

34.567

34.568

34.569

34.570

34.571

Figure 1. The examples of discontinuous motion.

synthesis [7, 13, 39], and other real-world applications [23,
29, 37].
Most of the previous works focus on the motion of
the objects in videos. They utilize the estimated flow
maps [12, 16], kernels [6, 15, 17, 21, 22], or externally estimated optical flow maps [19, 20, 24, 25, 29] to place each
object in the middle of its position on the adjacent frames.
However, as personal broadcast and cloud gaming contents increase, many of the practical videos contain special objects which do not move continuously such as user
interfaces, watermarks, logos, chatting windows and subtitles (as the examples on Figure 1). Besides, these elements
are received at the display devices as part of each frame, not
as additional information. Therefore, many of the video enhancement frameworks, including VFI, should be improved
to be robust to the discontinuous motions.
In this paper, our purpose is to expand the spectrum of
motions to address efficiently both continuous and discon-

9791

