This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unknown Sniffer for Object Detection: Don’t Turn a Blind Eye
to Unknown Objects
Wenteng Liang1,† , Feng Xue1,† , Yihao Liu1 , Guofeng Zhong2 , Anlong Ming1,∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{liangwenteng,xuefeng,l1h,mal}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Detecting objects with a limited number of classes in the
closed-world setting [2, 3, 14, 20, 21, 23, 31–33, 46] has been
the norm for years. Recently, the popularity of autonomous
† Equal Contribution
* Corresponding Author

This work was supported by the national key R & D program intergovernmental international science and technology innovation cooperation
project 2021YFE0101600.

(b) ORE
Distribution

(a) VOS

1
2
4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Non-object

(d) T-SNE

3

(c) Ours
Known
Unknown
Non-object

(e) Score for objects and non-object
Distribution

The recently proposed open-world object and open-set
detection have achieved a breakthrough in finding neverseen-before objects and distinguishing them from known
ones. However, their studies on knowledge transfer from
known classes to unknown ones are not deep enough, resulting in the scanty capability for detecting unknowns hidden
in the background. In this paper, we propose the unknown
sniffer (UnSniffer) to find both unknown and known objects.
Firstly, the generalized object confidence (GOC) score is
introduced, which only uses known samples for supervision
and avoids improper suppression of unknowns in the background. Significantly, such confidence score learned from
known objects can be generalized to unknown ones. Additionally, we propose a negative energy suppression loss to
further suppress the non-object samples in the background.
Next, the best box of each unknown is hard to obtain during
inference due to lacking their semantic information in training. To solve this issue, we introduce a graph-based determination scheme to replace hand-designed non-maximum
suppression (NMS) post-processing. Finally, we present
the Unknown Object Detection Benchmark, the first publicly benchmark that encompasses precision evaluation for
unknown detection to our knowledge. Experiments show
that our method is far better than the existing state-of-theart methods. Code is available at: https://github.
com/Went-Liang/UnSniffer.

Known
Unknown
Non-object

Unknown

(f) Score for known and unknown

Figure 1. (a)-(c) the predicted unknown (blue), known (yellow),
and missed (red) objects of VOS [9], ORE [18], and our model.
(d) t-SNE visualization of various classes’ hidden vectors. (e)
score for objects and non-object (generalized object confidence).
(f) score for unknown, known, and non-object (negative energy).

driving [4, 7, 17, 25, 29, 30, 38, 39, 43–45] has raised the bar
for object detection. That is, the detector should detect both
known and unknown objects. ‘Known Objects’ are those
that belong to pre-defined categories, while ‘Unknown Objects’ are those that the detector has never seen during training. Detecting unknown objects is crucial in coping with
more challenging environments, such as autonomous driving scenes with potential hazards.
Since unknown objects do not have labels in the training set, how to learn knowledge that can be generalized to
unknown classes from finite pre-defined categories is the
key issue in detecting unknown objects. In recent years,
a series of groundbreaking works have been impressive on
open-set detection (OSD) [8, 9, 11, 28] and open-world object detection (OWOD) [12, 18, 37, 40]. Several OSD methods have used uncertainty measures to distinguish unknown

3230

