This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Generalization against Photon-Limited Corruptions
via Worst-Case Sharpness Minimization
Zhuo Huang1,† , Miaoxi Zhu2,† , Xiaobo Xia1 , Li Shen3 , Jun Yu4,B ,
Chen Gong5 , Bo Han6 , Bo Du2 , Tongliang Liu1

Abstract
Robust generalization aims to tackle the most challenging data distributions which are rare in the training set and
contain severe noises, i.e., photon-limited corruptions. Common solutions such as distributionally robust optimization
(DRO) focus on the worst-case empirical risk to ensure low
training error on the uncommon noisy distributions. However, due to the over-parameterized model being optimized
on scarce worst-case data, DRO fails to produce a smooth
loss landscape, thus struggling on generalizing well to the
test set. Therefore, instead of focusing on the worst-case
risk minimization, we propose SharpDRO by penalizing the
sharpness of the worst-case distribution, which measures the
loss changes around the neighbor of learning parameters.
Through worst-case sharpness minimization, the proposed
method successfully produces a flat loss curve on the corrupted distributions, thus achieving robust generalization.
Moreover, by considering whether the distribution annotation is available, we apply SharpDRO to two problem settings and design a worst-case selection process for robust
generalization. Theoretically, we show that SharpDRO has
a great convergence guarantee. Experimentally, we simulate
photon-limited corruptions using CIFAR10/100 and ImageNet30 datasets and show that SharpDRO exhibits a strong
generalization ability against severe corruptions and exceeds
well-known baseline methods with large performance gains.

1. Introduction
Learning against corruptions has been a vital challenge
in the practical deployment of computer vision models, as
learning models are much more fragile to subtle noises than
human perception systems [12, 15, 31]. During the training, the encountered corruptions are essentially perceived as
†
Equal contribution. 1 Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney; 2 National
Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and
Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University; 3 JD Explore Academy;
4
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China; 5 Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information
of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology; 6 Department of Computer Science, Hong
Kong Baptist University. Correspondence to Jun Yu (harryjun@ustc.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Illustration of photon-limited corruptions.

distribution shift, which would significantly hinder the prediction results [29, 34, 51, 58–60]. Therefore, to mitigate the
performance degradation, enhancing generalization to corrupted data distributions has drawn lots of attention [1, 45].
In the real world, noise corruptions are commonly known
as photon-limited imaging problems [21, 26, 35, 50] which
arises due to numerous small corruption photons arriving to
a image sensor. Consequently, different numbers of captured
photons would form different levels of corruptions severity,
further producing multiple data distributions and imposing
varied impacts on learning models [14]. Specifically, the
encountered photon-limited corruption E is a composition
of multiple noise photon u, which is triggered by some discrete factors with a certain probability during a time interval.
For example, a photon u can be triggered by each platform
changing, re-distribution, transmission, etc. More photons
are captured, and severer corruption would be applied to
the image. Therefore, the severity s of the photon-limited
corruptions E can be modeled by Poisson distribution, i.e.,
−λ s
s ∼ P (s; λ) = e s!λ , which is illustrated in Figure 1.
As a result, the real-world training set is not completely
composed of clean data, but contains corrupted data with a
smaller proportion as the severity goes stronger.
Dealing with such a realistic problem by vanilla empirical
risk minimization can achieve satisfactory averaged accuracy
on the whole training set. However, due to the extremely limited number of severely-corrupted data, the learning model
would produce large training errors on the corrupted distributions, further hindering the robust performance under
challenging real-world situations. A popular approach to

16175

