This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Representation Learning for CAD
Benjamin T. Jones1

Michael Hu1 Milin Kodnongbua 1 Vladimir G. Kim2
1
2
University of Washington
Adobe Research

Adriana Schulz1

Part Classiﬁcation

Machining
Segmentation

Modeling
Segmentation

x,y,z

d

Task
Decoder

Face Embeddings

Pretrained
Encoder

B-Rep Model

Small
Labeled
Dataset

Large Unlabeled
Dataset

Decoder

Encoder

u,v

{benjones, mkhu, milink, adriana}@cs.washington.edu vokim@adobe.com

Rasterization

Self-Supervised Representation Learning

Few-shot Task Learning

Figure 1. Overview of our technique. We train a geometric self-supervision task of a large, unlabeled dataset of CAD Boundary Representations (B-Reps) to learn geometrically relevant representations for each B-Rep face. These pre-trained representations are then used to
train few-shot segmentation and classification learning tasks on labeled B-Rep datasets.

Abstract
Virtually every object in the modern world was created,
modified, analyzed and optimized using computer aided design (CAD) tools. An active CAD research area is the use
of data-driven machine learning methods to learn from the
massive repositories of geometric and program representations. However, the lack of labeled data in CAD’s native format, i.e., the parametric boundary representation
(B-Rep), poses an obstacle at present difficult to overcome.
Several datasets of mechanical parts in B-Rep format have
recently been released for machine learning research. However, large-scale databases are mostly unlabeled, and labeled datasets are small. Additionally, task-specific label
sets are rare and costly to annotate. This work proposes
to leverage unlabeled CAD geometry on supervised learning tasks. We learn a novel, hybrid implicit/explicit surface
representation for B-Rep geometry. Further, we show that
this pre-training both significantly improves few-shot learning performance and achieves state-of-the-art performance
on several current B-Rep benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Almost every human-made object that exists today
started its life as a model in a CAD system. As the preva-

lent method of creating 3D shapes, repositories of CAD
models are extensive. Further, CAD models have a robust
structure, including geometric and program representations
that have the potential to expose design and manufacturing intent. Learning from CAD data can therefore enable
a variety of applications in design automation and designand fabrication-aware shape reconstruction and reverse engineering.
An important challenge in learning from CAD is that
most of this data does not have labels that can be leveraged for inference tasks. Manually labeling B-Rep data is
time consuming and expensive, and its specialized format
requires CAD expertise, making it impractical for large collections.
In this work we ask: how can we leverage large databases
of unlabeled CAD geometry for analysis and modeling
tasks that typically require labels for learning?
Our work is driven by a simple, yet fundamental observation: the CAD data format was not developed to enable easy
visualizing or straightforward geometric interpretation: it
is a format designed to be compact, have infinite resolution, and allow easy editing. Indeed, CAD interfaces consistently run sophisticated algorithms to convert the CAD
representation into geometric formats for rendering. Driven
by this observation, our key insight is to leverage large col-

21327

