This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AShapeFormer : Semantics-Guided Object-Level Active Shape Encoding for 3D
Object Detection via Transformers
Zechuan Li1 , Hongshan Yu1,2,3∗ , Zhengeng Yang1 *, Tongjia Chen1 , Naveed Akhtar4
1
Hunan University, 2 National University of Defense Technology
3
Quanzhou Institute of Industrial Design and Machine Intelligence Innovation, Hunan University
4
The University of Western Australia
{lizechuan, yuhongshan, yzg050215, tomchen}@hnu.edu.cn; naveed.akhtar@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
3D object detection techniques commonly follow a
pipeline that aggregates predicted object central point features to compute candidate points. However, these candidate points contain only positional information, largely
ignoring the object-level shape information. This eventually leads to sub-optimal 3D object detection. In this work,
we propose AShapeFormer, a semantics-guided object-level
shape encoding module for 3D object detection. This is a
plug-n-play module that leverages multi-head attention to
encode object shape information. We also propose shape
tokens and object-scene positional encoding to ensure that
the shape information is fully exploited. Moreover, we introduce a semantic guidance sub-module to sample more
foreground points and suppress the influence of background
points for a better object shape perception. We demonstrate a straightforward enhancement of multiple existing
methods with our AShapeFormer. Through extensive experiments on the popular SUN RGB-D and ScanNetV2 dataset,
we show that our enhanced models are able to outperform
the baselines by a considerable absolute margin of up to
8.1%. Code will be available at https://github.
com/ZechuanLi/AShapeFormer

1. Introduction
As an important scene understanding task, 3D object detection [13,20,47] aims to detect 3D bounding boxes and semantic categories in 3D point cloud scenes. It plays an important role in many downstream tasks, such as augmented
reality [2, 3], mobile robots [18, 41, 52], and autonomous
navigation [1,36,37,39]. Object detection has made significant progress in the 2D domain [15,22,33]. However, owing
to the sparse and irregular nature of the point cloud data, 2D
detection techniques are generally not readily applicable to
the 3D object detection task.
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (Top) VoteNet [29] seed points contain many background points, leading to sub-optimal candidate points, which are
also intrinsically weak as they fail to account for object shape
and contour features. (Bottom) The proposed AShapeFormer selects more relevant seed points, leading to more appropriate candidates that additionally encode the object shape information actively. This results in high quality 3D object detection.

Inspired by their 2D counterparts, early attempts in
3D object detection, e.g., [16, 39], mapped irregular point
clouds to regular 3D voxels, thereafter using 3DCNNs for
feature extraction and object detection. However, voxelization inevitably loses fine-grained information of the point
clouds, which adversely affects the detection performance.
With the advances that allow direct processing of the point
clouds with deep neural models, e.g., [30, 31], recent methods aim at directly predicting the 3D bounding boxes from
the original unordered point clouds. Among these techniques, VoteNet [29] and its variants [7, 12, 28, 45, 46, 50]
have achieved remarkable performance.
These point-wise methods follow a common underlying
pipeline which includes first aggregating certain predicted
point features into candidate points. The candidate points
are later used to estimate the 3D bounding box information,
e.g., center, size, and orientation, along with the associated
semantic labels. As illustrated in Fig. 1, despite their excellent performance, these methods still face a few major

1012

