This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explicit Visual Prompting for Low-Level Structure Segmentations
Xiaodong Cun 2 *
Xi Shen 2
Chi-Man Pun 1 *
1
2
University of Macau
Tencent AI Lab

Weihuang Liu 1

Abstract
We consider the generic problem of detecting low-level
structures in images, which includes segmenting the manipulated parts, identifying out-of-focus pixels, separating
shadow regions, and detecting concealed objects. Whereas
each such topic has been typically addressed with a domainspecific solution, we show that a unified approach performs
well across all of them. We take inspiration from the widelyused pre-training and then prompt tuning protocols in NLP
and propose a new visual prompting model, named Explicit
Visual Prompting (EVP). Different from the previous visual
prompting which is typically a dataset-level implicit embedding, our key insight is to enforce the tunable parameters
focusing on the explicit visual content from each individual image, i.e., the features from frozen patch embeddings
and the input’s high-frequency components. The proposed
EVP significantly outperforms other parameter-efficient tuning protocols under the same amount of tunable parameters (5.7% extra trainable parameters of each task). EVP
also achieves state-of-the-art performances on diverse lowlevel structure segmentation tasks compared to task-specific
solutions. Our code is available at: https://github.
com/NiFangBaAGe/Explicit-Visual-Prompt.

1. Introduction
Advances in image editing and manipulation algorithms
have made it easy to create photo-realistic but fake pictures [31, 39, 63]. Detecting such manipulated regions becomes an important problem due to its potential negative
impact related to surveillance and crime [31]. Low-level
structures are known to be beneficial to tampered region detection, i.e., resizing and copy-pasting will destroy the JPEG
compression levels between the temper region and the host
image [28, 50, 62], the noise level of the tempered region
and the background is also different [76, 87]. Interesting, to
segment the blurred pixels [67], shadowed regions [59], and
concealed objects [15], low-level clues also play important
* Corresponding Author

task1
Prompting1
Prompting2

task2

Prompting3
Prompting4

task3

Frozen
Pretrained
Transformer

task4

Task1: Camouflaged Object Detection
Task2: Forgery Image Detection
Task3: Shadow Detection
Task4: Defocus Blur Detection
Frozen

Patch
Embedding

High Frequency
Extraction

Embedding
Tune

+

Tunable

Transformer
Blocks

High Frequency
Tune

Figure 1. We propose a unified method for four low-level structure
segmentation tasks: camouflaged object, forgery, shadow and defocus blur detection (Top). Our approach relies on a pre-trained frozen
transformer backbone that leverages explicit extracted features, e.g.,
the frozen embedded features and high-frequency components, to
prompt knowledge.

roles. These detection tasks are shown to be beneficial to
numerous computer vision tasks, including auto-refocus [1],
image retargeting [37], object tracking [55], etc.
Although all these tasks belong to low-level structure
segmentation, they are typically addressed by domainspecific solutions with carefully designed network architectures [8,87,90]. Moreover, the lack of large-scale datasets
is often considered a major factor, which limits the performances [31].
In this work, we propose a solution to address the four
tasks in a unified fashion. We take inspiration from recent

19434

