This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Recognition by Request
Chufeng Tang1 Lingxi Xie2 Xiaopeng Zhang2 Xiaolin Hu1,3,4( ) Qi Tian2( )
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Huawei Inc. 3 Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR)
4
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, THBI, Tsinghua University
tcf18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{198808xc, zxphistory}@gmail.com

xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Humans have the ability of recognizing visual semantics
in an unlimited granularity, but existing visual recognition
algorithms cannot achieve this goal. In this paper, we establish a new paradigm named visual recognition by request
(ViRReq1 ) to bridge the gap. The key lies in decomposing visual recognition into atomic tasks named requests and
leveraging a knowledge base, a hierarchical and text-based
dictionary, to assist task definition. ViRReq allows for (i)
learning complicated whole-part hierarchies from highly
incomplete annotations and (ii) inserting new concepts with
minimal efforts. We also establish a solid baseline by integrating language-driven recognition into recent semantic and instance segmentation methods, and demonstrate
its flexible recognition ability on CPP and ADE20K, two
datasets with hierarchical whole-part annotations.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition is one of the fundamental problems
in computer vision. In the past decade, visual recognition
algorithms have been largely advanced with the availability
of large-scale datasets and deep neural networks [8, 13, 18].
Typical examples include the ability of recognizing 10,000s
of object classes [6], segmenting objects into parts or even
parts of parts [43], using natural language to refer to openworld semantic concepts [31], etc.
Despite the increasing recognition accuracy in standard
benchmarks, we raise a critical yet mostly uncovered issue,
namely, the unlimited granularity of visual recognition.
As shown in Figure 1, given an image, humans have the
ability of recognizing arbitrarily fine-grained contents from
it, but existing visual recognition algorithms cannot achieve
the same goal. Superficially, this is caused by limited annotation budgets so that few training data is available for fine1 We recommend the readers to pronounce ViRReq as /’virik/.

original image

regions & instances

parts & parts of parts

person, bag, …

head, torso, …

eye, mouth, …

~80% annotated

~40% annotated

~10% annotated

overlaying
Person #1: head, torso, arms, legs, eyes, mouth, …
uncertain boundary between head/arm and torso

#1

#2

uncertain
boundary

#3

Person #2: head, torso, arms, legs, eyes, mouth, …
Person #3: head, torso, arms, legs, eyes, mouth, …
Person ★: instance was not annotated
Other objects: bag, shoes, necklace, …

Figure 1. An illustration of unlimited granularity in visual recognition. Top: an example image from ADE20K [43] with instancelevel and part-level annotations. Middle: more and more incomplete annotations of instances, parts, and parts of parts. Bottom:
as granularity goes finer, higher uncertainty occurs in recognizing the boundary (left) and semantic class (right) of objects and/or
parts – here, green, blue and red texts indicate labeled, unlabeled
(but defined), and unlabeled (and undefined) objects, respectively.

grained and/or long-tailed concepts, but we point out that a
more essential reason lies in the conflict between granularity and recognition certainty – as shown in Figure 1, when
annotation granularity goes finer, annotation certainty will
inevitably be lower. This motivates us that the granularity of visual recognition shall be variable across instances
and scenarios. For this purpose, we propose to interpret
semantic annotations into smaller units (i.e., requests) and
assume that recognition is performed only when it is asked,
so that one can freely adjust the granularity according to
object size, importance, clearness, etc.
In this paper, we establish a new paradigm named visual
recognition by request (ViRReq). We only consider the
segmentation task in this paper because it best fits the need
of unlimited granularity in the spatial domain. Compared to

15265

