This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SViTT: Temporal Learning of Sparse Video-Text Transformers
Yi Li* 1

Kyle Min2
1

Subarna Tripathi2
2

UC San Diego

{yil898, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Nuno Vasconcelos1

Intel Labs

{kyle.min, subarna.tripathi}@intel.com

Abstract
Do video-text transformers learn to model temporal relationships across frames? Despite their immense capacity
and the abundance of multimodal training data, recent work
has revealed the strong tendency of video-text models towards frame-based spatial representations, while temporal
reasoning remains largely unsolved. In this work, we identify several key challenges in temporal learning of videotext transformers: the spatiotemporal trade-off from limited
network size; the curse of dimensionality for multi-frame
modeling; and the diminishing returns of semantic information by extending clip length. Guided by these findings, we
propose SViTT, a sparse video-text architecture that performs multi-frame reasoning with significantly lower cost
than naı̈ve transformers with dense attention. Analogous
to graph-based networks, SViTT employs two forms of
sparsity: edge sparsity that limits the query-key communications between tokens in self-attention, and node sparsity that discards uninformative visual tokens. Trained with
a curriculum which increases model sparsity with the clip
length, SViTT outperforms dense transformer baselines on
multiple video-text retrieval and question answering benchmarks, with a fraction of computational cost. Project page:
http://svcl.ucsd.edu/projects/svitt.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of deep neural networks for
computer vision and natural language processing, there has
been growing interest in learning correspondences across
the visual and text modalities. A variety of vision-language
pretraining frameworks have been proposed [12, 22, 29, 34]
for learning high-quality cross-modal representations with
weak supervision. Recently, progress on visual transformers (ViT) [5,16,32] has enabled seamless integration of both
modalities into a unified attention model, leading to imagetext transformer architectures that achieve state-the-art performance on vision-language benchmarks [1, 27, 44].
Progress has also occurred in video-language pretraining
by leveraging image-text models for improved frame-based
* Work done during an internship at Intel Labs.

One person takes a pillow and some homework from an old chair, then smiles and laughs.

Query

Key / Value

Edge sparsity

Node sparsity

Figure 1. We propose SViTT, a sparse video-text transformer for
efficient modeling of temporal relationships across video frames.
Top: Semantic information for video-text reasoning is highly localized in the spatiotemporal volume, making dense modeling inefficient and prone to contextual noises. Bottom: SViTT pursues edge sparsity by limiting query-key pairs in self-attention, and
node sparsity by pruning redundant tokens from visual sequence.

reasoning [4, 9, 18]. Spatial modeling has the advantage
of efficient (linear) scaling to long duration videos. Perhaps due to this, single-frame models have proven surprisingly effective at video-text tasks, matching or exceeding
prior arts with complex temporal components [9, 24]. However, spatial modeling creates a bias towards static appearance and overlooks the importance of temporal reasoning in
videos. This suggests the question: Are temporal dynamics
not worth modeling in the video-language domain?
Upon a closer investigation, we identify a few key challenges to incorporating multi-frame reasoning in videolanguage models. First, limited model size implies a tradeoff between spatial and temporal learning (a classic example
being 2D/3D convolutions in video CNNs [46]). For any
given dataset, optimal performance requires a careful bal-

18919

