This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InternImage: Exploring Large-Scale Vision Foundation Models with
Deformable Convolutions
Wenhai Wang1∗ , Jifeng Dai2,1∗ , Zhe Chen3,1∗ , Zhenhang Huang1∗ , Zhiqi Li3,1∗ , Xizhou Zhu4∗ ,
Xiaowei Hu1 , Tong Lu3 , Lewei Lu4 , Hongsheng Li5 , Xiaogang Wang4,5 , Yu Qiao1B
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Tsinghua University
3
Nanjing University 4 SenseTime Research 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/InternImage

query pixels

Abstract
Compared to the great progress of large-scale vision
transformers (ViTs) in recent years, large-scale models
based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are still
in an early state. This work presents a new large-scale
CNN-based foundation model, termed InternImage, which
can obtain the gain from increasing parameters and training data like ViTs. Different from the recent CNNs that focus
on large dense kernels, InternImage takes deformable convolution as the core operator, so that our model not only
has the large effective receptive field required for downstream tasks such as detection and segmentation, but also
has the adaptive spatial aggregation conditioned by input
and task information. As a result, the proposed InternImage reduces the strict inductive bias of traditional CNNs
and makes it possible to learn stronger and more robust
patterns with large-scale parameters from massive data like
ViTs. The effectiveness of our model is proven on challenging benchmarks including ImageNet, COCO, and ADE20K.
It is worth mentioning that InternImage-H achieved a new
record 65.4 mAP on COCO test-dev and 62.9 mIoU on
ADE20K, outperforming current leading CNNs and ViTs.

1. Introduction
With the remarkable success of transformers in largescale language models [3–8], vision transformers (ViTs) [2,
9–15] have also swept the computer vision field and are
becoming the primary choice for the research and practice of large-scale vision foundation models. Some pioneers [16–20] have made attempts to extend ViTs to very
large models with over a billion parameters, beating convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and significantly pushing
the performance bound for a wide range of computer vision
tasks, including basic classification, detection, and segmen* equal contribution, B corresponding author (qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn)

response pixels with fixed weights

response pixels with adaptive weights

(a) global attention
✓ long-range dependence
✓ adaptive spatial aggregation
✗ computation/memory efficient

(b) local attention
✗ long-range dependence
✓ adaptive spatial aggregation
✓ computation/memory efficient

(c) large kernel
✓ long-range dependence
✗ adaptive spatial aggregation
✓ computation/memory efficient

(d) dynamic sparse kernel (ours)
✓ long-range dependence
✓ adaptive spatial aggregation
✓ computation/memory efficient

Figure 1. Comparisons of different core operators. (a) shows
the global aggregation of multi-head self-attention (MHSA) [1],
whose computational and memory costs are expensive in downstream tasks that require high-resolution inputs. (b) limits the
range of MHSA into a local window [2] to reduce the cost. (c)
is a depth-wise convolution with very large kernels to model longrange dependencies. (d) is a deformable convolution, which shares
similar favorable properties with MHSA and is efficient enough
for large-scale models. We start from it to build a large-scale CNN.

tation. While these results suggest that CNNs are inferior
to ViTs in the era of massive parameters and data, we argue that CNN-based foundation models can also achieve
comparable or even better performance than ViTs when
equipped with similar operator-/architecture-level designs,
scaling-up parameters, and massive data.
To bridge the gap between CNNs and ViTs, we first
summarize their differences from two aspects: (1) From
the operator level [9, 21, 22], the multi-head self-attention

14408

