This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RGB no more: Minimally-decoded JPEG Vision Transformers
Jeongsoo Park
Justin Johnson
University of Michigan
{jespark, justincj}@umich.edu

Most neural networks for computer vision are designed
to infer using RGB images. However, these RGB images are
commonly encoded in JPEG before saving to disk; decoding
them imposes an unavoidable overhead for RGB networks.
Instead, our work focuses on training Vision Transformers
(ViT) directly from the encoded features of JPEG. This way,
we can avoid most of the decoding overhead, accelerating
data load. Existing works have studied this aspect but they
focus on CNNs. Due to how these encoded features are
structured, CNNs require heavy modification to their architecture to accept such data. Here, we show that this is not
the case for ViTs. In addition, we tackle data augmentation
directly on these encoded features, which to our knowledge,
has not been explored in-depth for training in this setting.
With these two improvements – ViT and data augmentation
– we show that our ViT-Ti model achieves up to 39.2% faster
training and 17.9% faster inference with no accuracy loss
compared to the RGB counterpart. 1

1. Introduction
Neural networks that process images typically receive
their inputs as regular grids of RGB pixel values. This
spatial-domain representation is intuitive, and matches the
way that images are displayed on digital devices (e.g. LCD
panels with RGB sub-pixels). However, images are often
stored on disk as compressed JPEG files that instead use
frequency-domain representations for images. In this paper
we design neural networks that can directly process images
encoded in the frequency domain.
Networks that process frequency-domain images have
the potential for much faster data loading. JPEG files store
image data using Huffman codes; these are decoded to
(frequency-domain) discrete cosine transform (DCT) coefficients then converted to (spatial-domain) RGB pixels before being fed to the neural network (Fig. 1). Networks that
process DCT coefficients can avoid the expensive DCT to
RGB conversion; we show in Sec. 3 that this can reduce the
theoretical cost of data loading by up to 85%. Data is typi-

GPU

CPU

Abstract

DCT
Coefficients
𝑊

RGB

Extract Patches

8×8
𝐻
2

𝐻

𝑊
2

Typical

Ours

Already
Patched

ViT

Huffman Codes
10111010⋯
11101101⋯
10101011⋯

Linear
Projection

Transformer
Encoder

Figure 1. Our proposed training process. The typical process requires full decoding as well as patch extraction to train. In contrast,
our process does not since the DCT coefficients are already saved
in block-wise fashion. As ViTs work on image patches, we can
directly feed these coefficients to the network.

cally loaded by the CPU while the network runs on a GPU
or other accelerator; more efficient data loading can thus
reduce CPU bottlenecks and accelerate the entire pipeline.
We are not the first to design networks that process
frequency-domain images. The work of Gueguen et al. [1]
and Xu et al. [2] are most similar to ours: they show how
standard CNN architectures such as ResNet [3] and MobileNetV2 [4] can be modified to input DCT rather than
RGB and trained to accuracies comparable to their standard
formulations. We improve upon these pioneering efforts in
two key ways: architecture and data augmentation.
Adapting a CNN architecture designed for RGB inputs
to instead receive DCT is nontrivial. The DCT representaW
tion of an H ×W ×3 RGB image consists of a H
8 × 8 ×8×8
H W
tensor of luma data and two 16× 16 ×8×8 tensors of chroma
data. The CNN architecture must be modified both to accept
lower-resolution inputs (e.g. by skipping the first few stages
of a ResNet50 and adding capacity to later stages) and to accept heterogeneously-sized luma and chroma data (e.g. by
encoding them with separate pathways).

1 Code available at https://github.com/JeongsooP/RGB-no-more

We overcome these challenges by using Vision Trans-

22334

