This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Indescribable Multi-modal Spatial Evaluator
Lingke Kong
Manteia Tech

X. Sharon Qi
University of California, Los Angeles

Qijin Shen
Fuzhou University

kid_liet@163.com

xqi@mednet.ucla.edu

qijinshen@foxmail.com

Jiacheng Wang
Xiamen University

Jingyi Zhang
Xiamen University

Yanle Hu*
Mayo Clinic Arizona

jiachengw@stu.xmu.edu

zhangjingyi1@stu.xmu.edu.cn

Hu.Yanle@mayo.edu

Qichao Zhou*
Manteia Tech
zhouqc@manteiatech.com

Abstract
Multi-modal image registration spatially aligns two images with different distributions. One of its major challenges
is that images acquired from different imaging machines
have different imaging distributions, making it difficult to
focus only on the spatial aspect of the images and ignore
differences in distributions. In this study, we developed a
self-supervised approach, Indescribable Multi-model Spatial
Evaluator (IMSE), to address multi-modal image registration.
IMSE creates an accurate multi-modal spatial evaluator to
measure spatial differences between two images, and then optimizes registration by minimizing the error predicted of the
evaluator. To optimize IMSE performance, we also proposed
a new style enhancement method called Shuffle Remap which
randomizes the image distribution into multiple segments,
and then randomly disorders and remaps these segments, so
that the distribution of the original image is changed. Shuffle
Remap can help IMSE to predict the difference in spatial
location from unseen target distributions. Our results show
that IMSE outperformed the existing methods for registration
using T1-T2 and CT-MRI datasets. IMSE also can be easily
integrated into the traditional registration process, and can
provide a convenient way to evaluate and visualize registration results. IMSE also has the potential to be used as a new
paradigm for image-to-image translation. Our code is available at https://github.com/Kid-Liet/IMSE.

* Corresponding author.

GAN

X

IMSE

Y

Distribution mapping
Moving x

Target y

X

Y
Instance mapping

Corresponding

Non-corresponding

Figure 1. The GAN based methods can only ensure that the distribution of the X domain is mapped that of the Y domain. Ideally,
we want to achieve instance registration in which moving and target
images are one-to-one corresponded.

1. Introduction
The purpose of multi-modal image registration is to align
two images with different distributions (Moving (M ) and
Target (T ) images) by warping the space through the deformation field ϕ. A major challenge in multi-modal image
registration is that images from different modalities may differ in multiple aspects given the fact that images are acquired
using different imaging machines, or different acquisition
parameters. Due to dramatically different reconstruction
and acquisition methods, there is no simple one-to-one mapping between different imaging modalities. From the perspective of measuring similarity, mainstream unsupervised
multi-modal registration methods can be divided into two
categories: similarity operator based registration and imageto-image translation based registration.
Similarity operator based registration uses multi-modal
similarity operators as loss functions for registration, for ex-

9853

