This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context De-confounded Emotion Recognition
Dingkang Yang1,2
Zhaoyu Chen1
Yuzheng Wang1 Shunli Wang1 Mingcheng Li1 Siao Liu1
Xiao Zhao1 Shuai Huang1 Zhiyan Dong1 Peng Zhai1 Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4§
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 2 Institute of Meta-Medical, IPASS
3
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Changchun, China
4
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
{dkyang20,lihuazhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Training phase

Abstract
Context-Aware Emotion Recognition (CAER) is a crucial and challenging task that aims to perceive the emotional states of the target person with contextual information. Recent approaches invariably focus on designing sophisticated architectures or mechanisms to extract seemingly meaningful representations from subjects and contexts. However, a long-overlooked issue is that a context bias in existing datasets leads to a significantly unbalanced distribution of emotional states among different context scenarios. Concretely, the harmful bias is a confounder
that misleads existing models to learn spurious correlations
based on conventional likelihood estimation, significantly
limiting the models’ performance. To tackle the issue, this
paper provides a causality-based perspective to disentangle the models from the impact of such bias, and formulate the causalities among variables in the CAER task via
a tailored causal graph. Then, we propose a Contextual
Causal Intervention Module (CCIM) based on the backdoor
adjustment to de-confound the confounder and exploit the
true causal effect for model training. CCIM is plug-in and
model-agnostic, which improves diverse state-of-the-art approaches by considerable margins. Extensive experiments
on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our CCIM and the significance of causal insight.

1. Introduction
As an essential technology for understanding human intentions, emotion recognition has attracted significant attention in various fields such as human-computer interaction [1], medical monitoring [28], and education [40]. Previous works have focused on extracting multimodal emotion cues from human subjects, including facial expressions [9, 10, 49], acoustic behaviors [2, 50, 52], and body
§ Corresponding Author.

GT：Engagement

Excitement

GT：Happiness
Pleasure

GT：Engagement

Testing phase

Disapproval
Disconnection
Disquietment
GT：Doubt/Confusion
Engagement
Sadness

Affection

Grass, trees,
outdoors,etc

Pleasure

Similar Context

GT：Happiness

Prediction
Kosti et al.
Affection
Anticipation
Engagement
Excitement
Pleasure
Kosti et al.
+ CCIM(ours)
Disapproval
Disconnection
Disquietment
Doubt/Confusion
Engagement
Sadness

Figure 1. Illustration of the context bias in the CAER task. GT
means the ground truth. Most images contain similar contexts in
the training data with positive emotion categories. In this case,
the model learns the spurious correlation between specific contexts
and emotion categories and gives wrong results. Thanks to CCIM,
the simple baseline [19] achieves more accurate predictions.

postures [25, 53], benefiting from advances in deep learning algorithms [6, 7, 21, 26, 27, 43, 44, 46, 47, 54, 55, 59].
Despite the impressive improvements achieved by subjectcentered approaches, their performance is limited by natural and unconstrained environments. Several examples in
Figure 1 (left) show typical situations on a visual level. Instead of well-designed visual contents, multimodal representations of subjects in wild-collected images are usually
indistinguishable (e.g., ambiguous faces or gestures), which
forces us to exploit complementary factors around the subject that potentially reflect emotions.
Inspired by psychological study [3], recent works [19,22,
23, 29, 56] have suggested that contextual information contributes to effective emotion cues for Context-Aware Emotion Recognition (CAER). The contexts are considered to
include the place category, the place attributes, the objects,
or the actions of others around the subject [20]. The majority of such research typically follows a common pipeline:
(1) Obtaining the unimodal/multimodal representations of
the recognized subject; (2) Building diverse contexts and
extracting emotion-related representations; (3) Designing

19005

