This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Holistic 3D Human Motion from Speech
Hongwei Yi1∗ Hualin Liang2∗ Yifei Liu2∗ Qiong Cao3†
Yandong Wen1 Timo Bolkart1 Dacheng Tao3 Michael J. Black1†
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
South China University of Technology 3 JD Explore Academy
{hongwei.yi, yandong.wen, timo.bolkart, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de
{hualinliang3, yifei9697, mathqiong2012, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

... are things that everyone can do, to combat the kidney shortage. A truly amazing people can donate one of ...

Figure 1. Speech-to-motion translation example. Given a speech signal as input, our approach generates realistic, coherent, and diverse
holistic body motions; that is, the body motion together with facial expressions and hand gestures. From top to bottom: the input audio, the
corresponding transcript, video frames, and the generated motions. Note that the audio is the only input to our approach, while the transcript
and video frames are just shown for reference.

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of generating 3D holistic
body motions from human speech. Given a speech recording, we synthesize sequences of 3D body poses, hand gestures, and facial expressions that are realistic and diverse.
To achieve this, we first build a high-quality dataset of 3D
holistic body meshes with synchronous speech. We then
define a novel speech-to-motion generation framework in
which the face, body, and hands are modeled separately.
The separated modeling stems from the fact that face articulation strongly correlates with human speech, while body
poses and hand gestures are less correlated. Specifically,
we employ an autoencoder for face motions, and a compositional vector-quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE)
for the body and hand motions. The compositional VQVAE is key to generating diverse results. Additionally, we
propose a cross-conditional autoregressive model that generates body poses and hand gestures, leading to coherent and
* Equal Contribution.
† Joint Corresponding Authors.

realistic motions. Extensive experiments and user studies
demonstrate that our proposed approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Our dataset and code are released for research purposes at
https://talkshow.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
From linguistics and psychology we know that humans
use body language to convey emotion and use gestures in
communication [22, 28]. Motion cues such as facial expression, body posture and hand movement all play a role. For
instance, people may change their gestures when shifting
to a new topic [52], or wave their hands when greeting an
audience. Recent methods have shown rapid progress on
modeling the translation from human speech to body motion, and can be roughly divided into rule-based [38] and
learning-based [20, 21, 23, 32, 33, 55] methods. Typically,
the body motion in these methods is represented as the motion of a 3D mesh of the face/upper-body [5, 15, 26, 43, 44],
or 2D/3D landmarks of the face with 2D/3D joints of the

469

