This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SfM-TTR: Using Structure from Motion for Test-Time Refinement of
Single-View Depth Networks
Sergio Izquierdo
Javier Civera
I3A, University of Zaragoza, Spain
{izquierdo, jcivera}@unizar.es

Abstract
Estimating a dense depth map from a single view is geometrically ill-posed, and state-of-the-art methods rely on
learning depth’s relation with visual appearance using deep
neural networks. On the other hand, Structure from Motion
(SfM) leverages multi-view constraints to produce very accurate but sparse maps, as matching across images is typically limited by locally discriminative texture. In this work,
we combine the strengths of both approaches by proposing
a novel test-time refinement (TTR) method, denoted as SfMTTR, that boosts the performance of single-view depth networks at test time using SfM multi-view cues. Specifically,
and differently from the state of the art, we use sparse SfM
point clouds as test-time self-supervisory signal, fine-tuning
the network encoder to learn a better representation of the
test scene. Our results show how the addition of SfM-TTR
to several state-of-the-art self-supervised and supervised
networks improves significantly their performance, outperforming previous TTR baselines mainly based on photometric multi-view consistency. The code is available at
https://github.com/serizba/SfM-TTR.

1. Introduction
Obtaining accurate and dense depth maps from images
is a challenging research problem and an essential input
in a wide array of fields, like robotics [67], augmented
reality [36], endoscopy [42], or autonomous driving [22].
Single-view per-pixel depth estimation is even more challenging, as it is geometrically ill-posed in the general case.
However, in the last decade, intense research on deep models applied to this task has produced impressive results,
showing high promise for real-world applications.
Single-view depth learning was initially addressed as a
supervised learning problem, in which deep networks were
trained using large image collections annotated with ground
truth depth from range (e.g., LiDAR) sensors [12, 30]. At
present, this line of research keeps improving the accuracy

Input sequence

SfM-TTR

Scale alignment

Structure from Motion

Single-View
Depth Network

Re ned depth predictions

Figure 1. SfM-TTR overview. Our approach assumes an existing
pre-trained depth network and an input sequence at test time. We
estimate a SfM 3D reconstruction using the input sequence, and
depth maps using a single-view depth network. We align the SfM
point cloud with the network’s depth to obtain a pseudo-ground
truth to refine the network encoder, improving its representation
of the test scene and producing significantly more accurate depth
estimates.

of single-view depth estimates by better learning models
and training methods, as illustrated for example by [6, 59].
In parallel to improving the learning side of the problem,
several works are incorporating single- and multi-view geometric concepts to depth learning, extending its reach to
more general setups. For example, [3, 15] propose camera
intrinsics-aware models, enabling learning and predicting
depths for very different cameras. More importantly, many
other works (e.g. [20]) use losses based on multi-view photometric consistency, enabling self-supervised learning of
depth and even camera intrinsics [21].
Incorporating single- and multi-view geometry into

21466

