This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Compact Representations for LiDAR Completion and Generation
Yuwen Xiong1,2
Wei-Chiu Ma1,3
1
Waabi 2 University of Toronto

Jingkang Wang1,2
Raquel Urtasun1,2
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

LiDAR Completion

Our Dense LiDAR

Original Sparse LiDAR

Our Dense LiDAR

Original

Actor Removal

Original

Actor Insertion

Generation

Generation

Generation

Generation

Cond. Generation

Cond. Generation

Cond. Generation

Cond. Generation

Cond. Generation

LiDAR Generation

Original Sparse LiDAR

LiDAR Manipulation

{yxiong,wma,jwang,urtasun}@waabi.ai

Figure 1. UltraLiDAR learns discrete representations from large-scale LiDAR point clouds and conduct realistic, scalable and controllable
LiDAR completion and generation. Top row: Sparse-to-dense LiDAR completion; Second row: Controllable manipulation of real
LiDAR with actor removal and insertion; Third row: Diverse LiDAR generation with realistic global structure and fine-grained details;
Bottom row: Conditional scene generation with partially observed point clouds (highlighted in red). Please see supp. for more examples.

Abstract
LiDAR provides accurate geometric measurements of the
3D world. Unfortunately, dense LiDARs are very expensive
and the point clouds captured by low-beam LiDAR are often
sparse. To address these issues, we present UltraLiDAR, a
data-driven framework for scene-level LiDAR completion,
LiDAR generation, and LiDAR manipulation. The crux of
UltraLiDAR is a compact, discrete representation that encodes the point cloud’s geometric structure, is robust to
noise, and is easy to manipulate. We show that by aligning
the representation of a sparse point cloud to that of a dense
point cloud, we can densify the sparse point clouds as if they
were captured by a real high-density LiDAR, drastically reducing the cost. Furthermore, by learning a prior over the
discrete codebook, we can generate diverse, realistic LiDAR

point clouds for self-driving. We evaluate the effectiveness
of UltraLiDAR on sparse-to-dense LiDAR completion and
LiDAR generation. Experiments show that densifying realworld point clouds with our approach can significantly improve the performance of downstream perception systems.
Compared to prior art on LiDAR generation, our approach
generates much more realistic point clouds. According to
A/B test, over 98.5% of the time human participants prefer our results over those of previous methods. Please refer to project page https://waabi.ai/research/
ultralidar/ for more information.

1. Introduction
Building a robust 3D perception system is key to bringing self-driving vehicles into our daily lives. To effectively

1074

