This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge Combination to Learn Rotated Detection Without Rotated Annotation
Tianyu Zhu1, 2, * Bryce Ferenczi2 Pulak Purkait1 Tom Drummond2
Hamid Rezatofighi2 Anton van den Hengel1
1
Amazon IML. 2 Monash University
tianyuzhu52@gmail.com

{alanzty, purkaitp, hengelah}@amazon.com

{tianyu.zhu, bryce.ferenczi, tom.drummond, hamid.rezatofighi}@monash.edu

Abstract
Rotated bounding boxes drastically reduce output ambiguity of elongated objects, making it superior to axis-aligned
bounding boxes. Despite the effectiveness, rotated detectors
are not widely employed. Annotating rotated bounding boxes
is such a laborious process that they are not provided in many
detection datasets where axis-aligned annotations are used
instead. In this paper, we propose a framework that allows
the model to predict precise rotated boxes only requiring
cheaper axis-aligned annotation of the target dataset 1 .
To achieve this, we leverage the fact that neural networks
are capable of learning richer representation of the target
domain than what is utilized by the task. The under-utilized
representation can be exploited to address a more detailed
task. Our framework combines task knowledge of an out-ofdomain source dataset with stronger annotation and domain
knowledge of the target dataset with weaker annotation. A
novel assignment process and projection loss are used to enable the co-training on the source and target datasets. As a
result, the model is able to solve the more detailed task in the
target domain, without additional computation overhead during inference. We extensively evaluate the method on various
target datasets including fresh-produce dataset, HRSC2016
and SSDD. Results show that the proposed method consistently performs on par with the fully supervised approach.

1. Introduction
Rotated detectors introduced in recent works [17, 20, 32]
have received attention due to their outstanding performance
for top view images [15, 33, 34]. They reduce the output ambiguity of elongated objects for downstream tasks making
them superior to axis-aligned detectors in dense scenes with
severe occlusions [18]. However, the rotated annotation is
more expensive compared to axis-aligned annotation. Fur-

Figure 1. KCR combines the task knowledge of a source dataset
with stronger rotated annotation and the domain knowledge of the
target dataset with weaker axis-aligned annotation, which enables
the model to predict rotated detection on the target domain.

thermore, popular 2D annotation tools such as Sagemaker
Groundtruth 2 and VGG app 3 do not support rotated bounding box annotations. As a result, many popular detection
datasets only have axis-aligned annotations [3, 4, 11]. These
problems reduces the potential scope of the implementation
of rotated detectors. In this work, we introduce Knowledge
Combination to learn Rotated object detection, a training
scheme that only requires cheaper axis-aligned annotation
for the target dataset in order to predict rotated boxes.
Neural networks encode data into a latent space, which
is then decoded to optimize the given task. The latent embedding is an abstract representation of the data, containing
much richer information than the output [29]. Early works in
deep learning show that the model implicitly learns to detect
image features such as edges and corners [10, 12], which
can be used for more detailed tasks if decoded properly. We
believe decoding to a more precise task on the target domain can be learnt via co-optimizing with a strongly labelled
source dataset. We design a framework that combines task
knowledge of rotated detection from a source dataset, and
the domain knowledge of a disjoint class of objects in the
target dataset with only axis-aligned annotation, as shown
in Figure 1. This approach combines the advantage of both
weakly-supervised learning and transfer learning.
We follow a design principal that the framework should
2 https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/data-labeling/

* Corresponding author.
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/alanzty/KCR-Official

3 https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/ vgg/software/via/

15518

