This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Alignment Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Video-Text Retrieval
Xiaoshuai Hao1,2 , Wanqian Zhang1 ,* Dayan Wu1 , Fei Zhu1,2 , Bo Li1,2
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{haoxiaoshuai,zhangwanqian,wudayan,zhufei,libo}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Video-text retrieval is an emerging stream in both computer vision and natural language processing communities, which aims to find relevant videos given text queries.
In this paper, we study the notoriously challenging task,
i.e., Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Video-text Retrieval
(UDAVR), wherein training and testing data come from different distributions. Previous works merely alleviate the
domain shift, which however overlook the pairwise misalignment issue in target domain, i.e., there exist no semantic relationships between target videos and texts. To
tackle this, we propose a novel method named Dual Alignment Domain Adaptation (DADA). Specifically, we first introduce the cross-modal semantic embedding to generate
discriminative source features in a joint embedding space.
Besides, we utilize the video and text domain adaptations
to smoothly balance the minimization of the domain shifts.
To tackle the pairwise misalignment in target domain, we
propose the Dual Alignment Consistency (DAC) to fully exploit the semantic information of both modalities in target
domain. The proposed DAC adaptively aligns the videotext pairs which are more likely to be relevant in target domain, enabling that positive pairs are increasing progressively and the noisy ones will potentially be aligned in the
later stages. To that end, our method can generate more
truly aligned target pairs and ensure the discriminability of
target features. Compared with the state-of-the-art methods, DADA achieves 20.18% and 18.61% relative improvements on R@1 under the setting of TGIF→MSR-VTT and
TGIF→MSVD respectively, demonstrating the superiority
of our method.

1. Introduction
Video-text retrieval enables users to search videos with
a simple and natural language description. The de facto
paradigm is to learn high-level visual-textual embeddings
* Corresponding author.

Original distribution

Previous methods

Our method

Source Video

Target Video

Source Text

Target Text

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. Previous methods simply bring source and target features closer (blue and red
ovals are overlapping each other), whereas inevitably mixing target videos (red circles) and texts (red triangles) together, ignoring
whether they are semantically relevant or not. Instead, our method
exploits the semantic structures in target domain to adaptively generate truly aligned video-text pairs (dotted circles) and ensure the
discriminability of target data. Best viewed in color.

by off-the-shelf feature extractors, and to measure semantic
similarities in a joint embedding space [13, 42, 46, 63]. Despite their thrilling success, the primary assumption is that
training and testing data come from the same distribution,
which whereas may not hold in real scenarios.
To alleviate the domain shift problem, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has gained a lot of attention due to
its efficient training without the need of supervision in target
domain. UDA transfers knowledge from a labeled source
domain to an unlabeled target domain [15, 33, 40, 41, 53],
which has made remarkable progress in many fields, such as
image classification [33, 56], autonomous driving [54, 55],
medical image processing [35, 36], and video-based action
recognition [50, 52]. However, these methods are originally
designed for classification tasks, which might not be suitable for the video-text retrieval.
Note that in UDA Video-text Retrieval (UDAVR), there
exists no identical label set for source and target domains. The only supervision is the semantic relationship in
source dataset, which is also the general setting for UDA

18962

