This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transfer Knowledge from Head to Tail:
Uncertainty Calibration under Long-tailed Distribution
Jiahao Chen1 2 , Bing Su1 2 †
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
1

{nicelemon666, subingats}@gmail.com

Abstract
How to estimate the uncertainty of a given model is a
crucial problem. Current calibration techniques treat different classes equally and thus implicitly assume that the
distribution of training data is balanced, but ignore the fact
that real-world data often follows a long-tailed distribution. In this paper, we explore the problem of calibrating
the model trained from a long-tailed distribution. Due to
the difference between the imbalanced training distribution
and balanced test distribution, existing calibration methods
such as temperature scaling can not generalize well to this
problem. Specific calibration methods for domain adaptation are also not applicable because they rely on unlabeled
target domain instances which are not available. Models
trained from a long-tailed distribution tend to be more overconfident to head classes. To this end, we propose a novel
knowledge-transferring-based calibration method by estimating the importance weights for samples of tail classes to
realize long-tailed calibration. Our method models the distribution of each class as a Gaussian distribution and views
the source statistics of head classes as a prior to calibrate
the target distributions of tail classes. We adaptively transfer knowledge from head classes to get the target probability
density of tail classes. The importance weight is estimated
by the ratio of the target probability density over the source
probability density. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10LT, MNIST-LT, CIFAR-100-LT, and ImageNet-LT datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep neural networks, great
progress has been made in image classification. In addition
to performance, the uncertainty estimate of a given model
is also receiving increasing attention, as the confidence of
a model is expected to accurately reflect its performance.
† Corresponding author.

A model is called perfect calibrated if the predictive confidence of the model represents a good approximation of
its actual probability of correctness [9]. Model calibration
is particularly important in safety-critical applications, such
as autonomous driving, medical diagnosis, and robotics [1].
For example, if a prediction with low confidence is more
likely to be wrong, we can take countermeasures to avoid
unknown risks.
Most existing calibration techniques assume that the distribution of training data is balanced, i.e., each class has
a similar number of training instances, so that each class
is treated equally [9, 18, 25]. As shown in Fig. 1, the traditional calibration pipeline uses a balanced training set to
train the classification model and a balanced validation set
to obtain the calibration model, respectively. The target test
set is in the same distribution as the training/validation set.
However, data in the real-world often follows a long-tailed
distribution, i.e., a few dominant classes occupy most of
the instances, while much fewer examples are available for
most other classes [6, 16, 24]. When tested on balanced
test data, classification models trained from the training
set with a long-tailed distribution are naturally more overconfident to head classes. Only imbalanced validation set
with the same long-tailed distribution is available for calibrating such models since the validation set is often randomly divided from the training set.
Due to the different distributions between the imbalanced training data and the balanced test data [15], it is difficult for traditional calibration techniques to achieve balanced calibration among head classes and tail classes with
different levels of confidence estimations. For instance,
temperature scaling [9] with the temperature learned on a
validation set obtains degraded performance on the test set
if the two sets are in different distribution [29, 37]. As
shown in Fig. 2, a balanced test set suffers heavier overconfidence compared with a long-tailed validation set. Although temperature scaling can relieve such phenomenon,
there still exists overconfidence after calibration. Domain
adaptation calibration methods [29, 40] aim to generalize

19978

