This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Video as Stochastic Processes
for Fine-Grained Video Representation Learning
Heng Zhang1,2 * Daqing Liu3 * Qi Zheng4
Bing Su1,2†
Gaoling School of Articial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
JD Explore Academy, JD.com 4 The University of Sydney
1

zhangheng@ruc.edu.cn, {liudq.ustc, subingats}@gmail.com, qi.zheng@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
A meaningful video is semantically coherent and
changes smoothly. However, most existing ne-grained
video representation learning methods learn frame-wise
features by aligning frames across videos or exploring relevance between multiple views, neglecting the inherent dynamic process of each video. In this paper, we propose to
learn video representations by modeling Video as Stochastic Processes (VSP) via a novel process-based contrastive
learning framework, which aims to discriminate between
video processes and simultaneously capture the temporal
dynamics in the processes. Specically, we enforce the embeddings of the frame sequence of interest to approximate
a goal-oriented stochastic process, i.e., Brownian bridge,
in the latent space via a process-based contrastive loss. To
construct the Brownian bridge, we adapt specialized sampling strategies under different annotations for both selfsupervised and weakly-supervised learning. Experimental
results on four datasets show that VSP stands as a state-ofthe-art method for various video understanding tasks, including phase progression, phase classication, and frame
retrieval. Code is available at https://github.com/
hengRUC/VSP.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained video representation learning [11] is one of
the fundamental problems in computer vision, which has
great practical value in various real-world applications such
as action phase classication [11, 40], phase boundary detection [26], and video object segmentation [7, 9, 22, 33].
The way to model videos, especially the temporal dynamics, is the core problem of video representation learning
and is highly relevant to available data annotations. Pioneer
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

works [4,29] directly model video as 3D data where temporal is one dimension, and they require large-scale humangenerated annotations for representation learning. However, it is labor-intensive and time-consuming to collect
those annotations. Besides, human-generated annotations
hinder domain generalization to multiple downstream tasks.
To alleviate the requirement on labeled data, some recent works [11–13] model the video alignment (Figure 1(a))
across the temporal dimensions by the cycle-consistency
loss [11] or temporal alignment loss [13]. Their basic assumption is that two videos of the same action can be
aligned over temporal ordering in the embedding space, and
the latent correspondences across sequence pairs can be regarded as a supervisory signal. However, these methods essentially work in a weakly-supervised manner that requires
video-level annotations to construct video pairs, impeding
their application in the real-world scene where the semantic
labels are absent.
As an alternative, self-supervised video representation
learning [5, 26] explores the view relevance (Figure 1(b))
between two augmented views of one video. By modeling video as a sequence along the temporal dimensions,
they elaborately construct two views through a series of
spatio-temporal data augmentations. The training objective is to encourage the relevance of two augmented views
to conform to their assumptions, e.g., spatio-temporal contrast [26] or similarity distribution [5]. However, those
methods are sensitive to complex hand-craft view augmentation thus suffering from sub-optimal performance.
As crucial and intrinsic cues, the dynamics of videos
impose temporal correlations among successive frames.
Therefore, the evolution process of the corresponding negrained representations should follow coherent constraints,
which can be modeled as a stochastic process. To this
end, we propose a new perspective that considers Video as
Stochastic Processes (VSP) to explicitly capture the temporal dynamics of videos by exploring process agreement

2225

