This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Multiview Point Cloud Registration with Reliable
Pose Graph Initialization and History Reweighting
Haiping Wang*
Wuhan University
Yulan Guo
Sun Yat-sen University

Yuan Liu*
The University of Hong Kong

Yu-Shen Liu
Tsinghua University

Zhen Dong†
Wuhan University

Wenping Wang
Texas A&M University

Bisheng Yang†
Wuhan University

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new method for the multiview registration of point cloud. Previous multiview registration methods rely on exhaustive pairwise registration to
construct a densely-connected pose graph and apply Iteratively Reweighted Least Square (IRLS) on the pose graph to
compute the scan poses. However, constructing a denselyconnected graph is time-consuming and contains lots of
outlier edges, which makes the subsequent IRLS struggle to
find correct poses. To address the above problems, we first
propose to use a neural network to estimate the overlap between scan pairs, which enables us to construct a sparse
but reliable pose graph. Then, we design a novel history
reweighting function in the IRLS scheme, which has strong
robustness to outlier edges on the graph. In comparison
with existing multiview registration methods, our method
achieves 11% higher registration recall on the 3DMatch
dataset and ∼ 13% lower registration errors on the ScanNet dataset while reducing ∼ 70% required pairwise registrations. Comprehensive ablation studies are conducted to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our designs. The source
code is available at https://github.com/WHUUSI3DV/SGHR.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a prerequisite for many tasks
such as 3D reconstruction [17, 25, 32] and 3D segmentation [27, 35]. Most recent registration methods [1, 7, 22, 28,
39, 45, 48, 56] mainly focus on pairwise registration of two
partial point clouds (scans), which can only reconstruct a
part of the scene. In order to get a completed scene recon* Both authors contribute equally to this research.
† Corresponding authors: [dongzhenwhu, bshyang]@whu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Overview. (1) Given N unaligned partial scans, our target is to register all these scans into (4) a completed point cloud.
Our method has two contributions. (2) We learn a global feature
vector to initialize a sparse pose graph which contains much less
outliers and reduces the required number of pairwise registrations.
(3) We propose a novel IRLS scheme. In our IRLS scheme, we
initialize weights from both global features and pairwise registrations. Then, we design a history reweighting function to iteratively
refine poses, which improves the robustness to outliers.

struction, all partial point clouds should be simultaneously
aligned, which is called multiview registration. Due to its
complexity, multiview point cloud registration receives less
attention recently and only few recent studies propose multiview registration methods [18, 21, 30, 53, 54].
Given N unaligned partial point clouds, multiview registration aims to find a globally-consistent pose for every
partial point cloud. A commonly-adopted pipeline of multiview registration consists of two phases [54]. First, a
pairwise registration algorithm [28, 45, 48] is applied to ex-

9506

