This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detection Hub: Unifying Object Detection Datasets via Query Adaptation on
Language Embedding
Lingchen Meng1,2 Xiyang Dai3 Yinpeng Chen3 Pengchuan Zhang3 Dongdong Chen3
Mengchen Liu3 Jianfeng Wang3 Zuxuan Wu1,2† Lu Yuan3 Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft

Abstract

Object365
(a)

Combining multiple datasets enables performance boost
on many computer vision tasks. But similar trend has not
been witnessed in object detection when combining multiple datasets due to two inconsistencies among detection
datasets: taxonomy difference and domain gap. In this paper, we address these challenges by a new design (named
Detection Hub) that is dataset-aware and category-aligned.
It not only mitigates the dataset inconsistency but also provides coherent guidance for the detector to learn across
multiple datasets. In particular, the dataset-aware design
is achieved by learning a dataset embedding that is used
to adapt object queries as well as convolutional kernels in
detection heads. The categories across datasets are semantically aligned into a unified space by replacing one-hot category representations with word embedding and leveraging
the semantic coherence of language embedding. Detection
Hub fulfills the benefits of large data on object detection.
Experiments demonstrate that joint training on multiple
datasets achieves significant performance gains over training on each dataset alone. Detection Hub further achieves
SoTA performance on UODB benchmark with wide variety
of datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent computer vision development has demonstrated
significant benefits of leveraging large-scale data for computer vision tasks, such as image retrieval [31], image
recognition [47] and video recognition [39]. However, limited effort has been explored for the object detection task
due to the lack of a unified large-scale data. A naive attempt
is to combine all annotated data from different sources.
† Corresponding author.

baseball,
bat,hat,
person,
bracelet,
sneakers

COCO
sports ball,
person,
baseball bat

Visual Genome Sweatband,
baseball mitt, baseball,
glove, uniform, sock,
logo, helmet, head,
catcher, batter, bat
(b)

Language Embedding Space
Sweatband

Baseball Person

Qcoco

Qvg
Logo

Sports ball
Sneakers

Qo365
Figure 1. An illustration of the challenges of combing multiple
datasets. (a) There are significant domain gaps between different datasets: the taxonomy are different and the annotations are
inconsistent; (b) Even under a unified language embedding, the
distribution of categories among datasets are significant different
and requires special handling

However, due to the diversity of objects and the cost of annotating bounding boxes in images, traditional object detection datasets are collected in a domain-specific way, where a
limited number of interested categories are regarded as foregrounds and the rest of objects as backgrounds. This results

11402

