This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProTéGé: Untrimmed Pretraining for Video Temporal Grounding by Video
Temporal Grounding
Lan Wang⋆‡

Gaurav Mittal⋆†
Sandra Sajeev†
Ye Yu†
Matthew Hall†
‡
†
Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Mei Chen
†
‡
Microsoft
Michigan State University

{gaurav.mittal, yu.ye, mathall, ssajeev, mei.chen}@microsoft.com
{wanglan3,vishnu}@msu.edu

Downstream
Untrimmed Video

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video temporal grounding (VTG) is the video-language
multimodal task of localizing which part of an arbitrarily
long untrimmed video can be best associated with a given
natural language text query. VTG has a wide range of applications, such as information retrieval and robotics. Figure 1 shows a sample video-text pair for the VTG task and
illustrates the primary challenge in grounding an unconstrained natural language text query in a long untrimmed
video, namely, the need for a fine-grained understanding of
the spatio-temporal dynamics in the video.
⋆ Authors with equal contribution.

This work was done as Lan Wang’s internship project at Microsoft.

…

Ground
0.0-8.4s
Truth “A person kneeling on the floor
Video-text Pretraining
on Trimmed Videos
ProTéGé: Video-text
Pretraining on
Untrimmed Videos

13.3-22.4s

0.0-10.4s

13.4-22.3s

(a)

…

“Use a watercolor pen
to fill in the gaps.”

(b) Video-text Pretraining on
Trimmed Videos

13.4-19.3s

0.0-8.9s

Cosine Similarity of
Downstream Untrimmed
Video Features with Q2

“The person climbing mountain.”

…
“The person pours something into
a glass. (Q2)

talks on a phone.” (Q1)

Cosine Similarity of
Downstream Untrimmed
Video Features with Q2

“Reinforce the
handrail with
screws.”

…

Video temporal grounding (VTG) is the task of localizing a given natural language text query in an arbitrarily
long untrimmed video. While the task involves untrimmed
videos, all existing VTG methods leverage features from
video backbones pretrained on trimmed videos. This is
largely due to the lack of large-scale well-annotated VTG
dataset to perform pretraining. As a result, the pretrained
features lack a notion of temporal boundaries leading to
the video-text alignment being less distinguishable between
correct and incorrect locations. We present ProTéGé as
the first method to perform VTG-based untrimmed pretraining to bridge the gap between trimmed pretrained backbones and downstream VTG tasks. ProTéGé reconfigures
the HowTo100M dataset, with noisily correlated video-text
pairs, into a VTG dataset and introduces a novel Video-Text
Similarity-based Grounding Module and a pretraining objective to make pretraining robust to noise in HowTo100M.
Extensive experiments on multiple datasets across downstream tasks with all variations of supervision validate that
pretrained features from ProTéGé can significantly outperform features from trimmed pretrained backbones on VTG.

…

“Next step is to
fill the channel”

(c) ProTéGé: Video-text Pretraining on
Untrimmed Videos

Figure 1. (a) Comparison between video-text trimmed and
untrimmed pretraining on grounding text Q1 and Q2 in an
untrimmed video. Untrimmed video-text pretraining shows
stronger grounding capability. (b) and (c) show box plots of cosine similarity after joint video-text pretraining on trimmed and
untrimmed videos respectively, between video features aligning
with text (blue) and not aligning with text (red). We observe that
compared to using trimmed videos (b), cosine similarities of video
features aligning with text are higher and farther apart from that
of video features not aligning with text when using untrimmed
videos (c), thus illustrating the impact of untrimmed pretraining.

While there are multiple approaches for VTG, all existing methods, to the best of our knowledge, rely on video
backbones pretrained on trimmed videos (such as Kinetics
[15]) to obtain the visual features as part of their respective
approaches. Such a design choice introduces a disconnect
between the downstream VTG task on untrimmed videos
and the trimmed videos used for pretraining the model from
which video features are derived. For example, Fig 1 shows
that the grounding predictions (in orange), when using a
backbone jointly pretrained on trimmed videos and text,
do not match adequately with the ground truth. Due to
pretraining on trimmed videos, the video backbone is insensitive to temporal boundaries since the training objective is to associate an entire trimmed video to a label/text

6575

