This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniVidar: Omnidirectional Depth Estimation from Multi-Fisheye Images
Sheng Xie1 , Daochuan Wang2 , Yunhui Liu1,2,3, *
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen1
Hong Kong Center for Logistics Robotics2 , The Chinese University of Hong Kong3
xiesheng@stu.hit.edu.cn, wangdaochuan@hotmail.com, yhliu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Estimating depth from four large field of view (FoV) cameras has been a difficult and understudied problem. In this
paper, we proposed a novel and simple system that can convert this difficult problem into easier binocular depth estimation. We name this system OmniVidar, as its results are
similar to LiDAR, but rely only on vision. OmniVidar contains three components: (1) a new camera model to address
the shortcomings of existing models, (2) a new multi-fisheye
camera based epipolar rectification method for solving the
image distortion and simplifying the depth estimation problem, (3) an improved binocular depth estimation network,
which achieves a better balance between accuracy and efficiency. Unlike other omnidirectional stereo vision methods,
OmniVidar does not contain any 3D convolution, so it can
achieve higher resolution depth estimation at fast speed.
Results demonstrate that OmniVidar outperforms all other
methods in terms of accuracy and performance.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from images is an important research
field in computer vision, as it enables the acquisition of
depth information with low-cost cameras for a wide range
of applications. Traditional stereo cameras with pinhole
lenses are limited in their FoV. However, many scenarios
require an omnidirectional depth map, such as autonomous
driving [42] and robot navigation [13, 43]. Although there
are active sensors available that can provide omnidirectional
depth information, such as LiDAR [25], their high cost
makes them less accessible than stereo vision. Passive sensors, such as RGB cameras, are a common choice for depth
estimation due to their low cost, lightweight, and low power
consumption. To increase the FoV, fisheye lenses are often
introduced into stereo vision setups.
Over the past few decades, various methods have been
proposed for depth estimation using fisheye cameras. These
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our prototype that built with four 250◦ fisheye cameras
and its results of dense inverse distance map and cloud points. It
can get great depth estimation results in real scenes and achieve
real-time performance on modern GPU.

include the binocular fisheye system [31], up-down fisheye
system [13], and catadioptric cameras [17, 23, 32]. However, all of these approaches have limitations. The binocular fisheye system cannot provide an omnidirectional perception. The up-down fisheye system and catadioptric cameras can offer horizontal 360◦ depth perception, but their
vertical FoV is limited. Furthermore, catadioptric cameras
tend to be bulky, challenging to calibrate, and prone to errors. It turns out that the best choice for omnidirectional
depth estimation is a system consisting of four cameras
with extremely wide FoV (> 180◦ ). This system enables

21529

