This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Counterfactual Visual Explanations
Guillaume Jeanneret, Loı̈c Simon, Frédéric Jurie
University of Caen Normandie, ENSICAEN, CNRS, France
guillaume.jeanneret-sanmiguel@unicaen.fr

Abstract
Counterfactual explanations and adversarial attacks
have a related goal: flipping output labels with minimal
perturbations regardless of their characteristics. Yet, adversarial attacks cannot be used directly in a counterfactual explanation perspective, as such perturbations are perceived as noise and not as actionable and understandable
image modifications. Building on the robust learning literature, this paper proposes an elegant method to turn adversarial attacks into semantically meaningful perturbations,
without modifying the classifiers to explain. The proposed
approach hypothesizes that Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models are excellent regularizers for avoiding highfrequency and out-of-distribution perturbations when generating adversarial attacks. The paper’s key idea is to build
attacks through a diffusion model to polish them. This allows studying the target model regardless of its robustification level. Extensive experimentation shows the advantages of our counterfactual explanation approach over current State-of-the-Art in multiple testbeds.

1. Introduction
The research branch of explainable artificial intelligence
has yielded remarkable results, gradually opening the machine learning black boxes. The production of counterfactual explanations (CE) has become one of the promising pipelines for explainability, especially in computer vision [25, 28, 49, 54]. As a matter of fact, CE are an intuitive
way to expose how an input instance can be minimally modified to steer the desired change in the model’s output. More
precisely, CE answers the following: what does X have to
change to alter the prediction from Y to Y ′ ? From a user
perspective, these explanations are easy to understand since
they are concise and illustrated by examples. Henceforth,
companies have adopted CE as an interpretation methodology to legally justify the decision-making of machine learning models [60]. To better appreciate the potential of CE,
one may consider the following scenario: a client goes to a
photo booth to take some ID photos, and the system claims

the photos are invalid for such usage. Instead of performing
random attempts to abide by the administration criteria, an
approach based on CE could provide visual indications of
what the client should fix.
The main objective of CE is to add minimalistic semantic
changes in the image to flip the original model’s prediction.
Yet, these generated explanations must accomplish several
objectives [28,49,60]. A CE must be valid, meaning that the
CE has to change the prediction of the model. Secondly, the
modifications have to be sparse and proximal to the input
data, targeting to provide simple and concise explanations.
In addition, the CE method should be able to generate diverse explanations. If a trait is the most important for a certain class among other features, diverse explanations should
change this attribute most frequently. Finally, the semantic
changes must be realistic. When the CE method inserts outof-distribution artifacts in the input image, it is difficult to
interpret whether the flipping decision was because of the
inserted object or because of the shifting of the distribution,
making the explanation unclear.
Adversarial attacks share a common goal with CE: flipping the classifier’s prediction. For traditional and nonrobust visual classifiers, generating these attacks on input
instances creates imperceptible noise. Even though it has
been shown that it contains meaningful changes [24] and
that adversarial noise and counterfactual perturbations are
related [13, 23], adversarial attacks have lesser value. Indeed, the modifications present in the adversaries are unnoticeable by the user and leave him with no real feedback.
Contrary to the previous observations, many papers (e.g.,
[47]) evidenced that adversarial attacks toward robust classifiers generate semantic changes in the input images. This
has led works [51, 70] to explore robust models to produce
data using adversarial attacks. In the context of counterfactual explanations, this is advantageous [5, 52] because the
optimization will produce semantic changes to induce the
flipping of the label.
Then two challenges arise when employing adversarial
attacks for counterfactual explanations. On the one hand,
when studying a classifier, we must be able to explain its
behavior regardless of its characteristics. So, a naive ap-

16425

