This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Precision and Confidence:
A Train-Time Loss for Calibrating Object Detection
Muhammad Akhtar Munir1,2 Muhammad Haris Khan1 Salman Khan1,3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Information Technology University
3
Australian National University 4 Linköping University
{akhtar.munir,muhammad.haris,salman.khan,fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled astounding progress in several vision-based problems. Despite
showing high predictive accuracy, recently, several works
have revealed that they tend to provide overconfident predictions and thus are poorly calibrated. The majority of
the works addressing the miscalibration of DNNs fall under the scope of classification and consider only in-domain
predictions. However, there is little to no progress in studying the calibration of DNN-based object detection models,
which are central to many vision-based safety-critical applications. In this paper, inspired by the train-time calibration methods, we propose a novel auxiliary loss formulation
that explicitly aims to align the class confidence of bounding boxes with the accurateness of predictions (i.e. precision). Since the original formulation of our loss depends
on the counts of true positives and false positives in a minibatch, we develop a differentiable proxy of our loss that can
be used during training with other application-specific loss
functions. We perform extensive experiments on challenging in-domain and out-domain scenarios with six benchmark datasets including MS-COCO, Cityscapes, Sim10k,
and BDD100k. Our results reveal that our train-time loss
surpasses strong calibration baselines in reducing calibration error for both in and out-domain scenarios. Our source
code and pre-trained models are available at https://
github.com/akhtarvision/bpc_calibration

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable
results in various mainstream computer vision tasks, including image classification [5, 10, 33], object detection
[29, 36, 39], and semantic segmentation [2, 34]. However,
some recent works [9,26] show that these deep models have
the tendency to provide overconfident predictions. This
greatly limits the overall trust in their predictions, especially
when they are part of the decision-making system in safety-

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

18

20

D-ECE
Out-Domain (FoggyCS)

In-Domain (CS)

(a)

6

8

10

12

14
16
D-ECE
Out-Domain (FoggyCS)

In-Domain (CS)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison in terms of Detection Expected Calibration Error (D-ECE) on in-domain Cityscapes (CS) and out-domain
FoggyCS datasets. (a) Detection model trained with our proposed
BPC loss provides the lowest D-ECE (lower is better). (b) Posthoc and train-time calibration methods for classification: MDCA
[11] and MbLS [25] are sub-optimal for object detection. In contrast, BPC loss better calibrates in-domain and out-domain detections.

critical applications [6, 8, 32]. For instance, a decision system in an AI-powered healthcare diagnostic application can
safely reject predictions with low confidence, however, if
it mistakenly skips reviewing an incorrect prediction with
high confidence, it can lead to serious consequences.
An important underlying reason behind the miscalibration of DNNs is training with zero-entropy supervision signal which makes them overconfident, and thus inadvertently
miscalibrated. There have been few attempts towards improving the model calibration. A prominent technique is
based on a post-processing step that transforms the outputs of a trained model with parameter(s) learned on a
held-out validation set [9, 14, 15, 19, 28]. Although sim-

11474

