This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Noise2Noise: Efficient Image Denoising without any Data
Youssef Mansour and Reinhard Heckel
Technical University of Munich and Munich Center for Machine Learning
Munich, Germany
y.mansour@tum.de, reinhard.heckel@tum.de

Abstract
Recently, self-supervised neural networks have
shown excellent image denoising performance. However, current dataset free methods are either computationally expensive, require a noise model, or have inadequate image quality. In this work we show that a simple
2-layer network, without any training data or knowledge
of the noise distribution, can enable high-quality image denoising at low computational cost. Our approach
is motivated by Noise2Noise and Neighbor2Neighbor
and works well for denoising pixel-wise independent
noise. Our experiments on artificial, real-world camera, and microscope noise show that our method termed
ZS-N2N (Zero Shot Noise2Noise) often outperforms existing dataset-free methods at a reduced cost, making it
suitable for use cases with scarce data availability and
limited compute.

poor denoising quality [28], or do not generalise to different noise distributions or levels [15, 24]. We propose
a method that builds on the recent Noise2Noise [17] and
Neighbour2Neighbour [12] papers and aims to circumvent these issues to reach a good trade-off between denoising quality and computational resources. We make
only minimal assumptions on the noise statistics (pixelwise independence), and do not require training data.
Our method does not require an explicit noise model,
and is therefore suitable for various noise types and can
be employed when the noise distribution or level are unknown. The only assumption we make about the noise
is that it is unstructured and has zero mean.
In a nutshell, we convolve the noisy test image with
two fixed filters, which yields two downsampled images.
We next train a lightweight network with regularization
to map one downsampled image to the other. Our strategy builds on the recent Noise2Noise [17] and Neighbour2Neighbour [12] papers, however we take those
methods one step further by enabling denoising without
any training data. Even with an extremely small network
and without any training data, our method achieves good
denoising quality and often even outperforms large networks trained on datasets.
The key attributes of our work are as follows:

1. Introduction
Image denoising is the process of removing distortions from images, to enhance them visually and to reconstruct fine details. The latter is especially important
for medical images, where fine details are necessary for
an accurate diagnosis.
Current state-of-the-art image denoising techniques
rely on large data sets of clean-noisy image pairs and often consist of a neural network trained to map the noisy
to the clean image. The drawbacks of dataset based
methods are that data collection, even without ground
truths, is expensive and time-consuming, and second, a
network trained on dataset suffers from a performance
drop if the test images come from a different distribution of images. These drawbacks motivate research in
dataset-free methods.
All current zero-shot models are either suitable only
for specific noise distributions and need previous knowledge of the noise level [7, 20], require a lot of compute
(time, memory, GPU) to denoise an image [24], have

14018

• Compute. Dataset free neural network based algorithms [24, 28] require solving an optimization
problem involving millions of parameters to denoise an image. The huge parameter count requires large memory storage, advanced GPUs, and
long denoising times. In this work we show that
our method, that utilizes a simple 2 layer network,
with only 20k parameters, can often outperform
networks with millions of parameters while reducing the computational cost significantly and being
easily executable on a CPU.
• Generalisation. Existing zero-shot methods often
to do not generalise well. For example, BM3D [7],
a classical denoising algorithm does not generalize well to non-Gaussian noise, and blind spot net-

