This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DA Wand: Distortion-Aware Selection using Neural Mesh Parameterization
Richard Liu
University of Chicago

Noam Aigerman
Adobe Research

Vladimir G. Kim
Adobe Research

Rana Hanocka
University of Chicago

Figure 1. DA Wand enables interactive decaling through a conditional selection of local distortion-aware patches. Our method identifies
large patches within both developable and high-curvature regions which induce a low distortion parameterization.

Abstract
We present a neural technique for learning to select a
local sub-region around a point which can be used for
mesh parameterization. The motivation for our framework
is driven by interactive workflows used for decaling, texturing, or painting on surfaces. Our key idea is to incorporate segmentation probabilities as weights of a classical parameterization method, implemented as a novel differentiable parameterization layer within a neural network
framework. We train a segmentation network to select 3D
regions that are parameterized into 2D and penalized by the
resulting distortion, giving rise to segmentations which are
distortion-aware. Following training, a user can use our
system to interactively select a point on the mesh and obtain a large, meaningful region around the selection which
induces a low-distortion parameterization. Our code1 and
project2 are publicly available.

1. Introduction
Many interactive workflows for decaling, texturing, or
painting on a 3D mesh require extracting a large surface
patch around a point that can be mapped to the 2D plane
with low distortion. Unlike global parameterization approaches that map the entire mesh to 2D while introducing
as few cuts as possible [1, 7–9, 17, 35, 38, 41, 43, 44, 53, 54,
56]), this work focuses on segmenting a local sub-region
around a point of interest on a mesh for parameterization
[25,36,45,46,60,69,70,73]. Local parameterizations are advantageous in certain modeling settings because they are in1 https://github.com/threedle/DA-Wand
2 https://threedle.github.io/DA-Wand/

herently user-interactive, can achieve lower distortion than
their global counterparts, and are computationally more efficient. To date, however, techniques for extracting a surface patch that is amenable to local parameterization have
largely relied on heuristics balancing various compactness,
patch size, and developability priors [18].
This work instead takes a data-driven approach to learn
distortion-aware local segmentations that are optimal for
local parameterization. Our proposed framework uses
a novel differentiable parameterization layer to predict
a patch around a point and its corresponding UV map.
This enables self-supervised training, in which our network
is encouraged to predict area-maximizing and distortionminimizing patches through a series of carefully constructed priors, allowing us to sidestep the scarcity of
parameterization-labeled datasets.
We name our system the Distortion-Aware Wand (DA
Wand), which given an input mesh and initial triangle selection, outputs soft segmentation probabilities. We incorporate these probabilities into our parameterization layer by
devising a weighted version of a classical parameterization
method - LSCM [35] - which we call wLSCM. This adaptation gives rise to a probability-guided parameterization,
over which a distortion energy can be computed to enable
self-supervised training. We prove a theorem stating that the
wLSCM UV map converges to the LSCM UV map as the
soft probabilities converge to a binary segmentation mask,
which establishes the direct relation between probabilities
and binary segmentation in the parameterization context.
Reducing the distortion of the UV map and maximizing the segmentation area are competing objectives, as UV
distortion scales monotonically with patch size. Naively
summing these objectives leads to poor optimization with

16739

