This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScaleDet: A Scalable Multi-Dataset Object Detector
Yanbei Chen, Manchen Wang, Abhay Mittal, Zhenlin Xu,
Paolo Favaro, Joseph Tighe, Davide Modolo
AWS AI Labs
train across multiple upstream datasets

Abstract
Multi-dataset training provides a viable solution for exploiting heterogeneous large-scale datasets without extra
annotation cost. In this work, we propose a scalable multidataset detector (ScaleDet) that can scale up its generalization across datasets when increasing the number of training datasets. Unlike existing multi-dataset learners that
mostly rely on manual relabelling efforts or sophisticated
optimizations to unify labels across datasets, we introduce
a simple yet scalable formulation to derive a unified semantic label space for multi-dataset training. ScaleDet is
trained by visual-textual alignment to learn the label assignment with label semantic similarities across datasets.
Once trained, ScaleDet can generalize well on any given
upstream and downstream datasets with seen and unseen
classes. We conduct extensive experiments using LVIS,
COCO, Objects365, OpenImages as upstream datasets, and
13 datasets from Object Detection in the Wild (ODinW)
as downstream datasets. Our results show that ScaleDet
achieves compelling strong model performance with an
mAP of 50.7 on LVIS, 58.8 on COCO, 46.8 on Objects365,
76.2 on OpenImages, and 71.8 on ODinW, surpassing stateof-the-art detectors with the same backbone.

1. Introduction
Major advances in computer vision have been driven
by large-scale datasets, such as ImageNet [9] and OpenImages [22] for image classification, or Kinetics [6] and
ActivityNet [2] for video recognition. Large-scale datasets
are crucial for training recognition models that generalize
well. However, the collection of massive annotated datasets
is costly and time-consuming. This is especially prominent in detection and segmentation tasks that require detailed annotations at the bounding box or pixel level. To
exploit more training data without extra annotation cost, recent works unify multiple datasets to learn from more visual categories and more diverse visual domains for detection [38, 40, 47, 51] and segmentation [25, 37].
To train an object detector across multiple datasets, we
need to tackle several challenges. First, multi-dataset train-

OpenImages: person, footwear,…

Objects365: person, sneakers,…

…

sneakers

bottle

footwear

elephant

satchel

person

ScaleDet: learn in a unified semantic label space

…

OpenImages: sandwich,…

Thermal: dog, people

Aquarium: fish,…

test on any upstream or downstream dataset

Figure 1. Our scalable multi-dataset detector (ScaleDet) learns
across datasets in a unified semantic label space by visual-textual
alignment with label semantic similarities. At test time, ScaleDet
can generalize on any given upstream and downstream dataset.

ing requires unifying the heterogeneous label spaces across
datasets, as label definitions are dataset-specific. The labels
from two datasets may indicate the same or similar objects.
For example, “footwear” and “sneakers” are two different
labels in OpenImages [24] and Objects365 [34], but refer to
the same type of objects (see Figure 1). Second, the training setups may be inconsistent among datasets, as different
data sampling strategies and learning schedules are often required for datasets of different sizes. Third, a multi-dataset
model should perform better than single-dataset models on
individual datasets. This is challenging due to the heterogeneous label spaces, the domain discrepancy across datasets,
and the risk of overfitting to the larger datasets.
To resolve the above challenges, existing work resorts to
manually relabelings class labels [25], or training multiple
dataset-specific classifiers with constraints to relate labels
across datasets [51]. However, these methods lack scalability. The manual relabeling effort and the model complex-

7288

