This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive and Explainable Region-guided Radiology Report Generation
Tim Tanida1,∗
Philip Müller1,∗
Georgios Kaissis1,2
Daniel Rueckert1,3
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, 3 Imperial College London
{tim.tanida, philip.j.mueller, g.kaissis, daniel.rueckert}@tum.de

Abstract
The automatic generation of radiology reports has the
potential to assist radiologists in the time-consuming task
of report writing. Existing methods generate the full report from image-level features, failing to explicitly focus
on anatomical regions in the image. We propose a simple yet effective region-guided report generation model
that detects anatomical regions and then describes individual, salient regions to form the final report. While
previous methods generate reports without the possibility
of human intervention and with limited explainability, our
method opens up novel clinical use cases through additional interactive capabilities and introduces a high degree of transparency and explainability. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate our method’s effectiveness in report
generation, outperforming previous state-of-the-art models,
and highlight its interactive capabilities. The code and
checkpoints are available at https://github.com/
ttanida/rgrg .

Generated Report

Region-guided
Report Generation
Model

The right lung is clear.
Mild to moderate left
pleural e usion as
well as adjacent left
basal atelectasis.
Mild to moderate
cardiomegaly. There
is thoracolumbar
dextroscoliosis.

Figure 1. Our approach at a glance. Unique anatomical regions
of the chest are detected, the most salient regions are selected for
the report and individual sentences are generated for each region.
Consequently, each sentence in the generated report is explicitly
grounded on an anatomical region.

As such, current radiology report generation methods tend
to generate reports that are factually incomplete (i.e., missing key observations in the image) and inconsistent (i.e.,
containing factually wrong information) [28]. This is further exacerbated by current methods utilizing image-level
visual features to generate reports, failing to explicitly focus on salient anatomical regions in the image. Another issue regarding existing methods is the lack of explainability.
A highly accurate yet opaque report generation system may
not achieve adoption in the safety-critical medical domain if
the rationale behind a generated report is not transparent and
explainable [11, 14, 27]. Lastly, current methods lack interactivity and adaptability to radiologists’ preferences. E.g.,
a radiologist may want a model to focus exclusively on specific anatomical regions within an image.
ff

1. Introduction
Chest radiography (chest X-ray) is the most common
type of medical image examination in the world and is critical for identifying common thoracic diseases such as pneumonia and lung cancer [19, 37]. Given a chest X-ray, radiologists examine each depicted anatomical region and describe findings of both normal and abnormal salient regions
in a textual report [12]. Given the large volume of chest Xrays to be examined in daily clinical practice, this often becomes a time-consuming and difficult task, which is further
exacerbated by a shortage of trained radiologists in many
healthcare systems [3, 40, 41]. As a result, automatic radiology report generation has emerged as an active research
area with the potential to alleviate radiologists’ workload.
Generating radiology reports is a difficult task since reports consist of multiple sentences, each describing a specific medical observation of a specific anatomical region.
∗ Equal contribution

Inspired by radiologists’ working patterns, we propose
a simple yet effective Region-Guided Radiology Report
Generation (RGRG) method to address the challenges highlighted before. Instead of relying on image-level visual
features, our work is the first in using object detection
to directly extract localized visual features of anatomical
regions, which are used to generate individual, anatomyspecific sentences describing any pathologies to form the
final report. Conceptually, we divide and conquer the difficult task of generating a complete and consistent report
from the whole image into a series of simple tasks of gen-

7433

