This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vid2Seq: Large-Scale Pretraining of a Visual Language Model
for Dense Video Captioning
Antoine Yang† * Arsha Nagrani§ Paul Hongsuck Seo§ Antoine Miech♯
Jordi Pont-Tuset§ Ivan Laptev† Josef Sivic¶ Cordelia Schmid§
§
♯

Google Research

DeepMind

¶

†

Inria Paris and Département d’informatique de l’ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech Technical University in Prague
https://antoyang.github.io/vid2seq.html

Large-scale pretraining from narrated videos

Dense video captioning

Vid2Seq
Hey guys today I am going
to teach you how to ski

The kids make it look easy

First slope, congratz!

<1s><8s>The man is fastening the dog. <20s><50s>The dogs are pulling the sled. <45s><49s>The man is saying hello.

Figure 1. Vid2Seq is a visual language model that predicts dense event captions together with their temporal grounding in the video by
generating a single sequence of tokens (right). This ability is enabled by large-scale pretraining on unlabeled narrated videos (left).

Abstract
In this work, we introduce Vid2Seq, a multi-modal
single-stage dense event captioning model pretrained on
narrated videos which are readily-available at scale. The
Vid2Seq architecture augments a language model with special time tokens, allowing it to seamlessly predict event
boundaries and textual descriptions in the same output sequence. Such a unified model requires large-scale training
data, which is not available in current annotated datasets.
We show that it is possible to leverage unlabeled narrated
videos for dense video captioning, by reformulating sentence boundaries of transcribed speech as pseudo event
boundaries, and using the transcribed speech sentences as
pseudo event captions. The resulting Vid2Seq model pretrained on the YT-Temporal-1B dataset improves the state
of the art on a variety of dense video captioning benchmarks including YouCook2, ViTT and ActivityNet Captions.
Vid2Seq also generalizes well to the tasks of video paragraph captioning and video clip captioning, and to few-shot
settings. Our code is publicly available at [1].

1. Introduction
Dense video captioning requires the temporal localization and captioning of all events in an untrimmed video [45,
98, 127]. This differs from standard video captioning [62,
69, 79], where the goal is to produce a single caption for
a given short video clip. Dense captioning is significantly
more difficult, as it raises the additional complexity of localizing the events in minutes-long videos. However, it also
* This work was done when the first author was an intern at Google.

benefits from long-range video information. This task is
potentially highly useful in applications such as large-scale
video search and indexing, where the video content is not
segmented into clips.
Existing methods mostly resort to two-stage approaches [36, 45, 96], where events are first localized and
then captioned. To further enhance the inter-task interaction between event localization and captioning, some approaches have introduced models that jointly solve the two
tasks [19,98,127]. However, often these approaches still require task-specific components such as event counters [98].
Furthermore, they exclusively train on manually annotated
datasets of limited size [34, 45, 126], which makes it difficult to effectively solve the task. To address these issues,
we take inspiration from recent sequence-to-sequence models pretrained on Web data which have been successful on a
wide range of vision and language tasks [3,10,12,101,113].
First, we propose a video language model, called
Vid2Seq. We start from a language model trained on Web
text [77] and augment it with special time tokens that represent timestamps in the video. Given video frames and transcribed speech inputs, the resulting model jointly predicts
all event captions and their corresponding temporal boundaries by generating a single sequence of discrete tokens, as
illustrated in Figure 1 (right). Such a model therefore has
the potential to learn multi-modal dependencies between
the different events in the video via attention [90]. However
this requires large-scale training data, which is not available in current dense video captioning datasets [34,45,126].
Moreover, collecting manual annotations of dense captions
for videos is expensive and prohibitive at scale.

10714

