This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-supervised Single-view Image Relighting
Renjiao Yi,* Chenyang Zhu,* Kai Xu†
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
We present a learning-based approach to relight a single image of Lambertian and low-frequency specular objects. Our method enables inserting objects from photographs into new scenes and relighting them under the
new environment lighting, which is essential for AR applications. To relight the object, we solve both inverse rendering and re-rendering. To resolve the ill-posed inverse
rendering, we propose a weakly-supervised method by a
low-rank constraint. To facilitate the weakly-supervised
training, we contribute Relit, a large-scale (750K images)
dataset of videos with aligned objects under changing illuminations. For re-rendering, we propose a differentiable specular rendering layer to render low-frequency
non-Lambertian materials under various illuminations of
spherical harmonics. The whole pipeline is end-to-end and
efficient, allowing for a mobile app implementation of AR
object insertion. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance. Project
page: https://renjiaoyi.github.io/relighting/.

1. Introduction
Object insertion finds extensive applications in Mobile
AR. Existing AR object insertions require a perfect mesh
of the object being inserted. Mesh models are typically
built by professionals and are not easily accessible to amateur users. Therefore, in most existing AR apps such as
SnapChat and Ikea Place, users can use only built-in virtual objects for scene augmentation. This may greatly limit
user experience. A more appealing setting is to allow the
user to extract objects from a photograph and insert them
into the target scene with proper lighting effects. This calls
for a method of inverse rendering and relighting based on a
single image, which has so far been a key challenge in the
graphics and vision fields.
Relighting real objects requires recovering lighting, geometry and materials which are intertwined in the observed
image; it involves solving two problems, inverse render* Co-first authors.
† Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com.

Input photo

Non-Lambertian object relighting

Figure 1. Our method relights real objects into new scenes from
single images, which also enables editing materials from diffuse
to glossy with non-Lambertian rendering layers.

ing [17] and re-rendering. Furthermore, to achieve realistic results, the method needs to be applicable for nonLambertian objects. In this paper, we propose a pipeline
to solve both problems, weakly-supervised inverse rendering and non-Lambertian differentiable rendering for Lambertian and low-frequency specular objects.
Inverse rendering is a highly ill-posed problem, with several unknowns to be estimated from a single image. Deep
learning methods excel at learning strong priors for reducing ill-posedness. However, this comes at the cost of a large
amount of labeled training data, which is especially cumbersome to prepare for inverse rendering since ground truths
of large-scale real data are impossible to obtain. Synthetic
training data brings the problem of domain transfer. Some
methods explore self-supervised pipelines and acquire geometry supervisions of real data from 3D reconstruction by
multi-view stereo (MVS) [34, 35]. Such approaches, however, have difficulties in handling textureless objects.
To tackle the challenge of training data shortage, we propose a weakly-supervised inverse rendering pipeline based
on a novel low-rank loss and a re-rendering loss. For lowrank loss, a base observation here is that the material reflectance is invariant to illumination change, as an intrinsic property of an object. We derive a low-rank loss for
inverse rendering optimization which imposes that the reflectance maps of the same object under changing illuminations are linearly correlated. In particular, we constrain

8402

