This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Human-Object Contact in Images
Yixin Chen1†

Sai Kumar Dwivedi2

Michael J. Black2

Dimitrios Tzionas3

Beijing Institute of General Artificial Intelligence, China

†

Work done while interning at MPI-IS2

2

3

University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Humans constantly contact objects to move and perform
tasks. Thus, detecting human-object contact is important
for building human-centered artificial intelligence. However, there exists no robust method to detect contact between
the body and the scene from an image, and there exists no
dataset to learn such a detector. We fill this gap with HOT
(“Human-Object conTact”), a new dataset of human-object
contacts in images. To build HOT, we use two data sources:
(1) We use the PROX dataset of 3D human meshes moving
in 3D scenes, and automatically annotate 2D image areas
for contact via 3D mesh proximity and projection. (2) We
use the V-COCO, HAKE and Watch-n-Patch datasets, and
ask trained annotators to draw polygons around the 2D image areas where contact takes place. We also annotate the
involved body part of the human body. We use our HOT
dataset to train a new contact detector, which takes a single
color image as input, and outputs 2D contact heatmaps as
well as the body-part labels that are in contact. This is a
new and challenging task, that extends current foot-ground
or hand-object contact detectors to the full generality of
the whole body. The detector uses a part-attention branch
to guide contact estimation through the context of the surrounding body parts and scene. We evaluate our detector
extensively, and quantitative results show that our model
outperforms baselines, and that all components contribute
to better performance. Results on images from an online
repository show reasonable detections and generalizability. Our HOT data and model are available for research at
https://hot.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Contact is an important part of people’s everyday lives.
We constantly contact objects to move and perform tasks.
We walk by contacting the ground with our feet, we sit by
contacting chairs with our buttocks, hips and back, we grasp
and manipulate tools by contacting them with our hands.
Therefore, estimating contact between humans and objects
is useful for human-centered AI, especially for applications

Figure 1. Our contact detector, trained on HOT (“Human-Object
conTact”) dataset, estimates contact between humans and scenes
from an image taken in the wild. Contact is important for interacting
humans, yet, standard in-the-wild datasets unfortunately lack such
information. Our contact dataset and detector are a step towards
providing this in the wild. Images are from pexels.com.

such as AR/VR [1,15,26,30], activity recognition [22,39,44],
affordance detection [13, 25, 34, 67], fine-grained humanobject interaction detection [27, 37, 51, 57], imitation learning [38, 48, 63], populating scenes with avatars [18, 62, 64],
and sanitization of spaces and objects.
In contrast to off-the-shelf detectors for segmenting humans in images, or estimating their 2D joints or 3D shape and
pose, there exists no general detector of contact. Some work
exists for detecting part-specific contact, e.g., hand-object
[35, 45] or foot-ground [41, 49] contact, while other work
estimates contact only in constrained environments [20, 46]
with limited generalization. What we need, instead, is a
contact detector for the entire body that estimates detailed,
body-part-related, contact maps in arbitrary images. To train
this, we need data, but no suitable dataset exists at the moment. We address these limitations with a novel dataset and
model for detecting contact between whole-body humans
and objects in color images taken in the wild.
Annotating contact is challenging, as contact areas are
ipso facto occluded. Think of a person standing on the
floor; the sole of the shoe, and the floor area it contacts,
can not be observed. A naive approach is to instrument
a human with contact sensors, however, this is intrusive,
cumbersome to set up and does not scale. Instead, we use

17100

