This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Autoregressive Visual Tracking
Xing Wei†

Yifan Bai†

Yongchao Zheng†

† Xi’an Jiaotong University

{weixing, ygong}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Dahu Shi‡ §

‡ Zhejiang University

Yihong Gong†

§ Hikvision Research Institute

{yfbai, zyc}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Template

Abstract
We present ARTrack, an autoregressive framework for
visual object tracking. ARTrack tackles tracking as a coordinate sequence interpretation task that estimates object
trajectories progressively, where the current estimate is induced by previous states and in turn affects subsequences.
This time-autoregressive approach models the sequential
evolution of trajectories to keep tracing the object across
frames, making it superior to existing template matching
based trackers that only consider the per-frame localization accuracy. ARTrack is simple and direct, eliminating
customized localization heads and post-processings. Despite
its simplicity, ARTrack achieves state-of-the-art performance
on prevailing benchmark datasets. Source code is available
at https://github.com/MIV-XJTU/ARTrack.

shidahu@zju.edu.cn

𝑡
𝑡
𝑡
𝑡
𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑦𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑦𝑚𝑎𝑥

Search

Encoder

t-2
t-1

Autoregressive

Decoder

t

Command Token

… 𝑥

Spatio-Temporal Prompts

𝑡−2 𝑡−2 𝑡−2
𝑡−2
𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑦𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑦𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝑡−1 𝑡−1 𝑡−1
𝑡−1
𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑦𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑦𝑚𝑎𝑥

Figure 1. Our ARTrack framework. First, we embed visual features of template and search by an encoder. Then the coordinate
tokens at current time step are interpreted by the decoder, conditioning on the previous estimates (as spatio-temporal prompts), and
the command and visual tokens.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking [5, 20, 34, 38, 48, 52] is a foundational objective in the realm of computer vision, whereby
the tracker endeavors to estimate the location of an arbitrary
target in each video frame, based on its initial state. Despite
its ostensibly straightforward definition, the tracking task
poses a significant challenge in real-world settings due to
a variety of issues including but not limited to object deformation, scale variation, occlusion, and distraction from
similar objects. Fortunately, visual tracking capitalizes on
abundant temporal data as its input comprises a sequence
of video frames. Observationally, humans leverage temporal
information to gain a perception of the target’s deformation,
velocity, and acceleration trends, enabling them to maintain
consistent tracking results in the face of indiscriminative or
temporarily unavailable visual information.
The present mainstream approaches [10,13,45,61,64] for
visual object tracking typically view it as a per-frame template matching problem, neglecting the potential temporal
dependencies among the video frames. These methods generally follow three primary stages: (i) deep neural networkbased feature extraction from the search and template images,

(ii) an integration module using either convolution [2,4] or attention mechanisms [10,61] for feature matching/fusion, and
(iii) bounding-box localization through customized heads
for corner [13, 61], center/scale [64] estimation, and target
classification [4, 61]. In some cases, the first two stages
can be combined using a unified architecture [13, 64]. Postprocessing techniques are usually employed during the localization step, such as Hanning window penalty [10,56,64,68]
and box optimization [4, 56]. Some methods incorporate a
template update mechanism to improve the target feature
representation. Representative techniques in this category include template image selection [61], feature integration [56],
and time evolution [62, 66]. However, customized heads and
post-processing techniques are complex and may require
individual training and inference, which compromises the
simple end-to-end framework. Moreover, tracking emphasizes preserving localization accuracy across the sequence,
while conventional per-frame training methods prioritize
immediate localization accuracy, resulting in an objective
mismatch between training and inference [35].
This study proposes a novel framework to visual object

9697

