This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ContraNeRF: Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields for Synthetic-to-real
Novel View Synthesis via Contrastive Learning
Hao Yang1,4
Lanqing Hong2
Aoxue Li2
Tianyang Hu2
2
3*
Zhenguo Li
Gim Hee Lee
Liwei Wang1,5 *
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab School of Computing, National University of Singapore 4 Zhejiang Lab
5
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2

3

{haoy@stu, wanglw@cis}.pku.edu.cn

gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg

{honglanqing, liaoxue2, hutianyang1, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
Although many recent works have investigated generalizable NeRF-based novel view synthesis for unseen scenes,
they seldom consider the synthetic-to-real generalization,
which is desired in many practical applications. In this
work, we first investigate the effects of synthetic data in
synthetic-to-real novel view synthesis and surprisingly observe that models trained with synthetic data tend to produce sharper but less accurate volume densities. For pixels where the volume densities are correct, fine-grained details will be obtained. Otherwise, severe artifacts will be
produced. To maintain the advantages of using synthetic
data while avoiding its negative effects, we propose to introduce geometry-aware contrastive learning to learn multiview consistent features with geometric constraints. Meanwhile, we adopt cross-view attention to further enhance
the geometry perception of features by querying features
across input views. Experiments demonstrate that under
the synthetic-to-real setting, our method can render images
with higher quality and better fine-grained details, outperforming existing generalizable novel view synthesis methods in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. When trained on
real data, our method also achieves state-of-the-art results.
https://haoy945.github.io/contranerf/

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is a classical problem in computer
vision, which aims to produce photo-realistic images for unseen viewpoints [2,5,10,36,40]. Recently, Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [25] proposes to achieve novel view synthesis through continuous scene modeling through a neural net* Joint last authorship.

work, which quickly attracts widespread attention due to
its surprising results. However, the vanilla NeRF is actually designed to fit the continuous 5D radiance field of a
given scene, which often fails to generalize to new scenes
and datasets. How to improve the generalization ability of
neural scene representation is a challenging problem.
Recent works, such as pixelNeRF [46], IBRNet [37],
MVSNeRF [4] and GeoNeRF [19], investigate how to
achieve generalizable novel view synthesis based on neural radiance fields. However, these works mainly focus on
the generalization of NeRF to unseen scenes and seldom
consider the synthetic-to-real generalization, i.e., training
NeRF with synthetic data while testing it on real data. On
the other hand, synthetic-to-real novel view synthesis is desired in many practical applications where the collection of
dense view 3D data is expensive (e.g., autonomous driving, robotics, and unmanned aerial vehicle [34]). Although
some works directly use synthetic data such as Google
Scanned Objects [14] in model training, they usually overlook the domain gaps between the synthetic and real data
as well as possible negative effects of using synthetic data.
In 2D computer vision, it is common sense that synthetic
training data usually hurts the model’s generalization ability to real-world applications [1, 8, 44]. Will synthetic data
be effective in novel view synthesis?
In this work, we first investigate the effectiveness of synthetic data in NeRF’s training via extensive experiments.
Specifically, we train generalizable NeRF models using a
synthetic dataset of indoor scenes called 3D-FRONT [15],
and test the models on a real indoor dataset called ScanNet [9]. Surprisingly, we observe that the use of synthetic
data tends to result in more artifacts on one hand but better fine-grained details on the other hand (see Fig.1 and
Sec.3.2 for more details). Moreover, we observe that models trained on synthetic data tend to predict sharper but less

16508

