This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAP-VSTNet: Content Affinity Preserved Versatile Style Transfer
Linfeng Wen1 Chengying Gao1 * Changqing Zou2,3
1
Sun Yat-Sen University 2 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
wenlf5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

mcsgcy@mail.sysu.edu.cn

3

Zhejiang Lab

aaronzou1125@gmail.com

Figure 1. Our model produces more consistent stylization results with content affinity preserved for photorealistic image style transfer
(left), and photorealistic video and artistic video style transfer (right). Animations can be found in the supplementary material.

Abstract
Content affinity loss including feature and pixel affinity
is a main problem which leads to artifacts in photorealistic and video style transfer. This paper proposes a new
framework named CAP-VSTNet, which consists of a new reversible residual network and an unbiased linear transform
module, for versatile style transfer. This reversible residual network can not only preserve content affinity but not
introduce redundant information as traditional reversible
networks, and hence facilitate better stylization. Empowered by Matting Laplacian training loss which can address
the pixel affinity loss problem led by the linear transform,
the proposed framework is applicable and effective on versatile style transfer. Extensive experiments show that CAPVSTNet can produce better qualitative and quantitative results in comparison with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic style transfer aims to reproduce content
image with the style from a reference image in a photore*Corresponding Author

alistic way. To be photorealism, the stylized image should
preserve clear content detail and consistent stylization of
the same semantic regions. Content affinity preservation,
including feature and pixel affinity preservation [23,25,28],
is the key to achieve both clear content detail and consistent
stylization in the transfer.
The framework of a deep learning based photorealistic style transfer generally uses such an architecture: an
encoder module extracting content and style features, followed by a transformation module to adjust features statistics, and finally a decoder module to invert stylized feature
back to stylized image. Existing photorealistic methods typically employ pre-trained VGG [30] as encoder. Since the
encoder is specifically designed to capture object-level information for the classification task, it inevitably results in
content affinity loss. To reduce the artifacts, existing methods either use skip connection modules [2, 14, 40] or build
a shallower network [8, 23, 39]. However, these strategies,
limited by the image recovery bias, cannot achieve a perfect
content affinity preservation on unseen images.
In this work, rather than use the traditional encodertransformation-decoder architecture, we resort to a reversible framework [1] based solution called CAP-VSTNet,
which consists of a specifically designed reversible residual

18300

