This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Invertible Neural Skinning
Yash Kant1,2 , Aliaksandr Siarohin2 , Riza Alp Guler2 , Menglei Chai2 , Jian Ren2 ,
Sergey Tulyakov2 , Igor Gilitschenski1
1
University of Toronto, 2 Snap Research
https://yashkant.github.io/invertible-neural-skinning/

Abstract
Building animatable and editable models of clothed humans from raw 3D scans and poses is a challenging problem. Existing reposing methods suffer from the limited expressiveness of Linear Blend Skinning (LBS), require costly
mesh extraction to generate each new pose, and typically
do not preserve surface correspondences across different
poses. In this work, we introduce Invertible Neural Skinning
(INS) to address these shortcomings. To maintain correspondences, we propose a Pose-conditioned Invertible Network (PIN) architecture, which extends the LBS process by
learning additional pose-varying deformations. Next, we
combine PIN with a differentiable LBS module to build an
expressive and end-to-end Invertible Neural Skinning (INS)
pipeline. We demonstrate the strong performance of our
method by outperforming the state-of-the-art reposing techniques on clothed humans and preserving surface correspondences, while being an order of magnitude faster. We
also perform an ablation study, which shows the usefulness
of our pose-conditioning formulation, and our qualitative
results display that INS can rectify artefacts introduced by
LBS well.

1. Introduction
Being able to create animatable representations of
clothed humans beyond skinned meshes is essential for
building realistic augmented or virtual reality experiences
and improving simulators. Towards this goal, we consider
the task of building animatable human representations from
raw 3D scans and corresponding poses. Prior work in this
area has seen a shift from building parametric models of
humans [6, 21, 29], to more recent works learning implicit
3D neural representations [1,12,13,47,48,52,53] from data
in canonical space. These canonical representations are animated to a new pose by a learning skinning weight field
around them [11, 14, 35, 49, 54] and applying Linear Blend
Skinning (LBS) to warp the surface, where the pose is defined by a bone skeleton underlying the 3D surface.

Figure 1. Fast and Invertible Posing. We propose an end-to-end
learnable reposing pipeline that allows animating implicit surfaces
with intricate pose-varying effects, without requiring mesh extraction [34] for each pose, while also maintaining correspondences
across poses.

These prior works generally suffer from the limited expressivity of LBS when handling complex pose-varying
deformations, such as those of loose clothes and body
tissue (i.e. muscle bulges, skin wrinkles). In parametric models like SMPL [29], such deformations are represented by adding simple linear pose correctives (aka blend
shapes), but these are restrictive and only work for unclothed humans. Implicit methods, to relieve this issue,
learn their canonical representations conditioned on the deformed pose [11, 14]. However, this conditioning comes
with two major drawbacks during reposing. Given the sequence of poses, a new mesh has to be extracted from
scratch for each pose, which becomes a bottleneck when
animating subjects at a high frame-rate or resolution. Also,
as a consequence of this step, correspondences (topology
preservation) between the surfaces of the same subject
across different poses are lost.
Invertible Neural Networks (INN) [15, 16, 24] are bijective functions that can preserve exact correspondences between their input and output spaces, while learning complex non-linear transforms between them. This ability of
INNs makes them a suitable candidate for reposing, and in
this work, we leverage INNs to build an Invertible Neural Skinning (INS) pipeline. For this, we first build a

8715

