This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Siamese Image Modeling for Self-Supervised
Vision Representation Learning
Chenxin Tao1∗† , Xizhou Zhu2,4∗ , Weijie Su3∗† , Gao Huang1 , Bin Li3 ,
Jie Zhou1 , Yu Qiao4 , Xiaogang Wang5 , Jifeng Dai1,4B
1
Tsinghua University, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 University of Science and Technology of China,
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
tcx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhuwalter@sensetime.com,
jackroos@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {gaohuang,jzhou,daijifeng}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
binli@ustc.edu.cn, qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has delivered superior
performance on a variety of downstream vision tasks. Two
main-stream SSL frameworks have been proposed, i.e., Instance Discrimination (ID) and Masked Image Modeling
(MIM). ID pulls together representations from different
views of the same image, while avoiding feature collapse.
It lacks spatial sensitivity, which requires modeling the local structure within each image. On the other hand, MIM
reconstructs the original content given a masked image.
It instead does not have good semantic alignment, which
requires projecting semantically similar views into nearby
representations. To address this dilemma, we observe that
(1) semantic alignment can be achieved by matching different image views with strong augmentations; (2) spatial
sensitivity can benefit from predicting dense representations
with masked images. Driven by these analysis, we propose
Siamese Image Modeling (SiameseIM), which predicts the
dense representations of an augmented view, based on another masked view from the same image but with different
augmentations. SiameseIM uses a Siamese network with
two branches. The online branch encodes the first view,
and predicts the second view’s representation according to
the relative positions between these two views. The target
branch produces the target by encoding the second view.
SiameseIM can surpass both ID and MIM on a wide range
of downstream tasks, including ImageNet finetuning and
linear probing, COCO and LVIS detection, and ADE20k semantic segmentation. The improvement is more significant
in few-shot, long-tail and robustness-concerned scenarios.
Code shall be released.

∗ Equal contribution. † This work is done when Chenxin Tao and
Weijie Su are interns at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
B Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has been pursued in the
vision domain for a long time [32]. It enables us to pretrain models without human-annotated labels, which makes
it possible to exploit huge amounts of unlabeled data. SSL
has provided competitive results against supervised pretraining baselines in various downstream tasks, including
image classification [4, 23], object detection [35] and semantic segmentation [24].
To effectively train models in the SSL manner, researchers design the so-called “pretext tasks” to generate
supervision signals. One of the most typical frameworks
is Instance Discrimination (ID), whose core idea is to pull
together representations of different augmented views from
the same image, and avoid representational collapse. Different variants of ID have been proposed, including contrastive
learning [9, 24], asymmetric networks [12, 21], and feature
decorrelation [5, 57]. A recent work [43] has shown the intrinsic consistency among these methods via their similar
gradient structures. For ID methods, the representations of
each image are well separated, thus inducing good linear
separability. However, as shown in [35], for transfer learning on detection tasks with Vision Transformers [19], ID is
not superior to supervised pre-training, and even lags behind random initialization given enough training time.
Recently, another SSL framework has gradually attracted more attention, namely Masked Image Modeling
(MIM) [4, 23]. MIM methods train the model to reconstruct
the original content from a masked image. Such practice
can help to learn the rich local structures within an image,
leading to excellent performance in dense prediction tasks
such as object detection [35]. Nevertheless, MIM does not
have good linear separability as ID, and usually performs
poorly under the few-shot classification settings [1].
Both ID and MIM methods have their own strengths and

2132

