This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MagicPony: Learning Articulated 3D Animals in the Wild
Shangzhe Wu* Ruining Li∗ Tomas Jakab∗ Christian Rupprecht
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

Andrea Vedaldi

{szwu, ruining, tomj, chrisr, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk
3dmagicpony.github.io

Training

Single-view Images

Single-Image Inference

Test Image

Articulated 3D Shape

Textured

Relit

Animated

Figure 1. Learning Articulated 3D Animals in the Wild. Our method trains on a collection of single-view images of an animal category
and produces a model that can predict the articulated 3D shape of a new instance from a single test image, which can be animated and relit.

Abstract
We consider the problem of predicting the 3D shape, articulation, viewpoint, texture, and lighting of an articulated
animal like a horse given a single test image as input. We
present a new method, dubbed MagicPony, that learns this
predictor purely from in-the-wild single-view images of the
object category, with minimal assumptions about the topology of deformation. At its core is an implicit-explicit representation of articulated shape and appearance, combining
the strengths of neural fields and meshes. In order to help
the model understand an object’s shape and pose, we distil
the knowledge captured by an off-the-shelf self-supervised
vision transformer and fuse it into the 3D model. To overcome local optima in viewpoint estimation, we further introduce a new viewpoint sampling scheme that comes at
no additional training cost. MagicPony outperforms prior
work on this challenging task and demonstrates excellent
generalisation in reconstructing art, despite the fact that it
is only trained on real images. The code can be found on the
project page at https://3dmagicpony.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D shape of an object from a single image of it requires knowing a priori what are the
possible shapes and appearances of the object. Learning
* Equal contribution.

such a prior usually requires ad-hoc data acquisition setups [2, 20, 35, 36], involving at least multiple cameras, and
often laser scanners, domes and other hardware, not to mention significant manual effort. This is viable for certain
types of objects such as humans that are of particular interest in applications, but it is unlikely to scale to the long
tail of objects that can appear in natural images. The alternative is to learn a 3D prior from 2D images only, which are
available in abundance. However, this prior is highly complex and must be learned while using it to reconstruct in 3D
the 2D training data, which is a major challenge.
In this paper, we propose MagicPony, a novel approach
to learning 3D models of articulated object categories such
as horses and birds with only single-view input images for
training. We leverage recent progress in unsupervised representation learning, unsupervised image matching, efficient implicit-explicit shape representations and neural rendering, and devise a new auto-encoder architecture that reconstructs the 3D shape, articulation and texture of each object instance from a single image. For training, we only
require a 2D segmenter for the object category and a description of the topology and symmetry of its 3D skeleton
(i.e., the number and connectivity of bones). We do not
require apriori knowledge of the objects’ 3D shapes, keypoints, viewpoints, or of any other 2D or 3D cue which are
often used in prior work [14, 21, 22, 31]. From this, we
learn a function that, at test time, can estimate the shape
and texture of a new object from a single image, in a feedforward manner. The function exhibits remarkable gener-

8792

