This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Best Defense is a Good Offense: Adversarial Augmentation against
Adversarial Attacks
Iuri Frosio, NVIDIA

Jan Kautz, NVIDIA

ifrosio@nvidia.com

jkautz@nvidia.com

Abstract
Many defenses against adversarial attacks (e.g. robust
classifiers, randomization, or image purification) use countermeasures put to work only after the attack has been
crafted. We adopt a different perspective to introduce A5
(Adversarial Augmentation Against Adversarial Attacks), a
novel framework including the first certified preemptive defense against adversarial attacks. The main idea is to craft a
defensive perturbation to guarantee that any attack (up to a
given magnitude) towards the input in hand will fail. To this
aim, we leverage existing automatic perturbation analysis
tools for neural networks. We study the conditions to apply
A5 effectively, analyze the importance of the robustness of
the to-be-defended classifier, and inspect the appearance of
the robustified images. We show effective on-the-fly defensive augmentation with a robustifier network that ignores
the ground truth label, and demonstrate the benefits of robustifier and classifier co-training. In our tests, A5 consistently beats state of the art certified defenses on MNIST,
CIFAR10, FashionMNIST and Tinyimagenet. We also show
how to apply A5 to create certifiably robust physical objects. Our code at https://github.com/NVlabs/
A5 allows experimenting on a wide range of scenarios beyond the man-in-the-middle attack tested here, including the
case of physical attacks.

on randomness [35, 35] or removal of the adversarial signal [13,18,27,40], by moving the input back to the space of
natural (non-attacked) data before classification (Fig. 1, c).
All the aforementioned strategies activate the defense
mechanism only after the attack has been crafted. However, when dealing with adversarial attacks, the first actor
to move has a significant advantage. For instance, perturbing an image can avoid online person identification and preserve privacy [6, 19, 26]. Acting first is particularly suitable
against Man in the Middle (MitM) attacks that may practi-

(a) certified bounds

(b) adversarial training

(c) image purification

(d) A5

1. Introduction
Since Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been found
vulnerable to adversarial attacks [11, 30], researchers studied various protection strategies [4, 12, 20, 42, 43]. For instance, adversarial training [11,30] generates attacks while
asking a DNN for the correct output in training; it is simple,
partially effective and widely adopted. Certified methods
(e.g., IBP [12], CROWN [43], CROWN-IBP [42]) do a step
more by estimating correct (although often pessimistic) output bounds (Fig. 1, a) used for training. Adversarial training regularizes the classification landscape against the attacks (Fig. 1, b), but high protection often produces a loss in
clean accuracy. Other partially effective defenses are based

Figure 1. (a) An input x ∈ y∗ is correctly classified. The grey box
(certified bounds [12, 42, 43]) shows that, under an attack δxA ,
||δxA ||∞ < ϵA , misclassification ((x + δxA ) ∈ y0 ) is possible.
(b) Adversarial training [4, 20] creates robust DNNs with regular
classification landscapes: misclassification is less likely. (c) Image purification [27, 40] moves the attacked input x + δxA by
δxP back to correct classification. (d) A5 preemptively moves
x into a non attackable position. The original CIFAR10 image
classified as airplane (69.8% confidence) can be misclassified under attack (ship, 100% confidence). Once robustified through A5
(right), misclassification does not occur anymore.

4067

