This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VL-SAT: Visual-Linguistic Semantics Assisted Training for 3D Semantic Scene
Graph Prediction in Point Cloud
Ziqin Wang1 , Bowen Cheng1 , Lichen Zhao1 , Dong Xu2 , Yang Tang3∗ , Lu Sheng1 *
1
School of Software, Beihang University
2
The University of Hong Kong, 3 East China University of Science and Technology
{wzqin,chengbowen052,zlc1114,lsheng}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

dongxu@cs.hku.hk

Train & Inference Stage

yangtang@ecust.edu.cn

bath cabinet

Attached to
Standing on

The task of 3D semantic scene graph (3DSSG) prediction in the point cloud is challenging since (1) the 3D point
cloud only captures geometric structures with limited semantics compared to 2D images, and (2) long-tailed relation distribution inherently hinders the learning of unbiased prediction. Since 2D images provide rich semantics
and scene graphs are in nature coped with languages, in
this study, we propose Visual-Linguistic Semantics Assisted
Training (VL-SAT) scheme that can significantly empower
3DSSG prediction models with discrimination about longtailed and ambiguous semantic relations. The key idea
is to train a powerful multi-modal oracle model to assist the 3D model. This oracle learns reliable structural
representations based on semantics from vision, language,
and 3D geometry, and its benefits can be heterogeneously
passed to the 3D model during the training stage. By
effectively utilizing visual-linguistic semantics in training,
our VL-SAT can significantly boost common 3DSSG prediction models, such as SGFN and SGGpoint , only with 3D
inputs in the inference stage, especially when dealing with
tail relation triplets. Comprehensive evaluations and ablation studies on the 3DSSG dataset have validated the effectiveness of the proposed scheme. Code is available at
https://github.com/wz7in/CVPR2023-VLSAT.

1. Introduction
Structurally understanding 3D geometric scenes is particularly important for tasks that require interaction with
real-world environments, such as AR/VR [7, 21, 26–28, 49,
51] and navigation [4, 5, 10]. As one vital topic in this
field, predicting 3D semantic scene graph (3DSSG) in point
cloud [36] has received emerging attention in recent years.
Specifically, given the point cloud of a 3D scene that is associated with class-agnostic 3D instance masks, the 3DSSG
* Lu Sheng and Yang Tang are the corresponding authors.

(a)

3D Model

Same as
bath cabinet

Build in

Training Stage

Oracle Model

“A Scene of a sink build in a bath cabinet.”

(b)
sink

Attached to
Standing on

3D Model
Inference Stage

3D Input / Output

Same as
bath cabinet

Build in

2D Input Gradient Back-Prop. Lang Assist.

3D Assist.

Figure 1. Comparison between previous method and our VLSAT. (a) SGPN [36], as the 3D model, fails to find capture predicates such as build in. (b) VL-SAT creates an oracle model by heterogeneously fusing 2D semantics, and language knowledge along
with the geometrical features, and the 3D model receives benefits
from the oracle model during training. During inference, the enhanced 3D model can correctly detect the tail predicates.

prediction task would like to construct a directed graph
whose nodes are semantic labels of the 3D instances and
the edges recognize the directional semantic or geometrical
relations between connected 3D instances.
However, in addition to common difficulties faced by
scene graph prediction, there are several challenges specified to the 3DSSG prediction task. (1) 3D data such as
point clouds only capture the geometric structures of each
instance and may superficially define the relations by relative orientations or distances. (2) Recent 3DSSG predication datasets [36, 47] are quite small and suffer from longtailed predicate distributions, where semantic predicates are
often rarer than geometrical predicates. For example, as
shown in Fig. 1, the pioneering work SGPN [36] usually

21560

