This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaMix: Towards Corruption-Robust Continual Learning with
Temporally Self-Adaptive Data Transformation
Zhenyi Wang1 Li Shen 2, * Donglin Zhan 3 Qiuling Suo 1
Yanjun Zhu 1 Tiehang Duan 4 Mingchen Gao 1
1
State University of New York at Buffalo, USA; 2 JD Explore Academy, China
3
Columbia University, USA; 4 Meta, USA
{zhenyiwa, qiulings, yjzhu, mgao8}@buffalo.edu; dz2478@columbia.edu
{mathshenli, tiehang.duan}@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) has achieved rapid progress in
recent years. However, it is still largely unknown how to
determine whether a CL model is trustworthy and how to
foster its trustworthiness. This work focuses on evaluating
and improving the robustness to corruptions of existing CL
models. Our empirical evaluation results show that existing
state-of-the-art (SOTA) CL models are particularly vulnerable to various data corruptions during testing. To make them
trustworthy and robust to corruptions deployed in safetycritical scenarios, we propose a meta-learning framework of
self-adaptive data augmentation to tackle the corruption robustness in CL. The proposed framework, MetaMix, learns to
augment and mix data, automatically transforming the new
task data or memory data. It directly optimizes the generalization performance against data corruptions during training. To evaluate the corruption robustness of our proposed
approach, we construct several CL corruption datasets with
different levels of severity. We perform comprehensive experiments on both task- and class-continual learning. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method compared to SOTA baselines.

1. Introduction
Humans constantly acquire new information throughout
their lifespan and easily recognize information shifts such
as structure and style variations in images. Continual learning (CL) aims at imitating human’s ability to learn from
non-stationary data distributions without forgetting the previously learned knowledge. The past few years have witnessed
rapid progress in CL research [1, 30, 31, 36, 45]. Despite
the success, existing CL systems overlook the robustness
* Corresponding author

against unforeseen data shifts during testing. They assume
that training and test images for each task follow the same
distribution. However, as data distributions evolve and new
scenarios occur, test images often encounter various corruptions such as snow, blur, pixelation, and combinations,
resulting in a shifted distribution from the training set. For
example, Figure 1 shows various corruptions applied on one
image from Split-miniImageNet.
Data corruption can drastically impair the performance
of existing image recognition systems. A recent study [21]
shows that classification accuracy of various architectures
has dropped significantly on the ImageNet test set with some
simple and natural corruptions. Our empirical evaluation
results show that state-of-the-art CL models are even more
vulnerable to these corruptions during testing. For example,
the accuracy of DER++ [5] for task-continual learning decreases from 93.9% to 50.5% on split-CIFAR10; accuracy
drops to 10.6 % from 75.6 % on split-CIFAR100; accuracy
decreases to 9.8% from 61.3% on split-miniImageNet by
applying those common corruptions on test data of each CL
task. This severe issue makes existing CL models highly
unreliable in safety-critical applications. Thus, improving
the robustness of CL models to foster their trustworthiness
when deployed in real-world scenarios is essential.
Training a CL model robust to various corruptions is difficult due to the following challenges. 1) Unseen corruptions
could perturb the test set far beyond those encountered during training. A model that naively augments training images
with seen corruptions cannot generalize to the new ones
during testing. Also, it is unrealistic to enumerate all possible corruptions during training since there are infinite types
of corruptions and their combinations. 2) With the everevolving data distributions in CL, an effective augmentation
strategy learned on previous tasks may gradually become
less effective because the optimal augmentation strategies
are task-dependent and dynamically change over tasks [11].

24521

