This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Finetune like you pretrain: Improved finetuning of zero-shot vision models
Sachin Goyal1

Ananya Kumar2

Sankalp Garg1
Zico Kolter1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Stanford University
3
Bosch Center for AI

Aditi Raghunathan1

{sachingo, sankalpg, zkolter, raditi}@cs.cmu.edu, ananya@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Finetuning image-text models such as CLIP achieves
state-of-the-art accuracies on a variety of benchmarks.
However, recent works (Kumar et al., 2022; Wortsman
et al., 2021) have shown that even subtle differences in the
finetuning process can lead to surprisingly large differences
in the final performance, both for in-distribution (ID) and
out-of-distribution (OOD) data. In this work, we show that
a natural and simple approach of mimicking contrastive
pretraining consistently outperforms alternative finetuning
approaches. Specifically, we cast downstream class labels
as text prompts and continue optimizing the contrastive loss
between image embeddings and class-descriptive prompt
embeddings (contrastive finetuning).
Our method consistently outperforms baselines across 7
distribution shift, 6 transfer learning, and 3 few-shot learning benchmarks. On WILDS-iWILDCam, our proposed approach FLYP outperforms the top of the leaderboard by
2.3% ID and 2.7% OOD, giving the highest reported accuracy. Averaged across 7 OOD datasets (2 WILDS and 5 ImageNet associated shifts), FLYP gives gains of 4.2% OOD
over standard finetuning and outperforms current state-ofthe-art (LP-FT) by more than 1% both ID and OOD. Similarly, on 3 few-shot learning benchmarks, FLYP gives gains
up to 4.6% over standard finetuning and 4.4% over the
state-of-the-art. Thus we establish our proposed method
of contrastive finetuning as a simple and intuitive state-ofthe-art for supervised finetuning of image-text models like
CLIP. Code is available at https://github.com/
locuslab/FLYP.

1. Introduction
Recent large-scale models pretrained jointly on image
and text data, such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) or ALIGN
(Jia et al., 2021), have demonstrated exceptional performance on many zero-shot classification tasks. These models are pretrained via a contrastive loss that finds a joint embedding over the paired image and text data. Then, for a

new classification problem, one simply specifies a prompt
for all classnames and predict the class whose text embedding has highest similarity with the image embedding. Such
“zero-shot” classifiers achieve reasonable performance on
downstream tasks and impressive robustness to many common forms of distribution shift. However, in many cases, it
is desirable to further improve performance via supervised
finetuning: further training and updates to the pretrained parameters on a (possibly small) number of labeled images.
In practice, however, several studies have found
that standard finetuning procedures, while improving indistribution performance, come at a cost to robustness to
distribution shifts. Subtle changes to the finetuning process
could mitigate this decrease in robustness. For example,
Kumar et al. (2022) demonstrated the role of initialization
of the final linear head and proposed a two-stage process
of linear probing, then finetuning. Wortsman et al. (2021)
showed that ensembling the weights of the finetuned and
zero-shot classifier can improve robustness. Understanding
the role of these subtle changes is challenging, and there is
no simple recipe for what is the “correct” modification.
A common theme in all these previous methods is that
they are small changes to the standard supervised training
paradigm where we minimize a cross-entropy loss on an image classifier. Indeed, such a choice is natural precisely because we are finetuning the system to improve classification
performance. However, directly applying the supervised
learning methodology for finetuning pretrained models
without considering pretraining process can be sub-optimal.
In this paper, we show that an alternative, straightforward approach reliably outperforms these previous methods. Specifically, we show that simply finetuning a classifier via the same pretraining (contrastive) loss leads to uniformly better performance of the resulting classifiers. That
is, after constructing prompts from the class labels, we directly minimize the contrastive loss between these prompts
and the image embeddings of our (labeled) finetuning set.
We call this approach finetune like you pretrain (FLYP ) and

19338

