This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Putting People in Their Place: Affordance-Aware Human Insertion into Scenes
Sumith Kulal1

Tim Brooks2

Alex Aiken1

Alexei A. Efros2
1

Stanford University

Jiajun Wu1

Jimei Yang3

Jingwan Lu3

Krishna Kumar Singh3
2

UC Berkeley

Abstract
We study the problem of inferring scene affordances by
presenting a method for realistically inserting people into
scenes. Given a scene image with a marked region and an
image of a person, we insert the person into the scene while
respecting the scene affordances. Our model can infer the
set of realistic poses given the scene context, re-pose the
reference person, and harmonize the composition. We set
up the task in a self-supervised fashion by learning to repose humans in video clips. We train a large-scale diffusion
model on a dataset of 2.4M video clips that produces diverse
plausible poses while respecting the scene context. Given the
learned human-scene composition, our model can also hallucinate realistic people and scenes when prompted without
conditioning and also enables interactive editing. A quantitative evaluation shows that our method synthesizes more
realistic human appearance and more natural human-scene
interactions than prior work.

1. Introduction
A hundred years ago, Jakob von Uexküll pointed out the
crucial, even defining, role that the perceived environment
(umwelt) plays in an organism’s life [64]. At a high level,
he argued that an organism is only aware of the parts of
the environment that it can affect or be affected by. In a
sense, our perception of the world is defined by what kinds
of interactions we can perform. Related ideas of functional
visual understanding (what actions does a given scene afford
an agent?) were discussed in the 1930s by the Gestalt psychologists [35] and later described by J.J. Gibson [21] as
affordances. Although this direction inspired many efforts
in vision and psychology research, a comprehensive computational model of affordance perception remains elusive.
The value of such a computational model is undeniable for
future work in vision and robotics research.
The past decade has seen a renewed interest in such
computational models for data-driven affordance perception [15, 20, 24, 25, 67]. Early works in this space deployed a
Project page:
https : / / sumith1896 . github . io /
affordance-insertion.

3

Adobe Research

mediated approach by inferring or using intermediate semantic or 3D information to aid in affordance perception [24],
while more recent methods focus on direct perception of
affordances [15, 20, 67], more in line with Gibson’s framing [21]. However, these methods are severely constrained
by the specific requirements of the datasets, which reduce
their generalizability.
To facilitate a more general setting, we draw inspiration
from the recent advances in large-scale generative models,
such as text-to-image systems [49,50,54]. The samples from
these models demonstrate impressive object-scene compositionality. However, these compositions are implicit, and
the affordances are limited to what is typically captured in
still images and described by captions. We make the task
of affordance prediction explicit by putting people “into the
picture” [24] and training on videos of human activities.
We pose our problem as a conditional inpainting task
(Fig. 1). Given a masked scene image (first row) and a reference person (first column), we learn to inpaint the person
into the masked region with correct affordances. At training
time, we borrow two random frames from a video clip, mask
one frame, and try to inpaint using the person from the second frame as the condition. This forces the model to learn
both the possible scene affordances given the context and
the necessary re-posing and harmonization needed for a coherent image. At inference time, the model can be prompted
with different combinations of scene and person images. We
train a large-scale model on a dataset of 2.4M video clips of
humans moving in a wide variety of scenes.
In addition to the conditional task, our model can be
prompted in different ways at inference time. As shown in
the last row Fig. 1, when prompted without a person, our
model can hallucinate a realistic person. Similarly, when
prompted without a scene, it can also hallucinate a realistic
scene. One can also perform partial human completion tasks
such as changing the pose or swapping clothes. We show
that training on videos is crucial for predicting affordances
and present ablations and baseline comparisons in Sec. 4.
To summarize, our contributions are:
• We present a fully self-supervised task formulation for
learning affordances by learning to inpaint humans in

17089

