This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ULIP: Learning a Unified Representation of Language, Images, and Point
Clouds for 3D Understanding
Le Xue1 *, Mingfei Gao1 , Chen Xing1 , Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n1,2 , Jiajun Wu3 , Caiming Xiong1 ,
Ran Xu1 , Juan Carlos Niebles1 , and Silvio Savarese1
1

2

Salesforce Research, Palo Alto, USA
UT Austin, Texas, USA 3 Stanford University, Stanford, USA
Project Website:

https://tycho-xue.github.io/ULIP/

Abstract
The recognition capabilities of current state-of-the-art
3D models are limited by datasets with a small number
of annotated data and a pre-defined set of categories. In
its 2D counterpart, recent advances have shown that similar problems can be significantly alleviated by employing
knowledge from other modalities, such as language. Inspired by this, leveraging multimodal information for 3D
modality could be promising to improve 3D understanding
under the restricted data regime, but this line of research
is not well studied. Therefore, we introduce ULIP to learn
a unified representation of image, text, and 3D point cloud
by pre-training with object triplets from the three modalities. To overcome the shortage of training triplets, ULIP
leverages a pre-trained vision-language model that has already learned a common visual and textual space by training with massive image-text pairs. Then, ULIP learns a 3D
representation space aligned with the common image-text
space, using a small number of automatically synthesized
triplets. ULIP is agnostic to 3D backbone networks and can
easily be integrated into any 3D architecture. Experiments
show that ULIP effectively improves the performance of
multiple recent 3D backbones by simply pre-training them
on ShapeNet55 using our framework, achieving state-ofthe-art performance in both standard 3D classification and
zero-shot 3D classification on ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN. ULIP also improves the performance of PointMLP
by around 3% in 3D classification on ScanObjectNN, and
outperforms PointCLIP by 28.8% on top-1 accuracy for
zero-shot 3D classification on ModelNet40. Our code and
pre-trained models will be released.

* Contact: lxue@salesforce.com

1. Introduction

Small Scale
Triplets

An image of a
small private jet.

Text
Encoder

Pre-aligned

Image
Encoder

3D
Encoder

Figure 1. Illustration of ULIP. ULIP improves 3D understanding
by aligning features from image, text and point cloud in the same
space. To reduce the demand of 3D data, ULIP leverages image
and text encoders that are pre-trained with large-scale image-text
pairs, and aligns 3D representation to the pre-aligned image-text
feature space using a small scale of training triplets.

3D visual understanding research [6, 12, 16, 17, 24, 25]
is drawing significant attention in recent years due to the
increasing demand of real-world applications such as augmented/virtual reality [1, 27, 31, 46], autonomous driving [23, 57] and robotics [2, 48]. However, compared to
their 2D counterpart, 3D visual recognition research is still
limited by datasets with a small number of samples and a

1179

