This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DrapeNet: Garment Generation and Self-Supervised Draping
Luca De Luigi∗,2
1

Ren Li∗,1

Benoı̂t Guillard1

Mathieu Salzmann1

Pascal Fua1

: CVLab, EPFL, {name.surname}@epfl.ch 2 : University of Bologna, luca.deluigi4@unibo.it

Recover 3D models from…

Drape unseen garments

…images

…3D scans

Edit garments

initial

longer sleeves

shorter

opened

longer trousers

Figure 1. Our network can drape garments over bodies of different shapes in various poses. To minimize the required amount of supervision,
our draping network is trained with physics-based self-supervision and generalizes to multiple garments by being conditioned on latent
codes. These can be manipulated to edit specific features of the corresponding garments. Being fully differentiable, our pipeline makes it
possible to recover 3D models of garments and bodies from observations such as images and 3D scans.

Abstract
Recent approaches to drape garments quickly over arbitrary human bodies leverage self-supervision to eliminate
the need for large training sets. However, they are designed
to train one network per clothing item, which severely limits their generalization abilities. In our work, we rely on
self-supervision to train a single network to drape multiple
garments. This is achieved by predicting a 3D deformation
field conditioned on the latent codes of a generative network, which models garments as unsigned distance fields.
Our pipeline can generate and drape previously unseen
garments of any topology, whose shape can be edited by manipulating their latent codes. Being fully differentiable, our
formulation makes it possible to recover accurate 3D models of garments from partial observations – images or 3D
scans – via gradient descent. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/liren2515/DrapeNet.
∗ Equal contributions

1. Introduction
Draping digital garments over differently-shaped bodies in random poses has been extensively studied due to
its many applications such as fashion design, moviemaking, video gaming, virtual try-on and, nowadays, virtual and
augmented reality. Physics-based simulation (PBS) [3, 12,
23, 32, 33, 38, 39, 47–49, 51, 60] can produce outstanding results, but at a high computational cost.
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of deep neural networks aiming to achieve the quality of PBS draping
while being much faster, easily differentiable, and offering new speed vs. accuracy tradeoffs [15, 16, 25, 36, 44,
46, 50, 53, 55]. These networks are often trained to produce garments that resemble ground-truth ones. While effective, this requires building training datasets, consisting
of ground-truth meshes obtained either from computationally expensive simulations [31] or using complex 3D scanning setups [37]. Moreover, to generalize to unseen garments and poses, these supervised approaches require training databases encompassing a great variety of samples de-

1451

