This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Common Pets in 3D:
Dynamic New-View Synthesis of Real-Life Deformable Categories
Samarth Sinha
University of Toronto

Roman Shapovalov
Meta AI

Jeremy Reizenstein
Meta AI

samarth.sinha@mail.utoronto.ca

romansh@meta.com

reizenstein@meta.com

Ignacio Rocco
Meta AI

Natalia Neverova
Meta AI

Andrea Vedaldi
Meta AI

David Novotny
Meta AI

irocco@meta.com

nneverova@meta.com

vedaldi@meta.com

dnovotny@meta.com

Train a category-level model on videos of non-rigid objects

Reconstruct unseen videos at test-time

TrackeRF

TrackeRF

Figure 1. We tackle the problem of synthesising new views of deformable objects given only a small number of views taken at different
times. We introduce new benchmark data for this task: Common Pets in 3D (CoP3D), containing 4,200 smartphone videos of cats and
dogs collected ‘in the wild’. We also propose a new method, Tracker-NeRF, a deformable new-view synthesis algorithm which learns a
category-level reconstruction prior from videos and applies it to reconstruct new objects at test time.

Abstract
Obtaining photorealistic reconstructions of objects from
sparse views is inherently ambiguous and can only be
achieved by learning suitable reconstruction priors. Earlier works on sparse rigid object reconstruction successfully
learned such priors from large datasets such as CO3D. In
this paper, we extend this approach to dynamic objects. We
use cats and dogs as a representative example and introduce
Common Pets in 3D (CoP3D), a collection of crowd-sourced
videos of approximately 4,200 distinct pets. CoP3D is one
of the first large-scale datasets for benchmarking non-rigid
3D reconstruction “in the wild”. We also propose TrackerNeRF, a method for learning 4D reconstruction from our
dataset. At test time, given a small number of video frames
of an unseen object, Tracker-NeRF predicts the trajectories of its 3D points and generates new views, interpolating
viewpoint and time. Results on CoP3D reveal significantly
better non-rigid new-view synthesis performance than existing baselines. The data will be available on the project
webpage: https://cop3d.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Advances in photorealistic reconstruction and new-view
synthesis facilitate experiencing real-life objects and scenes
in virtual and mixed reality. However, compared to standard
2D photography, capturing 3D content remains significantly
more difficult. Methods based on neural radiance fields [22,
24, 27], signed distance functions [57], and other implicit
representations [43] use deep neural networks to represent
the geometry of a single scene [27]. They usually require
hundreds of input views for high-quality reconstruction, and
are often limited to rigid objects and static scenes. Instead,
we would like users be able to capture 3D and 4D content as
easily as taking an image or video with their smartphone, a
setting that we call casual capture.
Casual capture requires reconstructing objects from only
a few images, which is inherently ambiguous. This is particularly true for dynamic content which requires to reconstruct
not only shape and appearance, but also deformation. The
ambiguity induced by deformations can be controlled via
regularization [33, 47], but this can be too weak or too restrictive to work well in all cases. Alternatively, one can

4881

