This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dimensionality-Varying Diffusion Process
Han Zhang1,4† Ruili Feng2,4 Zhantao Yang1,4† Lianghua Huang4 Yu Liu4
Yifei Zhang1,4† Yujun Shen3 Deli Zhao4 Jingren Zhou4 Fan Cheng1∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Ant Group 4 Alibaba Group
{hzhang9617, ruilifengustc, ztyang196, shenyujun0302, zhaodeli}@gmail.com
{xuangen.hlh, ly103369, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com

qidouxiong619@sjtu.edu.cn

chengfan@sjtu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Synthesized samples on various datasets, including FFHQ (10242 and 2562 ), LSUN Church (2562 ), LSUN Bedroom (2562 ),
LSUN Cat (2562 ) and CIFAR10 (322 ). All these samples are generated from a 642 noise except CIFAR10 from 162 , while conventional
diffusion models can only start from a noise with the same dimension as the final sample.

Abstract
Diffusion models, which learn to reverse a signal destruction process to generate new data, typically require
the signal at each step to have the same dimension. We
argue that, considering the spatial redundancy in image
signals, there is no need to maintain a high dimensionality in the evolution process, especially in the early
generation phase. To this end, we make a theoretical
generalization of the forward diffusion process via signal
decomposition. Concretely, we manage to decompose an
image into multiple orthogonal components and control
the attenuation of each component when perturbing the
image. That way, along with the noise strength increasing,
we are able to diminish those inconsequential components
and thus use a lower-dimensional signal to represent the
source, barely losing information. Such a reformulation
allows to vary dimensions in both training and inference
of diffusion models. Extensive experiments on a range of
datasets suggest that our approach substantially reduces
the computational cost and achieves on-par or even better
synthesis performance compared to baseline methods. We
also show that our strategy facilitates high-resolution image
synthesis and improves FID of diffusion model trained on
FFHQ at 1024×1024 resolution from 52.40 to 10.46. Code
is available at https://github.com/damo-vilab/dvdp.
∗ corresponding author.
† Work performed at Alibaba DAMO Academy.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [2, 6, 9, 15, 21, 24, 28] have recently
shown great potential in image synthesis. Instead of directly
learning the observed distribution, it constructs a multistep forward process through gradually adding noise onto
the real data (i.e., diffusion). After a sufficiently large
number of steps, the source signal could be considered
completely destroyed, resulting in a pure noise distribution
that naturally supports sampling. In this way, starting from
sampled noises, we can expect new instances after reversing
the diffusion process step by step.
As it can be seen, the above pipeline does not change
the dimension of the source signal throughout the entire
diffusion process [6,26,28]. It thus requires the reverse process to map a high-dimensional input to a high-dimensional
output at every single step, causing heavy computation
overheads [10, 22]. However, images present a measure of
spatial redundancy [4] from the semantic perspective (e.g.,
an image pixel could usually be easily predicted according
to its neighbours). Given such a fact, when the source
signal is attenuated to some extent along with the noise
strength growing, it should be possible to get replaced by
a lower-dimensional signal. We therefore argue that there
is no need to follow the source signal dimension along
the entire distribution evolution process, especially at early
steps (i.e., steps close to the pure noise distribution) for
coarse generation.

14307

