This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACSeg: Adaptive Conceptualization for Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
Kehan Li1,3
1

Zhennan Wang2 Zesen Cheng1,3 Runyi Yu1,3 Yian Zhao5
Chang Liu4 Li Yuan1,2,3 * Jie Chen1,2,3∗

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3
4

2

Guoli Song2

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

5

Dalian University of Technology

Abstract
Recently, self-supervised large-scale visual pre-training
models have shown great promise in representing pixellevel semantic relationships, significantly promoting the development of unsupervised dense prediction tasks, e.g., unsupervised semantic segmentation (USS). The extracted relationship among pixel-level representations typically contains rich class-aware information that semantically identical pixel embeddings in the representation space gather
together to form sophisticated concepts. However, leveraging the learned models to ascertain semantically consistent pixel groups or regions in the image is non-trivial
since over/ under-clustering overwhelms the conceptualization procedure under various semantic distributions of different images. In this work, we investigate the pixel-level
semantic aggregation in self-supervised ViT pre-trained
models as image Segmentation and propose the Adaptive
Conceptualization approach for USS, termed ACSeg. Concretely, we explicitly encode concepts into learnable prototypes and design the Adaptive Concept Generator (ACG),
which adaptively maps these prototypes to informative concepts for each image. Meanwhile, considering the scene
complexity of different images, we propose the modularity
loss to optimize ACG independent of the concept number
based on estimating the intensity of pixel pairs belonging to
the same concept. Finally, we turn the USS task into classifying the discovered concepts in an unsupervised manner.
Extensive experiments with state-of-the-art results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed ACSeg.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the primary tasks in
computer vision, which has been widely used in many domains, such as autonomous driving [7, 14] and medical
* Corresponding author. Project page: https://lkhl.github.io/ACSeg.

(a) Under-clustering
Pixel-level representation

Prototype

Adaptive
Concept
Generator

(b) Over-clustering
Concept

Inactive prototype

Pixels in a concept

Concept

(c) Our Adaptive Conceptualization

Figure 1. Comparison between existing methods and our adaptive
conceptualization on finding underlying “concepts” in the pixellevel representations produced by a pre-trained model. While
under-clustering just focuses on a single object and over-clustering
splits objects, our adaptive conceptualization processes different
images adaptively through updating the initialized prototypes with
the representations for each image.

imaging [12, 24, 41]. With the development of deep learning and the increasing amount of data [7, 11, 28, 57], uplifting performance has been achieved on this task by optimizing deep neural networks with pixel-level annotations [29].
However, large-scale pixel-level annotations are expensive
and laborious to obtain. Different kinds of weak supervision
have been explored to achieve label efficiency [37], e.g.,
image-level [1,49], scribble-level [27], and box-level supervision [35]. More than this, some methods also achieve semantic segmentation without relying on any labels [19, 20],
namely unsupervised semantic segmentation (USS).
Early approaches for USS are based on pixel-level selfsupervised representation learning by introducing cross-

7162

