This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GlassesGAN: Eyewear Personalization using Synthetic Appearance Discovery
and Targeted Subspace Modeling*
Richard Plesh1 Peter Peer2
Vitomir Struc2
1
Clarkson University, USA 2 University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
https://github.com/pleshro/GlassesGAN_release
Enlarge

Raise

Round

Enlarge/Square

Cateye

Thin

Shrink

Lower

Square

Shrink/Round

Reverse Cateye

Thicken

Figure 1. This paper introduces GlassesGAN, an innovative approach to image editing capable of generating continuously tunable, multiattribute, and photo-realistic editing of eyeglasses by leveraging a novel method for modeling sub-spaces in the StyleGAN2 latent space.
The presented (1024 × 1024) examples show editing results for twelve different tuning attributes. Best viewed zoomed-in.

Abstract
We present GlassesGAN, a novel image editing framework for custom design of glasses, that sets a new standard in terms of output-image quality, edit realism, and
continuous multi-style edit capability. To facilitate the
editing process with GlassesGAN, we propose a Targeted
Subspace Modelling (TSM) procedure that, based on a
novel mechanism for (synthetic) appearance discovery in
the latent space of a pre-trained GAN generator, constructs
an eyeglasses-specific (latent) subspace that the editing
framework can utilize. Additionally, we also introduce an
appearance-constrained subspace initialization (SI) technique that centers the latent representation of the given input image in the well-defined part of the constructed subspace to improve the reliability of the learned edits. We
test GlassesGAN on two (diverse) high-resolution datasets
(CelebA-HQ and SiblingsDB-HQf) and compare it to three
state-of-the-art baselines, i.e., InterfaceGAN, GANSpace,
and MaskGAN. The reported results show that GlassesGAN
convincingly outperforms all competing techniques, while
* Supported by ARRS J2-2501(A), the Fulbright Scholarship Fund, the
Center for Identification Technology Research, and the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 1650503.

offering functionality (e.g., fine-grained multi-style editing)
not available with any of the competitors. The source code
for GlassesGAN is made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Consumers are increasingly choosing the convenience
of online shopping over traditional brick-and-mortar
stores [3]. For the apparel industry, which traditionally relied on individuals being able to try on items to suit their
taste and body shape before purchasing, the shift to digital
commerce has created an unsustainable cycle of purchasing,
shipping, and returns. Now, an estimated 85% of manufactured fashion items end up in landfills each year, largely due
to consumer returns and unsatisfied online customers [35].
In response to these challenges, the computer vision
community has become increasingly interested in virtualtry-on (VTON) techniques [3, 6, 9, 11] that allow for the development of virtual fitting rooms, where consumers can
try on clothing in a virtual setting. Furthermore, such techniques also give users the flexibility to explore custom
designs and personalize fashion items by rendering them
photo-realistically in the provided input image.
While considerable progress has been made recently in

16847

