This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VecFontSDF: Learning to Reconstruct and Synthesize High-quality Vector Fonts
via Signed Distance Functions
Zeqing Xia*, Bojun Xiong*, Zhouhui Lian†
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China

Abstract
Font design is of vital importance in the digital content design and modern printing industry. Developing algorithms capable of automatically synthesizing vector fonts
can significantly facilitate the font design process. However, existing methods mainly concentrate on raster image
generation, and only a few approaches can directly synthesize vector fonts. This paper proposes an end-to-end
trainable method, VecFontSDF, to reconstruct and synthesize high-quality vector fonts using signed distance functions (SDFs). Specifically, based on the proposed SDFbased implicit shape representation, VecFontSDF learns
to model each glyph as shape primitives enclosed by several parabolic curves, which can be precisely converted
to quadratic Bézier curves that are widely used in vector font products. In this manner, most image generation
methods can be easily extended to synthesize vector fonts.
Qualitative and quantitative experiments conducted on a
publicly-available dataset demonstrate that our method obtains high-quality results on several tasks, including vector
font reconstruction, interpolation, and few-shot vector font
synthesis, markedly outperforming the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Traditional vector font designing process relies heavily
on the expertise and effort from professional designers, setting a high barrier for common users. With the rapid development of deep generative models in the last few years,
a large amount of effective and powerful methods [1, 7, 32]
have been proposed to synthesize visually-pleasing glyph
images. In the meantime, how to automatically reconstruct
and generate high-quality vector fonts is still considered
as a challenging task in the communities of Computer Vision and Computer Graphics. Recently, several methods
* Denotes equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn

This work was supported by National Language Committee of China
(Grant No.: ZDI135-130), Center For Chinese Font Design and Research,
and Key Laboratory of Science, Technology and Standard in Press Industry
(Key Laboratory of Intelligent Press Media Technology).

(a) Vector Font Reconstruction

(b) Vector Font Interpolation

Figure 1. Examples of results obtained by our method in the tasks
of vector font reconstruction (a) and vector font interpolation (b).

based on sequential generative models [3,11,20,30,33] have
been reported that treat a vector glyph as a draw-commands
sequence and use Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) or
Transformer [31] to encode and decode the sequence. However, this explicit representation of vector graphics is extremely difficult for the learning and comprehension of deep
neural networks, mainly due to the long-range dependence
and the ambiguity in how to draw the outlines of glyphs.
More recently, DeepVecFont [33] was proposed to use dualmodality learning to alleviate the problem, showing stateof-the-art performance on this task. Its key idea is to use a
CNN encoder and an RNN encoder to extract features from
both image and sequence modalities. Despite using richer
information of dual-modality data, it still needs repetitively
random samplings of synthesis results to find the optimal
one and then uses Diffvg [18] to refine the vector glyphs under the guidance of generated images in the inference stage.
Another possible solution to model the vector graphic
is to use implicit functions which have been widely used
to represent 3D shapes in recent years. For instance,
DeepSDF [25] adopts a neural network to predict the values
of signed distance functions for surfaces, but it fails to con-

1848

