This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging the Gap between Model Explanations in
Partially Annotated Multi-label Classification
Youngwook Kim1
Cordelia Schmid4
1
4

Jae Myung Kim2
Zeynep Akata2,5
University of Tübingen

3

Inria, Ecole normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University

5

Seoul National University

2

Jieun Jeong1,3
Jungwoo Lee1,3 *
HodooAI Lab

MPI for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Due to the expensive costs of collecting labels in multilabel classification datasets, partially annotated multi-label
classification has become an emerging field in computer vision. One baseline approach to this task is to assume unobserved labels as negative labels, but this assumption induces
label noise as a form of false negative. To understand the
negative impact caused by false negative labels, we study
how these labels affect the model’s explanation. We observe
that the explanation of two models, trained with full and
partial labels each, highlights similar regions but with different scaling, where the latter tends to have lower attribution scores. Based on these findings, we propose to boost the
attribution scores of the model trained with partial labels to
make its explanation resemble that of the model trained with
full labels. Even with the conceptually simple approach,
the multi-label classification performance improves by a
large margin in three different datasets on a single positive label setting and one on a large-scale partial label
setting. Code is available at https://github.com/
youngwk/BridgeGapExplanationPAMC.

1. Introduction
Multi-label image classification is the task of predicting all labels corresponding to a given image. Since webcrawled images often contain multiple objects/concepts
[3, 32, 35, 44], the importance of this task is rising. However, it faces a significant issue of huge annotation costs. We
need C binary labels for each training image to provide exhaustive annotation for a model that classifies images into C
categories. It acts as a severe obstacle to scaling multi-label
classification datasets.
For this reason, partially annotated multi-label classification [2, 11, 13, 17, 21, 24] has recently become an actively
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. CAM Observation. We compare the class activation
map (CAM) output from two multi-label classification models:
one trained with full labels (CAMfull ) and the other trained with
partial labels and AN assumption (CAMpartial ). We observe that the
overall structure of CAMpartial is not much affected by the noisy
false negative labels during training. This observation motivates
us to make CAMpartial similar to CAMfull by boosting its relatively
large attribution scores. Best viewed in color.

studied topic. In this setting, instead of exhaustive annotation, only a few categories are labeled for each training image. We can effectively reduce the burden of annotation by
adopting partial annotation strategies.
One baseline approach for solving a partially annotated
multi-label classification task is assuming unobserved labels as negative labels (Assume Negative, AN) [4,6,36,40].
It is a reasonable assumption since most labels are negative labels in the multi-label scenario [33]. However, this
assumption causes label noise in a form of false negatives
since the actually positive but unannotated labels are incor-

3408

