This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L ANA: A Language-Capable Navigator for Instruction Following and Generation
Xiaohan Wang

Wenguan Wang

Jiayi Shao

Yi Yang*

CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/wxh1996/LANA-VLN

Abstract
Recently, visual-language navigation (VLN) – entailing
robot agents to follow navigation instructions – has shown
great advance. However, existing literature put most emphasis on interpreting instructions into actions, only delivering
“dumb” wayfinding agents. In this article, we devise L ANA,
a language-capable navigation agent which is able to not
only execute human-written navigation commands, but also
provide route descriptions to humans. This is achieved by simultaneously learning instruction following and generation
with only one single model. More specifically, two encoders,
respectively for route and language encoding, are built and
shared by two decoders, respectively for action prediction
and instruction generation, so as to exploit cross-task knowledge and capture task-specific characteristics. Throughout
pretraining and fine-tuning, both instruction following and
generation are set as optimization objectives. We empirically
verify that, compared with recent advanced task-specific
solutions, L ANA attains better performances on both instruction following and route description, with nearly half
complexity. In addition, endowed with language generation
capability, L ANA can explain to human its behaviours and assist human’s wayfinding. This work is expected to foster future efforts towards building more trustworthy and sociallyintelligent navigation robots.

1. Introduction
Developing agents that can interact with humans in natural language while perceiving and taking actions in their environments is one of the fundamental goals in artificial intelligence. As a small step towards this target, visual-language
navigation (VLN) [4] – endowing agents to execute natural
language navigation commands – recently received significant attention. In VLN space, much work has been done on
language grounding – teaching agents how to relate human
instructions with actions associated with perceptions. However, there has been far little work [27, 70, 1, 77, 23] on the
reverse side – language generation – teaching agents how to
* Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

Figure 1: L ANA is capable of both instruction following and generation. Its written report benefits human-robot collaboration, and,
to some extend, can explain its behavior: it takes a wrong action at
step 2 as it mistakes the dining room for bedroom. After gathering
more information at step 3, it changes to the correct direction.

verbalize a vivid description of navigation routes. More critically, existing VLN literature separately train agents that are
specialized for each single task. As a result, the delivered
agents are either strong wayfinding actors but never talking,
or conversable route instructors but never walking.
This article underlines a fundamental challenge in VLN:
Can we learn a single agent that is capable of both navigation instruction following and route description creation?
We propose L ANA, a language-capable navigation agent,
that is fully aware of such challenge (Fig. 1). By simultaneously learning instruction grounding and generation, L ANA
formalises human-to-robot and robot-to-human communication, conveyed using navigation-oriented natural language,
in a unified framework. This is of great importance, because:
i) It completes the necessary communication cycle between
human and agents, and promotes VLN agent’s real-world
utility [58]. For instance, when an agent takes long time to
execute a navigation command, during which sustained human attention is infeasible and undesirable, the agent should
report its progress [72]. Also, agents are expected to direct
human in agents’ explored areas [81], which is relevant for
search and rescue robots in disaster regions [71, 19], guide
19048

