This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Aligned Pseudo-Supervision from Non-Aligned Data for
Image Restoration in Under-Display Camera
Ruicheng Feng1 Chongyi Li1 Huaijin Chen2 Shuai Li2 Jinwei Gu3,4 Chen Change Loy1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseBrain Technology
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{ruicheng002, chongyi.li, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
{huaijin.chen, shuailizju}@gmail.com

jwgu@cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Due to the difficulty in collecting large-scale and perfectly aligned paired training data for Under-Display Camera (UDC) image restoration, previous methods resort to
monitor-based image systems or simulation-based methods,
sacrificing the realness of the data and introducing domain
gaps. In this work, we revisit the classic stereo setup for
training data collection – capturing two images of the same
scene with one UDC and one standard camera. The key
idea is to “copy” details from a high-quality reference image and “paste” them on the UDC image. While being
able to generate real training pairs, this setting is susceptible to spatial misalignment due to perspective and depth
of field changes. The problem is further compounded by
the large domain discrepancy between the UDC and normal
images, which is unique to UDC restoration. In this paper,
we mitigate the non-trivial domain discrepancy and spatial
misalignment through a novel Transformer-based framework that generates well-aligned yet high-quality target
data for the corresponding UDC input. This is made possible through two carefully designed components, namely, the
Domain Alignment Module (DAM) and Geometric Alignment Module (GAM), which encourage robust and accurate
discovery of correspondence between the UDC and normal views. Extensive experiments show that high-quality
and well-aligned pseudo UDC training pairs are beneficial for training a robust restoration network. Code and
the dataset are available at https://github.com/
jnjaby/AlignFormer.

1. Introduction
Under-Display Camera (UDC) is an imaging system
with cameras placed underneath a display. It emerges as
a promising solution for smartphone manufacturers to completely hide the selfie camera, providing a notch-free viewing experience on smartphones. However, the widespread

(b) Ref

(c) Anaglyph (UDC-Ref)

(d) AlignFormer (Ours)

(e) Anaglyph (UDC-AlignFormer)

(a) UDC

Figure 1. Domain and geometric misalignment in UDC. Stereo
pairs (a) and (b) are captured by Under-Display Camera and highend camera, respectively. The two images deviate significantly
due to the color shift and severe degradation the UDC image.
Anaglyph (c) illustrates the large spatial displacement between
UDC and reference images despite a careful hardware setup and
rough alignment. Our AlignFormer aligns the image pair and minimizes the parallax.

commercial production of UDC is prevented by poor imaging quality caused by diffraction artifacts. Such artifacts are
unique to UDC, caused by the gaps between display pixels
that act as an aperture. As shown in Figure 1(a), typical
diffraction artifacts entail flare, saturated blobs, blur, haze,
and noise. The complex and diverse distortions make the
reconstruction problem extremely challenging.
Training a deep network end-to-end for UDC restoration has been found challenging due to the need for a
large-scale dataset of real-world degraded images and their
high-quality counterparts. Existing methods [29, 52] build
datasets with a monitor-based imaging system. As discussed in Feng et al. [3], such a paradigm is inherently limited by the dynamic range and spatial resolution of the monitor. To address the problem, Feng et al. [3] present a synthetic dataset grounded on the imaging formation model [3].
Both datasets exhibit degradation that deviates from the actual physical imaging process, leading to poor generalizability to diverse real-world test cases.

5013

