This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Binarizing Sparse Convolutional Networks for Efficient Point Cloud Analysis
Xiuwei Xu1,2 , Ziwei Wang1,2 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Jiwen Lu1,2 *
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{xxw21, wang-zw18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Sparseconv

Shifted Sparseconv

Channels

(b)

...

* Corresponding author.

...

3D deep learning on point clouds [6, 12, 25, 27] has been
widely adopted in a wide variety of downstream applications including autonomous driving, AR/VR and robotics
due to its strong discriminative power and generalization
ability. In these applications, real-time interaction and fast

(a)

...

1. Introduction

...

In this paper, we propose binary sparse convolutional
networks called BSC-Net for efficient point cloud analysis.
We empirically observe that sparse convolution operation
causes larger quantization errors than standard convolution. However, conventional network quantization methods
directly binarize the weights and activations in sparse convolution, resulting in performance drop due to the significant quantization loss. On the contrary, we search the
optimal subset of convolution operation that activates the
sparse convolution at various locations for quantization
error alleviation, and the performance gap between realvalued and binary sparse convolutional networks is closed
without complexity overhead. Specifically, we first present
the shifted sparse convolution that fuses the information in
the receptive field for the active sites that match the predefined positions. Then we employ the differentiable search
strategies to discover the optimal opsitions for active site
matching in the shifted sparse convolution, and the quantization errors are significantly alleviated for efficient point
cloud analysis. For fair evaluation of the proposed method,
we empirically select the recently advances that are beneficial for sparse convolution network binarization to construct a strong baseline. The experimental results on ScanNet and NYU Depth v2 show that our BSC-Net achieves significant improvement upon our srtong baseline and outperforms the state-of-the-art network binarization methods by
a remarkable margin without additional computation overhead for binarizing sparse convolutional networks.

Channels

Figure 1. Demonstration of sparse convolution and the proposed
shifted sparse convolution. (a) Sparse convolution only operates
when the center of kernel slides over the active sites. (b) Our
shifted sparse convolution performs different operations for each
group of output channels, which brings more information from the
neighbor active sites.

response are required to guarantee safety and practicality.
Submanifold sparse convolution (we call it ”sparse convolution” for short in the rest of this paper) [12] is one of
the most popular and basic operator for point cloud analysis, which first voxelizes the point clouds and then applies
3D convolution on the voxels while keeping the same sparsity pattern throughout the layers of the network. Sparse
convolution is widely adopted in most state-of-the-art architectures for point cloud analysis and so it is desirable
to further improve its efficiency for more practical application. We opt for architecture-agnostic methods such as employing network binarization to achieve this goal. Binarized
neural networks [19,36] restrict the bitwidth of weights and
activations to only one bit and substitute the multiplicationaddition by xnor-bitcount operations, which decreases the

5313

