This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Better Decision Forests: Forest Alternating Optimization
Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán Magzhan Gabidolla Arman Zharmagambetov*
Dept. CSE, University of California, Merced
{mcarreira-perpinan,mgabidolla,azharmagambetov}@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Decision forests are among the most accurate models in
machine learning. This is remarkable given that the way
they are trained is highly heuristic: neither the individual trees nor the overall forest optimize any well-defined
loss. While diversity mechanisms such as bagging or boosting have been until now critical in the success of forests,
we think that a better optimization should lead to better
forests—ideally eliminating any need for an ensembling
heuristic. However, unlike for most other models, such as
neural networks, optimizing forests or trees is not easy, because they define a non-differentiable function. We show,
for the first time, that it is possible to learn a forest by optimizing a desirable loss and regularization jointly over all
its trees and parameters. Our algorithm, Forest Alternating
Optimization, is based on defining a forest as a parametric model with a fixed number of trees and structure (rather
than adding trees indefinitely as in bagging or boosting).
It then iteratively updates each tree in alternation so that
the objective function decreases monotonically. The algorithm is so effective at optimizing that it easily overfits, but
this can be corrected by averaging. The result is a forest
that consistently exceeds the accuracy of the state-of-the-art
while using fewer, smaller trees.

1. Introduction
In the past two decades, decision tree ensembles (forests)
have been recognized as among the most accurate of all machine learning (ML) models for regression, classification
and other tasks. This is evidenced by their widespread use
in practical applications (from fraud detection to ranking)
and by regularly being at the top of leaderboards in ML competitions and practitioner surveys (such as Kaggle or KDnuggets). While achieving the best performance possible
does require some hyperparameter tuning, this job is much
easier compared to neural networks, for example. For this
reason they are often considered off-the-shelf algorithms.
* currently at Meta AI (FAIR)

At the same time, the training algorithm for forests
seems outdated, given the larger, increasing role that numerical optimization has played in ML in recent years. Indeed,
to train a forest, one does not choose a loss function and regularization terms over a parametric model and optimize that
on a training set. Instead, one relies on two building blocks.
First, a procedure to learn an individual tree. This is almost
always based on a greedy recursive partitioning procedure,
such as CART [6], C4.5 [26] or its variations. Second, a
procedure to create the ensemble. The most successful ones
are bagging and feature sampling (in Random Forests (RF))
and boosting (in AdaBoost and Gradient Boosting (GB)).
Neither of these building blocks define a global objective
function of the forest’s parameters and optimize it, instead
they rely on local, proxy objectives (e.g. purity in learning
tree splits in CART, or the local loss in GB). Indeed, the only
way the model improves its accuracy is by adding more parameters (more nodes in a tree or more trees in a forest),
not by optimizing existing parameters. This leads to much
larger models than is necessary. The undeniable success of
forests has been attributed to intuitive but slippery concepts
such as the diversity of the base learners (trees). For RFs
and boosting, multiple conflicting theories have been put
forward [2, 5, 13, 20, 24, 25, 27, 28]. It is fair to say that nobody really understands why RF, AdaBoost or GB forests
work. It also seems reasonable that jointly optimizing over
the trees should make them naturally diverse, just as neurons in the same layer of a neural network differ from each
other when optimized with backpropagation.
We do not seek to explain why current forest algorithms
work. We seek to learn forests using solid optimization principles, bringing them into the mainstream of modern ML,
and as a result learn even better forests. Indeed, we can
interpret some recent advances as being due to a better optimization. One view of some forms of boosting connected
it with optimization [13, 24]. Gradient boosting (GB) [14],
possibly the type of forest that generally leads to the highest accuracy, relies on an attempt to make boosting close
to an optimization in model space that follows a functional
gradient. Unfortunately, GB relies on multiple approximations (including the use of CART to learn individual trees),

7589

