This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhanced Multimodal Representation Learning with Cross-modal KD
Mengxi Chen1 , Linyu Xing1 , Yu Wang1,2 , Ya Zhang1,2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory

1

{mxchen mc,xly8991,yuwanhsjtu,ya zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper explores the tasks of leveraging auxiliary
modalities which are only available at training to enhance
multimodal representation learning through cross-modal
Knowledge Distillation (KD). The widely adopted mutual
information maximization-based objective leads to a shortcut solution of the weak teacher, i.e., achieving the maximum mutual information by simply making the teacher
model as weak as the student model. To prevent such a
weak solution, we introduce an additional objective term,
i.e., the mutual information between the teacher and the
auxiliary modality model. Besides, to narrow down the information gap between the student and teacher, we further
propose to minimize the conditional entropy of the teacher
given the student. Novel training schemes based on contrastive learning and adversarial learning are designed to
optimize the mutual information and the conditional entropy, respectively. Experimental results on three popular
multimodal benchmark datasets have shown that the proposed method outperforms a range of state-of-the-art approaches for video recognition, video retrieval and emotion
classification.

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning has shown much promise in a
wide spectrum of applications, such as video understanding [20, 39, 44], sentiment analysis [1, 19, 47] and medical image segmentation [7, 49]. It is generally recognized
that including more modalities helps the prediction accuracy. For many real-world applications, while one has to
make predictions based on limited modalities due to efficiency or cost concerns, it is usually possible to collect additional modalities at training. To enhance the representation learned, several studies have thus considered to leverage such modalities as a form of auxiliary information at
training [11, 23, 29, 50]. Several attempts have explored
to fill in the auxiliary modalities at test time, by employing approaches such as Generative Adversarial Network

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between the MI-based
method and the proposed AMID method. (a) MI-based methods
maximize I(M ; S). (b) AMID maximizes I(M ; S) and I(M ; A),
while minimizing H(M |S).

(GAN) [4, 22]. However, such data generation-based approaches introduce extra computation costs at inference.
As an alternative, cross-modal knowledge distillation is
proposed, where a teacher model trained with both the target modalities and the auxiliary modalities (denoted as full
modalities hereafter), is employed to guide the training of a
student model with target modalities only [10,11,16,23,45,
46]. In such a way, the student model directly learns to embed information about auxiliary modalities and involves no
additional computational cost at inference. A typical practice is to pre-train the teacher model from the full modality
data, and fix it during the training. While such a setting
enables the teacher to provide information-rich representation [23, 46], it may not be favorable for the alignment of
the teacher and student, due to the large information gap
between them, especially at the early stage of training [32].
To better facilitate the knowledge transfer, online KD
is proposed to jointly train the teacher and the student.
One common solution is to maximize the mutual information (MI) between the teacher and the student in a shared

11766

