This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sound to Visual Scene Generation by Audio-to-Visual Latent Alignment
Kim Sung-Bin1

Arda Senocak2

Hyunwoo Ha1

Andrew Owens3

Tae-Hyun Oh1,4,5

1

Dept. of Electrical Engineering and 4 Grad. School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
2
3
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
University of Michigan
5
Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University
https://sound2scene.github.io/

Generated Images from Waveform Manipulation

Single
Waveform

Mixing
Waveforms

Generated Images from Latent Manipulation

Image
Feature

Train Horning

Stream Burbling

Dog
Barking
+
Water
Flowing

Cow Lowing

Audio
Feature

Cheering

Audio-Visual
Interpolation

Underwater
+
Volcano
Explosion

Skiing
Volume Change
Direction
Image
Feature

Volume
Changes

Water Flowing

Audio-Visual
Interpolation

Elk Bugling

Given Image

Volume Changes

Figure 1. Sound-to-image generation. We propose a model that synthesizes images of natural scenes from the sound. Our model is trained
solely from paired audio-visual data, without labels or language supervision. Our model’s predictions can be controlled by applying simple
manipulations to the input waveforms (left), such as by mixing two sounds together or by adjusting the volume. We can also control our
model’s outputs in latent space, such as by interpolating in directions specified by sound (right).

Abstract
How does audio describe the world around us? In this paper, we propose a method for generating an image of a scene
from sound. Our method addresses the challenges of dealing
with the large gaps that often exist between sight and sound.
We design a model that works by scheduling the learning procedure of each model component to associate audio-visual
modalities despite their information gaps. The key idea is to
enrich the audio features with visual information by learning to align audio to visual latent space. We translate the
input audio to visual features, then use a pre-trained generator to produce an image. To further improve the quality of
our generated images, we use sound source localization to
select the audio-visual pairs that have strong cross-modal
correlations. We obtain substantially better results on the
VEGAS and VGGSound datasets than prior approaches. We
also show that we can control our model’s predictions by
applying simple manipulations to the input waveform, or to
the latent space.

1. Introduction
Humans have the remarkable ability to associate sounds
with visual scenes, such as how chirping birds and rustling
branches bring to mind a lush forest, and the flowing water
conjures the image of a river. These cross-modal associations
convey important information, such as the distance and size
of sound sources, and the presence of out-of-sight objects.
An emerging line of work has sought to create multimodal learning systems that have these cross-modal prediction capabilities, by synthesizing visual imagery from
sound [15, 20, 26, 36, 37, 63, 69]. However, these existing
methods come with significant limitations, such as being
limited to simple datasets in which images and sounds are
closely correlated [63, 69], relying on vision-and-language
supervision [36], and being capable only of manipulating
Acknowledgment. This work was supported by IITP grant funded by Korea
government (MSIT) (No.2021-0-02068, Artificial Intelligence Innovation
Hub; No.2022-0-00124, Development of Artificial Intelligence Technology
for Self-Improving Competency-Aware Learning Capabilities). The GPU
resource was supported by the HPC Support Project, MSIT and NIPA.

6430

