This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is BERT Blind? Exploring the Effect of Vision-and-Language Pretraining on
Visual Language Understanding
Morris Alper∗ , Michael Fiman∗ , Hadar Averbuch-Elor
Tel Aviv University

Alex gave Riley a present Alex gave Riley an ultimatum
How concrete are the words present and ultimatum?

the ocean is [*]-colored
a corn chip is [*]-shaped
What word should be inserted in the blank?

Figure 1. In this paper, we propose a suite of visual language understanding tasks for probing the visual reasoning capabilities of text
encoder models. While we consider text-only tasks (i.e., processing only the textual descriptions above without associated imagery), we
argue that they require visual imagination to complete and can thus benefit from vision-and-language pretraining. For instance, consider
the words present and ultimatum. A simple online query (that considers only freely-available images) roughly yields a coherent set of
images for the more concrete word (namely present), while the latter cannot be uniquely depicted. Likewise, selecting the most natural
color or shape descriptors in cloze contexts as shown in the two examples on the right requires implicit knowledge of the appearance of the
referent under consideration (ocean and corn chip respectively).

Abstract
Most humans use visual imagination to understand and
reason about language, but models such as BERT reason
about language using knowledge acquired during text-only
pretraining. In this work, we investigate whether visionand-language pretraining can improve performance on textonly tasks that involve implicit visual reasoning, focusing
primarily on zero-shot probing methods. We propose a suite
of visual language understanding (VLU) tasks for probing
the visual reasoning abilities of text encoder models, as
well as various non-visual natural language understanding
(NLU) tasks for comparison. We also contribute a novel
zero-shot knowledge probing method, Stroop probing, for
applying models such as CLIP to text-only tasks without
needing a prediction head such as the masked language
modelling head of models like BERT. We show that SOTA
multimodally trained text encoders outperform unimodally
trained text encoders on the VLU tasks while being underperformed by them on the NLU tasks, lending new context
to previously mixed results regarding the NLU capabilities
of multimodal models. We conclude that exposure to images
during pretraining affords inherent visual reasoning knowl* These authors contributed equally to this work

edge that is reflected in language-only tasks that require implicit visual reasoning. Our findings bear importance in the
broader context of multimodal learning, providing principled guidelines for the choice of text encoders used in such
contexts1 .

1. Introduction
Humans are multimodal learners. We communicate
with each other about things that we have experienced and
knowledge we have gained using our senses—most commonly including sight as well as hearing, touch, smell, and
taste. Our communication channel is limited to a single
modality—spoken language, signed language, or text—but
a reader or listener is expected to use his or her imagination
to visualize and reason about the content being described.
In general, language is used to describe scenes, events, and
images; the words used to describe these are used to conjure up a visual impression in the listener. Therefore, it is
natural to consider the types of visual reasoning used in understanding language, and to ask how well we can currently
1 Our code will be made available at https://isbertblind.
github.io/

6778

