This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperspherical Embedding for Point Cloud Completion
Junming Zhang, Haomeng Zhang, Ram Vasudevan
University of Michigan

Matthew Johnson-Roberson
Carnegie Mellon University

{junming,haomeng,ramv}@umich.edu

mkj@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Most real-world 3D measurements from depth sensors
are incomplete, and to address this issue the point cloud
completion task aims to predict the complete shapes of
objects from partial observations. Previous works often
adapt an encoder-decoder architecture, where the encoder
is trained to extract embeddings that are used as inputs
to generate predictions from the decoder. However, the
learned embeddings have sparse distribution in the feature
space, which leads to worse generalization results during
testing. To address these problems, this paper proposes
a hyperspherical module, which transforms and normalizes embeddings from the encoder to be on a unit hypersphere. With the proposed module, the magnitude and direction of the output hyperspherical embedding are decoupled
and only the directional information is optimized. We theoretically analyze the hyperspherical embedding and show
that it enables more stable training with a wider range of
learning rates and more compact embedding distributions.
Experiment results show consistent improvement of point
cloud completion in both single-task and multi-task learning, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction
The continual improvement of 3D sensors has made
point clouds much more accessible, which drives the development of algorithms to analyze them. Thanks to deep
learning techniques, state of the art algorithms for point
cloud analysis have achieved incredible performance [9,20–
22,25] by effectively learning representations from large 3D
datasets [3, 6, 26] and have many applications in robotics,
autonomous driving, and 3D modeling. However, point
clouds in the real-world are often incomplete and sparse
due to many reasons, such as occlusions, low resolution,
and the limited view of 3D sensors. So it is critical to have
an algorithm that is capable of predicting complete shapes
of objects from partial observations.
Given the importance of point cloud completion, it is

Unconstrained
Embedding

Completion
Decoder

Encoder
Other Decoder

0

0.5

1.0

Hyper Module

Encoder

MLP

Hyperspherical
Embedding

Completion
Decoder

Norm
Other Decoder

0

0.5

1.0

Figure 1. An illustration of the architecture proposed in this paper. The upper subfigure shows the general point cloud analysis structure, where the
embedding is directly output from the encoder without constraints. The
lower subfigure shows the structure of the model with the proposed hyperspherical module. The figures under the embeddings illustrate the cosine similarity distribution between embeddings, which indicates a more
compact embedding distribution achieved by the proposed method and improves point cloud completion.

unsurprising that various methods have been proposed to
address this challenge [18, 27, 31, 34, 37, 41]. Most existing methods adapt encoder-decoder structures, in which the
encoder takes a partial point cloud as input and outputs
an embedding vector, and then it is taken by the decoder
which predicts a complete point cloud. The embedding
space is designed to be high-dimensional as it must have
large enough capacity to contain all information needed for
downstream tasks. However, the learned high-dimensional
embeddings, as shown in this paper, tend to have a sparse
distribution in the embedding space, which increases the
possibility that unseen features at testing are not captured
by the representation learned at training and leads to worse
generalizability of models.
Usually, one real-world application requires predictions
from multiple different tasks. For example, to grasp an
object in space the robot arm would need the information about the shape, category, and orientation of the target object. In contrast to training all tasks individually from
scratch, a more numerically efficient approach would be to
train all relevant tasks jointly by sharing parts of networks
between different tasks [11,13,28]. However, existing point
cloud completion methods lack the analysis of accomplish-

5323

