This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Density-Insensitive Unsupervised Domain Adaption on 3D Object Detection
Qianjiang Hu
Daizong Liu
Wei HuB
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
No. 128, Zhongguancun North Street, Beijing, China
hqjpku@pku.edu.cn, dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, forhuwei@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Waymo
KITTI
nuScenes

400
𝐷
!
300

3D object detection from point clouds is crucial in safetycritical autonomous driving. Although many works have
made great efforts and achieved significant progress on this
task, most of them suffer from expensive annotation cost
and poor transferability to unknown data due to the domain gap. Recently, few works attempt to tackle the domain gap in objects, but still fail to adapt to the gap of
varying beam-densities between two domains, which is critical to mitigate the characteristic differences of the LiDAR
collectors. To this end, we make the attempt to propose a
density-insensitive domain adaption framework to address
the density-induced domain gap. In particular, we first introduce Random Beam Re-Sampling (RBRS) to enhance the
robustness of 3D detectors trained on the source domain to
the varying beam-density. Then, we take this pre-trained detector as the backbone model, and feed the unlabeled target
domain data into our newly designed task-specific teacherstudent framework for predicting its high-quality pseudo labels. To further adapt the property of density-insensitivity
into the target domain, we feed the teacher and student
branches with the same sample of different densities, and
propose an Object Graph Alignment (OGA) module to construct two object-graphs between the two branches for enforcing the consistency in both the attribute and relation of
cross-density objects. Experimental results on three widely
adopted 3D object detection datasets demonstrate that our
proposed domain adaption method outperforms the stateof-the-art methods, especially over varying-density data.
Code is available at https://github.com/WoodwindHu/DTS.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental task in various
real-world scenarios, such as autonomous driving [24, 35]
and robot navigation [29], aiming to detect and localize
traffic-related objects such as cars, pedestrians, and cyB Corresponding author: W. Hu. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61972009).

AP
70"#

200
100
0
-0.6

-0.4
-0.2
Zenith Angle 𝜁
(a)

0

0.2

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

N → K (low to high) W→N (high to low)
SN ST3D Ours
(b)

Figure 1. (a) The significant difference of beam densities among
Waymo, KITTI, and nuScenes datasets. The beam density Dζ
represents the number of beams per unit zenith angle. The beams
are evenly distributed in nuScenes, while the density of beams in
Waymo and KITTI increases as the zenith angle ζ increases, with
the highest density near the horizontal direction. (b) Compared
to previous works (SN [43] and ST3D [51]), our method is more
effective in transferring the knowledge from low density to high
density or high density to low density (N: nuScenes, K: KITTI,
W: Waymo.).

clists in 3D point clouds [16, 25, 26]. With the advent of
deep learning, this task has obtained remarkable advances
[24, 35–37, 49, 56, 60] in recent years, which however requires costly dense annotations of point clouds. Further,
in real-world scenarios, upgrading LiDARs to other product models can be time-consuming and labor-intensive to
collect and annotate massive data for each kind of product, while it is reasonable to use labeled data from previous
sensors. Also, the number of LiDAR points used in massproduced robots and vehicles is usually fewer than that in
large-scale public datasets [44]. To bridge the domain gap
caused by different LiDAR beams, it is essential to develop
methods that address these differences. However, the generalization ability of existing methods is proved to be limited [43] when the 3D models trained on a specific dataset
are directly applied to an unknown dataset collected with a
different LiDAR, which prevents the wide applicability of
3D object detection in autonomous driving.
To reduce the domain gap between different datasets,
some works [13, 14, 27, 34, 43, 44, 47, 51, 55, 57] proposed
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods to transfer
knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain. However, most of them focus on reducing

17556

