This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Q: How to Specialize Large Vision-Language Models to Data-Scarce VQA Tasks?
A: Self-Train on Unlabeled Images!
Zaid Khan†∗ Vijay Kumar BG♣ Samuel Schulter♣ Xiang Yu♢∗ Yun Fu† Manmohan Chandraker♣♡
†

Northeastern University, ♣ NEC Labs America, ♢ Amazon, ♡ UC San Diego

Abstract
Finetuning a large vision language model (VLM) on a
target dataset after large scale pretraining is a dominant
paradigm in visual question answering (VQA). Datasets for
specialized tasks such as knowledge-based VQA or VQA
in non natural-image domains are orders of magnitude
smaller than those for general-purpose VQA. While collecting additional labels for specialized tasks or domains
can be challenging, unlabeled images are often available.
We introduce SelTDA (Self-Taught Data Augmentation),
a strategy for finetuning large VLMs on small-scale VQA
datasets. SelTDA uses the VLM and target dataset to build a
teacher model that can generate question-answer pseudolabels directly conditioned on an image alone, allowing us to
pseudolabel unlabeled images. SelTDA then finetunes the
initial VLM on the original dataset augmented with freshly
pseudolabeled images. We describe a series of experiments
showing that our self-taught data augmentation increases robustness to adversarially searched questions, counterfactual
examples and rephrasings, improves domain generalization,
and results in greater retention of numerical reasoning skills.
The proposed strategy requires no additional annotations or
architectural modifications, and is compatible with any modern encoder-decoder multimodal transformer. Code available at https://github.com/codezakh/SelTDA.

1. Introduction
Large, pretrained vision language foundation models [3,
20, 25, 26, 35, 49] are approaching human-level performance
on visual question answering (VQA) [26, 50–52, 54, 62], as
measured by the standard VQAv2 [13] benchmark. Yet on
more complex VQA tasks [37, 43] there is a larger gap between humans and machines. One difficulty is the small
scale of datasets for complex VQA tasks or those in domains
beyond natural images. The first solution to deal with the
∗ work done while at NEC Labs America

Figure 1. SelTDA expands the self-training paradigm to VQA. By
self-generating supervision (orange line) for an image I without
needing extra annotations, we can augment a target dataset with
new images and their pseudo-questions and answers (Q, A).

data scarcity is to employ transfer learning from a larger
VQA dataset (e.g. VQAv2) to the smaller, specialized VQA
dataset. However weaknesses of VQA models such as lack
of consistency [44], weakness to adversarially searched questions [27] and tendency to cheat by learning shortcuts [8]
can be exacerbated when fine-tuning on small datasets.
Collecting annotations to expand a dataset for knowledgeintensive tasks or specialized domains is often prohibitively
expensive. However, unlabeled images are cheap and often
available. How can we exploit unlabeled images for specific
visual question answering tasks? One possibility is to generate new question+answer pairs for the unlabeled images,
and use them during training. However, existing methods for
visual question generation require images with annotations —
either ground truth captions [2,4], or bounding boxes [21,48].
Even if these annotations were to be acquired, they induce a
limited set of possible questions; they are limited to objects
and concepts included in the acquired annotation, which are
in turn limited by the finite label space of pretrained object
detectors and the information disparity between a caption
and an image (an image usually contains much more content

15005

