This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Open Space Expansion for Open-Set Model Attribution
Tianyun Yang1,2 , Danding Wang1,2 ,* Fan Tang1,2 , Xinying Zhao1,2 , Juan Cao1,2 , Sheng Tang1,3
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Research Institute of Intelligent Computing, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
{yangtianyun19z,wangdanding,tangfan,zhaoxinying21s,caojuan,ts}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable progress in generative technology, the Janus-faced issues of intellectual property protection and malicious content supervision have arisen. Efforts
have been paid to manage synthetic images by attributing
them to a set of potential source models. However, the
closed-set classification setting limits the application in
real-world scenarios for handling contents generated by
arbitrary models. In this study, we focus on a challenging
task, namely Open-Set Model Attribution (OSMA), to simultaneously attribute images to known models and identify
those from unknown ones. Compared to existing openset recognition (OSR) tasks focusing on semantic novelty,
OSMA is more challenging as the distinction between
images from known and unknown models may only lie in
visually imperceptible traces. To this end, we propose a
Progressive Open Space Expansion (POSE) solution, which
simulates open-set samples that maintain the same semantics as closed-set samples but embedded with different
imperceptible traces. Guided by a diversity constraint, the
open space is simulated progressively by a set of lightweight
augmentation models. We consider three real-world scenarios and construct an OSMA benchmark dataset, including unknown models trained with different random seeds,
architectures, and datasets from known ones. Extensive
experiments on the dataset demonstrate POSE is superior
to both existing model attribution methods and off-the-shelf
OSR methods. Github: https://github.com/ICTMCG/POSE

1. Introduction
Advanced generative modeling technology can create
extremely realistic visual content, leading to dramatic
changes in the field of AI-enhanced design, arts, and metauniverse [23, 41, 47]. Whereas, the broadcasting of malicious content generated by open source generation models
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Open-set model attribution problem: The unknown
classes include unknown models different from known models
in training seeds, architectures, or training datasets. The goal is
to simultaneously attribute images to known models and identify
those from unknown ones.

has brought severe social impacts [9, 18, 43]. Furthermore,
new challenges have arisen for the ownership protection
of copyrighted digital generative models. To solve these
problems, model attribution, i.e., identifying the source
model of generated contents, has drawn increasing attention
recently [5, 33, 48, 50, 53].
Marra et al. [33] are among the first to point out that
GAN models leave specific fingerprints in the generated
images, just like camera devices. Further researches [5, 14,
48, 50, 53] validate the existence of GAN fingerprints and
show the feasibility of attributing fake images to a fixed
and finite set of known models. However, most of these
works focus on finding discriminative fingerprints among
the contents generated by different GAN models following
a simple closed-set setup. The ever-growing number of
unseen source models in the real-world scenario appeal
for a more generic approach. In this paper, we focus on

15856

