This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring the Effect of Primitives for
Compositional Generalization in Vision-and-Language
Chuanhao Li1 , Zhen Li1 , Chenchen Jing3 *, Yunde Jia2,1 , Yuwei Wu2,1∗
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3
School of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{lichuanhao,li.zhen,jiayunde,wuyuwei}@bit.edu.cn
jingchenchen@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Video:

Compositionality is one of the fundamental properties of
human cognition (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988). Compositional
generalization is critical to simulate the compositional capability of humans, and has received much attention in the
vision-and-language (V&L) community. It is essential to
understand the effect of the primitives, including words, image regions, and video frames, to improve the compositional
generalization capability. In this paper, we explore the effect of primitives for compositional generalization in V&L.
Specifically, we present a self-supervised learning based
framework that equips existing V&L methods with two characteristics: semantic equivariance and semantic invariance. With the two characteristics, the methods understand
primitives by perceiving the effect of primitive changes on
sample semantics and ground-truth. Experimental results
on two tasks: temporal video grounding and visual question
answering, demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
Compositionality is one of the fundamental properties of
human cognition argued by Fodor and Pylyshyn [11]. Compositional generalization in vision-and-language (V&L) has
received increasing attention and significant progress in recent years, but has not been fully explored. Compositional
generalization requires V&L methods to generalize well to
sentences with novel combinations of seen words, which is
critical to simulate the compositional properties of human
cognition.
* Corresponding author: Chenchen Jing and Yuwei Wu

Query: A person opens the door.

|

|

Query: The person opens a door. |

|

Query: A person closes the door.

|

|

Figure 1. An example in the context of temporal video grounding,
showing that primitives are the determinants of sample semantics
and ground-truth.

An indispensable premise for improving compositional
generalization is to understand the effect of the primitives,
including words, image regions, and video frames. Primitives are compositional building blocks mainly involved in
V&L tasks and the determinants of sample semantics. For
example, for a sample with the query “A person opens the
door” in the context of temporal video grounding (TVG),
its semantics are changed completely when the primitive
“opens” is changed to “closed”, but are unchanged when
the primitives “A” and “the” are modified to “The” and “a”,
respectively, as shown in Fig. 1. We investigate if existing
V&L methods are sensitive to the sample semantic changes
brought by primitive changes. Our observations show that
the methods erroneously keep almost 90% of the predictions unchanged when the sample semantics are corrupted
by replacing 50% critical words (e.g., nouns, verbs) in sentences. This suggests that existing methods cannot correctly
establish the relationship between the primitives and the
sample semantics and thus the ground-truth, so they cannot
achieve compositional generalization.
In this paper, we explore the effect of primitives for compositional generalization from two aspects: semantic equiv-

19092

