This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Analyzing Physical Impacts using Transient Surface Wave Imaging
Tianyuan Zhang1 Mark Sheinin1 Dorian Chan1 Mark Rau2
Matthew O’Toole1 Srinivasa G. Narasimhan1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Stanford University

Abstract
The subtle vibrations on an object’s surface contain information about the object’s physical properties and its interaction with the environment. Prior works imaged surface vibration to recover the object’s material properties
via modal analysis, which discards the transient vibrations propagating immediately after the object is disturbed.
Conversely, prior works that captured transient vibrations
focused on recovering localized signals (e.g., recording
nearby sound sources), neglecting the spatiotemporal relationship between vibrations at different object points. In
this paper, we extract information from the transient surface
vibrations simultaneously measured at a sparse set of object
points using the dual-shutter camera described by Sheinin
et al. [37]. We model the geometry of an elastic wave generated at the moment an object’s surface is disturbed (e.g.,
a knock or a footstep) and use the model to localize the disturbance source for various materials (e.g., wood, plastic,
tile). We also show that transient object vibrations contain
additional cues about the impact force and the impacting
object’s material properties. We demonstrate our approach
in applications like localizing the strikes of a ping-pong ball
on a table mid-play and recovering the footsteps’ locations
by imaging the floor vibrations they create.

1. Introduction
Our environment is teeming with vibrations created by
the interaction of physical objects. Some vibrations, like
a knock on the door or the sound of a ball bouncing off
the ground, can be perceived by humans because they are
transmitted from the vibrating object’s surface via the air.
However, many vibrations that fill our world are too subtle
for auditory-based remote sensing. Moreover, much like
ripples in a pond, the transient spatial shapes such vibrations
create on object surfaces are a visual cue that can disclose
the source of the disturbance and other object properties.
Object vibrations can be divided into two main types:
transient and modal. For example, consider the vibrations
of a tuning fork. When struck, the impulse creates transient waves propagating from the impact source until they

[37]
Figure 1. When physical objects interact, like a ping pong ball
bouncing off the table, they create minute vibrations that propagate through the objects’ surfaces and interiors. The transient vibrations that occur immediately on impact, exaggerated here for
visualization, carry information about the impact source location.
We image the surface vibrations at a sparse set of locations using
the imaging system of Sheinin et al. [37]. We model the elastic
wave propagation and recover the impact source locations without a direct line-of-sight on the impacted surface. Visit the project
page for videos of results [1].

reach and vibrate the fork’s entire body. After a short
time interval, the transient vibrations die down, leaving the
fork to vibrate at its resonant modal frequencies. Modal
analysis, which aims to measure these resonant frequencies [11, 13, 42], can reveal the tuning fork’s designed tone
(e.g., 440 Hz for the A tone) and can also be used to analyze
the fork’s material properties [9, 14, 18].
While extremely useful, modal analysis ignores the transient vibrations that occur at the moment of impact. Such
transient vibrations contain valuable cues about the disturbance’s origin, its magnitude, and the properties of the
object causing the disturbance (e.g., a falling basketball
vs. a falling rock). Prior works that did sense transient
vibrations primarily focused on localized low-dimensional
signals such as heartbeats [42, 44, 48], music and speech
[8, 15, 37, 45, 46, 48], and musical instruments [37]. These
works disregard the spatiotemporal relationship between
transient vibrations at different object points.
This paper focuses on recovering the physical location of an impacting object from transient surface vibra-

4339

