This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Treasure Beneath Multiple Annotations: An Uncertainty-aware Edge
Detector
Caixia Zhou1 , Yaping Huang1 ,* Mengyang Pu2 , Qingji Guan1 , Li Huang1 , Haibin Ling3
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Trafﬁc Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
School of Control and Computer Engineering, North China Electric Power University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, USA
{cxzhou,yphuang,qjguan,20112044}@bjtu.edu.cn, mengyang.pu@ncepu.edu.cn, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Deep learning-based edge detectors heavily rely on
pixel-wise labels which are often provided by multiple annotators. Existing methods fuse multiple annotations using
a simple voting process, ignoring the inherent ambiguity of
edges and labeling bias of annotators. In this paper, we
propose a novel uncertainty-aware edge detector (UAED),
which employs uncertainty to investigate the subjectivity
and ambiguity of diverse annotations. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
convert the deterministic label space into a learnable Gaussian distribution, whose variance measures the degree of
ambiguity among different annotations. Then we regard the
learned variance as the estimated uncertainty of the predicted edge maps, and pixels with higher uncertainty are
likely to be hard samples for edge detection. Therefore we
design an adaptive weighting loss to emphasize the learning from those pixels with high uncertainty, which helps
the network to gradually concentrate on the important pixels. UAED can be combined with various encoder-decoder
backbones, and the extensive experiments demonstrate that
UAED achieves superior performance consistently across
multiple edge detection benchmarks. The source code is
available at https://github.com/ZhouCX117/
UAED.

1. Introduction
Edge detection is a fundamental low-level vision task. It
greatly reduces irrelevant information and retains the most
important structural attributes. An efﬁcient edge detector
can generate structural edges that depict important areas
from a whole image, thereby beneﬁting many downstream
tasks [31, 37, 42, 50, 63]. Early pioneering methods [4, 26]
compute the gradient and choose suitable thresholds to select pixels with obvious brightness changes. Hand-crafted
* Corresponding author.

15507

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Uncertainty-Aware Edge Detector (UAED). The ﬁrst row shows (a) an image from the BSDS
test set and (b) four diverse labels by different annotators. The
second row shows (c) the ﬁnal edge label computed by majority
voting and (d) our estimated uncertainty map (red means high uncertainty and blue means low uncertainty). The third row shows
the edge detection results by (e) EDTER [41] and (f) our UAED,
both processed by non-maximum suppression.

feature based methods [1, 35] extract features from lowlevel cues including density and texture, and then design
complex rules to distinguish edges. Beneﬁting from the
powerful feature representation of Convolution Neural Network (CNN) and Transformer, recent works [16, 32, 41, 59]
concentrate on designing elaborate network architectures to
learn high-level semantic representations.
The previous efforts are mainly dedicated to designing
advanced networks to extract distinctive features. Except
for the well-designed models, precise pixel-level annotation is another key factor in building an efﬁcient edge detector under the supervised setting. Due to the complex-

