This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoDi: Unconditional Motion Synthesis from Diverse Data
Sigal Raab 1 Inbal Leibovitch 1 Peizhuo Li 2
Kfir Aberman 3 Olga Sorkine-Hornung 2 Daniel Cohen-Or 1
1

Tel-Aviv University

2

ETH Zurich

3

Google Research

sigal.raab@gmail.com

Figure 1. Our generative model is learned in an unsupervised setting from a diverse, unstructured and unlabeled motion dataset and yields
a highly semantic, clustered, latent space that facilitates synthesis operations. An encoder and a mapping network enable the employment
of real and generated motions, respectively.

Abstract
The emergence of neural networks has revolutionized the
field of motion synthesis. Yet, learning to unconditionally
synthesize motions from a given distribution remains challenging, especially when the motions are highly diverse. In
this work, we present MoDi – a generative model trained
in an unsupervised setting from an extremely diverse, unstructured and unlabeled dataset. During inference, MoDi
can synthesize high-quality, diverse motions. Despite the
lack of any structure in the dataset, our model yields a
well-behaved and highly structured latent space, which
can be semantically clustered, constituting a strong motion
prior that facilitates various applications including semantic editing and crowd animation. In addition, we present an
encoder that inverts real motions into MoDi’s natural motion manifold, issuing solutions to various ill-posed challenges such as completion from prefix and spatial editing.
Our qualitative and quantitative experiments achieve stateof-the-art results that outperform recent SOTA techniques.
Code and trained models are available at https://sigalraab.github.io/MoDi.

1. Introduction
The field of motion synthesis includes a wide range of
long-standing tasks whose goal is to generate a sequence

of temporally coherent poses that satisfy given cues and/or
spatio-temporal constraints and importantly, look natural.
In particular, learning to synthesize human motion from
a given data distribution is a challenging task, especially
when the dataset is highly diverse, unstructured, and unlabeled. In recent years, deep neural networks have become a
popular tool for motion generation, and their excellent performance is imputed to their ability to learn motion priors
from large-scale datasets. However, learning a motion prior
from a diverse dataset remains a challenge.
Previous works focus on synthesizing specific types of
motion of limited diversity [28], conditioned by a set of
frames [62] or by a label indicating a text or an action [51].
In this work, we present MoDi, an unconditional generative model that synthesizes diverse motions. MoDi is unsupervised and is trained on diverse, unstructured, and unlabeled datasets, yielding a well-behaved, highly semantic
latent space, facilitating a variety of synthesis operations.
Our design is inspired by the powerful architecture of
StyleGAN [34], which has become a foundation for synthesis in the imaging domain, as it learns a well-structured
latent space that allows incredible semantic editing capabilities [10]. However, there is a significant gap between
the imaging and motion domains; Images possess a regularized 2D spatial structure with a relatively large number
of degrees of freedom (DoF), while motion data is irregu-

13873

