This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NIFF: Alleviating Forgetting in Generalized Few-Shot Object Detection
via Neural Instance Feature Forging
Karim Guirguis1,2† Johannes Meier1† George Eskandar3 Matthias Kayser1 Bin Yang3 Jürgen Beyerer2,4
Robert Bosch GmbH1 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology2 University of Stuttgart3 Fraunhofer IOSB4

Abstract
Privacy and memory are two recurring themes in a broad
conversation about the societal impact of AI. These concerns arise from the need for huge amounts of data to train
deep neural networks. A promise of Generalized Few-shot
Object Detection (G-FSOD), a learning paradigm in AI, is
to alleviate the need for collecting abundant training samples of novel classes we wish to detect by leveraging prior
knowledge from old classes (i.e., base classes). G-FSOD
strives to learn these novel classes while alleviating catastrophic forgetting of the base classes. However, existing approaches assume that the base images are accessible, an
assumption that does not hold when sharing and storing
data is problematic. In this work, we propose the first datafree knowledge distillation (DFKD) approach for G-FSOD
that leverages the statistics of the region of interest (RoI)
features from the base model to forge instance-level features without accessing the base images. Our contribution
is three-fold: (1) we design a standalone lightweight generator with (2) class-wise heads (3) to generate and replay diverse instance-level base features to the RoI head while finetuning on the novel data. This stands in contrast to standard
DFKD approaches in image classification, which invert the
entire network to generate base images. Moreover, we make
careful design choices in the novel finetuning pipeline to
regularize the model. We show that our approach can dramatically reduce the base memory requirements, all while
setting a new standard for G-FSOD on the challenging MSCOCO and PASCAL-VOC benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Object detection (OD) is an integral element in modern computer vision perception systems (e.g., robotics and
self-driving cars). However, object detectors [1–8] require
abundant annotated data to train, which is labor and time
intensive. In some applications requiring rare class detection, collecting much data is challenging. Striving to
learn in limited data scenarios, few-shot object detection
(FSOD) [9] is an uprising field. It mimics the human cognitive ability by leveraging prior knowledge from previous
† Authors have equally contributed to this work.
Corresponding author: karim.guirguis@de.bosch.com

Figure 1. The base memory requirements for G-FSOD are dramatically reduced by our framework, while improving the overall
detection performance on MS-COCO (10-shot). We only store a
lightweight generator that synthesizes deep features for the RoI
head. BF denotes base-data free finetuning.

experiences with abundant base data, to rapidly learn novel
classes from limited samples. Despite the success of metalearning [10–15] and transfer learning [16–19] paradigms in
FSOD, most methods prioritize the detection performance
of the novel classes while ignoring the catastrophic forgetting of the base ones. This might lead to critical failure
cases in real-life operational perception systems.
To address the aforementioned concern, generalized fewshot object detection (G-FSOD) has been introduced to
jointly detect the base and novel classes. One of the first approaches to address the G-FSOD task was TFA [16], which
finetunes the detector using a balanced set of base and novel
class samples while freezing the backbone and the region
proposal network (RPN). While this has reduced forgetting,
the performance on novel classes has dropped significantly.
Since then, a plethora of works have attempted to improve
the overall detection performance. DeFRCN [19] proposed
a gradient manipulation approach to modify the RPN and
RoI head gradients. Retentive R-CNN [22], a knowledge
distillation approach and CFA [23], a gradient manipulation approach were proposed to explicitly tackle the catastrophic forgetting of base classes. However, all the above
approaches rely on the assumption that base data is available while learning the new classes. This made us raise
the following question: How to alleviate forgetting without
base data in case of a memory constraint or privacy concerns restricting the storage and replay of old base data?

24193

