This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Emotion Representations from Verbal and Nonverbal Communication
Sitao Zhang*
Yimu Pan*
James Z. Wang
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA
{sbz5211,ymp5078,jwang}@psu.edu

Abstract
Emotion understanding is an essential but highly challenging component of artificial general intelligence. The
absence of extensive annotated datasets has significantly
impeded advancements in this field. We present EmotionCLIP, the first pre-training paradigm to extract visual emotion representations from verbal and nonverbal communication using only uncurated data. Compared to numerical
labels or descriptions used in previous methods, communication naturally contains emotion information. Furthermore, acquiring emotion representations from communication is more congruent with the human learning process.
We guide EmotionCLIP to attend to nonverbal emotion cues
through subject-aware context encoding and verbal emotion cues using sentiment-guided contrastive learning. Extensive experiments validates the effectiveness and transferability of EmotionCLIP. Using merely linear-probe evaluation protocol, EmotionCLIP outperforms the state-of-theart supervised visual emotion recognition methods and rivals many multimodal approaches across various benchmarks. We anticipate that the advent of EmotionCLIP will
address the prevailing issue of data scarcity in emotion
understanding, thereby fostering progress in related domains. The code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/Xeaver/EmotionCLIP.

1. Introduction
If artificial intelligence (AI) can be equipped with emotional intelligence (EQ), it will be a significant step toward
developing the next generation of artificial general intelligence [46, 92]. The combination of emotion and intelligence distinguishes humans from other animals. The ability
to understand, use, and express emotions will significantly
facilitate the interaction of AI with humans and the environment [20, 48–50], making it the foundation for a wide variety of HCI [3], robotics [11], and autonomous driving [31]
applications.
* equal contribution

Categorical Label:
Shocked Regretful
0

1

0

1

0

Description:
An old man is chatting with his
son while eating at a restaurant.

Conversation:
- Dad. Who is Dede?
- Jesus. She was the love of my
life and I was too stupid to
realized it. I lost her because
of something so dumb.

Figure 1. Emotions emerge naturally in human communication through verbal and nonverbal cues. The rich semantic details within the expression can hardly be represented by humanannotated categorical labels and descriptions in current datasets.

Artificial emotional intelligence (AEI) research is still
in its nascency [30, 73]. The recent emergence of pretrained models in CV [10, 24, 62] and NLP [7, 16, 33, 68]
domains has ushered in a new era of research in related
subjects. By training on large-scale unlabeled data in a selfsupervised manner, the model learns nontrivial representations that generalize to downstream tasks [42, 62]. Unfortunately, such a technique remains absent from AEI research.
The conventional approaches in visual emotion understanding have no choice but to train models from scratch, or
leverage models from less-relevant domains [27, 66], suffering from data scarcity [29, 45]. The lack of pre-trained
models greatly limits the development of AEI research.
Research in neuroscience and psychology offers insights
for addressing this problem. Extending from the capabilities that have been coded genetically, humans learn emotional expressions through daily interaction and communication as early as when they are infants. It has been shown
that both vision [58] and language [41] play crucial roles in
this learning process. By absorbing and imitating expressions from others, humans eventually master the necessary

18993

