This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harmonious Feature Learning for Interactive Hand-Object Pose Estimation
Zhifeng Lin1 Changxing Ding1,2 * Huan Yao1 Zengsheng Kuang1 Shaoli Huang3
1
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 3 Tencent AI-Lab, Shenzhen
eezhifenglin@mail.scut.edu.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn
{mehuanyao,ftkuangzs}@mail.scut.edu.cn, shaolihuang@tencent.com

Abstract
Joint hand and object pose estimation from a single
image is extremely challenging as serious occlusion often
occurs when the hand and object interact. Existing approaches typically first extract coarse hand and object features from a single backbone, then further enhance them
with reference to each other via interaction modules. However, these works usually ignore that the hand and object are competitive in feature learning, since the backbone
takes both of them as foreground and they are usually mutually occluded. In this paper, we propose a novel Harmonious Feature Learning Network (HFL-Net). HFL-Net
introduces a new framework that combines the advantages
of single- and double-stream backbones: it shares the parameters of the low- and high-level convolutional layers of
a common ResNet-50 model for the hand and object, leaving the middle-level layers unshared. This strategy enables
the hand and the object to be extracted as the sole targets
by the middle-level layers, avoiding their competition in
feature learning. The shared high-level layers also force
their features to be harmonious, thereby facilitating their
mutual feature enhancement. In particular, we propose to
enhance the feature of the hand via concatenation with the
feature in the same location from the object stream. A subsequent self-attention layer is adopted to deeply fuse the
concatenated feature. Experimental results show that our
proposed approach consistently outperforms state-of-theart methods on the popular HO3D and Dex-YCB databases.
Notably, the performance of our model on hand pose estimation even surpasses that of existing works that only perform the single-hand pose estimation task. Code is available at https://github.com/lzfff12/HFL-Net.

1. Introduction
When humans interact with the physical world, they primarily do so by using their hands. Thus, an accurate understanding of how hands interact with objects is essen* Corresponding author.

Image

Front View

Other View

Figure 1. HFL-Net predicts the 3D hand and object poses from
single monocular RGB images accurately, even in serious occlusion scenarios.

tial to the understanding of human behavior. It can be
widely applied to a range of fields, including the development of virtual reality [36], augmented reality [33, 34],
and imitation-based robot learning [35], among others. Recently, hand pose estimation [12–16] and 6D object pose
estimation [17–19] based on monocular RGB images have
respectively achieved remarkable results. However, the research into joint hand-object pose estimation under circumstances of interaction remains in its infancy [2,3,23,26–28].
As illustrated in Figure 1, joint hand-object pose estimation from a single image is extremely challenging. The
main reason for this is that when the hand and object interact with each other, serious occlusion occurs; occlusion, in
turn, results in information loss, increasing the difficulty of
each task.
One mainstream solution to this problem is to utilize
context. Due to physical constraints, the interacting hand
and object tend to be highly correlated in terms of their
poses, meaning that the appearance of one can be useful
context for the other [1–3]. Methods that adopt this solution typically employ a single backbone to extract features
for the hand and object, respectively [2, 22, 27]. This uni-

12989

