This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Region-Aware Pretraining for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection with
Vision Transformers
Dahun Kim

Anelia Angelova
Weicheng Kuo
Google Research, Brain Team

{mcahny, anelia, weicheng}@google.com

Abstract
We present Region-aware Open-vocabulary Vision
Transformers (RO-ViT) – a contrastive image-text pretraining recipe to bridge the gap between image-level pretraining and open-vocabulary object detection. At the pretraining phase, we propose to randomly crop and resize regions
of positional embeddings instead of using the whole image
positional embeddings. This better matches the use of positional embeddings at region-level in the detection finetuning
phase. In addition, we replace the common softmax cross
entropy loss in contrastive learning with focal loss to better learn the informative yet difficult examples. Finally, we
leverage recent advances in novel object proposals to improve open-vocabulary detection finetuning. We evaluate
our full model on the LVIS and COCO open-vocabulary detection benchmarks and zero-shot transfer. RO-ViT achieves
a state-of-the-art 32.1 APr on LVIS, surpassing the best existing approach by +5.8 points in addition to competitive
zero-shot transfer detection. Surprisingly, RO-ViT improves
the image-level representation as well and achieves the state
of the art on 9 out of 12 metrics on COCO and Flickr imagetext retrieval benchmarks, outperforming competitive approaches with larger models.

1. Introduction
The ability to detect objects in the visual world is a hallmark of computer vision and machine intelligence. It is
key to enable many applications, e.g. autonomous agents
adapting to new environments with many novel objects, a
shopping system handling fine-grained user queries such as
“fedora”, “bonnet” outside of the training vocabulary. However, modern object detectors typically rely on manual annotations of regions and class labels, which limits their vocabulary size to an order of 103 and it is prohibitively expensive to scale up further. This is orders of magnitude smaller
than the objects we encounter in the visual world.
Recently, the open-vocabulary detection task (OVD) has
been proposed to overcome such limitation by leveraging

Contrastive image-text
pretraining

Open-vocabulary
detection finetuning

text embeddings

region embeddings

image
embeddings
GAP

Cropped PE
(CPE)

ViT encoder

random
crop-resize

CPE

patch
embedding

feature
region
crop
detector heads
ViT encoder
whole-image PE
patch embedding

Figure 1. Existing vision-language models are designed for imagelevel tasks, e.g., classification and retrieval. In this paper, we aim
to enhance the image-text pretraining for region-level downstream
task: open-vocabulary object detection. At pretraining, we propose to randomly crop and resize regions of positional embeddings
(PE) instead of using the whole image PE. This better matches the
use of PE at region-level in the detection finetuning and results in
better performance in detection and surprisingly also retrieval task.

abundant image-text pairs for training and ingesting the text
queries provided by users at test time [54]. By treating
the categories as text embeddings rather than discrete ids,
open-vocabulary detectors can flexibly predict a wide range
of objects unseen during the training time. Most existing
works leverage image-text pre-training which contains rich
semantic knowledge of open-vocabulary concepts. Knowledge distillation [13, 19], weak supervision [63], selftraining [41, 57, 60], and frozen model [29] have been proposed, and CNN backbones are most commonly used. With
the growing popularity of vision transformers in image understanding [12, 32, 56], multimodal [1, 2, 47], and self-

11144

