This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BAEFormer: Bi-directional and Early Interaction Transformers for Bird’s Eye
View Semantic Segmentation
Cong Pan1,2,∗ Yonghao He3 Junran Peng4 Qian Zhang3 Wei Sui3 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,5, B
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Horizon Robotics 4 Huawei Inc. 5 Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS

1

{pancong2018, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
{jrpeng4ever}@126.com

{yonghao.he}@aliyun.com

{qian01.zhang, wei.sui}@horizon.ai

Abstract
Bird’s Eye View (BEV) semantic segmentation is a
critical task in autonomous driving. However, existing
Transformer-based methods confront difficulties in transforming Perspective View (PV) to BEV due to their unidirectional and posterior interaction mechanisms. To address
this issue, we propose a novel Bi-directional and Early Interaction Transformers framework named BAEFormer, consisting of (i) an early-interaction PV-BEV pipeline and (ii)
a bi-directional cross-attention mechanism. Moreover, we
find that the image feature maps’ resolution in the crossattention module has a limited effect on the final performance. Under this critical observation, we propose to enlarge the size of input images and downsample the multiview image features for cross-interaction, further improving
the accuracy while keeping the amount of computation controllable. Our proposed method for BEV semantic segmentation achieves state-of-the-art performance in real-time inference speed on the nuScenes dataset, i.e., 38.9 mIoU at 45
FPS on a single A100 GPU.

1. Introduction
Recently, pure vision-based perception methods [16, 18,
25, 38] have occupied a significant position in autonomous
driving due to their higher signal-to-noise ratio and lower
cost compared to LIDAR-based methods [6, 14, 35, 39, 42].
Among them, Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) perception has become the mainstream method. The BEV representation
learning in vision-centric autonomous driving is to take consecutive frames from multiple surrounding cameras as input
and transform the pixel panel view to Bird’s-Eye-View to
∗ This work was done during Cong Pan’s internship at Horizon
Robotics. B Zhaoxiang Zhang is the Corresponding author.

conduct perception tasks such as 3D object detection, mapview semantic segmentation, and motion prediction.
The BEV representation offers several inherent advantages for visual perception. Firstly, it facilitates the integration of pure vision-based results with those from other
modalities. Secondly, it provides a natural means to unify
and express different perspectives under BEV to simplify
the subsequent module development and deployment, such
as planning and control. Finally, the object representation
in BEV circumvents the common scale and occlusion difficulties that arise in 2D tasks.
The enhancement of BEV perception performance
hinges on the rapid and graceful acquisition of road and object feature representations. Figure 1 illustrates that there
are two categories of BEV perception pipelines based on
distinct interaction mechanisms: (a) Late-interaction and
(b) Middle-interaction. The late-interaction pipeline [24]
employs independent perception on each camera view, followed by temporal and spatial fusion of the results into a
unified BEV space. Recently, the most widely used pipeline
is the middle-interaction [16, 18, 25, 38, 41]. It concatenates
all camera inputs as a whole into the network, transforms
them into the BEV space, and then outputs the result directly. The middle-interaction pipeline comprises a welldefined workflow for feature extraction, space transformation, and BEV space learning. Nevertheless, the transformation of PV to BEV using these two interaction strategies
remains arduous. To tackle this challenge, we propose a
novel paradigm: (c) Early-interaction method, which deserves further attention from the research community.
Our proposed early-interaction method offers distinct
advantages when compared to the two existing strategies.
Firstly, the image-space backbone only extracts image features with different resolutions sequentially without any information integration across resolutions. In contrast, our
proposed method advocates for the integration of global

9590

