This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RankMix: Data Augmentation for Weakly Supervised Learning of Classifying
Whole Slide Images with Diverse Sizes and Imbalanced Categories
Yuan-Chih Chen
IIS, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, ROC

Chun-Shien Lu
IIS, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, ROC

willpower057@gmail.com

lcs@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Whole Slide Images (WSIs) are usually gigapixel in size
and lack pixel-level annotations. The WSI datasets are also
imbalanced in categories. These unique characteristics,
significantly different from the ones in natural images, pose
the challenge of classifying WSI images as a kind of weakly
supervise learning problems. In this study, we propose,
RankMix, a data augmentation method of mixing ranked
features in a pair of WSIs. RankMix introduces the concepts of pseudo labeling and ranking in order to extract key
WSI regions in contributing to the WSI classification task. A
two-stage training is further proposed to boost stable training and model performance.
To our knowledge, the study of weakly supervised learning from the perspective of data augmentation to deal with
the WSI classification problem that suffers from lack of
training data and imbalance of categories is relatively unexplored.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Natural image processing tasks, including image classification and object detection, have been widely solved using
deep learning models and obtain astounding results. In this
study, we investigate how medical imaging can also benefit from deep learning with focus on whole slide images
(WSIs). WSI scanning is commonly used in disease diagnosis [12, 34]. The demand of computer aided assessment makes deep learning widely adopted in this field [1].
Because WSI is a gigapixel image and lacks pixel-level
annotations, multiple instance learning (MIL) [31, 32] is
an exact solution to this weakly supervised learning problem [2]. In MIL, a WSI is often cropped into tens of thousands of patches and then an aggregator will make a prediction based on integrating these patches. Most recent works
[5, 9, 10, 25, 28, 30, 37, 38, 44] focus on aggregator architecture design and improving feature extraction of the patches.

However, because WSI is difficult to collect and share, we
explore the possibility of data augmentation in WSI classification to increase training samples and mitigate the problem of class imbalance [19, 26, 33, 48] that WSI may have
due to rare diseases (versus common diseases). In addition,
patch feature extractor is often trained by self-supervised
learning [24,28] or comes from pre-trained models (such as
pre-trained in ImageNet [30, 37] or WSI datasets [5, 11]).
Therefore, for universality and portability, our work will focus on studying the feature domain instead of pixel domain
of patches.
Traditionally, mixup methods [18, 48] are employed to
mix photos of the same aspect ratio or vectors of the same
dimension. Nevertheless, this is not the case for WSI as
WSI intrinsically has a different number of patches, ranging
from hundreds to hundred of thousands. This is because the
generation of a WSI, caused by the tissue placement and
the tissue size, will make WSIs of varying aspect ratios and
sizes.
In addition, because a WSI tends to be a very large size
(equivalent to tens of thousands of 224 × 224 patches or
even larger) and the background often occupies a large part,
it is better to use data pre-processing to remove unimportant background parts in order to save computation time
and avoid possible unnecessary information [21, 39] (such
as noise and artifacts). That is, the pre-processing step of
cropping a WSI into patches, as shown in Fig. 1, will remove most of the background patches. The resultant WSI
patches, however, will lose their absolute positions.

1.2. Challenges
The above characteristics of WSI lead to the difficulty
of directly employing the traditional mixup methods. We
cannot simply resize two WSIs to have the same size for
the sake of performing mixup. This is because all WSIs
are scanned at the same magnification (e.g., 20x), the physical meanings will be lost if they are rescaled casually.
More importantly, due to loss of absolute positions among
the patches after removing the WSI background, resizing
patches actually do not solve this problem.

23936

