This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Scene Chronology
Haotong Lin1,2∗ Qianqian Wang2 Ruojin Cai2 Sida Peng1
Hadar Averbuch-Elor3 Xiaowei Zhou1† Noah Snavely2
1
Zhejiang University 2 Cornell University 3 Tel Aviv University
2011

2012
March 2011

2013

(c) Detailed view of content changes over time
April 2012

March 2012

August 2013

October 2013

(a) Internet photos with timestamps

2011

2012

2013

(b) 4D reconstruction across time

(d) Same content under varying illumination

Figure 1. Chronology reconstruction. Given timestamped Internet photos (a) of a landmark that has changed significantly over the years
(e.g., 5Pointz, NYC, the collective graffiti art project shown above), our method can reconstruct a time-varying 3D model, and render
photo-realistic images (b) with independent control of viewpoint, time (c) and illumination (d). Photos by Flickr users Ryan Brown,
DaniGMX, DJ Leekee, Diff Graff, Lee Smith, James Prochnik, Verity Rollins Photo under CC BY.

Abstract
In this work, we aim to reconstruct a time-varying 3D
model, capable of rendering photo-realistic renderings with
independent control of viewpoint, illumination, and time,
from Internet photos of large-scale landmarks. The core
challenges are twofold. First, different types of temporal
changes, such as illumination and changes to the underlying scene itself (such as replacing one graffiti artwork
with another) are entangled together in the imagery. Second, scene-level temporal changes are often discrete and
sporadic over time, rather than continuous. To tackle these
problems, we propose a new scene representation equipped
with a novel temporal step function encoding method that
can model discrete scene-level content changes as piecewise constant functions over time. Specifically, we represent
the scene as a space-time radiance field with a per-image
The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG. ∗ This work was done when Haotong Lin was in a remote
internship at Cornell University. † Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

illumination embedding, where temporally-varying scene
changes are encoded using a set of learned step functions.
To facilitate our task of chronology reconstruction from Internet imagery, we also collect a new dataset of four scenes
that exhibit various changes over time. We demonstrate that
our method exhibits state-of-the-art view synthesis results
on this dataset, while achieving independent control of viewpoint, time, and illumination. Code and data are available
at https://zju3dv.github.io/NeuSC/.

1. Introduction
If we revisit a space we once knew during our childhood,
it might not be as we remembered it. The buildings may
have weathered, or have been newly painted, or may have
been replaced entirely. Accordingly, there is no such thing
as a single, authoritative 3D model of a scene—only a model
of how it existed at a given instant in time. For a famous
landmark, Internet photos can serve as a kind of chronicle
of that landmark’s state over time, if we could organize the

20752

