This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFLight: Fast and Light Neural Radiance Fields using a Shared Feature Grid
Fernando Rivas-Manzaneque1,2
Jorge Sierra-Acosta1
Francesc Moreno-Noguer5

Adrian Penate-Sanchez3
Angela Ribeiro4

1

3

2
Arquimea Research Center
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
4
Universidad de las Palmas de Gran Canaria, IUSIANI
Centre for Automation and Robotics, CSIC-UPM
5
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC

Abstract
While original Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have
shown impressive results in modeling the appearance of a
scene with compact MLP architectures, they are not able
to achieve real-time rendering. This has been recently addressed by either baking the outputs of NeRF into a data
structure or arranging trainable parameters in an explicit
feature grid. These strategies, however, significantly increase the memory footprint of the model which prevents
their deployment on bandwidth-constrained applications.
In this paper, we extend the grid-based approach to achieve
real-time view synthesis at more than 150 FPS using a
lightweight model. Our main contribution is a novel architecture in which the density field of NeRF-based representations is split into N regions and the density is modeled using N different decoders which reuse the same feature grid. This results in a smaller grid where each feature
is located in more than one spatial position, forcing them
to learn a compact representation that is valid for different parts of the scene. We further reduce the size of the
final model by disposing of the features symmetrically on
each region, which favors feature pruning after training
while also allowing smooth gradient transitions between
neighboring voxels. An exhaustive evaluation demonstrates
that our method achieves real-time performance and quality
metrics on a pair with state-of-the-art with an improvement
of more than 2× in the FPS/MB ratio.

1. Introduction
The use of 3D objects reconstructed from real images
is becoming popular in a number of applications, such as
virtual-reality or online video-games. The increasing need
for realistic elements makes image-based reconstruction an
adequate alternative to modeling these objects from scratch
using fully manual or semi-automatic design engines. At
the same time, however, the larger the number of these assets is, the higher the constrain of their size in order to meet

Figure 1. NeRFLight is able to double the FPS/MB ratio of
the second best method while obtaining similar quality metrics to
state-of-the-art.

certain bandwidth and storage requirements.
Methods based on neural rendering have arisen as a
promising approach to solve this challenge. In particular, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] have demonstrated
outstanding potential. Instead of modeling the plenoptic function [1] by means of explicit geometry representations such as point clouds [2] or voxels [22], NeRF uses a
coordinate-based multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to model a
density and a color field that acts as a proxy of the plenoptic function. Applying this MLP in combination with positional encoding, NeRF achieves exceptional results in scene
representation, improving the quality and compactness of

12417

