This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Galactic: Scaling End-to-End Reinforcement Learning for Rearrangement
at 100k Steps-Per-Second
Vincent-Pierre Berges*
Meta AI (FAIR)
Roozbeh Mottaghi
Meta AI (FAIR)

Andrew Szot*
Georgia Tech

Dhruv Batra
Meta AI (FAIR), Georgia Tech

Abstract
We present Galactic, a large-scale simulation and
reinforcement-learning (RL) framework for robotic mobile
manipulation in indoor environments. Specifically, a Fetch
robot (equipped with a mobile base, 7DoF arm, RGBD camera,
egomotion, and onboard sensing) is spawned in a home
environment and asked to rearrange objects – by navigating
to an object, picking it up, navigating to a target location, and
then placing the object at the target location.
Galactic is fast. In terms of simulation speed (rendering
+ physics), Galactic achieves over 421,000 steps-per-second
(SPS) on an 8-GPU node, which is 54x faster than Habitat
2.0 [55] (7699 SPS). More importantly, Galactic was designed
to optimize the entire rendering+physics+RL interplay since
any bottleneck in the interplay slows down training. In terms
of simulation+RL speed (rendering + physics + inference +
learning), Galactic achieves over 108,000 SPS, which 88x
faster than Habitat 2.0 (1243 SPS).
These massive speed-ups not only drastically cut the
wall-clock training time of existing experiments, but also unlock
an unprecedented scale of new experiments. First, Galactic can
train a mobile pick skill to >80% accuracy in under 16 minutes,
a 100x speedup compared to the over 24 hours it takes to
train the same skill in Habitat 2.0. Second, we use Galactic to
perform the largest-scale experiment to date for rearrangement
using 5B steps of experience in 46 hours, which is equivalent
to 20 years of robot experience. This scaling results in a single
neural network composed of task-agnostic components achieving 85% success in GeometricGoal rearrangement, compared
to 0% success reported in Habitat 2.0 for the same approach.
The code is available at github.com/facebookresearch/galactic .

1. Introduction
The scaling hypothesis posits that as general-purpose neural
architectures are scaled to larger model sizes and training
experience ever increasingly sophisticated intelligent behavior
* Equal contribution

Devendra Singh Chaplot
Meta AI (FAIR)

Aaron Gokaslan
Cornell University

Eric Undersander
Meta AI (FAIR)

emerges. These so-called ‘scaling laws’ appear to be driving
many recent advances in AI, leading to massive improvements
in computer vision [12, 42, 44] and natural language processing [3, 40]. But what about embodied AI? We contend that
embodied AI experiments need to be scaled by several orders
of magnitude to become comparable to the experiment scales
of CV and NLP, and likely even further beyond given the multimodal interactive long-horizon nature of embodied AI problems.
Consider one of the largest-scale experiments in vision-andlanguage: the CLIP [39] model was trained on a dataset of
400 million images (and captions) for 32 epochs, giving a total
of approximately 12 Billion frames seen during training. In
contrast, most navigation experiments in embodied AI involve
only 100-500M frames of experience [5, 30, 68]. The value of
large scale training in embodied AI was demonstrated by Wijmans et al. [60] by achieving near-perfect performance on the
PointNav task through scaling to 2.5 billion steps of experience.
Since then, there have been several other examples of scaling
experiments to 1B steps in navigation tasks [41, 65]. Curiously,
as problems become more challenging, going from navigation
to mobile manipulation object rearrangement, the scale of
experiments have become smaller. Examples of training scales
in rearrangement policies include [19, 55, 59] training skills
in Habitat 2.0 for 100-200M steps and [58] in Visual Room
Rearrangement for 75M steps. In this work, we demonstrate for
the first time scaling training to 5 billion frames of experience
for rearrangement in visually challenging environments.
Why is large-scale learning in embodied AI hard? Unlike
in CV or NLP, data in embodied AI is collected through an
agent acting in environments. This data collection process
involves policy inference to compute actions, physics to update
the world state, rendering to compute agent observations, and
reinforcement learning (RL) to learn from the collected data.
These separate systems for rendering, physics, and inference
are largely absent in CV and NLP.
We present Galactic, a large-scale simulation+RL framework
for robotic mobile manipulation in indoor environments.
Specifically, we study and simulate the task of GeometricGoal

13767

