This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nerflets: Local Radiance Fields for Efficient Structure-Aware
3D Scene Representation from 2D Supervision
Xiaoshuai Zhang1,3 Abhijit Kundu1 Thomas Funkhouser1 Leonidas Guibas1,2
Hao Su3 Kyle Genova1
1

Google Research

2

3

Stanford University

University of California, San Diego

Figure 1. We propose to represent the scene with a set of local neural radiance fields, named nerflets, which are trained with only 2D
supervision. Our representation is not only useful for 2D tasks such as novel view synthesis and panoptic segmentation, but also capable
of solving 3D-oriented tasks such as 3D segmentation and scene editing. The key idea is our learned structured decomposition (top right).

Abstract
We address efficient and structure-aware 3D scene representation from images. Nerflets are our key contribution–
a set of local neural radiance fields that together represent
a scene. Each nerflet maintains its own spatial position, orientation, and extent, within which it contributes to panoptic, density, and radiance reconstructions. By leveraging
only photometric and inferred panoptic image supervision,
we can directly and jointly optimize the parameters of a set
of nerflets so as to form a decomposed representation of the
scene, where each object instance is represented by a group
of nerflets. During experiments with indoor and outdoor environments, we find that nerflets: (1) fit and approximate the
scene more efficiently than traditional global NeRFs, (2) allow the extraction of panoptic and photometric renderings
from arbitrary views, and (3) enable tasks rare for NeRFs,
such as 3D panoptic segmentation and interactive editing.
Our project page.

1. Introduction
This paper aims to produce a compact, efficient, and
comprehensive 3D scene representation from only 2D images. Ideally, the representation should reconstruct appear-

ances, infer semantics, and separate object instances, so that
it can be used in a variety of computer vision and robotics
tasks, including 2D and 3D panoptic segmentation, interactive scene editing, and novel view synthesis.
Many previous approaches have attempted to generate
rich 3D scene representations from images. PanopticFusion [34] produces 3D panoptic labels from images, though
it requires input depth measurements from specialized sensors. NeRF [32] and its descendants [3, 4, 33, 39] produce
3D density and radiance fields that are useful for novel
view synthesis, surface reconstruction, semantic segmentation [50, 60], and panoptic segmentation [5, 21]. However,
existing approaches require 3D ground truth supervision,
are inefficient, or do not handle object instances.
We propose nerflets, a 3D scene representation with multiple local neural fields that are optimized jointly to describe
the appearance, density, semantics, and object instances in a
scene (Figure 1). Nerflets constitute a structured and irregular representation– each is parameterized by a 3D center, a
3D XYZ rotation, and 3 (per-axis) radii in a 9-DOF coordinate frame. The influence of every nerflet is modulated by a
radial basis function (RBF) which falls off with increasing
distance from the nerflet center according to its orientation
and radii, ensuring that each nerflet contributes to a local

8274

