This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayoutDiffusion: Controllable Diffusion Model for
Layout-to-image Generation
Guangcong Zheng1 *, Xianpan Zhou2 *, Xuewei Li1†, Zhongang Qi3 , Ying Shan3 , Xi Li1,4,5,6†
1
College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Polytechnic Institute, Zhejiang University 3 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
4
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
5
Shanghai AI Lab 6 Zhejiang – Singapore Innovation and AI Joint Research Lab
{guangcongzheng, zhouxianpan, xueweili, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn
{zhongangqi, yingsshan}@tencent.com
(a) layout-guided vs. text-guided image generation for diffusion model
Caption

LDM

GT

Layout
wall

A desk top computer
and a laptop sitting on
a computer desk.

tv

window

laptop

table
keyboard

desk-stuff
tree

roof

A body of calm water
with a wooden canoe
docked on the side
and a home across the
water.

(b) Image-Layout Fusion in a unified space

Ours

house

bush

building boat

plant

river

Figure 1. Compared to text, the layout allows diffusion models to obtain more control over the objects while maintaining high quality.
Unlike the prevailing methods, we propose a diffusion model named LayoutDiffusion for layout-to-image generation. We transform the
difficult multimodal fusion of the image and layout into a unified form by constructing a structural image patch with region information
and regarding the patched image as a special layout.

Abstract
Recently, diffusion models have achieved great success
in image synthesis. However, when it comes to the layoutto-image generation where an image often has a complex
scene of multiple objects, how to make strong control over
both the global layout map and each detailed object remains
a challenging task. In this paper, we propose a diffusion
model named LayoutDiffusion that can obtain higher generation quality and greater controllability than the previous
works. To overcome the difficult multimodal fusion of image and layout, we propose to construct a structural image
patch with region information and transform the patched
image into a special layout to fuse with the normal layout in a unified form. Moreover, Layout Fusion Module
(LFM) and Object-aware Cross Attention (OaCA) are proposed to model the relationship among multiple objects and
designed to be object-aware and position-sensitive, allow* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ing for precisely controlling the spatial related information.
Extensive experiments show that our LayoutDiffusion outperforms the previous SOTA methods on FID, CAS by relatively 46.35%, 26.70% on COCO-stuff and 44.29%, 41.82%
on VG. Code is available at https://github.com/
ZGCTroy/LayoutDiffusion.

1. Introduction
Recently, the diffusion model has achieved encouraging
progress in conditional image generation, especially in textto-image generation such as GLIDE [24], Imagen [31], and
Stable Diffusion [30]. However, text-guided diffusion models may still fail in the following situations. As shown in
Fig. 1 (a), when aiming to generate a complex image with
multiple objects, it is hard to design a prompt properly and
comprehensively. Even input with well-designed prompts,
problems such as missing objects and incorrectly generating objects’ positions, shapes, and categories still occur in
the state-of-the-art text-guided diffusion model [24, 30, 31].

22490

