This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Query-Centric Trajectory Prediction
Zikang Zhou1,2 Jianping Wang1,2 Yung-Hui Li3 Yu-Kai Huang4
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute
3
Hon Hai Research Institute 4 Carnegie Mellon University
zikanzhou2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Predicting the future trajectories of surrounding agents
is essential for autonomous vehicles to operate safely. This
paper presents QCNet, a modeling framework toward pushing the boundaries of trajectory prediction. First, we identify that the agent-centric modeling scheme used by existing
approaches requires re-normalizing and re-encoding the input whenever the observation window slides forward, leading to redundant computations during online prediction.
To overcome this limitation and achieve faster inference,
we introduce a query-centric paradigm for scene encoding,
which enables the reuse of past computations by learning
representations independent of the global spacetime coordinate system. Sharing the invariant scene features among all
target agents further allows the parallelism of multi-agent
trajectory decoding. Second, even given rich encodings of
the scene, existing decoding strategies struggle to capture
the multimodality inherent in agents’ future behavior, especially when the prediction horizon is long. To tackle this
challenge, we first employ anchor-free queries to generate
trajectory proposals in a recurrent fashion, which allows
the model to utilize different scene contexts when decoding waypoints at different horizons. A refinement module
then takes the trajectory proposals as anchors and leverages
anchor-based queries to refine the trajectories further. By
supplying adaptive and high-quality anchors to the refinement module, our query-based decoder can better deal with
the multimodality in the output of trajectory prediction. Our
approach ranks 1st on Argoverse 1 and Argoverse 2 motion
forecasting benchmarks, outperforming all methods on all
main metrics by a large margin. Meanwhile, our model can
achieve streaming scene encoding and parallel multi-agent
decoding thanks to the query-centric design ethos.

1. Introduction
Making safe decisions for autonomous vehicles requires
accurate predictions of surrounding agents’ future trajectories. In recent years, learning-based methods have been

observation @ 𝑡 + 1

observation @ 𝑡

agent history

reference frame of agent state
reference frame of map polygon

Figure 1. Illustration of our query-centric reference frame,
where we build a local coordinate system for each spatial-temporal
element, including map polygons and agent states at all time steps.
In the attention-based encoder, all scene elements’ queries are derived and updated in their local reference frames.

widely used for trajectory prediction [14, 31, 37, 38, 46, 56].
Despite the considerable efforts made to enhance models’
forecasting ability, there is still a long way to go before fully
addressing the problem of trajectory prediction. Why is this
task so challenging, and what inability lies in existing approaches? We attempt to answer these questions from the
following two perspectives:
(i) While the flourishing forecasting models have
achieved impressive performance on trajectory prediction
benchmarks [7,13,49], today’s most advanced architectures
specialized for this task [37, 38, 46, 56] fail to process the
heterogeneous traffic scenes efficiently. In an autonomous
driving system, data frames arrive at the prediction module
sequentially as a stream of sparse scene context, including
the high-definition vector map and the surrounding agents’
kinematic states. A model must learn expressive representations of these scene elements to achieve accurate forecasts.
With the continuing development of modeling techniques
for sparse context encoding [14, 31, 50], the research community has witnessed rapid progress toward more powerful
trajectory predictors. Notably, factorized attention-based
Transformers [37,38,56] have recently raised prediction accuracy to an unprecedented level. However, they require
learning attention-based representations for each spatial-

17863

