This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-directional Distribution Alignment for Transductive Zero-Shot Learning
Zhicai Wang1 , Yanbin Hao1∗ , Tingting Mu2 , Ouxiang Li1 , Shuo Wang1 , Xiangnan He1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The University of Manchester
wangzhic@mail.ustc.edu.cn, haoyanbin@hotmail.com, tingting.mu@manchester.ac.uk,
lioox@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {shuowang.hfut,xiangnanhe}@gmail.com

Abstract

Auxiliary space

Visual space

Unseen data

Transductive
Generator

Backbone

Zero-shot learning (ZSL) suffers intensely from the domain shift issue, i.e., the mismatch (or misalignment) between the true and learned data distributions for classes
without training data (unseen classes). By learning additionally from unlabelled data collected for the unseen
classes, transductive ZSL (TZSL) could reduce the shift but
only to a certain extent. To improve TZSL, we propose a
novel approach Bi-VAEGAN which strengthens the distribution alignment between the visual space and an auxiliary
space. As a result, it can reduce largely the domain shift.
The proposed key designs include (1) a bi-directional distribution alignment, (2) a simple but effective L2 -norm based
feature normalization approach, and (3) a more sophisticated unseen class prior estimation. Evaluated by four
benchmark datasets, Bi-VAEGAN1 achieves the new state
of the art under both the standard and generalized TZSL
settings.

Seen data

Transductive
Regressor

Attribute
Text description
Ontology
Prototype
&
Real/Pseudo
Unseen attribute

Real/Syn
Unseen feature

Inductive

Transductive (Ours)

Figure 1. The top figure illustrates the proposed bi-directional
generation between the visual and auxiliary spaces. The bottom
figure compares the aligned visual space obtained by our method
with the unaligned one obtained by inductive ZSL for the unseen
classes using the AWA2 data. The bottom right figure shows our
approximately aligned attributes in auxiliary space.

1. INTRODUCTION
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) was originally known as zerodata learning in computer vision [21]. The goal is to tackle
the challenging training setup of largely restricted example and (or) label availability [6]. For instance, in conventional ZSL, no training example is provided for the targeted classes, and they are therefore referred to as the unseen classes. What is provided instead is a large amount
of training examples paired with their class labels but for a
different set of classes referred to as the seen classes. This
setup is also known as the inductive ZSL. Its core challenge is to enable the classifier to extract knowledge from
the seen classes and transfer it to the unseen classes, assuming the existence of such relevant knowledge [30, 42, 50].
For instance, a ZSL classifier can be constructed to recognize leopard images after feeding it the Felinae images
like wildcat, knowing leopard is relevant to Felinae. Information on class relevance is typically provided as aux* Yanbin Hao and Xiangnan He are both the corresponding authors.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/Zhicaiwww/Bi-VAEGAN

iliary data, bridging knowledge transfer from the seen to
unseen classes. The auxiliary data can be human-annotated
attribute information [38], text description [34], knowledge
graph [22] or a formal description of knowledge (e.g., ontology) [15], etc., which are encoded as (set of) embedding
vectors. Learning solely from auxiliary data to capture class
relevance is challenging, resulting in a discrepancy between
the true and modeled distributions for the unseen classes,
known as the domain shift problem. To ease the learning,
another ZSL setup called transductive ZSL (TZSL) is proposed. It allows to additionally include in the training unlabelled examples collected for the targeted classes. Since it
does not require any extra annotation effort to pair the examples from the unseen classes with their class labels, this
setup is still practical in real-world applications.
Supported by sufficient data examples, generative models have become popular, for instance, used to synthesize
examples to enhance classifier training [11, 24, 43] and to
learn the unseen data distribution [32, 41, 44] under the
TZSL setup. Depending on the label availability, they can

19893

