This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Federated Learning with Domain Shift: A Prototype View

1

Wenke Huang1 , Mang Ye1,2 ,* Zekun Shi1 , He Li1 , Bo Du1,2∗
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China.
https://github.com/WenkeHuang/RethinkFL

Abstract
Federated learning shows a bright promise as a privacypreserving collaborative learning technique. However,
prevalent solutions mainly focus on all private data sampled
from the same domain. An important challenge is that when
distributed data are derived from diverse domains. The private model presents degenerative performance on other domains (with domain shift). Therefore, we expect that the
global model optimized after the federated learning process stably provides generalizability performance on multiple domains. In this paper, we propose Federated Prototypes Learning (FPL) for federated learning under domain
shift. The core idea is to construct cluster prototypes and
unbiased prototypes, providing fruitful domain knowledge
and a fair convergent target. On the one hand, we pull the
sample embedding closer to cluster prototypes belonging
to the same semantics than cluster prototypes from distinct
classes. On the other hand, we introduce consistency regularization to align the local instance with the respective
unbiased prototype. Empirical results on Digits and Ofﬁce
Caltech tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
solution and the efﬁciency of crucial modules.

 

  

   

   

 

 

 

 
 



 
Figure 1. Illustration of heterogeneous federated learning. The
feature visualization on inter domains (→ represents testing on target domain i.e., M → SV means that local dataset is from MNIST
and test model on SVHN). The top row indicates that local training results in domain shift. The bottom row shows that our method
acquires generalizable performance on different domains.

1. Introduction
Federated learning is a privacy-preserving paradigm [47,
83], which reaches collaborative learning without leaking
privacy. The cornerstone solution, FedAvg [47], aggregates
parameters from participants and then distributes the global
model (averaged parameters) back for further training,
which aims to learn a high-quality model without centralizing private data. However, an inherent challenge in federated learning is data heterogeneity [26, 39, 69, 87]. Speciﬁcally, the private data is collected from distinct sources with
diverse preferences and presents non-iid (independently and
* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye, Bo Du

16312

identically distributed) distribution [87]. Each participant
optimizes toward the local empirical risk minimum, which
is inconsistent with the global direction. Therefore, the averaged global model unavoidably faces a slow convergence
speed [40] and achieves limited performance improvement.
A mainstream of subsequent efforts delves into introducing a variety of global signals to regulate private model
[13, 28, 38, 40, 51, 66, 70]. These methods focus on label skew, where distributed data are from the same domain, and simulate data heterogeneity via imbalanced sampling, e.g., Dirichlet strategy [32] to generate different label distributions. Nonetheless, another noticeable data het-

