This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Dependency Transformers:
Dependency Tree Emerges from Reversed Attention
Mingyu Ding13 * Yikang Shen2 Lijie Fan3 Zhenfang Chen2
Zitian Chen4 Ping Luo1 Josh Tenenbaum3 Chuang Gan24
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 MIT 4 UMass Amherst

Abstract
Humans possess a versatile mechanism for extracting
structured representations of our visual world. When looking at an image, we can decompose the scene into entities
and their parts as well as obtain the dependencies between
them. To mimic such capability, we propose Visual Dependency Transformers (DependencyViT) 1 that can induce visual dependencies without any labels. We achieve that with
a novel neural operator called reversed attention that can
naturally capture long-range visual dependencies between
image patches. Specifically, we formulate it as a dependency graph where a child token in reversed attention is
trained to attend to its parent tokens and send information
following a normalized probability distribution rather than
gathering information in conventional self-attention. With
such a design, hierarchies naturally emerge from reversed
attention layers, and a dependency tree is progressively induced from leaf nodes to the root node unsupervisedly.
DependencyViT offers several appealing benefits. (i) Entities and their parts in an image are represented by different subtrees, enabling part partitioning from dependencies; (ii) Dynamic visual pooling is made possible. The
leaf nodes which rarely send messages can be pruned without hindering the model performance, based on which we
propose the lightweight DependencyViT-Lite to reduce the
computational and memory footprints; (iii) DependencyViT
works well on both self- and weakly-supervised pretraining
paradigms on ImageNet, and demonstrates its effectiveness
on 8 datasets and 5 tasks, such as unsupervised part and
saliency segmentation, recognition, and detection.

1. Introduction
Humans have a rich mental representation of our surrounding environments. When looking at an image (see
Figure 1(a)), we can recognize the scene and also can
* This work was done when Mingyu was visiting MIT.
1 https://github.com/dingmyu/DependencyViT

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) is an example of hierarchical dependency structure.
(b) illustrates the dynamic pooling and information aggregation
process of DependencyViT.

quickly decompose it into hierarchical elements with dependencies, e.g., a laptop consisting of a screen and a keyboard is placed on the table. This ability to construct dependencies between objects (and/or their parts) serves as the
cornerstone of human intelligence, enabling us to perceive,
interact, and reason about the world.
From the pre-deeplearning era, many classical image dependency parsing algorithms [25, 27, 66, 70, 81, 98] have
been proposed. For example, Bayesian framework [70],
And-Or graph [27], and hierarchical probabilistic models [25, 66] for parsing images into their constituent visual
patterns. Apart from that, Capsule Network [40, 61] shows
the potential to learn geometrically organized parts from
images. After that, visual grounding methods [10, 18, 21,
23, 85] try to align the semantic meaning between visual
objects and words to distill effective structures for the vision branch from language. Similarly, human-object interaction approaches [39] learn the relationships between two
objects, e.g., a boy “holds” an ice cream, from manually
annotated labels. Such methods struggle to learn hierarchical visual structures, such as different parts of an object,
unless exhaustive and time-consuming manual annotations
are provided. Recently, vision-language (VL) grammar induction [72] proposes to extract shared hierarchical object

14528

