This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MarS3D: A Plug-and-Play Motion-Aware Model for Semantic Segmentation on
Multi-Scan 3D Point Clouds
Jiahui Liu1 * Chirui Chang1∗ Jianhui Liu1 Xiaoyang Wu1 Lan Ma2 Xiaojuan Qi1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 TCL AI Lab

1. Introduction
3D semantic segmentation on multi-scan large-scale
point clouds is a fundamental computer vision task that benefits many downstream problems in autonomous systems,
such as decision-making, motion planning, and 3D reconstruction, to name just a few. Compared with the singlescan semantic segmentation task, this task requires understanding not only the semantic categories but also the motion states (e.g., moving or static) of points based on multiscan point cloud data.
In the past few years, extensive research has been conducted on single-scan semantic segmentation with significant research advancements [4, 5, 12, 25, 31, 33, 36]. These
approaches are also applied to process multi-scan point
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

MarS3D

3D semantic segmentation on multi-scan large-scale
point clouds plays an important role in autonomous systems. Unlike the single-scan-based semantic segmentation
task, this task requires distinguishing the motion states of
points in addition to their semantic categories. However,
methods designed for single-scan-based segmentation tasks
perform poorly on the multi-scan task due to the lacking of
an effective way to integrate temporal information. We propose MarS3D, a plug-and-play motion-aware module for
semantic segmentation on multi-scan 3D point clouds. This
module can be flexibly combined with single-scan models
to allow them to have multi-scan perception abilities. The
model encompasses two key designs: the Cross-Frame Feature Embedding module for enriching representation learning and the Motion-Aware Feature Learning module for enhancing motion awareness. Extensive experiments show
that MarS3D can improve the performance of the baseline model by a large margin. The code is available at
https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/MarS3D.

car
non-moving

car

non-moving
car
moving

car
non-moving

car

GT

Abstract

Baseline

{liujh, xjqi}@eee.hku.hk, crchang@hku.hk, jhliu0212@gmail.com, xywu3@cs.hku.hk, rubyma@tcl.com

moving

car
non-moving

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed method, MarS3D, with
baseline method using SPVCNN [25] as the backbone on SemanticKITTI [1] dataset. MarS3D achieves excellent results in
the classification of semantic categories and motion states, while
the baseline method can not distinguish motion well from static.

clouds, wherein multiple point clouds are fused to form
a single point cloud before being fed to the network for
processing. Albeit simple, this strategy may lose temporal information and make distinguishing motion states a
challenging problem. As a result, they perform poorly
in classifying the motion states of objects. As shown
in Figure 1, the simple point cloud fusion strategy cannot effectively enable the model to distinguish the motion
states of cars even with a state-of-the-art backbone network
SPVCNN [25]. Recently, there have been some early attempts [7, 23, 24, 28] to employ attention modules [24] and
recurrent networks [7,23,28] to fuse information across different temporal frames. However, these approaches do not
perform well on the multi-scan task due to the insufficiency
of temporal representations and the limited feature extraction ability of the model.
In sum, a systematic investigation of utilizing the
rich spatial-temporal information from multiple-point cloud
scans is still lacking. This requires answering two critical
questions: (1) how can we leverage the multi-scan information to improve representation learning on point clouds for

9372

