This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Practical Upper Bound for the Worst-Case Attribution Deviations
Fan Wang1,2
1

Adams Wai-Kin Kong1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, IGP, Nanyang Technological University

2

fan005@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Model attribution is a critical component of deep neural
networks (DNNs) for its interpretability to complex models.
Recent studies bring up attention to the security of attribution methods as they are vulnerable to attribution attacks
that generate similar images with dramatically different attributions. Existing works have been investigating empirically improving the robustness of DNNs against those attacks; however, none of them explicitly quantifies the actual
deviations of attributions. In this work, for the first time,
a constrained optimization problem is formulated to derive
an upper bound that measures the largest dissimilarity of
attributions after the samples are perturbed by any noises
within a certain region while the classification results remain the same. Based on the formulation, different practical approaches are introduced to bound the attributions
above using Euclidean distance and cosine similarity under both ℓ2 and ℓ∞ -norm perturbations constraints. The
bounds developed by our theoretical study are validated on
various datasets and two different types of attacks (PGD attack and IFIA attribution attack). Over 10 million attacks
in the experiments indicate that the proposed upper bounds
effectively quantify the robustness of models based on the
worst-case attribution dissimilarities.

1. Introduction
Attribution methods play an important role in deep learning applications as one of the subareas of explainable AI.
Practitioners use attribution methods to measure the relative importance among different features and to understand
the impacts of features contributing to the model outputs.
They have been widely used in a number of critical realworld applications, such as risk management [2], medical
imaging [24, 29] and drug discovery [13]. In particular,
attributions are supposed to be secure and resistant to external manipulation such that proper explanations can be
applied to safety-sensitive applications. Regulations are

adamskong@ntu.edu.sg

also deployed in countries to enforce the interpretability
of deep learning models for a ‘right to explain’ [10]. Although attribution methods have been extensively studied
[18, 25, 28, 31, 36, 39], recent works reveal that they are vulnerable to visually imperceptible perturbations that drastically alter the attributions and keep the model outputs unchanged [6, 8].
Prior works [3, 4, 12, 23, 30, 32, 33] investigate the attribution robustness based on empirical and statistical estimations over entire dataset. However, current attribution robustness works are unable to evaluate how robust the model
is given any arbitrary test point, perturbed or unperturbed.
In this paper, we study the problem of finding the worst
attribution perturbation within certain predefined regions.
Specifically, given a trained model and an image sample,
we propose theoretical upper bounds of the attribution deviations from the unperturbed ones. As far as we know, this
is the first attempt to provide an upper bound of attribution
differences.
In this paper, the general upper bound for attribution deviation is first quantified as the maximum changes of attributions after the samples are perturbed while classification
results remain the same. Two cases are analyzed, including
with and without label constraint, which refers to the classification labels being unchanged and changed, respectively,
after the original samples are attacked. For each case, two
mostly used perturbation constraints, ℓ2 and ℓ∞ -norm, are
considered to compute the upper bound. For ℓ2 -norm constraint, our approach is based on the first-order Taylor series
of model attribution, and a tight upper bound ignoring the
label constraint is computed from the singular value of the
attribution gradient. ℓ∞ -norm constraint is more complicated because the upper bound is a solution of a concave
quadratic programming with box constraints, which is an
NP-hard problem. Thus, two relaxation approaches are proposed. Moreover, a more restricted bound constrained on
the unchanged label is also studied. In this study, Euclidean
distance and cosine distance, which are also employed in
the previous empirical studies [4, 30, 32], are used as dissimilarity functions to measure attribution difference. We

24616

