This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Light Weight Model for Active Speaker Detection
Junhua Liao1 , Haihan Duan2 , Kanghui Feng1 , Wanbing Zhao1 , Yanbing Yang1,3 , Liangyin Chen1,3 *
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China.
3
The Institute for Industrial Internet Research, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
{liaojunhua, fengkanghui, wanbingzhao}@stu.scu.edu.cn;
haihanduan@link.cuhk.edu.cn; {yangyanbing, chenliangyin}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Active speaker detection is a challenging task in audiovisual scenarios, with the aim to detect who is speaking in
one or more speaker scenarios. This task has received considerable attention because it is crucial in many applications. Existing studies have attempted to improve the performance by inputting multiple candidate information and
designing complex models. Although these methods have
achieved excellent performance, their high memory and
computational power consumption render their application
to resource-limited scenarios difficult. Therefore, in this
study, a lightweight active speaker detection architecture
is constructed by reducing the number of input candidates,
splitting 2D and 3D convolutions for audio-visual feature
extraction, and applying gated recurrent units with low
computational complexity for cross-modal modeling. Experimental results on the AVA-ActiveSpeaker dataset reveal
that the proposed framework achieves competitive mAP performance (94.1% vs. 94.2%), while the resource costs are
significantly lower than the state-of-the-art method, particularly in model parameters (1.0M vs. 22.5M, approximately
23×) and FLOPs (0.6G vs. 2.6G, approximately 4×). Additionally, the proposed framework also performs well on
the Columbia dataset, thus demonstrating good robustness.
The code and model weights are available at https:
//github.com/Junhua-Liao/Light-ASD.

1. Introduction
Active speaker detection is a multi-modal task that aims
to identify active speakers from a set of candidates in arbitrary videos. This task is crucial in speaker diarization [7, 42], speaker tracking [28, 29], automatic video editing [10, 20], and other applications, and thus has attracted
considerable attention from both the industry and academia.
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. mAP vs. FLOPs, size ∝ parameters. This figure shows
the mAP of different methods [1,2,19,23,37,45] on the benchmark
and the FLOPs required to predict one frame containing three candidates. The size of the blobs is proportional to the number of
model parameters. The legend shows the size of blobs corresponding to the model parameters from 1 × 106 to 30 × 106 .

Research on active speaker detection dates back more
than two decades [8, 35]. However, the lack of reliable
large-scale data has delayed the development of this field.
With the release of the first large-scale active speaker detection dataset, AVA-ActiveSpeaker [33], significant progress
has been made in this field [15, 37, 38, 40, 47], following
the rapid development of deep learning for audio-visual
tasks [22]. These studies improved the performance of active speaker detection by inputting face sequences of multiple candidates simultaneously [1, 2, 47], extracting visual
features with 3D convolutional neural networks [3, 19, 48],
and modeling cross-modal information with complex attention modules [9, 44, 45], etc, which resulted in higher memory and computation requirements. Therefore, applying the
existing methods to scenarios requiring real-time processing with limited memory and computational resources, such
as automatic video editing and live television, is difficult.

22932

