This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Flexible Multi-modal Document Models
Naoto Inoue1

Kotaro Kikuchi1
Edgar Simo-Serra2
Mayu Otani1
1
2
CyberAgent, Japan
Waseda University, Japan

Kota Yamaguchi1

{inoue naoto, kikuchi kotaro xa}@cyberagent.co.jp ess@waseda.jp
{otani mayu, yamaguchi kota}@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract
Creative workflows for generating graphical documents
involve complex inter-related tasks, such as aligning elements, choosing appropriate fonts, or employing aesthetically harmonious colors. In this work, we attempt at building a holistic model that can jointly solve many different
design tasks. Our model, which we denote by FlexDM,
treats vector graphic documents as a set of multi-modal
elements, and learns to predict masked fields such as element type, position, styling attributes, image, or text, using
a unified architecture. Through the use of explicit multi-task
learning and in-domain pre-training, our model can better
capture the multi-modal relationships among the different
document fields. Experimental results corroborate that our
single FlexDM is able to successfully solve a multitude of
different design tasks, while achieving performance that is
competitive with task-specific and costly baselines. 1

1. Introduction
Vector graphic documents are composed of diverse
multi-modal elements such as text or images and serve as
the dominant medium for visual communication today. The
graphical documents are created through many different
design tasks, e.g., filling in a background image, changing font and color, adding a decoration, or aligning texts.
While skilled designers perform tasks based on their design knowledge and expertise, novice designers often struggle to make decisions to create an effective visual presentation. To assist such novice designers, interactive frameworks equipped based on models that learn design knowledge from completed designs have been proposed [12, 38].
Our present work proposes models that can be used in such
systems, with a particular focus on developing holistic models that can flexibly switch between design tasks.
Design tasks are characterized by 1) the variety of
1 Please find the code and models at:
https://cyberagentailab.github.io/flex-dm.

possible actions and 2) the complex interaction between
multi-modal elements. As discussed above, a designer
can make almost any edit to the appearance of a vector
graphic document, ranging from basic layout to nuanced
font styling. While there have been several studies in solving specific tasks of a single modality, such as layout generation [3, 13, 23, 26, 30], font recommendation [56], or colorization [22,40,54], in realistic design applications, we believe it is essential to build a flexible model that can consider
multiple design tasks in a principled manner to make automated decisions on creative workflow.
In this work, we refer to a certain attribute of an element
as a field and formulate the various design tasks as a unified masked field prediction, which is inspired by the recent
masked autoencoders [9,15] and multi-task models [19,36].
The key idea is to utilize masking patterns to switch among
different design tasks within a single model; e.g., element
filling can be formulated as predicting all the fields of the
newly added element. Our flexible document model, denoted by FlexDM, consists of an encoder-decoder architecture with a multi-modal head dedicated to handling different
fields within a visual element. After pre-training with random masking strategy, we train FlexDM by explicit multitask learning where we randomly sample tasks in the form
of masking patterns corresponding to the target design task.
We illustrate in Figs. 1 and 2 an overview of FlexDM, with
emphasis on the correspondence between design tasks and
masking patterns.
Through our carefully designed experiments, we show
that our proposed FlexDM performs favorably against baselines in five design tasks using the Rico [7] and Crello [52]
datasets. We also study how different modeling approaches
affect the final task performance in the ablation study. Finally, we apply our framework to several previously studied design tasks with minimal modifications and show that
the performance matches or even surpasses the current taskspecific approaches.
Our contributions can be summarized in the following.
• We formulate multiple design tasks for vector graphic
documents by masked multi-modal field prediction in a

14287

