This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physics-Guided ISO-Dependent Sensor Noise Modeling
for Extreme Low-Light Photography
Yue Cao1 , Ming Liu1( ) , Shuai Liu, Xiaotao Wang, Lei Lei, Wangmeng Zuo1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
cscaoyue@gmail.com, csmliu@outlook.com, 18601200232@163.com, wangxt@126.com,
figoleilei@163.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Although deep neural networks have achieved astonishing performance in many vision tasks, existing learningbased methods are far inferior to the physical model-based
solutions in extreme low-light sensor noise modeling. To tap
the potential of learning-based sensor noise modeling, we
investigate the noise formation in a typical imaging process
and propose a novel physics-guided ISO-dependent sensor
noise modeling approach. Specifically, we build a normalizing flow-based framework to represent the complex noise
characteristics of CMOS camera sensors. Each component of the noise model is dedicated to a particular kind
of noise under the guidance of physical models. Moreover,
we take into consideration of the ISO dependence in the
noise model, which is not completely considered by the existing learning-based methods. For training the proposed
noise model, a new dataset is further collected with paired
noisy-clean images, as well as flat-field and bias frames
covering a wide range of ISO settings. Compared to existing methods, the proposed noise model is equipped with a
flexible structure and accurate modeling capabilities, which
is beneficial for better denoising performance in extreme
low-light scenes. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/happycaoyue/LLD.

1. Introduction
In recent years, learning-based image denoising methods
have achieved tremendous success with pairwise training
samples [22, 32]. However, it is still challenging to recover
high-quality results in extreme low-light scenarios, mainly
due to limited data [9, 31]. Considering the difficulty of
collecting enormous pairwise training data, noise modeling [25, 31, 33] becomes an alternative solution by simulating noises that match the extreme low-light distribution.
The noises in extreme low-light scenarios contain severe

striping artifacts and color bias, and the damage to image
quality is inconsistent across different ISO settings and locations. To model such complicated noises, physics-based
methods [9, 29, 31, 33] build cumbersome statistical models according to the physical process from photons (i.e., the
light) to digital signals (i.e., the rawRGB image). Nevertheless, the noise parameter calibration relies on a large number of flat-field and bias frames, which is also laborious and
expensive. For example, PMN [9] requires 400 bias frames
at each ISO setting to calibrate the noise parameters.
For circumventing the tedious parameter calibration process, learning-based methods [1, 5, 25] directly learn the
mapping from clean images to their noisy counterparts. Yet
the performance is still far inferior to the physics-based
statistical methods [31, 33]. To boost the performance of
learning-based sensor noise modeling, we delve into such
inferiority and attribute the major cause to the inconsistency
between the noise models and the imaging process. For
example, NoiseFlow [1] utilizes the distribution matching
ability of normalizing flow but is unable to model striping artifacts and color bias. Starlight [25] leverages various noise sources like heteroscedastic Gaussian noise, row
noise, and fixed-pattern noise. However, it mixes the noises
with the clean image and delivers them into a GAN model.
In other words, the noises are entangled with each other,
which increases the difficulty of describing the noise distributions. Moreover, these methods [1,5,25] either ignore the
ISO dependency of the noise or are based on the assumption
of a small range of ISO settings, further limiting the performance of learning-based noise modeling methods.
As a remedy, we propose a refined noise model to tap
the potential of learning-based sensor noise modeling. As
shown in Tab. 1, the proposed noise model covers the
most common kind of noises in the imaging process, including shot noise Nshot , dark current fixed-pattern noise
NF P , black level error noise NBLE , dark current shot noise
NDCSN , read noise Nread , row noise Nrow , and quantiza-

5744

