This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Predict Scene-Level Implicit 3D from Posed RGBD Data
Nilesh Kulkarni, Linyi Jin, Justin Johnson, David F. Fouhey
University of Michigan
Abstract
We introduce a method that can learn to predict scenelevel implicit functions for 3D reconstruction from posed
RGBD data. At test time, our system maps a previously
unseen RGB image to a 3D reconstruction of a scene via
implicit functions. While implicit functions for 3D reconstruction have often been tied to meshes, we show that we
can train one using only a set of posed RGBD images. This
setting may help 3D reconstruction unlock the sea of accelerometer+RGBD data that is coming with new phones.
Our system, D2-DRDF, can match and sometimes outperform current methods that use mesh supervision and shows
better robustness to sparse data.

1. Introduction
Consider the image in Figure 1. From this ordinary RGB
image, we can understand the complete 3D geometry of the
scene, including the floor and walls behind the chairs. Our
goal is to enable computers to recover this geometry from
a single RGB image. To this end, we present a method that
does so while learning only on posed RGBD images.
The task of reconstructing the full 3D of a scene from a
single previously unseen RGB image has long been known
to be challenging. Early work on full 3D relied on voxels [6, 17] or meshes [19], but these representations fail on
scenes due to topology and memory challenges. Implicit
functions (or learning to map each point in R3 to a value like
the distance to the nearest surface) have shown substantial
promise at overcoming these challenges. When conditioned
on an image, these have led to several successful methods.
Unfortunately, the implicit function status quo mainly
ties implicit function reconstruction methods to mesh supervision. This symbiosis has emerged since meshes give
excellent direct supervision. However, methods are limited
to training with an image-aligned mesh that is usually watertight (and often artist-created) [35, 38, 44] and occasionally non-watertight but professionally-scanned [27, 61].
We present a method, Depth to DRDF (D2-DRDF), that
breaks the implicit-function/mesh connection and can train
an effective single RGB image implicit 3D reconstruction

Inference: Single RGB Image to 3D
Inp

Training Data

ut

(Ours) Posed Depth

(Prior work) Explicit
3D Mesh

Figure 1. We propose a method, D2-DRDF, that reconstructs
full 3D from a single RGB image. During inference (left), our
method uses implicit functions to reconstruct the complete 3D including visible and occluded surfaces (visualized as surface normals ) such as the occluded wall and empty floor. For training,
our method uses only RGBD images and poses, unlike most prior
works that need an explicit and often watertight 3D mesh.

system using a set of RGBD images with known pose. We
envision that being able to entirely skip meshing will enable
the use of vast quantities of lower-quality data from consumers (e.g., from increasingly common consumer phones
with LiDAR scanners and accelerometers) as well as robots.
In addition to permitting training, the bypassing of meshing
may enable adaptation in a new environment on raw data
without needing an expert to ensure mesh acquisition.
Our key insight is that we can use segments of observed
free space in depth maps in other views to constrain distance functions. We show this using the Directed Ray Distance Function (DRDF) [27] that has recently shown good
performance in 3D reconstruction using implicit functions
and has the benefit of not needing watertight meshes for
training. Given an input reference view, the DRDF breaks
the problem of predicting the 3D surface into a set of independent 1D distance functions, each along a ray through
a pixel in the reference view and accounting for only surfaces on the ray. Rather than use an ordinary unsigned distance function, the DRDF signs the distance using the location of the camera’s pinhole and the intersections along
the ray. While [27] showed their method could be trained
on non-watertight meshes, their method is still dependent

17256

