This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MammalNet: A Large-scale Video Benchmark
for Mammal Recognition and Behavior Understanding
Jun Chen1∗
Ming Hu1∗
Darren J. Coker1
Michael L. Berumen1
2,3
4
5
Blair Costelloe
Sara Beery
Anna Rohrbach
Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior , 3 University of Konstanz
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 5 University of California, Berkeley
Order

Family

Mammal
Category

Hunt

Groom

…

Feed baby

Helarctos
…

Ursidae
Felidae

Ailuropoda

Atelidae

Gorilla

…

…

Primates

…

…

MammalNet

…

Carnivora

…

Ursus

Hominidae

Pan

…

…
Pongo

Figure 1. We propose MammalNet, a large-scale video benchmark for recognizing mammals and their behavior. It is built around a biological
mammal taxonomy spanning 17 orders, 69 families and 173 mammal categories, and includes 12 common high-level mammal behaviors
(e.g., hunt, groom). MammalNet enables the study of animal and behavior recognition, both separately and jointly. It also facilitates
investigating challenging compositional scenarios which test models’ zero- and low-shot transfer abilities. Moreover, MammalNet includes
behavior detection by localizing when a behavior occurs in an untrimmed video. Our dataset is the first to enable animal behavior analysis at
scale in an ecologically-grounded manner, and exemplifies multiple challenges for the computer vision community, such as recognition of
imbalanced, hierarchical distributions of fine-grained categories and generalization to unseen or seldom seen scenarios.

Abstract
Monitoring animal behavior can facilitate conservation
efforts by providing key insights into wildlife health, population status, and ecosystem function. Automatic recognition of
animals and their behaviors is critical for capitalizing on the
large unlabeled datasets generated by modern video devices
and for accelerating monitoring efforts at scale. However,
the development of automated recognition systems is currently hindered by a lack of appropriately labeled datasets.
Existing video datasets 1) do not classify animals according
to established biological taxonomies; 2) are too small to facilitate large-scale behavioral studies and are often limited
to a single species; and 3) do not feature temporally local-

ized annotations and therefore do not facilitate localization
of targeted behaviors within longer video sequences. Thus,
we propose MammalNet, a new large-scale animal behavior dataset with taxonomy-guided annotations of mammals
and their common behaviors. MammalNet contains over
18K videos totaling 539 hours, which is ∼10 times larger
than the largest existing animal behavior dataset [36]. It
covers 17 orders, 69 families, and 173 mammal categories
for animal categorization and captures 12 high-level animal
behaviors that received focus in previous animal behavior
studies. We establish three benchmarks on MammalNet:
standard animal and behavior recognition, compositional
low-shot animal and behavior recognition, and behavior
detection. Our dataset and code have been made available
at: https://mammal-net.github.io.

∗ Equal contribution.

13052

