This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleAdv: Meta Style Adversarial Training for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Yuqian Fu1 , Yu Xie2 , Yanwei Fu3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1 *
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China. 3 School of Data Science, Fudan University
{fuyq20, yxie18, yanweifu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CD-FSL) is a recently
emerging task that tackles few-shot learning across different
domains. It aims at transferring prior knowledge learned on
the source dataset to novel target datasets. The CD-FSL task
is especially challenged by the huge domain gap between
different datasets. Critically, such a domain gap actually
comes from the changes of visual styles, and wave-SAN [10]
empirically shows that spanning the style distribution of the
source data helps alleviate this issue. However, wave-SAN
simply swaps styles of two images. Such a vanilla operation
makes the generated styles “real” and “easy”, which still
fall into the original set of the source styles. Thus, inspired
by vanilla adversarial learning, a novel model-agnostic
meta Style Adversarial training (StyleAdv) method together
with a novel style adversarial attack method is proposed
for CD-FSL. Particularly, our style attack method synthesizes both “virtual” and “hard” adversarial styles for model
training. This is achieved by perturbing the original style
with the signed style gradients. By continually attacking
styles and forcing the model to recognize these challenging
adversarial styles, our model is gradually robust to the visual styles, thus boosting the generalization ability for novel
target datasets. Besides the typical CNN-based backbone,
we also employ our StyleAdv method on large-scale pretrained vision transformer. Extensive experiments conducted
on eight various target datasets show the effectiveness of
our method. Whether built upon ResNet or ViT, we achieve
the new state of the art for CD-FSL. Code is available at
https://github.com/lovelyqian/StyleAdv-CDFSL.

1. Introduction
This paper studies the task of Cross-Domain Few-Shot
Learning (CD-FSL) which addresses the Few-Shot Learning (FSL) problem across different domains. As a general recipe for FSL, episode-based meta-learning strategy
* indicates corresponding author

has also been adopted for training CD-FSL models, e.g.,
FWT [48], LRP [42], ATA [51], and wave-SAN [10]. Generally, to mimic the low-sample regime in testing stage, meta
learning samples episodes for training the model. Each
episode contains a small labeled support set and an unlabeled query set. Models learn meta knowledge by predicting
the categories of images contained in the query set according
to the support set. The learned meta knowledge generalizes
the models to novel target classes directly.
Empirically, we find that the changes of visual appearances between source and target data is one of the key causes
that leads to the domain gap in CD-FSL. Interestingly, waveSAN [10], our former work, shows that the domain gap
issue can be alleviated by augmenting the visual styles of
source images. Particularly, wave-SAN proposes to augment
the styles, in the form of Adaptive Instance Normalization
(AdaIN) [22], by randomly sampling two source episodes
and exchanging their styles. However, despite the efficacy
of wave-SAN, such a naı̈ve style generation method suffers
from two limitations: 1) The swap operation makes the styles
always be limited in the “real” style set of the source dataset;
2) The limited real styles further lead to the generated styles
too “easy” to learn. Therefore, a natural question is whether
we can synthesize “virtual” and “hard” styles for learning a
more robust CD-FSL model? Formally, we use “real/virtual”
to indicate whether the styles are originally presented in the
set of source styles, and define “easy/hard” as whether the
new styles make meta tasks more difficult.
To that end, we draw inspiration from the adversarial
training, and propose a novel meta Style Adversarial training method (StyleAdv) for CD-FSL. StyleAdv plays the
minimax game in two iterative optimization loops of metatraining. Particularly, the inner loop generates adversarial
styles from the original source styles by adding perturbations. The synthesized adversarial styles are supposed to be
more challenging for the current model to recognize, thus, increasing the loss. Whilst the outer loop optimizes the whole
network by minimizing the losses of recognizing the images
with both original and adversarial styles. Our ultimate goal is
to enable learning a model that is robust to various styles, be1
24575

