This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskSketch: Unpaired Structure-guided Masked Image Generation
Dina Bashkirova1⇤, José Lezama2 , Kihyuk Sohn2 , Kate Saenko1,3 , Irfan Essa2,4
1
Boston University, 2 Google Research, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 4 Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract
Recent conditional image generation methods produce
images of remarkable diversity, fidelity and realism. However, the majority of these methods allow conditioning only
on labels or text prompts, which limits their level of control over the generation result. In this paper, we introduce MaskSketch, an image generation method that allows
spatial conditioning of the generation result using a guiding sketch as an extra conditioning signal during sampling.
MaskSketch utilizes a pre-trained masked generative transformer, requiring no model training or paired supervision,
and works with input sketches of different levels of abstraction. We show that intermediate self-attention maps of a
masked generative transformer encode important structural
information of the input image, such as scene layout and
object shape, and we propose a novel sampling method
based on this observation to enable structure-guided generation. Our results show that MaskSketch achieves high
image realism and fidelity to the guiding structure. Evaluated on standard benchmark datasets, MaskSketch outperforms state-of-the-art methods for sketch-to-image translation, as well as unpaired image-to-image translation approaches. The code can be found on our project website:
https://masksketch.github.io/

1. Introduction
Recent Image generation methods achieved remarkable
success, allowing diverse and photorealistic image synthesis [4,11,44,46]. The majority of state-of-the-art generative
models allow conditioning with class labels [2, 4, 11, 13] or
text prompts [40, 41, 44, 46]. However, some applications
require a more fine-grained control over the spatial composition of the generation result. While methods conditioned
with segmentation maps [14] or strokes [34] achieve some
spatial control over the generated image, sketching allows a
more fine-grained specification of the target spatial layout,
which makes it desirable for many creative applications.
In this paper, we propose MaskSketch, a method for conditional image synthesis that uses sketch guidance to de⇤ Work done during an internship at Google.

Figure 1. Given an input sketch and class label, MaskSketch samples realistic images that follow the given structure. MaskSketch
works on sketches of various degree of abstraction by leveraging a
pre-trained masked image generator [4], while not requiring model
finetuning or pairwise supervision.

fine the desired structure, and a pre-trained state-of-the-art
masked generative transformer, MaskGIT [4], to leverage
a strong generative prior. We demonstrate the capability of
MaskSketch to generate realistic images of a given structure for sketch-to-photo image translation. Sketch-to-photo
[5, 20, 32] is one of the most challenging applications of
structure-conditional generation due to the large domain
gap between sketches and natural images. MaskSketch
achieves a balance between realism and structure fidelity.
Our experiments show that MaskSketch outperforms stateof-the-art sketch-to-photo [20] and unpaired image translation methods [6, 25, 37], according to standard metrics for
image generation [23] and user preference studies.
In MaskSketch, we formulate a structure similarity constraint based on the observation that the intermediate selfattention maps of a masked generative transformer [4] encode rich structural information (see Fig. 2). We use this

1879

