This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Privacy-Preserving Representations are not Enough: Recovering Scene Content
from Camera Poses
Kunal Chelani1

Torsten Sattler2 Fredrik Kahl1 Zuzana Kukelova3
Chalmers University of Technology
2
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
1

{chelani,fredrik.kahl}@chalmers.se

torsten.sattler@cvut.cz

Abstract
Visual localization is the task of estimating the camera
pose from which a given image was taken and is central
to several 3D computer vision applications. With the rapid
growth in the popularity of AR/VR/MR devices and cloudbased applications, privacy issues are becoming a very important aspect of the localization process. Existing work on
privacy-preserving localization aims to defend against an
attacker who has access to a cloud-based service. In this
paper, we show that an attacker can learn about details of a
scene without any access by simply querying a localization
service. The attack is based on the observation that modern
visual localization algorithms are robust to variations in appearance and geometry. While this is in general a desired
property, it also leads to algorithms localizing objects that
are similar enough to those present in a scene. An attacker
can thus query a server with a large enough set of images of
objects, e.g., obtained from the Internet, and some of them
will be localized. The attacker can thus learn about object
placements from the camera poses returned by the service
(which is the minimal information returned by such a service). In this paper, we develop a proof-of-concept version
of this attack and demonstrate its practical feasibility. The
attack does not place any requirements on the localization
algorithm used, and thus also applies to privacy-preserving
representations. Current work on privacy-preserving representations alone is thus insufficient.

1. Introduction
Visual localisation refers to the problem of estimating
the camera pose of a given image in a known scene. It is
a core problem in several 3D computer vision applications,
including self-driving cars [17, 18] and other autonomous
robots [50], and Augmented Reality [5, 23, 25].
A popular approach for Augmented/Mixed/Virtual Re-

kukelzuz@fel.cvut.cz

ality (XR) applications is to use a client-server mechanism
for localization: the user device (client) sends image data
to a cloud-based system (server) that computes and returns
the camera pose [23, 25, 46]. Examples of such services include Google’s Visual Positioning System [29], Microsoft’s
Azure Spatial Anchors [24], and Niantic’s Lightship [39].
Cloud-based localization services are popular for multiple
reasons - first, performing localization on the server reduces
storage requirements and the computational load, and thus
energy consumption, which is important for client devices
such as mobile phones and headsets; second, it enables using robust mapping and localization algorithms that are too
expensive for mobile devices; third, in the context of collaborative mapping, e.g., for the AR cloud or autonomous
driving, maintaining a single scene representation in a centralized place is far easier than keeping multiple copies on
various mobile devices up-to-date.
Naturally, sending user data to a server, e.g., in the
form of images to be localized or 3D maps recorded by
users that will be used for localization, raises privacy concerns [9, 41, 42]. Work on privacy-preserving localization
aims to resolve these concerns by ensuring that private details cannot be recovered from the data sent [14, 26, 42] to
or stored on the server [11, 11, 15, 28, 36, 41, 52].
Existing work focuses on scenarios where an attacker
gains access to the localization service or can eavesdrop on
the communication between client and server. In this work,
we demonstrate that it is possible for an attacker to learn
about the content of a scene stored on a localization server
without direct access to the server. We show that a localization service will reveal scene-related information through
estimated camera poses, i.e., through its normal operation
process. The attack is based on two recent developments:
(1) modern visual localization algorithms are designed to
be robust against changes such as illumination and seasonal
variations [44]. This is an essential property for cloud-based
localization services in order to operate robustly and reli-

13132

