This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AltFreezing for More General Video Face Forgery Detection
Zhendong Wang 1, * Jianmin Bao2, * Wengang Zhou1,3,† Weilun Wang1 Houqiang Li1,3,†
1
CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{zhendongwang,wwlustc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jianbao@microsoft.com, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing face forgery detection models try to discriminate
fake images by detecting only spatial artifacts (e.g., generative artifacts, blending) or mainly temporal artifacts (e.g.,
flickering, discontinuity). They may experience significant
performance degradation when facing out-domain artifacts.
In this paper, we propose to capture both spatial and temporal artifacts in one model for face forgery detection. A simple
idea is to leverage a spatiotemporal model (3D ConvNet).
However, we find that it may easily rely on one type of artifact and ignore the other. To address this issue, we present a
novel training strategy called AltFreezing for more general
face forgery detection. The AltFreezing aims to encourage
the model to detect both spatial and temporal artifacts. It
divides the weights of a spatiotemporal network into two
groups: spatial-related and temporal-related. Then the two
groups of weights are alternately frozen during the training
process so that the model can learn spatial and temporal
features to distinguish real or fake videos. Furthermore, we
introduce various video-level data augmentation methods to
improve the generalization capability of the forgery detection model. Extensive experiments show that our framework
outperforms existing methods in terms of generalization to
unseen manipulations and datasets.

1. Introduction
With the recent rapid development of face generation
and manipulation techniques [30, 31, 45–49, 56], it has become very easy to modify and manipulate the identities or
attributes given a face video. This brings many important
and impressive applications for movie-making, funny video
generation, and so on. However, these techniques can also be
abused for malicious purposes, creating serious crisis of trust
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

+

Temporal conv

Temporal conv!

Spatial conv!

Spatial conv
+

Figure 1. Illustration of AltFreezing training strategy in a building block of the spatiotemporal network. The convolutional kernels of the spatiotemporal network are divided into two groups:
temporal-based and spatial-based. Two groups of weights are
alternately frozen during training. With the help of the alternate
freezing (AltFreezing) strategy, our model can capture both spatial
and temporal artifacts to distinguish between fake and real videos.

and security in our society. Therefore, how to detect video
face forgeries has become a hot research topic recently.
To date, one successful line of research [10, 32, 34, 39,
42, 44, 50] tries to discriminate fake images by detecting
“spatial” artifacts in the generated images (e.g., checkboard,
unnaturalness, and characteristic artifacts underlying the
generative model). While these methods achieve impressive
results in searching spatial-related artifacts, they ignore the
temporal coherence of a video and fail to capture “temporal”
artifacts like flicking and discontinuity in the video face
forgeries. Some recent works [25,43,54] notice this issue and
try to address it by leveraging temporal clues. Although they
achieve encouraging results in detecting unnatural artifacts
at the temporal level, the resulting models are not sufficiently
capable of finding spatial-related artifacts.
In this paper, we attempt to capture both spatial and temporal artifacts for general video face forgery detection. Generally, a well-trained spatiotemporal network (3D ConvNet)
has the capability of searching both spatial and temporal
artifacts. However, we find that naïve training may cause
it to easily rely on spatial artifacts while ignoring temporal
artifacts to make a decision, causing a poor generalization

4129

