This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Stability-Plasticity Dilemma of Class-Incremental Learning
Dongwan Kim1
Bohyung Han1,2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ECE1 & IPAI2 , Seoul National University
{dongwan123, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
A primary goal of class-incremental learning is to strike
a balance between stability and plasticity, where models
should be both stable enough to retain knowledge learned
from previously seen classes, and plastic enough to learn
concepts from new classes. While previous works demonstrate strong performance on class-incremental benchmarks, it is not clear whether their success comes from
the models being stable, plastic, or a mixture of both.
This paper aims to shed light on how effectively recent
class-incremental learning algorithms address the stabilityplasticity trade-off. We establish analytical tools that measure the stability and plasticity of feature representations,
and employ such tools to investigate models trained with
various algorithms on large-scale class-incremental benchmarks. Surprisingly, we find that the majority of classincremental learning algorithms heavily favor stability over
plasticity, to the extent that the feature extractor of a model
trained on the initial set of classes is no less effective than
that of the final incremental model. Our observations not
only inspire two simple algorithms that highlight the importance of feature representation analysis, but also suggest that class-incremental learning approaches, in general,
should strive for better feature representation learning.

1. Introduction
Despite the unprecedented success of deep learning [19,
23,27,30], most deep neural networks have static use cases.
However, real-world problems often require adaptivity to
incoming data [17], changes in training environments, and
domain shifts [2, 7, 15]. Thus, researchers have been actively working on model adaptation techniques, and have
proposed various continual learning approaches so far.
A naı̈ve approach for continual learning is to simply finetune a model. However, such a solution is rather ineffective due to a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [13], which arises as a result of high plasticity of neural
networks, i.e. parameters important for the old tasks are updated to better fit the new data. On the flip side, enforcing

model stability introduces its own set of limitations, mainly
the lack of adaptivity to new data. Thus, we encounter the
stability-plasticity dilemma: how can we balance stability
and plasticity such that the model is able to learn new concepts while retaining old ones? Finding an optimal balance
between these two opposing forces is a core challenge of
continual learning research, and has been the main focus of
many previous works [6, 12, 16, 20, 21, 26, 31].
We conduct an in-depth study of recent works in continual learning, specifically concentrating on class-incremental
learning (CIL)—a subfield of continual learning—where
new sets of classes arrive in an online fashion. We are motivated by the lack of systematic analyses in the field of CIL,
which hampers our understanding of how effectively the existing algorithms balance stability and plasticity. Moreover,
works that do perform analyses usually focus on the classifier, e.g., classifier bias [1, 10], rather than the intermediate
feature representations. However, investigating the stability
and plasticity in the feature level is just as important, if not
more, because utilizing the model’s full capacity to learn
robust representations is critical to maximizing the potential of CIL algorithms.
To measure plasticity, we retrain the classification layer
of CIL models at various incremental stages and study how
effectively their feature extractors have learnt new concepts. We then investigate stability by measuring feature
similarity with Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) [3, 14]
and by visualizing the feature distribution shift using tSNE [29]. Suprisingly, and possibly concerningly, our analyses show that the majority of CIL models accumulate little
new knowledge in their feature representations across incremental stages. In fact, most of the analyzed CIL algorithms
seem to alleviate catastrophic forgetting by heavily overlooking model plasticity in favor of high stability. Finally,
we introduce two simple algorithms based on our observations. The first is an extension of Dynamically Expandable
Representations (DER) [31], which demonstrates how our
analyses may be used to improve the efficiency and efficacy
of CIL algorithms. The second is an exploitative method,
which can be interpreted as an extreme case of DER [31]
in terms of architectural design; this method shares a sim-

20196

