This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Multi-Modal Graph Transformer with Shared-Context Processing for
Representation Learning of Giga-pixel Images
Ramin Nakhli
University of British Columbia

Puria Azadi Moghadam
University of British Columbia

Haoyang Mi
Johns Hopkins University

ramin.nakhli@ubc.ca

puria.azadi@ubc.ca

hmi1@jhmi.edu

Hossein Farahani
University of British Columbia

Alexander Baras
Johns Hopkins University

Blake Gilks
University of British Columbia

h.farahani@ubc.ca

baras@jhmi.edu

blake.gilks@vch.ca

Ali Bashashati
University of British Columbia
ali.bashashati@ubc.ca

Abstract
Processing giga-pixel whole slide histopathology images
(WSI) is a computationally expensive task. Multiple instance learning (MIL) has become the conventional approach to process WSIs, in which these images are split
into smaller patches for further processing. However, MILbased techniques ignore explicit information about the individual cells within a patch. In this paper, by defining the
novel concept of shared-context processing, we designed a
multi-modal Graph Transformer (AMIGO) that uses the cellular graph within the tissue to provide a single representation for a patient while taking advantage of the hierarchical
structure of the tissue, enabling a dynamic focus between
cell-level and tissue-level information. We benchmarked the
performance of our model against multiple state-of-the-art
methods in survival prediction and showed that ours can
significantly outperform all of them including hierarchical
Vision Transformer (ViT). More importantly, we show that
our model is strongly robust to missing information to an
extent that it can achieve the same performance with as
low as 20% of the data. Finally, in two different cancer
datasets, we demonstrated that our model was able to stratify the patients into low-risk and high-risk groups while
other state-of-the-art methods failed to achieve this goal.
We also publish a large dataset of immunohistochemistry
images (InUIT) containing 1,600 tissue microarray (TMA)
cores from 188 patients along with their survival information, making it one of the largest publicly available datasets
in this context.

1. Introduction
Digital processing of medical images has recently attracted significant attention in computer vision communities, and the applications of deep learning models in this
domain span across various image types (e.g., histopathology images, CT scans, and MRI scans) and numerous
tasks (e.g., classification, segmentation, and survival prediction) [6, 11, 27, 28, 30, 36, 38, 44]. The paradigm-shifting
ability of these models to learn predictive features directly
from raw images has presented exciting opportunities in
medical imaging. This has especially become more important for digitized histopathology images where each data
point is a multi-gigapixel image (also referred to as a Whole
Slide Image or WSI). Unlike natural images, each WSI
has high granularity at different levels of magnification and
a size reaching 100,000×100,000 pixels, posing exciting
challenges in computer vision.
The typical approach to cope with the computational
complexities of WSI processing is to use the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) technique [31]. More specifically,
this approach divides each slide into smaller patches (e.g.,
256×256 pixels), passes them through a feature extractor,
and represents the slide with an aggregation of these representations. This technique has shown promising results
in a variety of tasks, including cancer subtype classification and survival prediction. However, it suffers from several major issues. Firstly, considering the high resolution
of WSIs, even a non-overlapping 256×256 window generates a huge number of patches. Therefore, the subsequent
aggregation method of MIL has to perform either a simple
pooling operation [3, 17] or a hierarchical aggregation to

11547

