This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multivariate, Multi-frequency and Multimodal: Rethinking Graph Neural
Networks for Emotion Recognition in Conversation

†

Feiyu Chen†‡
Jie Shao†‡∗
Shuyuan Zhu†
Heng Tao Shen†‡
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
‡
Sichuan Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Yibin, China
{chenfeiyu,shaojie,eezsy,shenhengtao}@uestc.edu.cn

Dialogue

Emotion

Wait, Rach! Where's the
other one?
1 澳

Neutral

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human beings constantly express their feelings in everyday communication. Emotion Recognition in Conversation (ERC) aims at enabling machines to detect interactive human emotions in a dialogue, utilizing multi-sensory
data, including textual, visual and acoustic information
[5, 13, 18, 24]. Unlike traditional affective computing tasks
that are performed on single modalities (e.g., text, speech
or facial images) [12, 28, 32] or/and in non-conversational
∗ Corresponding author: Jie Shao. This work is supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61832001 and
No. 62276047), Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province (No.
2023NSFSC1972) and Science and Technology Program of Yibin Sanjiang
New Area (No. 2023SJXQYBKJJH001).

A

V

Calm voice

2 澳

Oh what, you-you want
both of them?

Surprise

High pitch
prediction

Rachel Karen Green,
3 澳 where's the other earring?!

Anger

Flat tone

Okay, okay, okay, look,
4 澳 just don't freak out, but I
kinda lost it.

Fear

Soft voice

I know it's in the
5 澳 apartment, but I definitely
lost it.

Neutral

Low voice

Well, what am I going to
6 澳 tell Monica? She wants to
wear them tonight!

prediction

Complex relationships of high arity across modality and
context dimensions is a critical challenge in the Emotion
Recognition in Conversation (ERC) task. Yet, previous
works tend to encode multimodal and contextual relationships in a loosely-coupled manner, which may harm relationship modelling. Recently, Graph Neural Networks
(GNN) which show advantages in capturing data relations,
offer a new solution for ERC. However, existing GNN-based
ERC models fail to address some general limits of GNNs,
including assuming pairwise formulation and erasing highfrequency signals, which may be trivial for many applications but crucial for the ERC task. In this paper, we propose a GNN-based model that explores multivariate relationships and captures the varying importance of emotion
discrepancy and commonality by valuing multi-frequency
signals. We empower GNNs to better capture the inherent
relationships among utterances and deliver more sufficient
multimodal and contextual modelling. Experimental results
show that our proposed method outperforms previous stateof-the-art works on two popular multimodal ERC datasets.

T

Fear

Loud voive
Textual information

Acoustic information

Visual information

Figure 1. An example of multimodal dialogue (left) and the complex multivariate relationships of u3 and u6 (right).

scenario [15, 23, 33], there exists a distinct and essential
challenge in the ERC task - the complex multivariate relationships among multiple modalities and conversational
context. In other words, the emotional dependencies of an
utterance are usually of high arity, and involve multi-source
information across both modality and context dimensions.
Figure 1 presents a sample of conversation between two
speakers. Take the utterance u3 as an example. The visual
and acoustic messages of utterance u3 (an expressionless
face and a flat tone) are ambiguous, but imply a veiled anger
if coupled with the text. Moreover, the emotion behind u3
is also related to the preceding context u1 and u2 . In particular, the change from calling by nickname in u1 to calling
by full name in u3 suggests an emotion shift caused by u2 ,
since another speaker tries to make a joke with a pretended
lightness. Therefore, the relationships in {u1 , u2 , u3 } are
complex and multivariate, and involve interdependencies
across both modality and context dimensions.

10761

