This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Contextual Scene Graph Generation with Unbiased Context Augmentation
Tianlei Jin1

Fangtai Guo1
Qiwei Meng1
Shiqiang Zhu1
Xiangming Xi1
Wen Wang1
Zonghao Mu1
Wei Song1 *
1
Research Center for Intelligent Robotics, Zhejiang Lab

{jtl,guofangtai,mengqw,zhusq,xxm21,wangwen,muzonghao,weisong}@zhejianglab.com

Abstract
Scene graph generation (SGG) methods have historically suffered from long-tail bias and slow inference speed.
In this paper, we notice that humans can analyze relationships between objects relying solely on context descriptions,
and this abstract cognitive process may be guided by experience. For example, given descriptions of cup and table
with their spatial locations, humans can speculate possible
relationships < cup, on, table > or < table, near, cup >.
Even without visual appearance information, some impossible predicates like f lying in and looking at can be empirically excluded. Accordingly, we propose a contextual scene
graph generation (C-SGG) method without using visual information and introduce a context augmentation method.
We propose that slight perturbations in the position and size
of objects do not essentially affect the relationship between
objects. Therefore, at the context level, we can produce diverse context descriptions by using a context augmentation
method based on the original dataset. These diverse context
descriptions can be used for unbiased training of C-SGG
to alleviate long-tail bias. In addition, we also introduce
a context guided visual scene graph generation (CV-SGG)
method, which leverages the C-SGG experience to guide
vision to focus on possible predicates. Through extensive
experiments on the publicly available dataset, C-SGG alleviates long-tail bias and omits the huge computation of
visual feature extraction to realize real-time SGG. CV-SGG
achieves a great trade-off between common predicates and
tail predicates.

1. Introduction
SGG is a challenging technology that identifies triplet
relationships < subject, predicate, object > between objects from images. With the development of artificial intelligence, SGG has gradually become a bridge from image
recognition to image understanding. Scene graphs are an
* Corresponding Author

indispensable part of complex visual understanding tasks,
such as visual question answering [24], visual grounding
[21] and visual-language navigation [40]. However, the researches [3, 19, 36]on SGG suffer from two insurmountable obstacles. The first is the long-tail bias derived from
datasets. More common predicates such as on and near
have more samples than tail predicates such as from and
above, causing the model to prefer to classify the common
predicates. The second is the low-speed inference in practical applications. Analyzing the predicate between each
objects-pair to generate a scene graph is a quadratic time
complexity problem, making real-time inference difficult.
On the one hand, some SGG methods [3, 26, 31, 34] are
dedicated to solving the long-tail bias. Tang [26] and Chiou
[2] introduce the causal graph and the label frequency to
reason tail predicates and attempt unbiased SGG inference
based on biased training. Li [11] and Desai [3] propose
to optimize label distribution and rebalance category sampling, which realize unbiased SGG training. However, these
methods increase the recall of tail predicates, but inevitably
reduce the recall of common predicates. The current SGG
methods are difficult to consider and balance the recall of
common predicates and tail predicates simultaneously. We
think the internal reason is that there are not enough data
samples for each predicate.
On the other hand, some SGG methods [18, 33] focus
on improving the inference speed of the SGG task. In detail, Yang [33] designs all objects in a fully connected graph
structure and prunes the connections between objects. It
can reduce the time complexity of SGG inference. Liu [18]
transforms the predicate inference into an integral on relationship affinity fields. Although the time complexity is not
reduced, the computation amount of integral operation is
much less than that of deep learning calculation of visual
features. These methods improve the inference speed, but
sacrifice the recall performance.
We reflect on the human cognitive process of predicate
analysis between objects and discover two overlooked phenomena. First, humans can roughly infer the predicate between objects based on the context descriptions only includ-

6302

