This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Appearance and Motion Learning for Efﬁcient Rolling Shutter Correction
Bin Fan
Yuxin Mao
Yuchao Dai†
Zhexiong Wan
Qi Liu
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China

Abstract
Rolling shutter correction (RSC) is becoming increasingly popular for RS cameras that are widely used in commercial and industrial applications. Despite the promising performance, existing RSC methods typically employ
a two-stage network structure that ignores intrinsic information interactions and hinders fast inference. In this paper, we propose a single-stage encoder-decoder-based network, named JAMNet, for efﬁcient RSC. It ﬁrst extracts
pyramid features from consecutive RS inputs, and then simultaneously reﬁnes the two complementary information
(i.e., global shutter appearance and undistortion motion
ﬁeld) to achieve mutual promotion in a joint learning decoder. To inject sufﬁcient motion cues for guiding joint
learning, we introduce a transformer-based motion embedding module and propose to pass hidden states across pyramid levels. Moreover, we present a new data augmentation strategy “vertical ﬂip + inverse order” to release the
potential of the RSC datasets. Experiments on various
benchmarks show that our approach surpasses the state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin, especially with a 4.7
dB PSNR leap on real-world RSC. Code is available at
https://github.com/GitCVfb/JAMNet.

Figure 1. Performance vs. Speed. Each circle represents the performance of a model in terms of FPS and PSNR on the FastecRS testing set [29] with 640 × 480 images using a 3090 GPU.
The radius of each circle denotes the model’s number of parameters. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance with realtime inferences and smaller parameters compared with prior RSC
methods, including DeepUnrollNet [29], SUNet [10], JCD [56],
AdaRSC [5], and Cascaded method (i.e., SUNet + DAIN [4]).

The RSC task aims to recover a latent distortion-free
global shutter (GS) image corresponding to a speciﬁc exposure time between consecutive RS frames. The resulting RSC methods can be divided into traditional and
deep learning-based ones. The traditional RSC methods
[1, 13, 26, 38, 40, 48, 50] usually rely on hand-designed
prior assumptions, geometric constraints, and complex optimization frameworks. Consequently, such processes are
typically time-consuming and require complex parametertuning strategies for different scenarios, which restricts their
real-world applications. In contrast, convolutional neural
networks have also been used to remove RS artifacts in recent years due to the considerable success in many computer vision tasks, such as [5, 9, 14, 29, 51, 60]. Particularly, RSC methods based on multiple consecutive RS images have been heavily investigated [5, 10, 29, 56].
In general, these multi-image-based RSC approaches often consist of a two-stage network design with two key
elements: a motion estimation module and a GS frame
synthesis module, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (a). The former
is dedicated to estimating a pixel-wise undistortion ﬁeld,
which is utilized to warp the RS appearance content to

1. Introduction
As commonly used image sensors in the automotive sector and motion picture industry, CMOS sensors offer particular beneﬁts, including low cost and simplicity in design
[15, 20, 42, 48]. The row-wise readout mechanism from top
to bottom of electronic CMOS sensors, however, results in
undesirable image distortions called the rolling shutter (RS)
effect (also known as the jelly effect, e.g., wobble, skew)
when a moving camera or object is in progress. Often, even
a small camera motion causes visible geometric distortions
in the captured RS image or video. Because of this, the RS
effect inevitably becomes a hindrance to scene understanding and a nuisance in photography. As such, RS correction
(RSC), as a way to make up for such deﬁciencies, is gradually gaining more and more attention [5, 11, 27, 29, 58].
 Equal contribution. † Corresponding author (daiyuchao@gmail.com).

5671

