This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NIKI: Neural Inverse Kinematics with Invertible Neural Networks
for 3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation
Jiefeng Li1∗ Siyuan Bian1∗ Qi Liu1 Jiasheng Tang3 Fan Wang3 Cewu Lu12†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Alibaba Group

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D human pose and shape (HPS) from
monocular input is a challenging problem. It has many
applications [9, 31, 43, 56, 57, 59, 60]. Despite the rapid
progress powered by deep neural networks [17, 21, 22, 24,
29, 62], the performance of existing methods is not satisfactory in complex real-world applications where people are
often occluded and truncated by themselves, each other, and
objects.
* Equal contribution.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan

Research Institute, Qi Zhi Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

Average Joint Error (mm)

With the progress of 3D human pose and shape estimation, state-of-the-art methods can either be robust to occlusions or obtain pixel-aligned accuracy in non-occlusion
cases. However, they cannot obtain robustness and meshimage alignment at the same time. In this work, we present
NIKI (Neural Inverse Kinematics with Invertible Neural
Network), which models bi-directional errors to improve
the robustness to occlusions and obtain pixel-aligned accuracy. NIKI can learn from both the forward and inverse
processes with invertible networks. In the inverse process,
the model separates the error from the plausible 3D pose
manifold for a robust 3D human pose estimation. In the
forward process, we enforce the zero-error boundary conditions to improve the sensitivity to reliable joint positions for
better mesh-image alignment. Furthermore, NIKI emulates
the analytical inverse kinematics algorithms with the twistand-swing decomposition for better interpretability. Experiments on standard and occlusion-specific benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of NIKI, where we exhibit robust and well-aligned results simultaneously. Code is available at https://github.com/Jeff-sjtu/NIKI.

100

HybrIK (pixel-aligned)
PARE (regression)
NIKI

90
80
70
60
50
40
3DPW

3DPW-OCC

3DPW-XOCC

Figure 1. Trade-off between pixel-aligned accuracy and robustness. From 3DPW to 3DPW-XOCC, the degree of occlusion increases. The pixel-aligned approach performs well only in nonocclusion cases. The direct regression approach is more robust to
occlusions but less accurate in non-occlusion cases. NIKI shows
high accuracy and strong robustness simultaneously. Illustrative
results on the 3DPW-XOCC dataset are shown on the right.

Existing state-of-the-art approaches rely on pixelaligned local evidence, e.g., 3D keypoints [14, 29], mesh
vertices [37], and mesh-aligned features [62], to perform accurate human pose and shape estimation. Although the local evidence helps obtain high accuracy in standard benchmarks, it fails when the mesh-image correspondences are
unavailable due to occlusions and truncations. These pixelaligned approaches sacrifice robustness to occlusions for
high accuracy in non-occlusion scenarios. On the other
hand, direct regression approaches are more robust to occlusions. Such approaches directly predict a set of pose
and shape parameters with neural networks. By encoding
human body priors in the networks, they predict a more
physiologically plausible result than the pixel-aligned approaches in severely occluded scenarios. However, direct
regression approaches use all pixels to predict human pose
and shape, which is a highly non-linear mapping and suf-

12933

