This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Patch-Craft Self-Supervised Training for Correlated Image Denoising
Gregory Vaksman and Michael Elad
CS Department - The Technion
Haifa, Israel
grishav@campus.technion.ac.il, elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Supervised neural networks are known to achieve excellent results in various image restoration tasks. However,
such training requires datasets composed of pairs of corrupted images and their corresponding ground truth targets. Unfortunately, such data is not available in many applications. For the task of image denoising in which the
noise statistics is unknown, several self-supervised training
methods have been proposed for overcoming this difficulty.
Some of these require knowledge of the noise model, while
others assume that the contaminating noise is uncorrelated,
both assumptions are too limiting for many practical needs.
This work proposes a novel self-supervised training technique suitable for the removal of unknown correlated noise.
The proposed approach neither requires knowledge of the
noise model nor access to ground truth targets. The input to our algorithm consists of easily captured bursts of
noisy shots. Our algorithm constructs artificial patch-craft
images from these bursts by patch matching and stitching,
and the obtained crafted images are used as targets for the
training. Our method does not require registration of the
images within the burst. We evaluate the proposed framework through extensive experiments with synthetic and real
image noise.

1. Introduction
Supervised neural networks have proven themselves
powerful, achieving impressive results in solving image
restoration problems (e.g., [14–16, 18, 33, 41–43]). In the
commonly deployed supervised training for such tasks, one
needs a dataset consisting of pairs of corrupted and ground
truth images. The degraded images are fed to the network
input, while the ground truth counterparts are used as guiding targets. When the degradation model is known and easy
to implement, one can construct such a dataset by applying
This research was partially supported by the Israel Science Foundation
(ISF) under Grant 335/18 and the Council For Higher Education - Planning
& Budgeting Committee.

the degradation to clean images. However, a problem arises
when the degradation model is unknown. In such cases,
while it is relatively easy to acquire distorted images, obtaining their ground truth counterparts can be challenging.
For this reason, there is a need for self-supervised methods
that use corrupted images only in the training phase. More
on these methods is detailed in Section 2.
In this work we focus on the problem of image denoising
with an unknown noise model. More specifically, we assume that the noise is additive, zero mean, but not necessarily Gaussian, and one that could be cross-channel and shortrange spatially correlated1 . We additionally assume that the
noise is (mostly) independent of the image and nearly homogeneous, i.e., having low to moderate spatially variant
statistics. Examples of such noise could be Gaussian correlated noise or real image noise in digital cameras. Several
recent papers propose methods for self-supervised training
under similar such challenging conditions. However, they
all assume an uncorrelated noise or a noise with a known
model, thus limiting their coverage of the need posed.
This work proposes a novel self-supervised training
framework for addressing the problem of image denoising of an unknown correlated noise. The proposed algorithm gets as input bursts of shots, where each frame in
the burst captures nearly the same scene, up to moderate
movements of the camera and objects. Such sequences of
images are easily captured in many digital cameras. Our
algorithm uses one image from the burst as the input, utilizing the rest of the frames of the same burst for constructing
(noisy) targets for training. For creating these target images,
we harness the concept of patch-craft frames introduced in
PaCNet [35]. Similar to PaCNet, we split the input shot
into fully overlapping patches. For each patch, we find its
nearest neighbor within the rest of the burst images. Note
that, unlike PaCNet, we strictly omit the input shot from
the neighbor search. We proceed by building m patch-craft
1 By short-term we refer to the case in which the auto-correlation func-

tion decays fast, implying that only nearby noise pixels may be highly correlated. The correlation range we consider is governed by the patch size in
our algorithm - see Section 3 for more details.

5795

