This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SUDS: Scalable Urban Dynamic Scenes
Haithem Turki1*

Jason Y. Zhang1
Francesco Ferroni2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Argo AI

Deva Ramanan1

Abstract
We extend neural radiance fields (NeRFs) to dynamic
large-scale urban scenes. Prior work tends to reconstruct
single video clips of short durations (up to 10 seconds). Two
reasons are that such methods (a) tend to scale linearly with
the number of moving objects and input videos because a
separate model is built for each and (b) tend to require supervision via 3D bounding boxes and panoptic labels, obtained manually or via category-specific models. As a step
towards truly open-world reconstructions of dynamic cities,
we introduce two key innovations: (a) we factorize the scene
into three separate hash table data structures to efficiently
encode static, dynamic, and far-field radiance fields, and
(b) we make use of unlabeled target signals consisting of
RGB images, sparse LiDAR, off-the-shelf self-supervised
2D descriptors, and most importantly, 2D optical flow. Operationalizing such inputs via photometric, geometric, and
feature-metric reconstruction losses enables SUDS to decompose dynamic scenes into the static background, individual objects, and their motions. When combined with our
multi-branch table representation, such reconstructions can
be scaled to tens of thousands of objects across 1.2 million
frames from 1700 videos spanning geospatial footprints of
hundreds of kilometers, (to our knowledge) the largest dynamic NeRF built to date. We present qualitative initial results on a variety of tasks enabled by our representations,
including novel-view synthesis of dynamic urban scenes,
unsupervised 3D instance segmentation, and unsupervised
3D cuboid detection. To compare to prior work, we also
evaluate on KITTI and Virtual KITTI 2, surpassing state-ofthe-art methods that rely on ground truth 3D bounding box
annotations while being 10x quicker to train.

1. Introduction
Scalable geometric reconstructions of cities have transformed our daily lives, with tools such as Google Maps and
Streetview [6] becoming fundamental to how we navigate
and interact with our environments. A watershed moment
*Work done as an intern at Argo AI.

Figure 1. SUDS. We scale neural reconstructions to city scale by
dividing the area into multiple cells and training hash table representations for each. We show our full city-scale reconstruction
above and the derived representations below. Unlike prior methods, our approach handles dynamism across multiple videos, disentangling dynamic objects from static background and modeling
shadow effects. We use unlabeled inputs to learn scene flow and
semantic predictions, enabling category- and object-level scene
manipulation.

in the development of such technology was the ability to
scale structure-from-motion (SfM) algorithms to city-scale
footprints [4]. Since then, the advent of Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [33] has transformed this domain by allowing for photorealistic interaction with a reconstructed scene
via view synthesis.
Recent works have attempted to scale such representations to neighborhood-scale reconstructions for virtual
drive-throughs [47] and photorealistic fly-throughs [52].
However, these maps remain static and frozen in time.
This makes capturing bustling human environments—

12375

