This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cascaded Local Implicit Transformer for Arbitrary-Scale Super-Resolution
Hao-Wei Chen*,1,2 Yu-Syuan Xu*,2 Min-Fong Hong2 Yi-Min Tsai2 Hsien-Kai Kuo2 Chun-Yi Lee1
1
Elsa Lab, National Tsing Hua University 2 MediaTek Inc.
{jaroslaw1007, cylee}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
{Yu-Syuan.Xu, romulus.hong, Yi-Min.Tsai, Hsienkai.Kuo }@mediatek.com

Abstract
Implicit neural representation has recently shown a
promising ability in representing images with arbitrary resolutions. In this paper, we present a Local Implicit Transformer (LIT), which integrates the attention mechanism and
frequency encoding technique into a local implicit image
function. We design a cross-scale local attention block to effectively aggregate local features and a local frequency encoding block to combine positional encoding with Fourier
domain information for constructing high-resolution images. To further improve representative power, we propose a Cascaded LIT (CLIT) that exploits multi-scale features, along with a cumulative training strategy that gradually increases the upsampling scales during training. We
have conducted extensive experiments to validate the effectiveness of these components and analyze various training
strategies. The qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that LIT and CLIT achieve favorable results and outperform the prior works in arbitrary super-resolution tasks.

1. Introduction
Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) is the process
of reconstructing high-resolution (HR) images from their
corresponding low-resolution (LR) counterparts. SISR has
long been recognized as a challenging task in the low-level
vision domain due to its ill-posed nature, and has attracted
a number of researchers dedicated to this field of study over
the past decade [1–21]. A line of SISR research referred to
as ‘fixed-scale SR’ [1–15] focuses on extracting feature embeddings from LR images and leveraging these embeddings
to upsample images with a predefined factor through learnable deconvolutions [3] or sub-pixel convolutions [4]. Despite their success, many of the proposed approaches necessitate a distinct deep neural network model for each upsampling scale, which is usually restricted to a limited selection
of integers (e.g., 2×, 3×, 4×). Such a limitation constrains
the potential applications and deployment options of SISR
models. To overcome this limitation, approaches for upsampling LR images in a continuous manner via a single
model emerge and attracted considerable attention recently.
Over the past few years, arbitrary-scale SR has emerged
and attracted considerable attention from researchers [16–
21]. Apart from the pioneering work Meta-SR [16], recent
*Equal contribution

LR

HR

LR

HR

(a)

LIIF

Local Ensemble High

LIIF

Local Ensemble High

Ours

Attention Map

Ours

Attention Map

(b)

Low

Low

Figure 1. An illustration and comparison of different approaches that take
into account nearby pixels for continuous upsampling: (a) the local ensemble method used in [17], and (b) our proposed local attention mechanism.

endeavors [17–21] have achieved arbitrary-scale SR by replacing the upsampling layers commonly adopted by previous approaches with local implicit image functions, and
have demonstrated favorable performance. These local implicit functions employ multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to
map 2D coordinates and corresponding latent representations to RGB values. Fig. 1 illustrates how different approaches sample latent representations based on the queried
coordinates (depicted as the red dots). Fig. 1 (a) illustrates the local ensemble technique adopted by contemporary mainstream methods [17–21]. It calculates the RGB
value of the queried coordinate by taking the weighted average of those of the surrounding four pixels based on their
relative distances to the queried coordinate. This approach,
however, does not consider contextual information and relies solely on distance. For instance, in Fig. 1, the queried
coordinates are intentionally designed to lie on edges. However, merely calculating the weighted average of pixels fails
to reflect the contextual information about the image content, thereby preventing the accurate capture of the necessary features for performing SR. As a result, although pixel
distance plays a vital role in SR tasks, it is essential to concentrate more on the contextual information in an image.
In light of the above observations, we propose a Local Implicit Transformer (LIT), which expands the numbers of referenced latent vectors and accounts for the feature correlation in the context by exploiting the attention
mechanism [22]. LIT comprises a Cross-Scale Local Attention Block (CSLAB), a Local Frequency Encoding Block

18257

