This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-Personalizing Vision-Language Models to Find Named Instances in Video
Chun-Hsiao Yeh1,3*
1

Bryan Russell3

Josef Sivic2,3

University of California, Berkeley
daniel yeh@berkeley.edu

2

Fabian Caba Heilbron3†

CIIRC CTU

3

Simon Jenni3†

Adobe Research

{brussell,inr03127,caba,jenni}@adobe.com

Abstract
Large-scale vision-language models (VLM) have shown
impressive results for language-guided search applications.
While these models allow category-level queries, they currently struggle with personalized searches for moments in
a video where a specific object instance such as “My dog
Biscuit” appears. We present the following three contributions to address this problem. First, we describe a method
to meta-personalize a pre-trained VLM, i.e., learning how to
learn to personalize a VLM at test time to search in video.
Our method extends the VLM’s token vocabulary by learning novel word embeddings specific to each instance. To
capture only instance-specific features, we represent each
instance embedding as a combination of shared and learned
global category features. Second, we propose to learn such
personalization without explicit human supervision. Our
approach automatically identifies moments of named visual
instances in video using transcripts and vision-language
similarity in the VLM’s embedding space. Finally, we introduce This-Is-My, a personal video instance retrieval benchmark. We evaluate our approach on This-Is-My and DeepFashion2 and show that we obtain a 15% relative improvement over the state of the art on the latter dataset.

1. Introduction
The recent introduction of large-scale pre-trained visionlanguage models (VLMs) has enabled many new vision
tasks, including zero-shot classification and retrieval [14,
18, 22], image/video generation [12, 24, 25, 27, 28, 32], or
language-guided question answering [1, 19, 42]. It is now
possible to search not only for specific object categories
(e.g., dogs) but also for more specific descriptions of both
† Equal advising.
∗ Work done during CHY’s summer internship at Adobe Research.
2 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the
Czech Technical University in Prague.

Figure 1. Meta-Personalized Vision-Language Model (VLM)
to Retrieve Named Instances in Video. Given a video where a
user-specific instance, e.g., “My dog Biscuit” is mentioned, our
method automatically learns a representation for the user-specific
instance in the VLM’s text input space. The personalized VLM
can then be used to retrieve the learned instance in other contexts
through natural language queries, e.g., <my dog Biscuit>
grabbing a pink frisbee. This result is enabled by metapersonalizing the VLM on a large-scale dataset of narrated videos
by pre-learning shared global category tokens (in this example for
the category of ’dogs’), which are then easily personalized to userspecific instances from only a few user-given training examples.

the object and scene attributes (e.g., “A small white dog
playing at the dog park”). However, we often do not want
to search for just any example of a generic category but instead to find a specific instance. For example, a user might
want to search their personal video library for all the scenes
that show their dog “Biscuit grabbing a pink frisbee”, as
illustrated in Figure 1. Since VLMs do not have a representation of “Biscuit,” such queries are beyond the capabilities

19123

