This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ego-Body Pose Estimation via Ego-Head Pose Estimation
Jiaman Li

C. Karen Liu†
Jiajun Wu†
Stanford University

{jiamanli,karenliu,jiajunwu}@cs.stanford.edu

Timestamp

(a) Egocentric Video
Generated Motion 1

z

Generated Motion 2

x
y

(b) Head Pose Estimation

Timestamp

(c) Full-Body Human Motion Generation

Figure 1. Taking egocentric video (a) as input, our approach first predicts head pose (b); it then estimates multiple plausible full-body
human motions (c) from the predicted head pose. This motion sequence shows a human kicking and jumping in place. Please refer to the
supplementary video on our project page for a complete motion sequence visualization.

Abstract
Estimating 3D human motion from an egocentric video
sequence plays a critical role in human behavior understanding and has various applications in VR/AR. However, naively
learning a mapping between egocentric videos and human
motions is challenging, because the user’s body is often unobserved by the front-facing camera placed on the head of
the user. In addition, collecting large-scale, high-quality
datasets with paired egocentric videos and 3D human motions requires accurate motion capture devices, which often
limit the variety of scenes in the videos to lab-like environments. To eliminate the need for paired egocentric video and
human motions, we propose a new method, Ego-Body Pose
Estimation via Ego-Head Pose Estimation (EgoEgo), which
decomposes the problem into two stages, connected by the
head motion as an intermediate representation. EgoEgo first
integrates SLAM and a learning approach to estimate accurate head motion. Subsequently, leveraging the estimated
head pose as input, EgoEgo utilizes conditional diffusion
† indicates equal contribution.

to generate multiple plausible full-body motions. This disentanglement of head and body pose eliminates the need
for training datasets with paired egocentric videos and 3D
human motion, enabling us to leverage large-scale egocentric video datasets and motion capture datasets separately.
Moreover, for systematic benchmarking, we develop a synthetic dataset, AMASS-Replica-Ego-Syn (ARES), with paired
egocentric videos and human motion. On both ARES and
real data, our EgoEgo model performs significantly better
than the current state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human motion from an egocentric video,
which records the environment viewed from the first-person
perspective with a front-facing monocular camera, is critical to applications in VR/AR. However, naively learning a
mapping between egocentric videos and full-body human
motions is challenging for two reasons. First, modeling
this complex relationship is difficult; unlike reconstruction
motion from third-person videos, the human body is often
out of view of an egocentric video. Second, learning this

17142

