This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Crowd3D: Towards Hundreds of People Reconstruction from a Single Image
Hao Wen1,† , Jing Huang1,† , Huili Cui1 , Haozhe Lin2 , Yu-Kun Lai3 , Lu Fang2 , Kun Li1,∗
1
Tianjin University, China 2 Tsinghua University, China 3 Cardiff University, United Kingdom
{wenhao, hj00, huilicui 1, lik}@tju.edu.cn, {linhz, fanglu}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk

Input

Results

Bird’s-eye View

Side View

Figure 1. Given a single large-scene image with hundreds of people, our method can reconstruct 3D poses, shapes and locations of these
people in a global camera space with coherency with the scene. Please zoom in for more details.

Abstract
Image-based multi-person reconstruction in wide-field
large scenes is critical for crowd analysis and security alert.
However, existing methods cannot deal with large scenes
containing hundreds of people, which encounter the challenges of large number of people, large variations in human scale, and complex spatial distribution. In this paper,
we propose Crowd3D, the first framework to reconstruct the
3D poses, shapes and locations of hundreds of people with
global consistency from a single large-scene image. The
core of our approach is to convert the problem of complex
crowd localization into pixel localization with the help of
our newly defined concept, Human-scene Virtual Interaction Point (HVIP). To reconstruct the crowd with global
consistency, we propose a progressive reconstruction network based on HVIP by pre-estimating a scene-level camera and a ground plane. To deal with a large number of persons and various human sizes, we also design an adaptive
human-centric cropping scheme. Besides, we contribute
a benchmark dataset, LargeCrowd, for crowd reconstruction in a large scene. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method. The code and the
† Equal contribution.
* Corresponding author.

dataset are available at http://cic.tju.edu.cn/
faculty/likun/projects/Crowd3D.

1. Introduction
3D pose, shape and location reconstruction for hundreds
of people in a large scene will help with modeling crowd behavior for simulation and security monitoring. However, no
existing methods can achieve this with global consistency.
In this paper, we aim to reconstruct the 3D poses, shapes
and locations of hundreds of people in the global camera
space from a single large-scene image, as shown in Fig. 1.
Although monocular human pose and shape estimation
[15, 37, 43] has been extensively explored over the past
years, estimating global space locations together with human poses and shapes for multiple people from a single image is still a difficult problem due to the depth ambiguity.
Existing methods [13, 35] reconstruct 3D poses, shapes and
relative positions of the reconstructed human meshes by assuming a constant focal length. But the methods are limited
to small scenes with a common FoV (Field of View). These
methods cannot regress the people from a whole large-scene
image [41] due to the relatively small and varying human
scales in comparison to the image size. Even with an image
cropping strategy, these methods cannot obtain consistent

8937

