This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Transferable Spatiotemporal Representations
from Natural Script Knowledge
Ziyun Zeng1,2 * Yuying Ge3 * Xihui Liu3
Bin Chen4
Ping Luo3 Shu-Tao Xia1 Yixiao Ge2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
*

equal contribution

zengzy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
chenbin2021@hit.edu.cn

pluo@cs.hku.hk

corresponding authors
yuyingge@hku.hk

xihuiliu@eee.hku.hk

xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training on large-scale video data has become a
common recipe for learning transferable spatiotemporal
representations in recent years. Despite some progress, existing methods are mostly limited to highly curated datasets
(e.g., K400) and exhibit unsatisfactory out-of-the-box representations. We argue that it is due to the fact that they
only capture pixel-level knowledge rather than spatiotemporal semantics, which hinders further progress in video
understanding. Inspired by the great success of imagetext pre-training (e.g., CLIP), we take the first step to exploit language semantics to boost transferable spatiotemporal representation learning. We introduce a new pretext task, Turning to Video for Transcript Sorting (TVTS),
which sorts shuffled ASR scripts by attending to learned
video representations. We do not rely on descriptive captions and learn purely from video, i.e., leveraging the natural transcribed speech knowledge to provide noisy but useful semantics over time. Our method enforces the vision
model to contextualize what is happening over time so that
it can re-organize the narrative transcripts, and can seamlessly apply to large-scale uncurated video data in the real
world. Our method demonstrates strong out-of-the-box spatiotemporal representations on diverse benchmarks, e.g.,
+13.6% gains over VideoMAE on SSV2 via linear probing. The code is available at https://github.com/
TencentARC/TVTS.

1. Introduction
The aspiration of representation learning is to encode
general-purpose representations that transfer well to diverse downstream tasks, where self-supervised methodologies [9, 25] dominate due to their advantage in exploiting

yixiaoge@tencent.com

large-scale unlabeled data. Despite significant progress in
learning representations of still images [23, 43], the real
world is dynamic and requires reasoning over time. In this
paper, we focus on out-of-the-box spatiotemporal representation learning, a more challenging but practical task towards generic video understanding, which aims to capture
hidden representations that can be further used to conduct
reasoning on broader tasks, e.g., classification and retrieval.
There have been various attempts at self-supervised pretraining on video data from discriminative learning objectives [5, 8, 27] to generative ones [17, 49], where the
core is context capturing in spatial and temporal dimensions. Though promising results are achieved when transferring the pre-trained models to downstream video recognition [22, 33, 48] via fine-tuning, the learned representations are still far away from out-of-the-box given the poor
linearly probing results (see Figure 1(a)). Moreover, existing works mostly develop video models on the highly curated dataset with particular biases, i.e., K400 [31]. Their
applicability in the real world is questioned given the observed performance drops when training on a larger but
uncurated dataset, YT-Temporal [55]. We argue that, to
address the above issue, the rich spatiotemporal semantics
contained in the video itself should be fully exploited. But
current video models generally exploit visual-only perception (e.g., pixels) without explicit semantics.
Recently, the success of CLIP [43] has inspired the community to learn semantically aware image representations
that are better transferable to downstream tasks and scalable to larger uncurated datasets. It provides a feasible solution for improving spatiotemporal representation learning
but remains two key problems. (1) The vision-language
contrastive constraints in CLIP mainly encourage the understanding of static objects (noun contrast) and simple motions (verb contrast), while how to enable long-range tem-

23079

