This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frustratingly Easy Regularization on Representation Can
Boost Deep Reinforcement Learning
Qiang He1

Huangyuan Su2

Jieyu Zhang3

Xinwen Hou1

1 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United States
3 University of Washington, Seattle, United States

qianghe97@gmail.com, huangyus@andrew.cmu.edu, jieyuz2@cs.washington.edu, xinwen.hou@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) gives the promise
that an agent learns good policy from high-dimensional
information, whereas representation learning removes irrelevant and redundant information and retains pertinent
information. In this work, we demonstrate that the learned
representation of the 𝑄-network and its target 𝑄-network
should, in theory, satisfy a favorable distinguishable representation property. Specifically, there exists an upper bound
on the representation similarity of the value functions of
two adjacent time steps in a typical DRL setting. However,
through illustrative experiments, we show that the learned
DRL agent may violate this property and lead to a suboptimal policy. Therefore, we propose a simple yet effective
regularizer called Policy Evaluation with Easy Regularization on Representation (PEER), which aims to maintain the
distinguishable representation property via explicit regularization on internal representations. And we provide the
convergence rate guarantee of PEER. Implementing PEER
requires only one line of code. Our experiments demonstrate
that incorporating PEER into DRL can significantly improve
performance and sample efficiency. Comprehensive experiments show that PEER achieves state-of-the-art performance
on all 4 environments on PyBullet, 9 out of 12 tasks on DMControl, and 19 out of 26 games on Atari. To the best of our
knowledge, PEER is the first work to study the inherent representation property of 𝑄-network and its target. Our code
is available at https://sites.google.com/view/peer-cvpr2023/.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) leverages the function approximation abilities of deep neural networks (DNN)
and the credit assignment capabilities of RL to enable agents
to perform complex control tasks using high-dimensional

observations such as image pixels and sensor information
[1, 2, 3, 4]. DNNs are used to parameterize the policy and
value functions, but this requires the removal of irrelevant
and redundant information while retaining pertinent information, which is the task of representation learning. As a result,
representation learning has been the focus of attention for
researchers in the field [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. In this
paper, we investigate the inherent representation properties
of DRL.
The action-value function is a measure of the quality of
taking an action in a given state. In DRL, this function is
approximated by the action-value network or 𝑄-network.
To enhance the training stability of the DRL agent, Mnih
et al. [2] introduced a target network, which computes the
target value with the frozen network parameters. The weights
of a target network are either periodically replicated from
learning 𝑄-network, or exponentially averaged over time
steps. Despite the crucial role played by the target network
in DRL, previous studies[5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24] have not considered the
representation property of the target network. In this work,
we investigate the inherent representation property of the
𝑄-network. Following the commonly used definition of representation of 𝑄-network [17, 25, 26], the 𝑄-network can be
separated into a nonlinear encoder and a linear layer, with the
representation being the output of the nonlinear encoder. By
employing this decomposition, we reformulate the Bellman
equation [27] from the perspective of representation of 𝑄network and its target. We then analyze this formulation and
demonstrate theoretically that a favorable distinguishable
representation property exists between the representation of
𝑄-network and that of its target. Specifically, there exists
an upper bound on the representation similarity of the value
functions of two adjacent time steps in a typical DRL setting,
which differs from previous work.
We subsequently conduct experimental verification to
investigate whether agents can maintain the favorable dis-

20215

