This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Q-DETR: An Efficient Low-Bit Quantized Detection Transformer
Sheng Xu1† , Yanjing Li1† , Mingbao Lin3 , Peng Gao4 , Guodong Guo5 , Jinhu Lü1,2 , Baochang Zhang1,2∗
1
Beihang University 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory 3 Tencent
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 UNIUBI Research, Universal Ubiquitous Co.

Abstract
The recent detection transformer (DETR) has advanced object detection, but its application on resourceconstrained devices requires massive computation and
memory resources. Quantization stands out as a solution
by representing the network in low-bit parameters and operations. However, there is a significant performance drop
when performing low-bit quantized DETR (Q-DETR) with
existing quantization methods. We find that the bottlenecks of Q-DETR come from the query information distortion through our empirical analyses. This paper addresses
this problem based on a distribution rectification distillation
(DRD). We formulate our DRD as a bi-level optimization
problem, which can be derived by generalizing the information bottleneck (IB) principle to the learning of Q-DETR.
At the inner level, we conduct a distribution alignment for
the queries to maximize the self-information entropy. At the
upper level, we introduce a new foreground-aware query
matching scheme to effectively transfer the teacher information to distillation-desired features to minimize the conditional information entropy. Extensive experimental results
show that our method performs much better than prior arts.
For example, the 4-bit Q-DETR can theoretically accelerate DETR with ResNet-50 backbone by 6.6× and achieve
39.4% AP, with only 2.6% performance gaps than its realvalued counterpart on the COCO dataset 1 .

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of natural language processing
(NLP), object detection with transformers (DETR) has been
introduced to train an end-to-end detector via a transformer
encoder-decoder [4]. Unlike early works [22, 31] that often
employ convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and require
post-processing procedures, e.g., non-maximum suppression (NMS), and hand-designed sample selection, DETR
treats object detection as a direct set prediction problem.
† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author: bczhang@buaa.edu.cn
1 Code: https://github.com/SteveTsui/Q-DETR

decoder.0.co_attn.query

decoder.2.co_attn.query

decoder.5.co_attn.query

(a) Real-valued DETR-R50

(b) 4-bit DETR-R50

Figure 1. The histogram of query values q (blue shadow) and corresponding PDF curves (red curve) of Gaussian distribution [17],
w.r.t the cross attention of different decoder layers in (a) realvalued DETR-R50, and (b) 4-bit quantized DETR-R50 (baseline).
Gaussian distribution is generated from the statistical mean and
variance of the query values. The query in quantized DETR-R50
bears information distortion compared with the real-valued one.
Experiments are performed on the VOC dataset [9].

Despite this attractiveness, DETR usually has a tremendous number of parameters and float-pointing operations
(FLOPs). For instance, there are 39.8M parameters taking
up 159MB memory usage and 86G FLOPs in the DETR
model with ResNet-50 backbone [12] (DETR-R50). This
leads to an unacceptable memory and computation consumption during inference, and challenges deployments on
devices with limited supplies of resources.
Therefore, substantial efforts on network compression
have been made towards efficient online inference [7, 33,
43, 44]. Quantization is particularly popular for deploying
on AI chips by representing a network in low-bit formats.
Yet prior post-training quantization (PTQ) for DETR [26]
derives quantized parameters from pre-trained real-valued
models, which often restricts the model performance in a
sub-optimized state due to the lack of fine-tuning on the
training data. In particular, the performance drastically
drops when quantized to ultra-low bits (4-bits or less). Alternatively, quantization-aware training (QAT) [25, 42] performs quantization and fine-tuning on the training dataset

3842

