This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Language-Image Pre-training via Masking
Yanghao Li⇤

Haoqi Fan⇤

Ronghang Hu⇤
⇤

Christoph Feichtenhofer†

Kaiming He†

equal technical contribution, † equal advising

Meta AI, FAIR
https://github.com/facebookresearch/flip
Abstract

1. Introduction
Language-supervised visual pre-training, e.g., CLIP [52],
has been established as a simple yet powerful methodology
for learning representations. Pre-trained CLIP models stand
out for their remarkable versatility: they have strong zeroshot transferability [52]; they demonstrate unprecedented
quality in text-to-image generation (e.g., [53, 55]); the pretrained encoder can improve multimodal and even unimodal
visual tasks. Like the role played by supervised pre-training
a decade ago [40], language-supervised visual pre-training
is new fuel empowering various tasks today.
Unlike classical supervised learning with a pre-defined
label set, natural language provides richer forms of supervision, e.g., on objects, scenes, actions, context, and their relations, at multiple levels of granularity. Due to the complex
nature of vision plus language, large-scale training is essential for the capability of language-supervised models. For
example, the original CLIP models [52] were trained on 400
million data for 32 epochs—which amount to 10,000 ImageNet [16] epochs, taking thousands of GPU-days [52, 36].

73
3.7
zero-shot accuracy (%)

We present Fast Language-Image Pre-training (FLIP), a
simple and more efficient method for training CLIP [52].
Our method randomly masks out and removes a large portion of image patches during training. Masking allows us to
learn from more image-text pairs given the same wall-clock
time and contrast more samples per iteration with similar
memory footprint. It leads to a favorable trade-off between
accuracy and training time. In our experiments on 400 million image-text pairs, FLIP improves both accuracy and
speed over the no-masking baseline. On a large diversity of
downstream tasks, FLIP dominantly outperforms the CLIP
counterparts trained on the same data. Facilitated by the
speedup, we explore the scaling behavior of increasing the
model size, data size, or training length, and report encouraging results and comparisons. We hope that our work will
foster future research on scaling vision-language learning.

speedup

72

71

70

69

mask 0% (our CLIP repro.)
mask 50%
mask 75%

68
0

50

100
150
training time (hours)

200

250

Figure 1. Accuracy vs. training time trade-off. With a high
masking ratio of 50% or 75%, our FLIP method trains faster and
is more accurate than its CLIP counterpart. All entries are benchmarked in 256 TPU-v3 cores. Training is done on LAION-400M
for 6.4, 12.8, or 32 epochs, for each masking ratio. Accuracy is
evaluated by zero-shot transfer on the ImageNet-1K validation set.
The model is ViT-L/16 [20]. More details are in Fig. 3. As the
CLIP baseline takes ⇠2,500 TPU-days training, a speedup of 3.7⇥
can save ⇠1,800 TPU-days.

Even using high-end infrastructures, the wall-clock training
time is still a major bottleneck hindering explorations on
scaling vision-language learning.
We present Fast Language-Image Pre-training (FLIP), a
simple method for efficient CLIP training. Inspired by the
sparse computation of Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [29],
we randomly remove a large portion of image patches during training. This design introduces a trade-off between
“how carefully we look at a sample pair” vs. “how many
sample pairs we can process”. Using masking, we can: (i)
see more sample pairs (i.e., more epochs) under the same
wall-clock training time, and (ii) compare/contrast more
sample pairs at each step (i.e., larger batches) under similar memory footprint. Empirically, the benefits of processing more sample pairs greatly outweigh the degradation of
per-sample encoding, resulting in a favorable trade-off.

23390

