This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DETR with Additional Global Aggregation
for Cross-domain Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Zongheng Tang1,2,3 Yifan Sun2 Si Liu1,3 * Yi Yang4
1Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 Baidu Inc
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University 4 CCAI, Zhejiang University
1

tzhhhh123@buaa.edu.cn sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn liusi@buaa.edu.cn yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a DETR-based method for crossdomain weakly supervised object detection (CDWSOD),
aiming at adapting the detector from source to target domain through weak supervision. We think DETR has strong
potential for CDWSOD due to an insight: the encoder and
the decoder in DETR are both based on the attention mechanism and are thus capable of aggregating semantics across
the entire image. The aggregation results, i.e., imagelevel predictions, can naturally exploit the weak supervision for domain alignment. Such motivated, we propose
DETR with additional Global Aggregation (DETR-GA), a
CDWSOD detector that simultaneously makes “instancelevel + image-level” predictions and utilizes “strong +
weak“ supervisions. The key point of DETR-GA is very
simple: for the encoder / decoder, we respectively add multiple class queries / a foreground query to aggregate the
semantics into image-level predictions. Our query-based
aggregation has two advantages. First, in the encoder, the
weakly-supervised class queries are capable of roughly locating the corresponding positions and excluding the distraction from non-relevant regions. Second, through our
design, the object queries and the foreground query in the
decoder share consensus on the class semantics, therefore
making the strong and weak supervision mutually benefit
each other for domain alignment. Extensive experiments on
four popular cross-domain benchmarks show that DETRGA significantly improves cross-domain detection accuracy
(e.g., 29.0% → 79.4% mAP on PASCAL VOC → Clipartall
dataset) and advances the states of the art.

1. Introduction
The cross-domain problem is a critical challenge for object detection in real-world applications. Concretely, there
is usually a domain gap between the training and testing
* Corresponding author: Si Liu

person dog

transformer
encoder

transformer
decoder
correlated

class query

feature token

foreground query

object query

Figure 1. To exploit the weak supervision, DETR-GA aggregates
the semantic information across the entire image into image-level
predictions. Specifically, DETR-GA adds multiple class queries /
a foreground query into the transformer encoder / decoder, respectively. The foreground query is correlated with the object queries
but has no position embedding. We visualize the attention score
of some queries, e.g., “person“ and “dog”. Despite no position supervision, each class query / the foreground query attends to the
class-specific / foreground regions for semantic aggregation.

data. This domain gap significantly compromises the detection accuracy when the detector trained on the source domain is directly deployed on a novel target domain. To mitigate the domain gap, existing domain adaptation methods
can be categorized into supervised, unsupervised [7,10,39],
and weakly supervised approaches [17, 21, 33, 58]. Among
the three approaches, we are particularly interested in the
weakly supervised one because it requires only image-level
annotations and achieves a good trade-off between the adaptation effect and the annotation cost. Therefore, this paper
challenges the cross-domain weakly supervised object detection (CDWSOD), aiming at adapting the detector from
the source to target domain through weak supervision.
We think the DETR-style detector [3,27,67] has high potential for solving CDWSOD. In contrast to current CDW-

11422

