This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEV-SAN: Accurate BEV 3D Object Detection via Slice Attention Networks
Ming Lu1*
Rongyu Zhang1
Xiaowei Chi1,2*
Jiaming Liu1 *
Zhaoqing Wang3
Yandong Guo4
Shanghang Zhang1†
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
3
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
The University of Sydney
AI2Robotics

1. Introduction
Object detection is an essential computer vision task,
which has wide applications in security, robotics, au* Equal contribution: liujiaming.pku@gmail.com
† Corresponding author: shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Trailer

Bus

Construction vehicle

Bicycle

Barrier

Traffic cone

Pedestrian

Motorcycle

Truck

Car

Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) 3D Object Detection is a crucial multi-view technique for autonomous driving systems.
Recently, plenty of works are proposed, following a similar paradigm consisting of three essential components, i.e.,
camera feature extraction, BEV feature construction, and
task heads. Among the three components, BEV feature construction is BEV-specific compared with 2D tasks. Existing methods aggregate the multi-view camera features to
the flattened grid in order to construct the BEV feature.
However, flattening the BEV space along the height dimension fails to emphasize the informative features of different
heights. For example, the barrier is located at a low height
while the truck is located at a high height. In this paper,
we propose a novel method named BEV Slice Attention Network (BEV-SAN) for exploiting the intrinsic characteristics
of different heights. Instead of flattening the BEV space, we
first sample along the height dimension to build the global
and local BEV slices. Then, the features of BEV slices are
aggregated from the camera features and merged by the attention mechanism. Finally, we fuse the merged local and
global BEV features by a transformer to generate the final
feature map for task heads. The purpose of local BEV slices
is to emphasize informative heights. In order to find them,
we further propose a LiDAR-guided sampling strategy to
leverage the statistical distribution of LiDAR to determine
the heights of local slices. Compared with uniform sampling, LiDAR-guided sampling can determine more informative heights. We conduct detailed experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of BEV-SAN. Code will be released.

Height

Abstract

Figure 1. The statistics of 3D bounding boxes along the height
dimension.

tonomous driving, etc. With the development of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), a huge amount of methods are proposed for 2D [7–9, 18, 25, 26] and 3D [5, 24, 27, 33] object
detection. As there are too many methods, we focus our
introduction on the cutting-edge multi-view camera-based
3D object detection, which has gained increasing attention
from the community. The Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) is a unified representation of the surrounding scene and is suitable
for autonomous driving tasks. Therefore, plenty of 3D object detection methods [3,11,12,14–17,30,32] are proposed
for multi-view BEV perception recently.
Although the model architectures of those methods are
different, they commonly follow a similar paradigm consisting of three essential components including camera feature
extraction, BEV feature extraction, and task heads. Among
the three components, BEV feature construction is BEVspecific compared with 2D tasks. [16] presents a new framework that learns a unified BEV representation with spatiotemporal transformers. They first lift each query on the flattened BEV grid to a pillar-like query and then project the

17461

