This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-driven Feature Tracking for Event Cameras
Nico Messikommer*

Carter Fang∗

Mathias Gehrig

Davide Scaramuzza

Robotics and Perception Group, University of Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Because of their high temporal resolution, increased resilience to motion blur, and very sparse output, event cameras have been shown to be ideal for low-latency and lowbandwidth feature tracking, even in challenging scenarios.
Existing feature tracking methods for event cameras are
either handcrafted or derived from first principles but require extensive parameter tuning, are sensitive to noise,
and do not generalize to different scenarios due to unmodeled effects. To tackle these deficiencies, we introduce the
first data-driven feature tracker for event cameras, which
leverages low-latency events to track features detected in
a grayscale frame. We achieve robust performance via a
novel frame attention module, which shares information
across feature tracks. By directly transferring zero-shot
from synthetic to real data, our data-driven tracker outperforms existing approaches in relative feature age by up to
120 % while also achieving the lowest latency. This performance gap is further increased to 130 % by adapting our
tracker to real data with a novel self-supervision strategy.
Multimedia Material A video is available at https:
//youtu.be/dtkXvNXcWRY and code at https://
github.com/uzh-rpg/deep_ev_tracker

1. Introduction
Despite many successful implementations in the real
world, existing feature trackers are still primarily constrained by the hardware performance of standard cameras.
To begin with, standard cameras suffer from a bandwidthlatency trade-off, which noticeably limits their performance
under rapid movements: at low frame rates, they have
minimal bandwidth but at the expense of an increased latency; furthermore, low frame rates lead to large appearance
changes between consecutive frames, significantly increasing the difficulty of tracking features. At high frame rates,
the latency is reduced at the expense of an increased bandwidth overhead and power consumption for downstream
* equal contribution.

Figure 1. Our method leverages the high-temporal resolution of
events to provide stable feature tracks in high-speed motion in
which standard frames suffer from motion blur. To achieve this,
we propose a novel frame attention module that combines the information across feature tracks.

systems. Another problem with standard cameras is motion blur, which is prominent in high-speed low-lit scenarios, see Fig. 1. These issues are becoming more prominent
with the current commodification of AR/VR devices.
Event cameras have been shown to be an ideal complement to standard cameras to address the bandwidth-latency
trade-off [16, 17]. Event cameras are bio-inspired vision
sensors that asynchronously trigger information whenever
the brightness change at an individual pixel exceeds a predefined threshold. Due to this unique working principle,
event cameras output sparse event streams with a temporal
resolution in the order of microseconds and feature a highdynamic range and low power consumption. Since events
are primarily triggered in correspondence of edges, event
cameras present minimal bandwidth. This makes them ideal
for overcoming the shortcomings of standard cameras.
Existing feature trackers for event cameras have shown

5642

