This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RMLVQA: A Margin Loss Approach For Visual Question Answering with
Language Biases
Abhipsa Basu

Sravanti Addepalli

abhipsabasu@iisc.ac.in

sravantia@iisc.ac.in

R. Venkatesh Babu
venky@iisc.ac.in

Vision and AI Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Abstract
Visual Question Answering models have been shown to
suffer from language biases, where the model learns a correlation between the question and the answer, ignoring the
image. While early works attempted to use question-only
models or data augmentations to reduce this bias, we propose an adaptive margin loss approach having two components. The first component considers the frequency of
answers within a question type in the training data, which
addresses the concern of the class-imbalance causing the
language biases. However, it does not take into account
the answering difficulty of the samples, which impacts their
learning. We address this through the second component,
where instance-specific margins are learnt, allowing the
model to distinguish between samples of varying complexity. We introduce a bias-injecting component to our model,
and compute the instance-specific margins from the confidence of this component. We combine these with the estimated margins to consider both answer-frequency and taskcomplexity in the training loss. We show that, while the margin loss is effective for out-of-distribution (ood) data, the
bias-injecting component is essential for generalising to indistribution (id) data. Our proposed approach, Robust Margin Loss for Visual Question Answering (RMLVQA) 1 improves upon the existing state-of-the-art results when compared to augmentation-free methods on benchmark VQA
datasets suffering from language biases, while maintaining
competitive performance on id data, making our method the
most robust one among all comparable methods.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) lies at the intersection
of computer vision and natural language processing. It is
1 Code available at https://github.com/val-iisc/RMLVQA

the task of answering a question based on a given image.
VQA networks need to combine knowledge from both visual scene and the question to predict the answer. These
systems have numerous applications such as aiding the visually impaired in understanding their surroundings, image
retrieval systems in e-commerce, and robotics.
With the success of deep learning, research in VQA has
made great strides in recent years [3, 5, 16]. However, studies have shown that deep networks may learn correlations
between the question and answer alone, ignoring the image
modality [3, 21, 36]. They fail to do multimodal reasoning,
specifically, if there is a class imbalance in the answer distributions of the training and test sets. For example, if most of
the questions starting with “What color..?” are paired with
the answer “red” in the training data, the model memorizes
this trend to answer “red” for all color based questions in
the test set, irrespective of the image.
One solution to this problem is to perform data augmentations in various ways [1,4,11,15,27,36,42,43,46]. These
methods outperform most other debiasing techniques in the
literature. However, augmentation strategies are dependent
on the dataset in question and the type of biases observed,
which makes the process manual and tedious. Another extensively explored solution is to learn the bias in the dataset
separately using a question-only branch [9, 12, 18] and explicitly removing the learnt bias from the base model.
Margin losses have been widely used for a number
of tasks. Cao et al. [10] address the problem of long
tailed recognition through an adaptive margin loss, ensuring
higher cosine margin penalty for the tail classes and lower
penalty for other classes. A similar adaptive cosine margin penalty has been applied to mitigate the language bias
problem in VQA by a previous work [17]. Margin losses
have been widely used in deep face recognition as well,
where it is desired that the features of two images of the
same person should be as similar as possible, whereas those
of two different people should be far apart. Margin losses

11671

