This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-Aware Relative Object Queries to Unify Video Instance and Panoptic
Segmentation
Anwesa Choudhuri, Girish Chowdhary, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{anwesac2,girishc,aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Object queries have emerged as a powerful abstraction
to generically represent object proposals. However, their
use for temporal tasks like video segmentation poses two
questions: 1) How to process frames sequentially and propagate object queries seamlessly across frames. Using independent object queries per frame doesn’t permit tracking,
and requires post-processing. 2) How to produce temporally consistent, yet expressive object queries that model
both appearance and position changes. Using the entire
video at once doesn’t capture position changes and doesn’t
scale to long videos. As one answer to both questions we
propose ‘context-aware relative object queries’, which are
continuously propagated frame-by-frame. They seamlessly
track objects and deal with occlusion and re-appearance of
objects, without post-processing. Further, we find contextaware relative object queries better capture position changes
of objects in motion. We evaluate the proposed approach
across three challenging tasks: video instance segmentation,
multi-object tracking and segmentation, and video panoptic
segmentation. Using the same approach and architecture,
we match or surpass state-of-the art results on the diverse
and challenging OVIS, Youtube-VIS, Cityscapes-VPS, MOTS
2020 and KITTI-MOTS data.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) [56] and Multi-Object
Tracking and Segmentation (MOTS) combines segmentation
and tracking of object instances across frames of a given
video, whereas video panoptic segmentation (VPS) requires
to also pixel-wise categorize the entire video semantically.
These are challenging tasks because objects are occasionally partly or entirely occluded, because the appearance and
position of objects change over time, and because objects
may leave the camera’s field of view only to re-appear at a
later time. Addressing these challenges to obtain an accurate
method for the aforementioned tasks that works online is
important in fields like video editing, autonomous systems,

and augmented as well as virtual reality, among others.
Classically, VIS or MOTS treat every frame or clip in a
video independently and associate the predictions temporally
via a post-processing step [1, 3, 4, 6, 12, 19, 35, 41, 50, 56, 57].
Many of these approaches are based on object proposal generation, that are used in classical detection methods [16, 43].
For image detection and segmentation, recently, queryvectors have been shown to encode accurate object proposals [7, 9, 10]. These query-vector-based object proposals are
more flexible than classical object proposals because they
are not axis-aligned but rather feature-vector based. Using
these accurate query vectors for images, recent methods on
VIS [22, 52] adopt the classical method of operating frameby-frame independently, followed by a post-processing step
for associating the query vectors temporally based on their
similarity. It remains unclear how the query-vector-based
object proposals can be seamlessly extended to the temporal
domain.
Some recent transformer-based works [8, 25, 49, 51] use
global object queries to process entire videos at once offline,
but these methods fail to scale to long videos. However,
intuitively, offline approaches should be more accurate than
online methods since they operate with a much larger temporal context. Surprisingly, this is not the case. The best
methods on VIS [18,22,52] produce query vectors frame-byframe independently, raising the question why global query
vectors fail to accurately represent objects spatio-temporally.
We study this carefully and observe that the query vectors are
often too reliant on the static spatial positions of objects in a
few frames. They hence fail to encode the position changes
well. This over-reliance of query vectors on spatial positions
has not been observed before in the context of video segmentation. How to address this remains an open question.
It also remains unclear how the query-vector-based object
proposals can be extended to the temporal domain, while
keeping the processing of frames sequential.
In a first attempt to sequentially propagate object queries,
the problem of multi-object tracking was studied [38, 44,
58]. These works use separate, distinct queries to represent
existing object tracks and new objects. New object queries

6377

