This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lookahead Diffusion Probabilistic Models for Refining Mean Estimation
Guoqiang Zhang
University of Technology Sydney

Kenta Niwa
NTT Communication Science Laboratories

guoqiang.zhang@uts.edu.au

kenta.niwa.bk@hco.ntt.co.jp

W. Bastiaan Kleijn
Victoria University of Wellington
bastiaan.kleijn@vuw.ac.nz

Abstract
We propose lookahead diffusion probabilistic models
(LA-DPMs) to exploit the correlation in the outputs of the
deep neural networks (DNNs) over subsequent timesteps in
diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) to refine the mean
estimation of the conditional Gaussian distributions in the
backward process. A typical DPM first obtains an estimate
of the original data sample x by feeding the most recent
state z i and index i into the DNN model and then computes
the mean vector of the conditional Gaussian distribution for
z i 1 . We propose to calculate a more accurate estimate for
x by performing extrapolation on the two estimates of x
that are obtained by feeding (z i+1 , i+1) and (z i , i) into the
DNN model. The extrapolation can be easily integrated into
the backward process of existing DPMs by introducing an
additional connection over two consecutive timesteps, and
fine-tuning is not required. Extensive experiments showed
that plugging in the additional connection into DDPM,
DDIM, DEIS, S-PNDM, and high-order DPM-Solvers leads
to a significant performance gain in terms of Fréchet inception distance (FID) score. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/guoqiang-zhangx/LA-DPM .

1. Introduction
As one type of generative model, diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have made significant progress in recent
years. The pioneering work [17] applied non-equilibrium
statistical physics to estimating probabilistic data distributions. In doing so, a Markov forward diffusion process is
constructed by systematically inserting additive noise in the
data until essentially only noise remains. The data distribution is then gradually restored by a reverse diffusion process starting from a simple parametric distribution. The
main advantage of DPMs over classic tractable models (e.g.,
HMMs, GMMs, see [5]) is that they can accurately model

both the high and low likelihood regions of the data distribution via the progressive estimation of noise-perturbed data
distributions. In comparison to generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1, 8, 9], DPMs exhibit more stable training
dynamics by avoiding adversarial learning.
The work [10] focuses on a particular type of DPM,
namely a denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM),
and shows that after a sufficient number of timesteps (or
equivalently iterations) in the backward process, DDPM
can achieve state-of-the-art performance in image generation tasks by the proper design of a weighted variational
bound (VB). In addition, by inspection of the weighted VB,
it is found that the method score matching with Langevin dynamics (SMLD) [19, 20] can also be viewed as a DPM. The
recent work [21] interprets DDPM and SMLD as search of
approximate solutions to stochastic differential equations.
See also [15] and [7] for improved DPMs that lead to better
log-likelihood scores and sampling qualities, respectively.
One inconvenience of a standard DPM is that the associated deep neural network (DNN) needs to run for a sufficient number of timesteps to achieve high sampling quality while the generative model of a GAN only needs to run
once. This has led to an increasing research focus on reducing the number of reverse timesteps in DPMs while retaining a satisfactory sampling quality (see [22] for a detailed overview). Song et al. proposed the so-called denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) [18] as an extension of DDPM from a non-Markov forward process point of
view. The work [11] proposed to learn a denoising schedule
in the reverse process by explicitly modeling the signal-tonoise ratio in the image generation task. [6] and [12] considered effective audio generation by proposing different noise
scheduling schemes in DPMs. Differently from the above
methods, the recent works [4] and [3] proposed to estimate
the optimal variance of the backward conditional Gaussian
distribution to improve sampling qualities for both small
and large numbers of timesteps.

1421

