This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decomposed Cross-modal Distillation for RGB-based Temporal Action Detection
Pilhyeon Lee1

Taeoh Kim2
1

Minho Shim2

Yonsei University

2

Dongyoon Wee2

Hyeran Byun1 *

Naver Cloud, AI Tech.

B lph1114@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Temporal action detection aims to predict the time intervals and the classes of action instances in the video. Despite
the promising performance, existing two-stream models exhibit slow inference speed due to their reliance on computationally expensive optical flow. In this paper, we introduce a decomposed cross-modal distillation framework to
build a strong RGB-based detector by transferring knowledge of the motion modality. Specifically, instead of direct
distillation, we propose to separately learn RGB and motion
representations, which are in turn combined to perform action localization. The dual-branch design and the asymmetric training objectives enable effective motion knowledge
transfer while preserving RGB information intact. In addition, we introduce a local attentive fusion to better exploit
the multimodal complementarity. It is designed to preserve
the local discriminability of the features that is important
for action localization. Extensive experiments on the benchmarks verify the effectiveness of the proposed method in enhancing RGB-based action detectors. Notably, our framework is agnostic to backbones and detection heads, bringing consistent gains across different model combinations.

1. Introduction
With the popularization of mobile devices, a significant
number of videos are generated, uploaded, and shared every single day through various online platforms such as
YouTube and TikTok. Accordingly, there arises the importance of automatically analyzing untrimmed videos. As one
of the major tasks, temporal action detection (or localization) [56] has attracted much attention, whose goal is to find
the time intervals of action instances in the given video. In
recent years, a lot of efforts have been devoted to improving
the action detection performance [28–30, 36, 37, 74, 79, 84].
Most existing action detectors take as input two-stream
data consisting of RGB frames and motion cues, e.g., optical flow [21, 66, 78]. Indeed, it is widely known that differ-

Detector

Optical flow

Detector

Distillation

Distillation

Optical flow

Detector
Detector
Detector

RGB frames

RGB frames

(a) Conventional distillation

(b) Decomposed distillation (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between conventional distillation and ours.
Average mAP (%)
RGB+OF RGB
∆

Framework

Method

Anchor-based

G-TAD [74]

41.5

26.9

−14.6

Anchor-free

AFSD [34]
Actionformer [80]

52.4
62.2

43.3
55.5

−9.1
−6.7

DETR-like

TadTR [42]

56.7

46.0

−10.7

Proposal-free

TAGS [47]

52.8

47.9

−4.9

Table 1. Impact of motion modality. We measure the average mAP
under the IoU thresholds of [0.3:0.7:0.1] on THUMOS’14.

ent modalities provide complementary information [6, 24,
58, 69]. To examine how much two-stream action detectors rely on the motion modality, we conduct an ablative
study using a set of representative models1 . As shown in
Table 1, regardless of the framework types, all the models experience sharp performance drops when the motion
modality is absent, probably due to the static bias of video
models [11, 27, 31, 32]. This indicates that explicit motion
cues are essential for accurate action detection.
However, two-stream action detectors impose a cycle of
dilemmas for real-world applications due to the heavy computational cost of motion modality. For instance, the most
popular form of motion cues for action detection, TV-L1
optical flow [66], is not real-time, taking 1.8 minutes to
process a 1-min 224 × 224 video of 30 fps on a single
GPU [58]. Although cheaper motion clues such as temporal
gradient [63, 70, 85] can be alternatives, two-stream models
still exhibit inefficiency at inference by doubling the net1 Each model is reproduced by its official codebase.

* Corresponding author

2373

