This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the effectiveness of partial variance reduction in federated learning with
heterogeneous data
Bo Li⇤

Mikkel N. Schmidt
Tommy S. Alstrøm
Technical University of Denmark

Sebastian U. Stich
CISPA‡

{blia, mnsc, tsal}@dtu.dk

Abstract

stich@cispa.de

Client
1

Data heterogeneity across clients is a key challenge in
federated learning. Prior works address this by either
aligning client and server models or using control variates to correct client model drift. Although these methods
achieve fast convergence in convex or simple non-convex
problems, the performance in over-parameterized models
such as deep neural networks is lacking. In this paper,
we first revisit the widely used FedAvg algorithm in a deep
neural network to understand how data heterogeneity influences the gradient updates across the neural network
layers. We observe that while the feature extraction layers are learned efficiently by FedAvg, the substantial diversity of the final classification layers across clients impedes
the performance. Motivated by this, we propose to correct
model drift by variance reduction only on the final layers.
We demonstrate that this significantly outperforms existing
benchmarks at a similar or lower communication cost. We
furthermore provide proof for the convergence rate of our
algorithm.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is emerging as an essential distributed learning paradigm in large-scale machine learning.
Unlike in traditional machine learning, where a model is
trained on the collected centralized data, in federated learning, each client (e.g. phones and institutions) learns a model
with its local data. A centralized model is then obtained by
aggregating the updates from all participating clients without ever requesting the client data, thereby ensuring a certain level of user privacy [13, 17]. Such an algorithm is especially beneficial for tasks where the data is sensitive, e.g.
chemical hazards detection and diseases diagnosis [33].
Two primary challenges in federated learning are i) han⇤ Work done while at CISPA

‡ CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

3964

2

N

.....

Server
Feature extractor
Classifier
Variance reduction

Figure 1. Our proposed FedPVR framework with the performance
(communicated parameters per round client()server). Smaller ↵
corresponds to higher data heterogeneity. Our method achieves a
better speedup than existing approaches by transmitting a slightly
larger number of parameters than FedAvg.

dling data heterogeneity across clients [13] and ii) limiting the cost of communication between the server and
clients [10]. In this setting, FedAvg [17] is one of the
most widely used schemes: A server broadcasts its model to
clients, which then update the model using their local data
in a series of steps before sending their individual model to
the server, where the models are aggregated by averaging
the parameters. The process is repeated for multiple communication rounds. While it has shown great success in
many applications, it tends to achieve subpar accuracy and
convergence when the data are heterogeneous [14, 24, 31].
The slow and sometimes unstable convergence of FedAvg can be caused by client drift [14] brought on by data
heterogeneity. Numerous efforts have been made to improve FedAvg’s performance in this setting. Prior works
attempt to mitigate client drift by penalizing the distance
between a client model and the server model [20, 31] or
by performing variance reduction techniques while updating client models [1, 14, 32]. These works demonstrate
fast convergence on convex problems or for simple neural networks; however, their performance on deep neural

