This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JAWS: Just A Wild Shot for Cinematic Transfer in Neural Radiance Fields
Xi Wang1 ,* Robin Courant1,2 ,* Jinglei Shi3 , Eric Marchand1 , Marc Christie1
1
Inria, IRISA, CNRS, Univ. Rennes, 2 LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris, 3 VCIP, CS, Nankai Univ.
xi.wang@inria.fr, robin.courant@polytechnique.edu, jinglei.shi@nankai.edu.cn
{eric.marchand, marc.christie}@irisa.fr

Abstract
This paper presents JAWS, an optimization-driven approach that achieves the robust transfer of visual cinematic
features from a reference in-the-wild video clip to a newly
generated clip. To this end, we rely on an implicit-neuralrepresentation (INR) in a way to compute a clip that shares
the same cinematic features as the reference clip. We propose a general formulation of a camera optimization problem in an INR that computes extrinsic and intrinsic camera
parameters as well as timing. By leveraging the differentiability of neural representations, we can back-propagate
our designed cinematic losses measured on proxy estimators through a NeRF network to the proposed cinematic
parameters directly. We also introduce specific enhancements such as guidance maps to improve the overall quality and efficiency. Results display the capacity of our system to replicate well known camera sequences from movies,
adapting the framing, camera parameters and timing of the
generated video clip to maximize the similarity with the reference clip.

1. Introduction
Almost all film directors and visual artists follow the
paradigm of watch-and-learn by drawing inspiration from
others visual works. Imitating masterpieces (also known
as visual homage) in their visual composition, camera motion or character action is a popular way to pay tribute to
and honor the source work which influenced them. This
subtly draws a faint, yet distinctive clue through the development of the whole film history. Examples are commonplace: across the dizzy effect of dolly-zoom in Vertigo to
the scary scene in Jaws (see Fig. 1); or from the old school
Bruce Lee’s kung-fu films to blockbusters such as Kill Bill
and Matrix series. The cinematic knowledge encompassed
in reference sequences is therefore carried out and inherited
through these visual homages, and have even been adapted
* Equal contribution. Corresponding to jinglei.shi@nankai.edu.cn.

Figure 1. This illustration displays the capacity of our proposed
method to transfer the cinematic motions from the in-the-wild famous film clip Jaws (bottom) to another context, replicating and
adapting the dolly-zoom effect (a combined translation plus field
of view change in opposite directions, causing distinctive motions
on background and foreground contents).

to more modern visual media such as digital animation or
video games. Audiences obviously acknowledge the strong
references between the epic Western The good, the bad and
the ugly of 1966 and the 2010 Red Dead Redemption.
The creation of such visual homages in real or virtual environments yet remains a challenging endeavor that requires
more than just replicating a camera angle, motion or visual
compositions. Such a cinematic transfer task is successful
only if it can achieve a similar visual perception (look-andfeel) between the reference and homage clip, for example
in terms of visual composition (i.e. how visual elements are
framed on screen), perceived motion (i.e. how elements and
scene move through the whole sequence), but also, camera
focus, image depth, actions occurring or scene lighting.
Inspired by the aforementioned watch-and-learn
paradigm, we propose to address the cinematic transfer
problem by focusing on motion characteristics, i.e. solving
a cinematic motion transfer problem.

16933

