This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Sparse Convolutional Networks with Global Context Enhancement for
Faster Object Detection on Drone Images

1

Bowei Du1,2† , Yecheng Huang1,2† , Jiaxin Chen2 , Di Huang1,2,3∗
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{boweidu, ychuang, jiaxinchen, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Object detection on drone images with low-latency is an
important but challenging task on the resource-constrained
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platform. This paper investigates optimizing the detection head based on the sparse
convolution, which proves effective in balancing the accuracy and efficiency. Nevertheless, it suffers from inadequate
integration of contextual information of tiny objects as well
as clumsy control of the mask ratio in the presence of foreground with varying scales. To address the issues above, we
propose a novel global context-enhanced adaptive sparse
convolutional network (CEASC). It first develops a contextenhanced group normalization (CE-GN) layer, by replacing
the statistics based on sparsely sampled features with the
global contextual ones, and then designs an adaptive multilayer masking strategy to generate optimal mask ratios at
distinct scales for compact foreground coverage, promoting
both the accuracy and efficiency. Extensive experimental results on two major benchmarks, i.e. VisDrone and UAVDT,
demonstrate that CEASC remarkably reduces the GFLOPs
and accelerates the inference procedure when plugging into
the typical state-of-the-art detection frameworks (e.g. RetinaNet and GFL V1) with competitive performance. Code is
available at https://github.com/Cuogeihong/CEASC.

1. Introduction
Recent progress of deep neural networks (e.g. CNNs and
Transformers) has significantly boosted the performance of
object detection on public benchmarks such as COCO [23].
By contrast, building detectors for unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) platforms currently remains a challenging task. On
the one hand, existing studies are keen on designing complicated models to reach high accuracies of tiny objects on
† indicates equal contribution.
∗ refers to the corresponding author.

COCO

VisDrone

(a)
VisDrone

UAVDT

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of foreground proportions on the COCO
and drone imagery databases; and (b) visualization of foregrounds
(highlighted in yellow) on samples from VisDrone and UAVDT.

high-resolution drone imagery, which are computationally
consuming. On the other hand, the hardware equipped with
UAVs is often resource-constrained, raising an urgent demand in lightweight deployed models for fast inference and
low latency.
To deal with the dilemma of balancing the accuracy and
efficiency, a number of efforts are made, mainly on general
object detection, which basically concentrate on reducing

13435

