This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Foundation Model Drives Weakly Incremental Learning for Semantic
Segmentation
Chaohui Yu1 ,

Qiang Zhou1 ,

Jingliang Li2 , Jianlong Yuan1 , Zhibin Wang1 , Fan Wang1
1
Alibaba Group
2
University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
{huakun.ych,jianchong.zq,gongyuan.yjl,zhibin.waz,fan.w}@alibaba-inc.com
框架区别

Ima
Y t 1 [ Ct
<latexit sha1_base64="xvJmIIEAPIcDqbL6LREB13LnQvA=">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</latexit>

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision and has witnessed great progress using deep
learning in the past few years. It aims at assigning each
pixel a category label. Modern supervised semantic segmentation methods [12, 14] are usually based on published
large-scale segmentation datasets with pixel annotations.
Despite the promising results, one model pre-trained on one

Cls.
Loss
Image
(a) WILSS

Step t
“Horse”

Modern incremental learning for semantic segmentation
methods usually learn new categories based on dense annotations. Although achieve promising results, pixel-by-pixel
labeling is costly and time-consuming. Weakly incremental learning for semantic segmentation (WILSS) is a novel
and attractive task, which aims at learning to segment new
classes from cheap and widely available image-level labels.
Despite the comparable results, the image-level labels can
not provide details to locate each segment, which limits the
performance of WILSS. This inspires us to think how to improve and effectively utilize the supervision of new classes
given image-level labels while avoiding forgetting old ones.
In this work, we propose a novel and data-efficient framework for WILSS, named FMWISS. Specifically, we propose
pre-training based co-segmentation to distill the knowledge of complementary foundation models for generating
dense pseudo labels. We further optimize the noisy pseudo
masks with a teacher-student architecture, where a plugin teacher is optimized with a proposed dense contrastive
loss. Moreover, we introduce memory-based copy-paste
augmentation to improve the catastrophic forgetting problem of old classes. Extensive experiments on Pascal VOC
and COCO datasets demonstrate the superior performance
of our framework, e.g., FMWISS achieves 70.7% and 73.3%
in the 15-5 VOC setting, outperforming the state-of-the-art
method by 3.4% and 6.1%, respectively.

Step t

“a photo of Horse”
Seg.
Loss

Foundation
Models

Image
(b) FMWISS (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of the major difference of pipeline between
previous WILSS work and FMWISS. Given a model pre-trained
on old classes with pixel-level labels (Y t−1 ), previous work [8]
learn new classes (e.g., horse) via image-level labels (C t ), while
FMWISS improves and effectively utilizes the supervision from
complementary foundation models.

dataset is prone to easily forget learned knowledge when being retrained on another dataset with new classes. This phenomenon is known as catastrophic forgetting [37], which is
caused by large changes of model parameters to model new
samples with novel categories without accessing old samples.
A promising approach to solve such catastrophic forgetting problem is called incremental learning. Many
methods have been proposed to solve image classification
task [7, 10, 17, 25, 28, 33, 41, 44, 46, 49, 50]. Recently, a
few methods have been presented to address incremental
learning for semantic segmentation (ILSS) task, where only
new classes of training samples of the current step are labeled with pixel annotations and old classes of the previous step are labeled as background. Modern ILSS methods
can be classified into two categories: regularization-based
and replay-based. Regularization-based methods [9, 18, 39]
focus on distilling knowledge, e.g., output probability, intermedia features, from pre-trained model of previous step.
Replay-based methods [36] propose to store the information
of previous old classes or web-crawled images and replay
for new training steps. However, a key barrier to further develop these methods is the requirement for pixel-level annotations for new classes. Very recently, WILSON [8] first
proposes a new task, weakly incremental learning for semantic segmentation (WILSS), to incrementally update the
model from image-level labels for new classes. Despite the
comparable results, the image-level labels can not provide

23685

