This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConStruct-VL: Data-Free Continual Structured VL Concepts Learning*
James Seale Smith†1,2 Paola Cascante-Bonilla1,3 Assaf Arbelle4
Donghyun Kim1,4 Rameswar Panda1,4 David Cox1,4 Diyi Yang5
Zsolt Kira2 Rogerio Feris1,4 Leonid Karlinsky†1,4
1

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
4
IBM Research 5 Stanford University

1. Introduction
Recently, large Vision-and-Language (VL) models
achieved great advances in zero-shot learning [4, 16, 16, 19,
23, 25, 40, 51, 58]. Pre-trained on hundreds of millions [40]
or billions [45] of image-and-text pairs collected from the
* This work is supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) Contract No. FA8750-19-C-1001. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of DARPA.
† Equal contribution
1 Our code is publicly available at https : / / github . com /
jamessealesmith/ConStruct-VL

Rice University

Continual Learning of
Structured V&L Concepts

Efficient access to past
models with Layered
LoRA (LaLo) architecture

Abstract
Recently, large-scale pre-trained Vision-and-Language
(VL) foundation models have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in many zero-shot downstream tasks, achieving
competitive results for recognizing objects defined by as
little as short text prompts. However, it has also been
shown that VL models are still brittle in Structured VL
Concept (SVLC) reasoning, such as the ability to recognize
object attributes, states, and inter-object relations. This
leads to reasoning mistakes, which need to be corrected
as they occur by teaching VL models the missing SVLC
skills; often this must be done using private data where
the issue was found, which naturally leads to a data-free
continual (no task-id) VL learning setting. In this work,
we introduce the first Continual Data-Free Structured VL
Concepts Learning (ConStruct-VL) benchmark1 and show
it is challenging for many existing data-free CL strategies.
We, therefore, propose a data-free method comprised of a
new approach of Adversarial Pseudo-Replay (APR) which
generates adversarial reminders of past tasks from past task
models. To use this method efficiently, we also propose a
continual parameter-efficient Layered-LoRA (LaLo) neural
architecture allowing no-memory-cost access to all past
models at train time. We show this approach outperforms
all data-free methods by as much as ∼ 7% while even
matching some levels of experience-replay (prohibitive for
applications where data-privacy must be preserved).

3

Understanding Spatial relations

Understanding Colors

Reminding using
Adversarial PseudoReplay (APR)

Understanding Action relations

Understanding Object states

…
Figure 1. Illustration for the Continual Data-Free Structured
VL Concepts Learning (ConStruct-VL). Structured VL Concept
(SVLC) understanding skills are added / refined over time, with
Adversarial Pseudo-Replay (APR) effectively countering catastrophic forgetting using our Layered-LoRA (LaLo) architecture’s
ability of efficient no-memory-cost access to past task models.

web, these VL models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in understanding (recognizing [16, 40], detecting
[63], segmenting [57], etc.) objects appearing in images or
videos [39], thus moving beyond the previous paradigm of
fixed object classes to open-vocabulary models.
Despite these great advances, several recent works [52,
67] have found VL models to be brittle with respect to understanding Structured VL Concepts (SVLCs) - non-object
textual content such as object attributes, states, inter-object
relations (e.g. spatial, interaction, etc.), and more. Naturally, it is important to alleviate these shortcomings, as
this lack of understanding of SVLCs can lead to embarrassing errors on the VL model’s part for many applications,
such as analysis of multi-modal social networks data, multimodal chat, multi-modal document analysis, and more. Importantly, in most of these applications: (i) different errors
made by the model surface sequentially in the course of
time, each time identifying another SVLC ‘skill’ missing
in the model; (ii) typically, to fix the errors, one would attempt additional fine-tuning of the model on a data collected
from the source on which the errors were observed (hoping
to avoid catastrophic forgetting of the previous model im-

14994

