This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEV-Guided Multi-Modality Fusion for Driving Perception
Yunze Man
UIUC

Liang-Yan Gui
UIUC

Yu-Xiong Wang
UIUC

yunzem2@illinois.edu

lgui@illinois.edu

yxw@illinois.edu

Abstract
Integrating multiple sensors and addressing diverse
tasks in an end-to-end algorithm are challenging yet critical topics for autonomous driving. To this end, we introduce BEVGuide, a novel Bird’s Eye-View (BEV) representation learning framework, representing the first attempt
to unify a wide range of sensors under direct BEV guidance in an end-to-end fashion. Our architecture accepts input from a diverse sensor pool, including but not limited
to Camera, Lidar and Radar sensors, and extracts BEV
feature embeddings using a versatile and general transformer backbone. We design a BEV-guided multi-sensor
attention block to take queries from BEV embeddings and
learn the BEV representation from sensor-specific features.
BEVGuide is efficient due to its lightweight backbone design and highly flexible as it supports almost any input sensor configurations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our framework achieves exceptional performance in BEV
perception tasks with a diverse sensor set. Project page is
at https://yunzeman.github.io/BEVGuide.

1. Introduction
The recent research in Bird’s Eye-View (BEV) perception and multi-sensor fusion has stimulated rapid progress
for autonomous driving. The BEV coordinates naturally
unify various downstream object-level and scene-level perception tasks, while joint learning with multiple sensors
minimizes uncertainty, resulting in more robust and accurate predictions. However, existing work still exhibits fundamental limitations. On the one hand, fusion strategies
often necessitate explicit space transformations, which can
be ill-posed and prone to errors. On the other hand, existing
techniques utilizing BEV representations rely on ad-hoc designs and support a limited set of sensors (i.e., cameras and
Lidar). These constraints impede the evolution of a more
general and flexible multi-sensor architecture for BEV 3D
perception, which inspires the design of our work.
More specifically, as different sensors always lie in different coordinate systems, prior approaches usually transform features of each sensor into the same space prior to

Lidar

Camera

Radar

Query sensors in parallel

Tasks: BEV Segmentation
Velocity Estimation, etc.

BEV
Embeddings

Decoder

BEV-Guided Sensor Fusion

Figure 1. BEVGuide takes input from a sensor combination
and learns BEV feature representation using a portable and general BEV-guided multi-sensor attention module. In principle,
BEVGuide is able to take a wide variety of sensors and perform
any BEV perception task.

fusion. For example, some work prioritizes one sensor over
another [1, 42, 43]. However, such fusion architectures tend
to be inflexible and heavily reliant on the presence of the
primary sensor – should the primary sensor be unavailable
or malfunction, the entire pipeline collapses. Alternatively,
other work transforms all sensors into the same space (3D
or BEV space) using provided or estimated geometric constraints [10, 22, 25]. Such methods usually require an explicit depth estimation from camera images, which is susceptible to errors due to the ill-posed nature of the image
modality. Moreover, errors that arise during the transformation process may propagate into subsequent feature fusion stages, ultimately impacting downstream tasks. Our
approach seeks to streamline this process by employing the
BEV space to directly guide the fusion of multiple sensor
feature maps within their native spaces.
Simultaneously, in addition to camera and Lidar sensors
which bring about rich semantic information and 3D features respectively, we emphasize the integration of Radar
sensors, which deliver unique velocity information and robust signals in extreme weather conditions but have received considerably less attention in research compared
with other sensing modalities. Among the limited literature
that involves Radar learning, some work focuses on utilizing the velocity measurement for prediction [39, 45], while

21960

