This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCPNet: Semantic Scene Completion on Point Cloud
Zhaoyang Xia1 , Youquan Liu1 , Xin Li2 , Xinge Zhu3 , Yuexin Ma4 ,
Yikang Li1 , Yuenan Hou1 †, and Yu Qiao1
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 East China Normal University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 ShanghaiTech University
1
{houyuenan, liyikang, qiaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn
Abstract
Training deep models for semantic scene completion
(SSC) is challenging due to the sparse and incomplete input, a large quantity of objects of diverse scales as well as
the inherent label noise for moving objects. To address the
above-mentioned problems, we propose the following three
solutions: 1) Redesigning the completion sub-network. We
design a novel completion sub-network, which consists of
several Multi-Path Blocks (MPBs) to aggregate multi-scale
features and is free from the lossy downsampling operations. 2) Distilling rich knowledge from the multi-frame
model. We design a novel knowledge distillation objective,
dubbed Dense-to-Sparse Knowledge Distillation (DSKD).
It transfers the dense, relation-based semantic knowledge
from the multi-frame teacher to the single-frame student,
signiﬁcantly improving the representation learning of the
single-frame model. 3) Completion label rectiﬁcation. We
propose a simple yet effective label rectiﬁcation strategy,
which uses off-the-shelf panoptic segmentation labels to remove the traces of dynamic objects in completion labels,
greatly improving the performance of deep models especially for those moving objects. Extensive experiments
are conducted in two public SSC benchmarks, i.e., SemanticKITTI and SemanticPOSS. Our SCPNet ranks 1st on
SemanticKITTI semantic scene completion challenge and
surpasses the competitive S3CNet [3] by 7.2 mIoU. SCPNet also outperforms previous completion algorithms on the
SemanticPOSS dataset. Besides, our method also achieves
competitive results on SemanticKITTI semantic segmentation tasks, showing that knowledge learned in the scene
completion is beneﬁcial to the segmentation task.

1. Introduction
Semantic scene completion (SSC) [20] aims at inferring
†: Corresponding author.

17642

both geometry and semantics of the scene from an incomplete and sparse observation, which is a crucial component
in 3D scene understanding. Performing semantic scene
completion in the outdoor scenarios is challenging due to
the sparse and incomplete input, a large quantity of objects
of diverse scales as well as the inherent label noise for those
moving objects (See Fig. 1 (a)).
Recent years have witnessed an explosion of methods
in the outdoor scene completion ﬁeld [3, 19, 22, 25, 29, 32].
For example, S3CNet [3] performs 2D and 3D completion
tasks jointly and achieves impressive performance on SemanticKITTI [1]. JS3C-Net [29] performs semantic segmentation ﬁrst and then feeds the segmentation features to
the completion sub-network. The coarse-to-ﬁne reﬁnement
module is further put forward to improve the completion
quality. Although signiﬁcant progress has been achieved
in this area, these methods heavily rely on the voxelwise
completion labels and show unsatisfactory completion performance on the small, distant objects and crowded scenes.
Moreover, the long traces of dynamic objects in original
completion labels will hamper the learning of completion
models, which is overlooked in the previous literature [20].
To address the preceding problems, we propose three
solutions from the aspects of the completion sub-network
redesign, distillation of multi-frame knowledge as well as
completion label rectiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst make
a comprehensive overhaul of the completion sub-network.
We adopt the completion-ﬁrst principle and make the completion module directly process the raw voxel features. Besides, we avoid the use of downsampling operations since
they inevitably introduce information loss and cause severe misclassiﬁcation for those small objects and crowded
scenes. To improve the completion quality on objects of diverse scales, we design Multi-Path Blocks (MPBs) with varied kernel sizes, which aggregate multi-scale features and
fully utilize the rich contextual information.
Second, to combat against the sparse and incomplete input signals, we make the single-scan student model distil
knowledge from the multi-frame teacher model. However,

