This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Jigsaw Puzzle: A Versatile Position Embedding for Vision Transformers
Bin Ren1,2 * Yahui Liu2 * Yue Song2 Wei Bi3 Rita Cucchiara4 Nicu Sebe2
1
University of Pisa, Italy 2 University of Trento, Italy
3
Tencent AI Lab , China 5 Beijing Jiaotong University, China
4
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy

Wei Wang5†

Abstract
Position Embeddings (PEs), an arguably indispensable
component in Vision Transformers (ViTs), have been shown
to improve the performance of ViTs on many vision tasks.
However, PEs have a potentially high risk of privacy leakage since the spatial information of the input patches is
exposed. This caveat naturally raises a series of interesting
questions about the impact of PEs on accuracy, privacy, prediction consistency, etc. To tackle these issues, we propose a
Masked Jigsaw Puzzle (MJP) position embedding method.
In particular, MJP first shuffles the selected patches via our
block-wise random jigsaw puzzle shuffle algorithm, and their
corresponding PEs are occluded. Meanwhile, for the nonoccluded patches, the PEs remain the original ones but their
spatial relation is strengthened via our dense absolute localization regressor. The experimental results reveal that 1)
PEs explicitly encode the 2D spatial relationship and lead
to severe privacy leakage problems under gradient inversion
attack; 2) Training ViTs with the naively shuffled patches can
alleviate the problem, but it harms the accuracy; 3) Under
a certain shuffle ratio, the proposed MJP not only boosts
the performance and robustness on large-scale datasets (i.e.,
ImageNet-1K and ImageNet-C, -A/O) but also improves the
privacy preservation ability under typical gradient attacks
by a large margin. The source code and trained models are
available at https://github.com/yhlleo/MJP.

1. Introduction
Transformers [38] demonstrated their overwhelming
power on a broad range of language tasks (e.g., text classification, machine translation, or question answering [22, 38]),
and the vision community follows it closely and extends it for
vision tasks, such as image classification [7,37], object detection [2, 51], segmentation [47], and image generation [3, 24].
Most of the previous ViT-based methods focus on designing different pre-training objectives [9, 11, 12] or variants
of self-attention mechanisms [28, 39, 40]. By contrast, PEs
* Equal contribution. Email: {bin.ren, yahui.liu}@unitn.it
† Corresponding author. Email: wei.wang@bjtu.edu.cn

(a) UMAP

(b) PCA

Figure 1. Low-dimensional projection of position embeddings from
DeiT-S [37]. (a) The 2D UMAP projection, it shows that reverse
diagonal indices have the same order as the input patch positions.
(b) The 3D PCA projection, it also shows that the position information is well captured with PEs. Note that the embedding of index 1
(highlighted in red) corresponds to the [CLS] embedding that does
not embed any positional information.

receive less attention from the research community and have
not been well studied yet. In fact, apart from the attention
mechanism, how to embed the position information into the
self-attention mechanism is also one indispensable research
topic in Transformer. It has been demonstrated that without the PEs, the pure language Transformer encoders (e.g.,
BERT [6] and RoBERTa [25]) may not well capture the
meaning of positions [43]. As a consequence, the meaning
of a sentence can not be well represented [8]. Similar phenomenon of PEs could also be observed in vision community.
Dosovitskiy et al. [7] reveals that removing PEs causes performance degradation. Moreover, Lu et al. [29] analyzed
this issue from the perspective of user privacy and demonstrated that the PEs place the model at severe privacy risk
since it leaks the clues of reconstructing sequential patches
back to images. Hence, it is very interesting and necessary
to understand how the PEs affect the accuracy, privacy, and
consistency in vision tasks. Here the consistency means
whether the predictions of the transformed/shuffled image
are consistent with the ones of the original image.
To study the aforementioned effects of PEs, the key is to
figure out what explicitly PEs learn about positions from
input patches. To answer this question, we project the
high-dimensional PEs into the 2D and 3D spaces using Uni-

20382

