This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fix the Noise: Disentangling Source Feature for
Controllable Domain Translation
Dongyeun Lee1,2

Jae Young Lee1 Doyeon Kim1 Jaehyun Choi1
Jaejun Yoo3 Junmo Kim1
2
3
1
KAIST
Klleon AI Research
UNIST

ℋ𝑠𝑠

ℋ𝑠𝑠→𝑡𝑡

𝐧𝐧𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎

Feature space ℋ

𝐧𝐧𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟

ℋ𝑡𝑡

Transfer Learning
𝐧𝐧𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎

Generated from Gs

More Source

Generated from Gs→t

𝐧𝐧𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟

More Target

Figure 1. Given a source model Gs , our method can smoothly control the degree of source domain features in a fine-tuned model Gs→t .
Samples in each row are generated from the same latent code z ∈ Z by Gs and Gs→t . Here, Hs , Hs→t , and Ht denote feature spaces of
the source, our model, and simply fine-tuned target model, respectively. Our approach explicitly guides the model to preserve the source
features by using the anchor point nanch , which allows a flexible and smooth cross-domain control via Gs→t .

Abstract
Recent studies show strong generative performance in
domain translation especially by using transfer learning
techniques on the unconditional generator. However, the
control between different domain features using a single
model is still challenging. Existing methods often require
additional models, which is computationally demanding
and leads to unsatisfactory visual quality. In addition, they
have restricted control steps, which prevents a smooth transition. In this paper, we propose a new approach for highquality domain translation with better controllability. The
key idea is to preserve source features within a disentangled
subspace of a target feature space. This allows our method
to smoothly control the degree to which it preserves source
features while generating images from an entirely new domain using only a single model. Our extensive experiments
show that the proposed method can produce more consistent
and realistic images than previous works and maintain precise controllability over different levels of transformation.
The code is available at LeeDongYeun/FixNoise.

1. Introduction
Image translation between different domains is a longstanding problem in computer vision [8, 9, 13, 20, 22, 24,
35, 52, 62]. Controllability in domain translation is important since it allows the users to set the desired properties.
Recently, several studies have shown promising results in
domain translation using a pre-trained unconditional generator, such as StyleGAN2 [27], and its fine-tuned version
[29, 30, 42, 48]. These studies implemented domain translation by embedding an image from the source domain to
the latent space of the source model and by providing the
obtained latent code into the target model to generate a target domain image. To preserve semantic correspondence
between different domains, previous works commonly focused on the hierarchical design of the unconditional generator. They used several techniques like freezing [30] and
swapping [42] layers or both [29]. In these approaches,
users can control the degree of preserved source features
by setting the number of freezing or swapping layers of the
target model differently.
However, one of the notable limitations of the previous

14224

