This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Deformable Local Features by Jointly Learning
to Detect and Describe Keypoints
Guilherme Potje1
Felipe Cadar1
André Araujo2
3,4
Renato Martins
Erickson R. Nascimento1,5
1

3

Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais 2 Google Research
Université de Bourgogne 4 Université de Lorraine, LORIA, Inria 5 Microsoft

{guipotje,cadar,erickson}@dcc.ufmg.br, renato.martins@u-bourgogne.fr, andrearaujo@google.com

1. Introduction
Finding pixel-wise correspondences between images depicting the same surface is a long-standing problem in computer vision. Besides varying illumination, viewpoint, and
distance to the object of interest, real-world scenes impose
additional challenges. The vast majority of the correspondence algorithms in the literature assume that our world is
rigid, but this assumption is far from the truth. It is noticeable that the community invests significant efforts into novel
architectures and training strategies to improve image match-

MS = 0.48

DISK

Local feature extraction is a standard approach in computer vision for tackling important tasks such as image
matching and retrieval. The core assumption of most methods is that images undergo affine transformations, disregarding more complicated effects such as non-rigid deformations.
Furthermore, incipient works tailored for non-rigid correspondence still rely on keypoint detectors designed for rigid
transformations, hindering performance due to the limitations of the detector. We propose DALF (Deformation-Aware
Local Features), a novel deformation-aware network for
jointly detecting and describing keypoints, to handle the
challenging problem of matching deformable surfaces. All
network components work cooperatively through a feature
fusion approach that enforces the descriptors’ distinctiveness
and invariance. Experiments using real deforming objects
showcase the superiority of our method, where it delivers 8%
improvement in matching scores compared to the previous
best results. Our approach also enhances the performance
of two real-world applications: deformable object retrieval
and non-rigid 3D surface registration. Code for training, inference, and applications are publicly available at verlab.
dcc.ufmg.br/descriptors/dalf_cvpr23.

DALF

Abstract

MS = 0.38

Figure 1. Image matching under deformations. We propose
DALF, a deformation-aware keypoint detector and descriptor for
matching deformable surfaces. DALF (top) enables local feature
matching across deformable scenes with improved matching scores
(MS) compared to state-of-the-art, as illustrated with DISK [37].
Green lines show correct matches, and red markers, the mismatches.

ing for rigid scenes [6, 19, 26, 34, 37, 42], but disregards the
fact that many objects in the real world can deform in more
complex ways than an affine transformation.
Many applications in industry, medicine, and agriculture require tracking, retrieval, and monitoring of arbitrary
deformable objects and surfaces, where a general-purpose
matching algorithm is needed to achieve accurate results.
Since the performance of standard affine local features significantly decreases for scenarios such as strong illumination
changes and deformations, a few works considering a wider
class of transformations have been proposed [24, 25, 30].
However, all the deformation-aware methods neglect the
keypoint detection phase, limiting their applicability in challenging deformations. Although the problems of keypoint
detection and description can be treated separately, recent
works that jointly perform detection and description of features [4, 26] indicate an entanglement of the two tasks since
the keypoint detection can impact the performance of the descriptor. The descriptor for its turn can be used to determine
reliable points optimized for specific goals. In this work,

1306

