This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OcTr: Octree-based Transformer for 3D Object Detection
Chao Zhou1,2 , Yanan Zhang1,2 , Jiaxin Chen2 , Di Huang1,2,3 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{zhouchaobeing, zhangyanan, jiaxinchen, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
A key challenge for LiDAR-based 3D object detection is
to capture sufficient features from large scale 3D scenes especially for distant or/and occluded objects. Albeit recent
efforts made by Transformers with the long sequence modeling capability, they fail to properly balance the accuracy
and efficiency, suffering from inadequate receptive fields or
coarse-grained holistic correlations. In this paper, we propose an Octree-based Transformer, named OcTr, to address
this issue. It first constructs a dynamic octree on the hierarchical feature pyramid through conducting self-attention
on the top level and then recursively propagates to the level
below restricted by the octants, which captures rich global
context in a coarse-to-fine manner while maintaining the
computational complexity under control. Furthermore, for
enhanced foreground perception, we propose a hybrid positional embedding, composed of the semantic-aware positional embedding and attention mask, to fully exploit semantic and geometry clues. Extensive experiments are conducted on the Waymo Open Dataset and KITTI Dataset, and
OcTr reaches newly state-of-the-art results.

Local

Dilated

Windows
Shifted Windows

(1) Fixed Pattern Limited Receptive Field

Global
Receptive
Field

Global Induced Set

(2) Set Proxy Limited Representation

(3) Octree Construction

Fine-grained
Representation

Figure 1. Illustration of three sparsification strategies of attention
matrices. Fixed pattern (1) narrows receptive fields and set proxy
(2) discards elaborate correlations. The proposed octree construction (3) keeps the global receptive field in a coarse-grained manner
while maintaining fine-grained representations.

1. Introduction
3D object detection from point clouds has received extensive attention during the past decade for its ability to provide accurate and stable recognition and localization in autonomous driving perception systems. In this task, feature
learning plays a very fundamental and crucial role; yet it is
rather challenging due to not only the disordered and sparse
nature of data sampling, but also to insufficient acquisition
under occlusion or at a distance. To address this issue, many
methods have been proposed, which can be taxonomized
into two major classes, i.e. grid-based and point-based. The
former first regularize point clouds into multi-view images
or voxels and then apply 2D or 3D CNNs to build shape rep* indicates the corresponding author.

resentations [4, 52], while the latter directly conduct MLP
based networks such as PointNet++ [33] and DGCNN [50]
on original points for geometry description [32, 40, 42, 60].
Unfortunately, they fail to capture necessary context information through the small receptive fields in the deep models, leading to limited results.
Witnessing the recent success of Transformers in NLP,
many studies have investigated and extended such architectures for 3D vision [24, 29, 58, 61]. Transformers are reputed to model long-range dependencies, delivering global
receptive fields, and to be suitable for scattered inputs of arbitrary sizes. Meanwhile, in contrast to those static weights
that are learned in convolutions, Transformers dynamically
aggregate the input features according to the relationships

5166

