This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reliability in Semantic Segmentation: Are We on the Right Track?
Pau de Jorge

Riccardo Volpi

Philip H. S. Torr

Grégory Rogez

University of Oxford
NAVER LABS Europe*

NAVER LABS Europe

University of Oxford

NAVER LABS Europe

Abstract
Motivated by the increasing popularity of transformers
in computer vision, in recent times there has been a rapid
development of novel architectures. While in-domain performance follows a constant, upward trend, properties like
robustness or uncertainty estimation are less explored—
leaving doubts about advances in model reliability. Studies
along these axes exist, but they are mainly limited to classification models. In contrast, we carry out a study on semantic
segmentation, a relevant task for many real-world applications where model reliability is paramount. We analyze a
broad variety of models, spanning from older ResNet-based
architectures to novel transformers and assess their reliability based on four metrics: robustness, calibration, misclassification detection and out-of-distribution (OOD) detection. We find that while recent models are significantly
more robust, they are not overall more reliable in terms of
uncertainty estimation. We further explore methods that can
come to the rescue and show that improving calibration can
also help with other uncertainty metrics such as misclassification or OOD detection. This is the first study on modern
segmentation models focused on both robustness and uncertainty estimation and we hope it will help practitioners and
researchers interested in this fundamental vision task1 .

1. Introduction
Humans tend to overestimate their abilities, a cognitive bias known as Dunning-Kruger effect [27]. Unfortunately, so do deep neural networks. Despite impressive performance on a wide range of tasks, deep learning models
tend to be overconfident—that is, they predict with highconfidence even when they are wrong [19]. This effect is
even more severe under domain shifts, where models tend
to underperform in general [23, 40, 45].
While these vulnerabilities affect deep models in general, they are often studied for classification models and are
* https://europe.naverlabs.com
1 Code available at https://github.com/naver/relis

Cityscapes

IDD
Increased domain shift

ACDC

Figure 1. Top: mIoU and ECE vs. domain shift. Errors are
normalized with respect to the lowest error on the training distribution (Cityscapes). We compare recent segmentation models, both transformer-based (SETR [58], SegFormer [55] and Segmenter [48]) and convolution-based (ConvNext [30]) with ResNet
baselines (UPerNet [54] and DLV3+ [6]). All recent models (both
transformers and CNNs) are remarkably more robust than ResNet
baselines (whose lines in mIoU overlap), however, ECE increases
sharply for all methods. Bottom: Sample images for each dataset.

comparably less explored for semantic segmentation, a fundamental task in computer vision that is key to many critical applications such as autonomous driving and AI-assisted
medical imaging. In those applications, domain shifts are
more the rule than the exception (e.g., changes in weather
for a self-driving car or differences across patients for a
medical imaging system). Therefore, brittle performance
and overconfidence under domain shifts are two important
and challenging problems to address for a safe deployment
of artificial intelligence systems in the real world.
With that in mind, we argue that a reliable model should
i) be robust to domain shifts and ii) provide good uncertainty estimates. The core goal of this study is providing an
answer to the following, crucial question: are state-of-theart semantic segmentation models improving in terms of
robustness and uncertainty estimation?
To shed light on this, we evaluate a large body of segmentation models, assessing their in-domain (ID) vs. out-

7173

