This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDA: Explicit Text-Decoupling and Dense Alignment for 3D Visual Grounding
Yanmin Wu1

Xinhua Cheng1

Renrui Zhang2,3

Zesen Cheng1

Jian Zhang1∗

1

2

Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
wuyanmin@stu.pku.edu.cn

This is a tall gray trash can . It is under the
left side of the counter , to the left of the
door when you enter.

object
The door is rectangular in
shape and has a small window
on the upper portion.

(b1)

zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

This is a black trash can. It is under a
bathroom counter.

(a) Regular 3D visual grounding

object
(b2)
The white refrigerator is in
front of the kitchen stove . It
is to the left side of the room
as one enters the kitchen.

(b3)

The trash can is white and plastic. It is
attached to the wall to the left of the toilet.

It is a brown wooden object,
with a cloth seat and back. It
has multicolored flower
patterns on the seat, and back.

(b4)
This is a black object . It is
located next to a tall shelf and
there is a fan in front of it .

(b) Grounding without object name
Figure 1. Text-decoupled, dense aligned 3D visual grounding. Different colours in the text correspond to different decoupled components.
(a) Regular 3D visual grounding: locating objects requires comprehensively considering multiple semantic cues such as appearance attributes, object names, and spatial relationships. (b) Grounding without object name: not mentioning object names, avoiding short-cuts
and forcing the model to predict the target based on other attributes.

Abstract
3D visual grounding aims to find the object within point
clouds mentioned by free-form natural language descriptions with rich semantic cues. However, existing methods
either extract the sentence-level features coupling all words
or focus more on object names, which would lose the wordlevel information or neglect other attributes. To alleviate
these issues, we present EDA that Explicitly Decouples
the textual attributes in a sentence and conducts Dense
Alignment between such fine-grained language and point
cloud objects. Specifically, we first propose a text decoupling module to produce textual features for every semantic component. Then, we design two losses to supervise
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by Shenzhen
Research Project under Grant JCYJ20220531093215035.

the dense matching between two modalities: position alignment loss and semantic alignment loss. On top of that,
we further introduce a new visual grounding task, locating objects without object names, which can thoroughly
evaluate the model’s dense alignment capacity. Through
experiments, we achieve state-of-the-art performance on
two widely-adopted 3D visual grounding datasets, ScanRefer and SR3D/NR3D, and obtain absolute leadership on
our newly-proposed task. The source code is available at
https://github.com/yanmin-wu/EDA.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal cues can highly benefit the 3D environment perception of an agent, including 2D images, 3D point
clouds, and language. Recently, 3D visual grounding (3D
VG) [8,50], also known as 3D object referencing [3], has at-

19231

