This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SOOD: Towards Semi-Supervised Oriented Object Detection
Wei Hua∗1 , Dingkang Liang∗1 , Jingyu Li1 , Xiaolong Liu1 , Zhikang Zou2 , Xiaoqing Ye2 , Xiang Bai†1
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, {whua hust, dkliang, xbai}@hust.edu.cn
2
Baidu Inc., China
Aerial scene

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD), aiming to explore unlabeled data for boosting object detectors, has become an active task in recent years. However, existing
SSOD approaches mainly focus on horizontal objects, leaving multi-oriented objects that are common in aerial images
unexplored. This paper proposes a novel Semi-supervised
Oriented Object Detection model, termed SOOD, built upon
the mainstream pseudo-labeling framework. Towards oriented objects in aerial scenes, we design two loss functions to provide better supervision. Focusing on the orientations of objects, the first loss regularizes the consistency
between each pseudo-label-prediction pair (includes a prediction and its corresponding pseudo label) with adaptive
weights based on their orientation gap. Focusing on the
layout of an image, the second loss regularizes the similarity and explicitly builds the many-to-many relation between
the sets of pseudo-labels and predictions. Such a global
consistency constraint can further boost semi-supervised
learning. Our experiments show that when trained with
the two proposed losses, SOOD surpasses the state-of-theart SSOD methods under various settings on the DOTAv1.5 benchmark. The code will be available at https:
//github.com/HamPerdredes/SOOD.

1. Introduction
Sufficient labeled data is essential for fully-supervised
object detection. However, the data labeling process is timeconsuming and expensive. Recently, Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD), where object detectors are learned
from labeled data as well as easy-to-obtain unlabeled data,
has attracted increasing attention. Existing SSOD methods [16, 24, 44, 50] mainly focus on detecting objects with
horizontal bounding boxes in general scenes. Nevertheless,
in more complex scenes, such as aerial scenes, objects usu* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Work done when Dingkang Liang was an intern at Baidu.

(a) Arbitrary rotating objects

(b) Small and dense objects

Figure 1. Arbitrary rotating (a), small and dense (b) objects are
common in aerial scenes, which are often regularly arranged on
the image. From a global perspective, this pattern indicates that an
aerial can be regarded as a layout.

ally need to be annotated with oriented bounding boxes.
Considering the higher annotation cost of oriented boxes* ,
semi-supervised oriented object detection is worth studying.
Compared with general scenes, the main characteristics
of objects in aerial scenes (or aerial objects for short) are
three-fold: arbitrary orientations, small scales, and agglomeration, as shown in Fig. 1. The mainstream SSOD methods are based on the pseudo-labeling framework [3, 35, 36]
consisting of a teacher model and a student model. The
teacher model, an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) of
the student model at historical training iterations, generates pseudo-labels for unlabeled images. Thus, the student
model can learn from both labeled and unlabeled data. To
extend the framework to oriented object detection, we think
the following two aspects need to be addressed: 1) As orientation is an essential property of multi-oriented objects, how
to use the orientation information when guiding the student
with pseudo-labels is critical. 2) As aerial objects are often
dense and regularly distributed in an image, we can utilize
the layout to facilitate the learning of each pair instead of
treating them individually.
This paper proposes the first Semi-supervised Oriented
* Annotation cost of an oriented box is about 36.5% (86$ vs. 63$ per 1k
at 2022.11) more than a horizontal box according to https://cloud.
google.com/ai-platform/data-labeling/pricing.

15558

