This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Binary Latent Diffusion
Ze Wang
Purdue University

Jiang Wang Zicheng Liu
Microsoft Corporation

Qiang Qiu
Purdue University

zewang@purdue.edu

{jiangwang, zliu}@microsoft.com

qqiu@purdue.edu

1. Introduction
The goal of modeling the image distribution that allows
the efficient generation of high-quality novel samples drives
the research of representation learning and generative models. Directly representing and generating images in the pixel
space stimulates various research such as generative adversarial networks [2, 7, 18, 29], flow models [11, 34, 43, 47],
energy-based models [12, 13, 66, 71], and diffusion models [24, 41, 54, 55]. As the resolution grows, it becomes
increasingly difficult to accurately regress the pixel values.
And this challenge usually has to be addressed through hi-

FFHQ

CelebA

LSUN Bedrooms

FFHQ

ImageNet

CelebA-HQ

In this paper, we show that a binary latent space can
be explored for compact yet expressive image representations. We model the bi-directional mappings between an
image and the corresponding latent binary representation
by training an auto-encoder with a Bernoulli encoding distribution. On the one hand, the binary latent space provides
a compact discrete image representation of which the distribution can be modeled more efficiently than pixels or continuous latent representations. On the other hand, we now
represent each image patch as a binary vector instead of
an index of a learned cookbook as in discrete image representations with vector quantization. In this way, we obtain
binary latent representations that allow for better image
quality and high-resolution image representations without
any multi-stage hierarchy in the latent space. In this binary
latent space, images can now be generated effectively using a binary latent diffusion model tailored specifically for
modeling the prior over the binary image representations.
We present both conditional and unconditional image generation experiments with multiple datasets, and show that
the proposed method performs comparably to state-of-theart methods while dramatically improving the sampling efficiency to as few as 16 steps without using any test-time
acceleration. The proposed framework can also be seamlessly scaled to 1024 ⇥ 1024 high-resolution image generation without resorting to latent hierarchy or multi-stage
refinements.

LSUN Churches

Abstract

1024 x 1024

256 x 256

Figure 1. Examples of generated images with different resolutions
using the proposed method.

erarchical model architectures [29, 72] or at a notably high
cost [24]. Moreover, while demonstrating outstanding generated image quality, GAN models suffer from issues including insufficient mode coverage [38] and training instability [21].
Representing and generating images in a learned latent
space [33, 42, 49] provides a promising alternative. Latent
diffusion [49] performs denoising in latent feature space
with a lower dimension than the pixel space, therefore reducing the cost of each denoising step. However, regressing the real-value latent representations remains complex
and demands hundreds of diffusion steps. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) [23,33,48] generate images without any iterative steps. However, the static prior of the latent space restricts the expressiveness, and can lead to posterior collapse.
To achieve higher flexibility of the latent distribution without significantly increasing the modeling complexity, VQVAE [61] introduces a vector-quantized latent space, where

22576

