This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient and Explicit Modelling of Image Hierarchies for Image Restoration
Yawei Li1 Yuchen Fan2 Xiaoyu Xiang2 Denis Demandolx2
Rakesh Ranjan2 Radu Timofte1,3 Luc Van Gool1,4
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich 2 Meta Reality Labs 3 University of Würzburg

4

KU Leuven

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to propose a mechanism to
efficiently and explicitly model image hierarchies in the
global, regional, and local range for image restoration. To
achieve that, we start by analyzing two important properties of natural images including cross-scale similarity
and anisotropic image features. Inspired by that, we propose the anchored stripe self-attention which achieves a
good balance between the space and time complexity of
self-attention and the modelling capacity beyond the regional range. Then we propose a new network architecture dubbed GRL to explicitly model image hierarchies in
the Global, Regional, and Local range via anchored stripe
self-attention, window self-attention, and channel attention
enhanced convolution. Finally, the proposed network is applied to 7 image restoration types, covering both real and
synthetic settings. The proposed method sets the new stateof-the-art for several of those. Code will be available at
https://github.com/ofsoundof/GRL-ImageRestoration.git.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims at recovering high-quality images
from low-quality ones, resulting from an image degradation processes such as blurring, sub-sampling, noise corruption, and JPEG compression. Image restoration is an illposed inverse problem since important content information
about the image is missing during the image degradation
processes. Thus, in order to recover a high-quality image,
the rich information exhibited in the degraded image should
be fully exploited.
Natural images contain a hierarchy of features at global,
regional, and local ranges which could be used by deep neural networks for image restoration. First, the local range
covers a span of several pixels and typical features are edges
and local colors. To model such local features, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with small kernels (e.g.
3 × 3) are utilized. Second, the regional range is characterized by a window with tens of pixels. This range of pix-

(b) 0848x4 from DIV2K, 1020 × 768

(a) bridge from ICB, 2749 × 4049

(c) 073 from Urban100, 1024 × 765

Figure 1. Natural images show a hierarchy of features in a global,
regional, and local range. The local (edges, colors) and regional
features (the pink squares) could be well modelled by CNNs and
window self-attention. By contrast, it is difficult to efficiently and
explicitly model the rich global features (cyan rectangles).

els can cover small objects and components of large objects
(pink squares in Fig. 1). Due to the larger range, modelling
the regional features (consistency, similarity) explicitly with
large-kernel CNNs would be inefficient in both parameters
and computation. Instead, transformers with a window attention mechanism are well suited for this task. Third, beyond local and regional, some features have a global span
(cyan rectangles in Fig. 1), incl. but not limited to symmetry, multi-scale pattern repetition (Fig. 1a), same scale texture similarity (Fig. 1b), and structural similarity and consistency in large objects and content (Fig. 1c). To model
features at this range, global image understanding is needed.
Different from the local and regional range features,
there are two major challenges to model the global range
features. Firstly, existing image restoration networks based
on convolutions and window attention could not capture
long-range dependencies explicitly by using a single computational module. Although non-local operations are used
in some works, they are either used sparsely in the network
or applied to small image crops. Thus, global image under-

18278

