This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFLiX: High-Quality Neural View Synthesis
by Learning a Degradation-Driven Inter-viewpoint MiXer
Kun Zhou1,2 * Wenbo Li3 * Yi Wang4
Tao Hu
Nianjuan Jiang2 Xiaoguang Han1 Jiangbo Lu2†
1
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen, 2 SmartMore Corporation 3 CUHK 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
kunzhou@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {wenboli,taohu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn,{jiangbo.lu,wygamle}@gmail.com
3

Figure 1. We propose NeRFLiX, a general NeRF-agnostic restorer that is capable of improving neural view synthesis quality. The first
example is from Tanks and Temples [25], the second/third examples are from LLFF [36], and the last one is a user scene captured by a
mobile phone. RegNeRF-V3 [39] means the model trained with three input views.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) show great success in
novel view synthesis. However, in real-world scenes, recovering high-quality details from the source images is still
challenging for the existing NeRF-based approaches, due to
the potential imperfect calibration information and scene
representation inaccuracy. Even with high-quality training frames, the synthetic novel views produced by NeRF
models still suffer from notable rendering artifacts, such as
noise, blur, etc. Towards to improve the synthesis quality of NeRF-based approaches, we propose NeRFLiX, a
general NeRF-agnostic restorer paradigm by learning a
degradation-driven inter-viewpoint mixer. Specially, we de* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

sign a NeRF-style degradation modeling approach and construct large-scale training data, enabling the possibility of
effectively removing NeRF-native rendering artifacts for existing deep neural networks. Moreover, beyond the degradation removal, we propose an inter-viewpoint aggregation
framework that is able to fuse highly related high-quality
training images, pushing the performance of cutting-edge
NeRF models to entirely new levels and producing highly
photo-realistic synthetic views.

1. Introduction
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) can generate photorealistic images from new viewpoints, playing a heated role
in novel view synthesis. In light of NeRF’s [37] success,
numerous approaches [2, 9, 11, 19, 34, 35, 38, 40, 41, 47, 53,
54, 59, 61, 65] along these lines have been proposed, contin-

12363

