This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Kernel Aware Resampler
Michael Bernasconi1,2 Abdelaziz Djelouah2 Farnood Salehi2 Markus Gross1,2 Christopher Schroers2
1

2

ETH Zürich

DisneyResearch|Studios

michael.bernasconi@inf.ethz.ch, abdelaziz.djelouah@disney.com

Transform

Bilinear

LIIF

SRWarp

Ours

Ours (sharper)

Figure 1. Comparison of our method with LIIF and SRWarp when rectifying a natural image. As the kernel map is unknown in this case it
is estimated automatically for our method. Additionally our results can be further sharpened.

Abstract
Deep learning based methods for super-resolution have
become state-of-the-art and outperform traditional approaches by a significant margin. From the initial models designed for fixed integer scaling factors (e.g. ×2 or
×4), efforts were made to explore different directions such
as modeling blur kernels or addressing non-integer scaling
factors. However, existing works do not provide a sound
framework to handle them jointly. In this paper we propose a framework for generic image resampling that not
only addresses all the above mentioned issues but extends
the sets of possible transforms from upscaling to generic
transforms. A key aspect to unlock these capabilities is the
faithful modeling of image warping and changes of the sampling rate during the training data preparation. This allows
a localized representation of the implicit image degradation
that takes into account the reconstruction kernel, the local geometric distortion and the anti-aliasing kernel. Using
this spatially variant degradation map as conditioning for
our resampling model, we can address with the same model
both global transformations, such as upscaling or rotation,
and locally varying transformations such lens distortion or
undistortion. Another important contribution is the auto-

matic estimation of the degradation map in this more complex resampling setting (i.e. blind image resampling). Finally, we show that state-of-the-art results can be achieved
by predicting kernels to apply on the input image instead of
direct color prediction. This renders our model applicable
for different types of data not seen during the training such
as normals.

1. Introduction
Thanks to recent advances in deep learning based superresolution which allow to infer impressive high frequency
details from low resolution inputs, it has become possible to
bridge the gap between content and display resolution without noticeable degradation in quality. This is beneficial in
different contexts and, among other things, has enabled new
visual effects production workflows to operate in 2K while
still ultimately delivering at 4K resolution by performing a
2x upscale just before final delivery.
However, super-resolution is not the only image transformation that can occur in typical visual effects pipelines, and
it is very common to perform additional tasks such as image rectification, retargeting, lens (un)distortion or image

22347

