This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-positioning Point-based Transformer for Point Cloud Understanding
Jinyoung Park1 *, Sanghyeok Lee1∗ , Sihyeon Kim1 , Yunyang Xiong2 , Hyunwoo J. Kim1†
1
Korea University, 2 Meta Reality Labs
{lpmn678, cat0626, sh bs15, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
yunyang@fb.com

Abstract
Transformers have shown superior performance on various computer vision tasks with their capabilities to capture long-range dependencies. Despite the success, it
is challenging to directly apply Transformers on point
clouds due to their quadratic cost in the number of points.
In this paper, we present a Self-Positioning point-based
Transformer (SPoTr), which is designed to capture both
local and global shape contexts with reduced complexity. Specifically, this architecture consists of local selfattention and self-positioning point-based global crossattention. The self-positioning points, adaptively located
based on the input shape, consider both spatial and semantic information with disentangled attention to improve expressive power. With the self-positioning points, we propose
a novel global cross-attention mechanism for point clouds,
which improves the scalability of global self-attention by
allowing the attention module to compute attention weights
with only a small set of self-positioning points. Experiments
show the effectiveness of SPoTr on three point cloud tasks
such as shape classification, part segmentation, and scene
segmentation. In particular, our proposed model achieves
an accuracy gain of 2.6% over the previous best models on
shape classification with ScanObjectNN. We also provide
qualitative analyses to demonstrate the interpretability of
self-positioning points. The code of SPoTr is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/SPoTr.

1. Introduction
Point clouds have been widely applied in various areas
such as autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality. Since the point cloud is an unordered set of points
with irregular structures, adopting convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on point clouds is challenging. Some works
devoted effort to transforming point clouds into regular
* First two authors have equal contribution.
† is the corresponding author.

(a) Local attention

(b) Global attention

(c) SP attention

Figure 1. Comparison of attention methods. (a) Local attention,
(b) Global attention, (c) Self-positioning point-based attention (SP
attention).

structures, such as projection to multi-view images [1, 2]
and voxelization [3, 4]. Others have tried to preserve the
structure and design a convolution on the point space [5–
11]. However, the ability to capture long-range dependencies is limited in most convolution-based approaches, while
it is crucial to understand global shape context, especially
with real-world data [12].
Transformer [13] tackled the long-range dependency issue in natural language processing and later it has been
actively extended to 2D image processing [14–17]. Early
works tried to replace convolutional layers with selfattention [14, 18–22], but they struggled with the quadratic
computational cost of self-attention to the number of pixels. To mitigate the scalability issue, self-attention in local neighborhoods [15,17] or approximating a self-attention
with a reduced set of queries or keys [16, 23, 24] have been
studied. For point clouds, Point Transformer [25] applies a
local attention operation (Figure 1a) and PointASNL [26]
employs a global attention module in a non-local manner (Figure 1b). Still, in point clouds, Transformer, which
tackles both long-range dependency and scalability issues,
has been less explored.
In this paper, we propose Self-Positioning point-based
Transformer (SPoTr) to capture both local and global shape
contexts with reduced complexity. SPoTr block consists of
two attention modules: (i) local points attention (LPA) to
learn local structures and (ii) self-positioning point-based

21814

