This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIER: Metric Learning Beyond Class Labels via Hierarchical Regularization
Sungyeon Kim1
Boseung Jeong1
Suha Kwak1,2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH1
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2
{sungyeon.kim, boseung01, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/HIER

Abstract
Supervision for metric learning has long been given in
the form of equivalence between human-labeled classes. Although this type of supervision has been a basis of metric
learning for decades, we argue that it hinders further advances in the field. In this regard, we propose a new regularization method, dubbed HIER, to discover the latent semantic hierarchy of training data, and to deploy the hierarchy
to provide richer and more fine-grained supervision than
inter-class separability induced by common metric learning losses. HIER achieves this goal with no annotation for
the semantic hierarchy but by learning hierarchical proxies
in hyperbolic spaces. The hierarchical proxies are learnable parameters, and each of them is trained to serve as
an ancestor of a group of data or other proxies to approximate the semantic hierarchy among them. HIER deals with
the proxies along with data in hyperbolic space since the
geometric properties of the space are well-suited to represent their hierarchical structure. The efficacy of HIER is
evaluated on four standard benchmarks, where it consistently improved the performance of conventional methods
when integrated with them, and consequently achieved the
best records, surpassing even the existing hyperbolic metric
learning technique, in almost all settings.

1. Introduction
Learning a discriminative and generalizable embedding
space has been a vital step within many machine learning
tasks including content-based image retrieval [18, 26, 36,
37], face verification [20, 33], person re-identification [6,
50], few-shot learning [29, 35, 39], and representation
learning [18, 45, 53]. Deep metric learning has aroused lots
of attention as an effective tool for this purpose. Its goal
is to learn an embedding space where semantically similar samples are close together and dissimilar ones are far
apart. Hence, the semantic affinity between samples serves
as the main supervision for deep metric learning, and has
long been given in the form of equivalence between their
human-labeled classes.

HIER

Figure 1. Motivation of HIER. HIER aims to discover an inherent but latent semantic hierarchy of data (colored dots on the
boundary) by learning hierarchical proxies (larger black dots) in
hyperbolic space. The semantic hierarchy is deployed to provide
rich and fine-grained supervision that cannot be derived only by
human-labeled classes.

Although this type of supervision has been a basis of
metric learning for decades, we argue that it now hinders
further advances of the field. The equivalence of humanlabeled classes deals with only a tiny subset of possible relations between samples due to the following two reasons.
First, the class equivalence is examined at only a single
fixed level of semantic hierarchy, although different classes
can be semantically similar if they share the same superclass. Second, the equivalence is a binary relation that ignores the degree of semantic affinity between two classes.
It is difficult to overcome these two limitations since the semantic hierarchy of data is latent and only human-labeled
classes are available from existing datasets in the standard
metric learning setting. However, once they are resolved,
one can open up the possibility of providing rich supervision beyond human-labeled classes.
In this regard, we propose a new regularization method,
called HIErarchical Regularization (HIER), to discover and
deploy the latent semantic hierarchy of training data for
metric learning. Since the semantic hierarchy can capture
not only the predefined set of classes but also their subclasses, super-classes, and affinities between them, our regularizer is expected to provide richer and more fine-grained
supervision beyond inter-class separability induced by common metric learning losses. However, it is challenging
to establish such a semantic hierarchy of data given their
19903

