This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Part Priors: Learning to Optimize Part-Based Object Completion in
RGB-D Scans
Aleksei Bokhovkin
Technical University of Munich

Angela Dai
Technical University of Munich

aleksei.bokhovkin@tum.de

angela.dai@tum.de

Figure 1. Our Neural Part Priors learn optimizable parametric latent spaces of object part geometries, which we can use to fit partial,
real-world RGB-D scans of a scene, decomposing detected objects into their complete part geometries. In contrast to 3D scene understanding
approaches that make independent predictions per-object, our parametric part spaces enables formulating test-time constraints for consistency
within an input scene, thus producing both accurate as well as globally-consistent part decompositions.

Abstract

3D scene understanding has seen significant advances in
recent years, but has largely focused on object understanding
in 3D scenes with independent per-object predictions. We
thus propose to learn Neural Part Priors (NPPs), parametric
spaces of objects and their parts, that enable optimizing to
fit to a new input 3D scan with global scene consistency constraints. The rich structure of our NPPs enables accurate,
holistic scene reconstruction across similar objects in the
scene. Both objects and their part geometries are characterized by coordinate field MLPs, facilitating optimization
at test time to fit to input geometric observations as well as
similar objects in the input scan. This enables more accurate reconstructions than independent per-object predictions
as a single forward pass, while establishing global consistency within a scene. Experiments on the ScanNet dataset
demonstrate that NPPs significantly outperforms the stateof-the-art in part decomposition and object completion in
real-world scenes.

1. Introduction
With the introduction of commodity RGB-D sensors (e.g.,
Microsoft Kinect, Intel RealSense, etc.), remarkable progress
has been made in reconstruction and tracking to construct
3D models of real-world environments [9, 14, 37, 39, 52].
This has enabled construction of large-scale datasets of realworld 3D scanned environments [4, 11], enabling significant
advances in 3D semantic segmentation [10, 13, 23], 3D semantic instance segmentation [18, 24, 26], and even partlevel understanding of scenes [3]. The achieved 3D object
recognition has shown impressive advances, but methods focus on independent predictions per object in single forward
passes, resulting in semantic predictions that are inconsistent
between repeated objects in a scene, and/or geometric predictions that do not precisely match input observed geometry.
Simultaneously, recent advances in representing 3D
shapes as continuous implicit functions represented with
coordinate field MLPs have shown high-fidelity shape reconstruction [6–8, 40, 47]. Such methods have focused on
object-level reconstructions, whereas part-based understanding is fundamental to many higher-level scene understanding
tasks (e.g., interactions often occur with object parts – sitting
on the seat of a couch, opening a door with a handle, etc.).

9032

