This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Achieving a Better Stability-Plasticity Trade-off via Auxiliary Networks in
Continual Learning
Sanghwan Kim

Lorenzo Noci Antonio Orvieto
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland

Thomas Hofmann

{sanghwan.kim, lorenzo.noci, antonio.orvieto, thomas.hofmann}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
In contrast to the natural capabilities of humans to
learn new tasks in a sequential fashion, neural networks
are known to suffer from catastrophic forgetting, where the
model’s performances on old tasks drop dramatically after
being optimized for a new task. Since then, the continual
learning (CL) community has proposed several solutions
aiming to equip the neural network with the ability to learn
the current task (plasticity) while still achieving high accuracy on the previous tasks (stability). Despite remarkable
improvements, the plasticity-stability trade-off is still far
from being solved and its underlying mechanism is poorly
understood. In this work, we propose Auxiliary Network
Continual Learning (ANCL), a novel method that applies
an additional auxiliary network which promotes plasticity
to the continually learned model which mainly focuses on
stability. More concretely, the proposed framework materializes in a regularizer that naturally interpolates between
plasticity and stability, surpassing strong baselines on task
incremental and class incremental scenarios. Through
extensive analyses on ANCL solutions, we identify some
essential principles beneath the stability-plasticity tradeoff. The code implementation of our work is available at
https://github.com/kim-sanghwan/ANCL.

1. Introduction
The continual learning (CL) model aims to learn from
current data while still maintaining the information from
previous training data. The naive approach of continuously
fine-tuning the model on sequential tasks, however, suffers
from catastrophic forgetting [8, 21]. Catastrophic forgetting occurs in a gradient-based neural network because the
updates made with the current task are likely to override
the model weights that have been changed by the gradients
from the old tasks.
Catastrophic forgetting can be understood in terms of

stability-plasticity dilemma [22], one of the well-known
challenges in continual learning. Specifically, the model
not only has to generalize well on past data (stability) but
also learn new concepts (plasticity). Focusing on stability
will hinder the neural network from learning the new data,
whereas too much plasticity will induce more forgetting
of the previously learned weights. Therefore, CL model
should strike a balance between stability and plasticity.
There are various ways to define the problem of CL.
Generally speaking, it can be categorized into three scenarios [27] : Task Incremental Learning (TIL), Domain Incremental Learning (DIL), and Class Incremental Learning
(CIL). In TIL, the model is informed about the task that
needs to be solved; the task identity is given to the model
during the training session and the test time. In DIL, the
model is required to solve only one task at hands without
the task identity. In CIL, the model should solve the task
itself and infer the task identity. Since the model should
discriminate all classes that have been seen so far, it is usually regarded as the hardest continual learning scenario. Our
study performs extensive evaluations on TIL and CIL setting which will be further explained in Sec. 4.
Recently, several papers [19, 20, 28, 31] proposed the
usage of an auxiliary network or an extra module that is
solely trained on the current dataset, with the purpose of
combining this additional structure with the previous network or module that has been continuously trained on the
old datasets. For example, Active Forgetting with synaptic Expansion-Convergence (AFEC) [28] regularizes the
weights relevant to the current task through a new set of
network parameters called the expanded parameters based
on weight regularization methods. The expanded parameters are solely optimized on the current task and are allowed to forget the previous ones. As a result, AFEC can
reduce potential negative transfer by selectively merging the
old parameters with the expanded parameters. The stabilityplasticity balance in AFEC is adjusted via hyperparameters
which scale the regularization terms for remembering the
old tasks and learning the new tasks.

11930

