This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Measure the Point Cloud Reconstruction Loss in a
Representation Space
Tianxin Huang1 Zhonggan Ding2 Jiangning Zhang2 Ying Tai2 Zhenyu Zhang2
Mingang Chen3 Chengjie Wang2 Yong Liu1∗
1
APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
3
Shanghai Development Center of Computer Software Technology

Abstract
For point cloud reconstruction-related tasks, the reconstruction losses to evaluate the shape differences between
reconstructed results and the ground truths are typically
used to train the task networks. Most existing works measure the training loss with point-to-point distance, which
may introduce extra defects as predeﬁned matching rules
may deviate from the real shape differences. Although some
learning-based works have been proposed to overcome the
weaknesses of manually-deﬁned rules, they still measure the
shape differences in 3D Euclidean space, which may limit
their ability to capture defects in reconstructed shapes. In
this work, we propose a learning-based Contrastive Adversarial Loss (CALoss) to measure the point cloud reconstruction loss dynamically in a non-linear representation space
by combining the contrastive constraint with the adversarial strategy. Speciﬁcally, we use the contrastive constraint
to help CALoss learn a representation space with shape similarity, while we introduce the adversarial strategy to help
CALoss mine differences between reconstructed results and
ground truths. According to experiments on reconstructionrelated tasks, CALoss can help task networks improve reconstruction performances and learn more representative
representations.

1. Introduction
Point clouds, as the common description for 3D shapes,
have been broadly used in many areas such as 3D detection [17, 18] and surface reconstruction [9, 13, 19]. For the
point cloud reconstruction-related tasks [5, 7, 11, 16], networks need to predict point clouds as similar as possible
to the ground truths. Reconstruction losses that can differentiably calculate the shape differences between reconstructed results and ground truths are required to train the
task networks. Existing works often use the matching-based
* means the corresponding author

Figure 1. Sg and So denote ground truths and point clouds generated by the task network. Sp is a positive sample with similar
shapes as Sg acquired by perturbation [2]. Matching-based losses
measure distances between points matched by different predeﬁned
rules. PCLoss [6] learns to extract descriptors in 3D Euclidean
space by linearly weighting coordinates according to their distances to predicted center points, while our method dynamically
measures the shape differences with distances between learned
global representations in the constructed representation space. Lp
and Lr denote representation distances between Sg , Sp and Sg ,
So , respectively. Ladv
is an adversarial loss to maximize represenr
tation distances between Sg , So . Ladv
and Lp are used to optimize
r
CALoss, while Lr is adopted to train the task network.

reconstruction losses Chamfer Distance (CD) and Earth
Mover’s Distance (EMD) to constrain shape differences.
CD matches points ﬁrstly with their nearest neighbors in
another point cloud and then calculates the shape difference
as average point-to-point distance, while EMD calculates
the average point-to-point distance under an optimizationbased global matching. We can ﬁnd that CD and EMD
actually measure the distances between matched points instead of the distances between shapes. As the predeﬁned
matching rules are static and unlearnable, training results
of CD and EMD may fall into inappropriate local minimums where the reconstruction losses are small but the
shapes are obviously different. Learning-based losses in

12208

