This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Actor-centric Causality Graph for Asynchronous Temporal Inference in
Group Activity
Zhao Xie, Tian Gao, Kewei Wu*, Jiao Chang
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data, Hefei University of Technology
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
xiezhao@hfut.edu.cn; gaotian@mail.hfut.edu.cn; wukewei@hfut.edu.cn; jiaochang@mail.hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
The causality relation modeling remains a challenging
task for group activity recognition. The causality relations
describe the influence on the centric actor (effect actor)
from its correlative actors (cause actors). Most existing
graph models focus on learning the actor relation with synchronous temporal features, which is insufficient to deal
with the causality relation with asynchronous temporal features. In this paper, we propose an Actor-Centric Causality Graph Model, which learns the asynchronous temporal
causality relation with three modules, i.e., an asynchronous
temporal causality relation detection module, a causality
feature fusion module, and a causality relation graph inference module. First, given a centric actor and its correlative
actor, we analyze their influences to detect causality relation. We estimate the self influence of the centric actor with
self regression. We estimate the correlative influence from
the correlative actor to the centric actor with correlative
regression, which uses asynchronous features at different
timestamps. Second, we synchronize the two action features
by estimating the temporal delay between the cause action
and the effect action. The synchronized features are used to
enhance the feature of the effect action with a channel-wise
fusion. Third, we describe the nodes (actors) with causality features and learn the edges by fusing the causality relation with the appearance relation and distance relation.
The causality relation graph inference provides crucial features of effect action, which are complementary to the base
model using synchronous relation inference. Experiments
show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on the Volleyball dataset and Collective Activity dataset.

1. Introduction
Group activity recognition is a challenging task to identify the group activity by analyzing the actors that perform
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the causality relation. (a) Asynchronous
causality relation. (b) Synchronous temporal relation graph. (c)
Asynchronous temporal causality relation detection and fusion.
(d) Asynchronous temporal causality relation graph learns the influences of two actors to detect causality relation. In this work, we
enforce the graph model with asynchronous causality relation by
analyzing the actors’ influences.

different actions. It has been widely used in many applications in video surveillance, social interaction analysis,
and sports analysis [4, 14, 25, 40]. Unlike individual action
recognition, group activity recognition learns the relation
between actors to infer the group activity. The relation between two actors can be explained as cause-effect relation
(denoted as causality relation), in which the action of one

6652

