This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test of Time: Instilling Video-Language Models with a Sense of Time
Piyush Bagad
University of Amsterdam

Makarand Tapaswi

Cees G.M. Snoek

IIIT Hyderabad

University of Amsterdam

bpiyush.github.io/testoftime-website

Abstract
1.

Modelling and understanding time remains a challenge
in contemporary video understanding models. With language emerging as a key driver towards powerful generalization, it is imperative for foundational video-language
models to have a sense of time. In this paper, we consider
a specific aspect of temporal understanding: consistency of
time order as elicited by before/after relations. We establish that seven existing video-language models struggle to
understand even such simple temporal relations. We then
question whether it is feasible to equip these foundational
models with temporal awareness without re-training them
from scratch. Towards this, we propose a temporal adaptation recipe on top of one such model, VideoCLIP, based on
post-pretraining on a small amount of video-text data. We
conduct a zero-shot evaluation of the adapted models on
six datasets for three downstream tasks which require varying degrees of time awareness. We observe encouraging
performance gains especially when the task needs higher
time awareness. Our work serves as a first step towards
probing and instilling a sense of time in existing videolanguage models without the need for data and computeintense training from scratch.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised pretraining at scale on multimodal web
corpora tied with powerful architectures [107] has led to
foundational models [12] for images [2, 49, 59, 83, 84] and
videos [2, 6, 26, 109, 119, 126]. These models have enabled
remarkable improvements on a plethora of downstream
video-language tasks such as video-text retrieval, video
question-answering, and action recognition. Given the cost
and difficulty of video annotations, even for a small amount
of downstream data, such foundational models are emerging
as the de-facto backbone for zero-shot [119, 122, 127] and
few-shot generalization [2]. However, it remains unclear
if these video-language models capture essential properties
of a video beyond what can be learned from static images,
most notably: time.
Many before us have shown that existing video-language

2.

3.

4.
A.

Dog runs away before it
brings a ball to the man

baby eats food after it
C. The
looks into the camera

The dog brings a a ball to

B. the man before it runs away
baby looks into the
D. The
camera after it eats food

Figure 1. Can you match the correct video-text pairs? Understanding the time order of events across video and language is necessary
to be able to solve this task. See footnote on next page for answers.

models [6, 57, 66, 119] can achieve impressive performance
on several video benchmarks [22, 41, 120] without reliably encoding time [13, 56, 59]. For example, Buch et
al. [13] show that a model that uses a single (carefully
selected) frame often outperforms recent video-language
models [57, 119] on standard video benchmarks such as
MSR-VTT [120]. Lei et al. [56] report similar findings with
a single-frame pretraining approach. These findings hint at
a lack of time awareness in video models. However, it remains unclear if these findings are caused, indeed, by the
lack of time in video models or whether the benchmarks
themselves do not mandate time awareness. Furthermore,
there is no clear definition of what it means for a model to
be time aware. In this paper, we strive to shed light on all
these factors of time awareness in video-language models.
As a first step, we consider a simple notion of understanding time, i.e., understanding temporal relations such as
before and after [4]. Consider the task presented in Fig. 1. A
time invariant model shall be able to associate (A) with (1)

2503

