This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image as a Foreign Language: BE I T Pretraining for
Vision and Vision-Language Tasks
Wenhui Wang*, Hangbo Bao*, Li Dong*, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu
Kriti Aggarwal, Owais Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, Furu Wei†
Microsoft Corporation
https://aka.ms/beit-3

Abstract
A big convergence of language, vision, and multimodal
pretraining is emerging. In this work, we introduce a
general-purpose multimodal foundation model BE I T-3,
which achieves excellent transfer performance on both vision and vision-language tasks. Specifically, we advance
the big convergence from three aspects: backbone architecture, pretraining task, and model scaling up. We use Multiway Transformers for general-purpose modeling, where
the modular architecture enables both deep fusion and
modality-specific encoding. Based on the shared backbone, we perform masked “language” modeling on images
(Imglish), texts (English), and image-text pairs (“parallel
sentences”) in a unified manner. Experimental results show
that BE I T-3 obtains remarkable performance on object detection (COCO), semantic segmentation (ADE20K), image
classification (ImageNet), visual reasoning (NLVR2), visual
question answering (VQAv2), image captioning (COCO),
and cross-modal retrieval (Flickr30K, COCO).

1. Introduction: The Big Convergence
Recent years have featured a trend toward the big convergence of language [14, 15, 46], vision [3, 43], and multimodal [45, 62, 69] pretraining. By performing large-scale
pretraining on massive data, we can easily transfer the models to various downstream tasks. It is appealing that we can
pretrain a general-purpose foundation model that handles
multiple modalities. In this work, we advance the convergence trend for vision-language pretraining from the following three aspects.
First, the success of Transformers [59] is translated from
language to vision [16] and multimodal [26, 62] problems.
The unification of network architectures enables us to seamlessly handle multiple modalities. For vision-language
modeling, there are various ways to apply Transformers
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Masked Data Modeling
Switching Modality Experts

BEiT-3
(Multiway Transformer)

V-FFN

L-FFN

VL-FFN

Vision
Expert

Language
Expert

VL
Expert

𝐿x

Shared Multi-Head
Self-Attention

Images

Texts

Image-Text
Pairs
Multimodal Input

Figure 1. Overview of BE I T-3 pretraining. We perform masked
data modeling on monomodal (i.e., images, and texts) and multimodal (i.e., image-text pairs) data with a shared Multiway Transformer as the backbone network.

due to the different natures of downstream tasks. For example, the dual-encoder architecture is used for efficient
retrieval [45], encoder-decoder networks for generation
tasks [63], and the fusion-encoder architecture for imagetext encoding [26]. However, most foundation models have
to manually convert the end-task formats according to the
specific architectures. Moreover, the parameters are usually not effectively shared across modalities. In this work,
we adopt Multiway Transformers [62] for general-purpose
modeling, i.e., one unified architecture shared for various
downstream tasks. The modular network also comprehensively considers modality-specific encoding and crossmodality fusion.
Second, the pretraining task based on masked data modeling has been successfully applied to various modalities,
such as texts [14] and images [3, 43]. Current visionlanguage foundation models usually multitask other pretraining objectives (such as image-text matching), rendering scaling-up unfriendly and inefficient. In contrast, we
only use one pretraining task, i.e., mask-then-predict, to

19175

