This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Solving Oscillation Problem in Post-Training Quantization Through a
Theoretical Perspective
Yuexiao Ma1 *, Huixia Li2 , Xiawu Zheng3 , Xuefeng Xiao2 , Rui Wang2 ,
Shilei Wen2 , Xin Pan2 , Fei Chao1 , Rongrong Ji1,4†
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
ByteDance Inc. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University.
bobma@stu.xmu.edu.cn, zhengxw01@pcl.ac.cn, {fchao, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn,
{lihuixia, xiaoxuefeng.ailab, ruiwang.rw, zhengmin.666, panxin.321}@bytedance.com.

Abstract
Oscillation

Post-training quantization (PTQ) is widely regarded as
one of the most efficient compression methods practically,
benefitting from its data privacy and low computation costs.
We argue that an overlooked problem of oscillation is in the
PTQ methods. In this paper, we take the initiative to explore and present a theoretical proof to explain why such a
problem is essential in PTQ. And then, we try to solve this
problem by introducing a principled and generalized framework theoretically. In particular, we first formulate the oscillation in PTQ and prove the problem is caused by the difference in module capacity. To this end, we define the module capacity (ModCap) under data-dependent and data-free
scenarios, where the differentials between adjacent modules
are used to measure the degree of oscillation. The problem is then solved by selecting top-k differentials, in which
the corresponding modules are jointly optimized and quantized. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
successfully reduces the performance drop and is generalized to different neural networks and PTQ methods. For
example, with 2/4 bit ResNet-50 quantization, our method
surpasses the previous state-of-the-art method by 1.9%. It
becomes more significant on small model quantization, e.g.
surpasses BRECQ method by 6.61% on MobileNetV2 ×0.5.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have rapidly become a
research hotspot in recent years, being applied to various
* This work was done when Yuexiao Ma was intern at ByteDance Inc.
Code is available at: https://github.com/bytedance/MRECG
† Corresponding Author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Left: Reconstruction loss distribution of BRECQ [17]
on 0.5 scaled MobileNetV2 quantized to 4/4 bit. Loss oscillation in BRECQ during reconstruction see red dashed box. Right:
Mixed reconstruction granularity (MRECG) smoothing loss oscillation and achieving higher accuracy.

scenarios in practice. However, as DNNs evolve, better
model performance is usually associated with huge resource
consumption from deeper and wider networks [8, 14, 28].
Meanwhile, the research field of neural network compression and acceleration, which aims to deploy models in
resource-constrained scenarios, is gradually gaining more
and more attention, including but not limited to Neural Architecture Search [18, 19, 33, 35–40, 42, 43], network pruning [4, 7, 16, 27, 32, 41], and quantization [3, 5, 6, 15, 17, 21,
22,29,31]. Among these methods, quantization proposed to
transform float network activations and weights to low-bit
fixed points, which is capable of accelerating inference [13]
or training [44] speed with little performance degradation.
In general, network quantization methods are divided
into quantization-aware training (QAT) [3, 5, 6] and posttraining quantization (PTQ) [11, 17, 22, 31]. The former
reduces the quantization error by quantization fine-tuning.
Despite the remarkable results, the massive data require-

7950

