This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local-guided Global: Paired Similarity Representation
for Visual Reinforcement Learning
Hyesong Choi1 , Hunsang Lee2 , Wonil Song3 , Sangryul Jeon4 , Kwanghoon Sohn3 , Dongbo Min1†
1
Ewha W. University 2 Hyundai Motor Company 3 Yonsei University 4 University of Michigan

Abstract
Recent vision-based reinforcement learning (RL) methods have found extracting high-level features from raw pixels with self-supervised learning to be effective in learning
policies. However, these methods focus on learning global
representations of images, and disregard local spatial structures present in the consecutively stacked frames. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach, termed self-supervised
Paired Similarity Representation Learning (PSRL) for effectively encoding spatial structures in an unsupervised manner.
Given the input frames, the latent volumes are first generated individually using an encoder, and they are used to
capture the variance in terms of local spatial structures, i.e.,
correspondence maps among multiple frames. This enables
for providing plenty of fine-grained samples for training the
encoder of deep RL. We further attempt to learn the global semantic representations in the action aware transform module
that predicts future state representations using action vectors as a medium. The proposed method imposes similarity
constraints on the three latent volumes; transformed query
representations by estimated pixel-wise correspondence, predicted query representations from the action aware transform
model, and target representations of future state, guiding
action aware transform with locality-inherent volume. Experimental results on complex tasks in Atari Games and
DeepMind Control Suite demonstrate that the RL methods
are significantly boosted by the proposed self-supervised
learning of paired similarity representations.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been an appealing
tool for training agents to solve various tasks including complex control and video games [12]. While most approaches
have focused on training RL agent under the assumption
This work was partly supported by IITP grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.RS-2022-00155966, AI Convergence Innovation Human Resources Development (Ewha Womans University)) and
the Mid-Career Researcher Program through the NRF of Korea (NRF2021R1A2C2011624). † Corresponding author: dbmin@ewha.ac.kr

that compact state representations are readily available, this
assumption does not hold in the cases where raw visual observations (e.g. images) are used as inputs for training the
deep RL agent. Learning visual features from raw pixels
only using a reward function leads to limited performance
and low sample efficiency.
To address this challenge, a number of deep RL approaches [1,10,38,40,43,44,46] leverage the recent advance
of self-supervised learning which effectively extracts highlevel features from raw pixels in an unsupervised fashion.
In [38, 46], they propose to train the convolutional encoder
for pairs of images using a contrastive loss [24,50]. For training the RL agent, given a query and a set of keys consisting of
positive and negative samples, they minimize the contrastive
loss such that the query matches with the positive sample
more than any of the negative samples [38, 46]. While the
parameters of the query encoder are updated through backpropagation using the contrastive loss [50], the parameters
of the key encoder are computed with an exponential moving average (EMA) of the query encoder parameters. The
output representations of the query encoder are passed to the
RL algorithm for training the agent. These approaches have
shown compelling performance and high sample efficiency
on the complex control tasks when compared to existing
image-based RL approaches [31, 33, 51].
While these approaches can effectively encode the global
semantic representations of images with the self-supervised
representation learning, there has been no attention on the
local fine-grained structures present in the consecutively
stacked images. Our key observation is that spatial deformation, i.e., the change in terms of the spatial structures
across the consecutive frames, can provide plenty of local
samples for training the RL agent. Establishing dense correspondence [19, 34, 39, 42, 55], which has been widely used
for various tasks such as image registration and recognition
in computer vision, can be an appropriate tool in modeling
the local spatial deformation.
In this work, we propose a novel approach, termed
self-supervised Paired Similarity Representation Learning
(PSRL), that learns representations for deep RL by effectively encoding the spatial structures in a self-supervised

15072

