This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CF-Font: Content Fusion for Few-shot Font Generation
Chi Wang1,2 *, Min Zhou2 , Tiezheng Ge2 , Yuning Jiang2 , Hujun Bao1 , Weiwei Xu1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group
wangchi1995@zju.edu.cn, {yunqi.zm, tiezheng.gtz, mengzhu.jyn}@alibaba-inc.com
{bao, xww}@cad.zju.edu.cn

Source
(content)

Weight Target
(content) (style)

Ours

The characters generated by our method

（b）

（a）

Figure 1. Characters generated by our method. (a) Source: source character images selected from ten basis fonts for content feature fusion.
Weights: different colors and their covered areas on the doughnut chart represent the weights used to blend content features adaptively. Ten
colors correspond to source images in colored boxes. Target: few-shot target reference character images. One of those is performed as an
example. Ours: images generated by our method with fused content features and style features. (b) Generated character images of the first
ten lines from a famous Chinese poem, each line with an extracted style, e.g. thin, thick, swollen, cuneiform, inscription, or cursive style.

Abstract
Content and style disentanglement is an effective way to
achieve few-shot font generation. It allows to transfer the
style of the font image in a source domain to the style defined with a few reference images in a target domain. However, the content feature extracted using a representative
font might not be optimal. In light of this, we propose a content fusion module (CFM) to project the content feature into
a linear space defined by the content features of basis fonts,
which can take the variation of content features caused
by different fonts into consideration. Our method also allows to optimize the style representation vector of reference
images through a lightweight iterative style-vector refinement (ISR) strategy. Moreover, we treat the 1D projection of
a character image as a probability distribution and leverage
the distance between two distributions as the reconstruction loss (namely projected character loss, PCL). Compared
to L2 or L1 reconstruction loss, the distribution distance
pays more attention to the global shape of characters. We
* This work was done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author.

have evaluated our method on a dataset of 300 fonts with
6.5k characters each. Experimental results verify that our
method outperforms existing state-of-the-art few-shot font
generation methods by a large margin. The source code
can be found at https:// github.com/ wangchi95/ CF-Font.

1. Introduction
Few-shot font generation aims to produce characters of
a new font by transforming font images from a source domain to a target domain according to just a few reference
images. It can greatly reduce the labor of expert designers to create a new style of fonts, especially for logographic
languages that contain multiple characters, such as Chinese
(over 60K characters), Japanese (over 50K characters), and
Korean (over 11K characters), since only several reference
images need to be manually designed. Therefore, font generation has wide applications in font completion for ancient
books and monuments, personal font generation, etc.
Recently, with the rapid development of convolutional neural networks [22] and generative adversarial networks [9] (GAN), pioneers have made great progress in

1858

