This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TriVol: Point Cloud Rendering via Triple Volumes
Tao Hu 1∗ Xiaogang Xu1∗ Ruihang Chu 1 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
{taohu,xgxu,rhchu,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Point Cloud & Camera

Graphics Rendering

Point-NeRF

TriVol (Ours)

Ground Truth

Graphics Rendering

NPBG++

TriVol (Ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Given the colored point cloud of a category-specific scene or object, our TriVol can render photo-realistic images.

Abstract
Existing learning-based methods for point cloud rendering adopt various 3D representations and feature querying mechanisms to alleviate the sparsity problem of point
clouds. However, artifacts still appear in rendered images,
due to the challenges in extracting continuous and discriminative 3D features from point clouds. In this paper, we
present a dense while lightweight 3D representation, named
TriVol, that can be combined with NeRF to render photorealistic images from point clouds. Our TriVol consists of
triple slim volumes, each of which is encoded from the point
cloud. TriVol has two advantages. First, it fuses respective
fields at different scales and thus extracts local and nonlocal features for discriminative representation. Second,
since the volume size is greatly reduced, our 3D decoder
can be efficiently inferred, allowing us to increase the resolution of the 3D space to render more point details. Extensive experiments on different benchmarks with varying
kinds of scenes/objects demonstrate our framework’s effectiveness compared with current approaches. Moreover, our
framework has excellent generalization ability to render a
category of scenes/objects without fine-tuning. The source
code is available at https://github.com/dvlabresearch/TriVol.git.

* Equal Contribution.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic point cloud rendering (without hole artifacts and with clear details) approaches can be employed for
a variety of real-world applications, e.g., the visualization
of automatic drive [6, 8, 23, 29], digital humans [1, 19, 27],
and simulated navigation [5,11,43]. Traditional point cloud
renderers [36] adopt graphics-based methods, which do not
require any learning-based models. They project existing
points as image pixels by rasterization and composition.
However, due to the complex surface materials in real-world
scenes and the limited precision of the 3D scanners, there
are a large number of missing points in the input point
cloud, leading to vacant and blurred image areas inevitably
as illustrated in Fig. 1.
In recent years, learning-based approaches [1, 10, 35, 45,
49] have been proposed to alleviate the rendering problem
in graphics-based methods. They use a variety of querying strategies in the point cloud to obtain continuous 3D
features for rendering, e.g., the ball querying employed in
the PointNet++ [34] and the KNN-based querying in PointNeRF [45]. However, if the queried position is far away
from its nearest points, the feature extraction process will
usually fail and have generalization concerns. To guarantee
accurate rendering, two groups of frameworks are further
proposed. The first group [1, 35, 38] projects the features of
all points into the 2D plane and then trains 2D neural networks, like UNet [37], to restore and sharpen the images.
However, since such a 2D operation is individual for dif-

20732

