This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Turning Strengths into Weaknesses: A Certified Robustness Inspired
Attack Framework against Graph Neural Networks
§
†
‡

Binghui Wang§*, Meng Pang†*, and Yun Dong‡
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology

School of Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Nanchang University

Department of Visual and Performing Arts, Education, and Sciences, Waubonsee Community College

Email: §bwang70@iit.edu, †mengpang@ncu.edu.cn, ‡ydong@waubonsee.edu
Abstract

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in many graph learning tasks. However, recent studies show that GNNs are vulnerable to both
test-time evasion and training-time poisoning attacks that
perturb the graph structure. While existing attack methods
have shown promising attack performance, we would like to
design an attack framework to further enhance the performance. In particular, our attack framework is inspired by
certified robustness, which was originally used by defenders to defend against adversarial attacks. We are the first,
from the attacker perspective, to leverage its properties to
better attack GNNs. Specifically, we first derive nodes’ certified perturbation sizes against graph evasion and poisoning attacks based on randomized smoothing, respectively.
A larger certified perturbation size of a node indicates this
node is theoretically more robust to graph perturbations.
Such a property motivates us to focus more on nodes with
smaller certified perturbation sizes, as they are easier to be
attacked after graph perturbations. Accordingly, we design
a certified robustness inspired attack loss, when incorporated into (any) existing attacks, produces our certified robustness inspired attack counterpart. We apply our framework to the existing attacks and results show it can significantly enhance the existing base attacks’ performance.

1. Introduction
Learning with graphs, such as social networks, citation
networks, chemical networks, has attracted significant attention recently. Among many methods, graph neural networks (GNNs) [14,33,38,41,44] have achieved state-of-theart performance in graph related tasks such as node classification, graph classification, and link prediction. However,
recent studies [8,19,20,23,30,34,36,37,39,40,50,51] show
that GNNs are vulnerable to both test-time graph evasion
* Corresponding authors

attacks and training-time graph poisoning attacks1 . Take
GNNs for node classification as an instance, graph evasion attacks mean that, given a learnt GNN model and a
(clean) graph, an attacker carefully perturbs the graph structure (i.e., inject new edges to or remove the existing edges
from the graph) such that as many testing nodes as possible are misclassified o by the GNN model. Whereas, graph
poisoning attacks mean that, given a GNN algorithm and a
graph, an attacker carefully perturbs the graph structure in
the training phase, such that the learnt GNN model misclassifies as many testing nodes as possible in the testing phase.
While existing methods have shown promising attack performance, we want to ask: Can we design a general attack
framework that can further enhance both the existing graph
evasion and poisoning attacks to GNNs? The answer is yes.
We design an attack framework inspired by certified robustness. Certified robustness was originally used by defenders to guarantee the robustness of classification models against evasion attacks. Generally speaking, a testing
example (e.g., an image or a node) with a better certified
robustness guarantee indicates this example is theoretically
more robust to adversarial (e.g., pixel or graph) perturbations. While certified robustness is mainly derived for doing the good, attackers, on the other hand, can also leverage
its property to do the bad. For instance, when an attacker
knows the certified robustness of nodes in a graph, he can
base on nodes’ certified robustness to reversely reveal the
vulnerable region of the graph and leverage this vulnerability to design better attacks. We are inspired by such property of certified robustness and design the first certified robustness inspired attacks to GNNs.
Our attack framework consists of three parts: i) Inspired by the state-of-the-art randomized smoothing based
certified robustness against evasion attacks to image models [7, 28] and GNN models [35], we first propose to generalize randomized smoothing and derive the node’s cer1 We mainly consider the graph structure attack in the paper, as it is
more effective than the feature attack. However, our attack framework can
be easily extended to the feature attack.

16394

