This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimizing the Accumulated Trajectory Error to Improve Dataset Distillation
Jiawei Du1,5,2†, Yidi Jiang2 †, Vincent Y. F. Tan3,2 , Joey Tianyi Zhou1,5 *, Haizhou Li4,2
1

Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
3

4
5

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore

SRIBD, School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China

Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
{dujiawei,yidi jiang}@u.nus.edu, vtan@nus.edu.sg, Joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com

ConvNet on CIFAR 100, IPC=10

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning has achieved astounding successes
in achieving ever better performances in a wide range of
* Corresponding Author. † Equal Contribution.

MTT in Distillation
MTT in Evaluation
Ours in Evaluation

0.5

L Test(f ) L Test(f * )

4.5
4.0

0.4

L Test(f )

Model-based deep learning has achieved astounding successes due in part to the availability of large-scale real-world
data. However, processing such massive amounts of data
comes at a considerable cost in terms of computations, storage, training and the search for good neural architectures.
Dataset distillation has thus recently come to the fore. This
paradigm involves distilling information from large realworld datasets into tiny and compact synthetic datasets such
that processing the latter ideally yields similar performances
as the former. State-of-the-art methods primarily rely on
learning the synthetic dataset by matching the gradients obtained during training between the real and synthetic data.
However, these gradient-matching methods suffer from the
so-called accumulated trajectory error caused by the discrepancy between the distillation and subsequent evaluation. To
mitigate the adverse impact of this accumulated trajectory
error, we propose a novel approach that encourages the optimization algorithm to seek a flat trajectory. We show that
the weights trained on synthetic data are robust against the
accumulated errors perturbations with the regularization
towards the flat trajectory. Our method, called Flat Trajectory Distillation (FTD), is shown to boost the performance
of gradient-matching methods by up to 4.7% on a subset
of images of the ImageNet dataset with higher resolution
images. We also validate the effectiveness and generalizability of our method with datasets of different resolutions and
demonstrate its applicability to neural architecture search.
Code is available at .https://github.com/AngusDujw/FTDdistillation.

0.6

3.5

0.3
0.2

3.0

0.1

2.5

0.0
0

10

20

Epoch

30

40

50

Figure 1. The change of the loss difference LTTest (fθ ) − LTTest (fθ∗ ),

in which θ and θ∗ denote the weights optimized by synthetic dataset S
and real dataset T , respectively. The gray line represents LTTest (fθ∗ ) and
is associated with the gray y-axis of the plot with two y-axes. The lines
indicated by “Evaluation” represent the networks that are initialized at epoch
0 and trained with the synthetic dataset for 50 epochs. The line indicated by
“Distillation” represents the network that is initialized at epochs 2, 4, . . . , 48
and trained with the synthetic dataset for 2 epochs. The former lines have
much higher loss difference compared to the latter; this is caused by the
accumulated trajectory error. And we try to minimize it in the evaluation
phase, so that the loss difference line of our method is lower and tends to
converge than that of MTT [1].

fields by exploiting large-scale real-world data and wellconstructed Deep Neural Networks (DNN) [4, 5, 9]. Unfortunately, these achievements have come at a prohibitively high
cost in terms of computation, particularly when it relates to
the tasks of data storage, network training, hyperparameter
tuning, and architectural search.
A series of model distillation studies [2, 14, 16, 22] has
thus been proposed to condense the scale of models by distilling the knowledge from a large-scale teacher model into
a compact student one. Recently, a similar but distinct task,
dataset distillation [1, 3, 26, 35, 36, 42–45, 47, 49, 50] has
been considered to condense the size of real-world datasets.
This task aims to synthesize a large-scale real-world dataset
into a tiny synthetic one, such that a model trained with the
synthetic dataset is comparable to the one trained with the

3749

