This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vid2Avatar: 3D Avatar Reconstruction from Videos in the Wild via
Self-supervised Scene Decomposition
Chen Guo1 Tianjian Jiang1 Xu Chen1,2 Jie Song†1 Otmar Hilliges1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Figure 1. We propose Vid2Avatar, a method to reconstruct detailed 3D avatars from monocular videos in the wild via self-supervised scene
decomposition. Our method does not require any groundtruth supervision or priors extracted from large datasets of clothed human scans,
nor do we rely on any external segmentation modules. Project page: https://ait.ethz.ch/vid2avatar.

Abstract
We present Vid2Avatar, a method to learn human avatars
from monocular in-the-wild videos. Reconstructing humans
that move naturally from monocular in-the-wild videos is
difficult. Solving it requires accurately separating humans
from arbitrary backgrounds. Moreover, it requires reconstructing detailed 3D surface from short video sequences,
making it even more challenging. Despite these challenges,
our method does not require any groundtruth supervision
or priors extracted from large datasets of clothed human
scans, nor do we rely on any external segmentation modules. Instead, it solves the tasks of scene decomposition and
surface reconstruction directly in 3D by modeling both the
human and the background in the scene jointly, parameterized via two separate neural fields. Specifically, we define
a temporally consistent human representation in canonical
space and formulate a global optimization over the background model, the canonical human shape and texture, and
per-frame human pose parameters. A coarse-to-fine sampling strategy for volume rendering and novel objectives
are introduced for a clean separation of dynamic human
and static background, yielding detailed and robust 3D human reconstructions. The evaluation of our method shows
improvements over prior art on publicly available datasets.

† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Being able to reconstruct detailed avatars from readily
available “in-the-wild” videos, for example recorded with
a phone, would enable many applications in AR/VR, in
human-computer interaction, robotics and in the movie and
sports industry. Traditionally, high-fidelity 3D reconstruction of dynamic humans has required calibrated multi-view
systems [9, 10, 19, 28, 32, 48, 52], which are expensive and
require highly-specialized expertise to operate. In contrast,
emerging applications such as the Metaverse require more
light-weight and practical solutions in order to make the
digitization of humans a widely available technology. Reconstructing humans that move naturally from monocular
in-the-wild videos is clearly a difficult problem. Solving it
requires accurately separating humans from arbitrary backgrounds, without any prior knowledge about the scene or
the subject. Moreover it requires reconstructing detailed 3D
surface from short video sequences, made even more challenging due to depth ambiguities, the complex dynamics of
human motion and the high-frequency surface details.
Traditional template-based approaches [15, 16, 61] cannot generalize to in-the-wild settings due to the requirement
for a pre-scanned template and manual rigging. Methods
that are based on explicit mesh representations are limited
to a fixed topology and resolution [3, 8, 14, 36]. Fullysupervised methods that directly regress 3D surfaces from

12858

