This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanBench: Towards General Human-centric Perception
with Projector Assisted Pretraining
Shixiang Tang1,4 *, Cheng Chen4 *, Qingsong Xie4 , Meilin Chen2,4 , Yizhou Wang2,4 , Yuanzheng Ci1 ,
Lei Bai3†, Feng Zhu4 , Haiyang Yang4 , Li Yi4 , Rui Zhao4,5 , Wanli Ouyang3
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 SenseTime Research,
5
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
stan3906@uni.sydney.edu.au, chencheng1@sensetime.com, bailei@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Human-centric perceptions include a variety of vision
tasks, which have widespread industrial applications, including surveillance, autonomous driving, and the metaverse. It is desirable to have a general pretrain model
for versatile human-centric downstream tasks. This paper forges ahead along this path from the aspects of both
benchmark and pretraining methods. Specifically, we propose a HumanBench based on existing datasets to comprehensively evaluate on the common ground the generalization abilities of different pretraining methods on 19
datasets from 6 diverse downstream tasks, including person
ReID, pose estimation, human parsing, pedestrian attribute
recognition, pedestrian detection, and crowd counting. To
learn both coarse-grained and fine-grained knowledge in
human bodies, we further propose a Projector AssisTed
Hierarchical pretraining method (PATH) to learn diverse
knowledge at different granularity levels. Comprehensive
evaluations on HumanBench show that our PATH achieves
new state-of-the-art results on 17 downstream datasets and
on-par results on the other 2 datasets. The code will be
publicly at https://github.com/OpenGVLab/HumanBench.

1. Introduction
Human-centric perception has been a long-standing pursuit for computer vision and machine learning communities. It encompasses massive research tasks and applications including person ReID in surveillance [16, 17, 60,
96, 112], human parsing and pose estimation in the metaverse [47, 48, 61, 79, 90, 92], and pedestrian detection in autonomous driving [8, 51, 87]. Although significant progress
has been made, most existing human-centric studies and
pipelines are task-specific for better performances, leading
* Equal contribution. This work was done in SenseTime.
† Corresponding author.

to huge costs in representation/network design, pretraining,
parameter-tuning, and annotations. To promote real-world
deployment, we ask: whether a general human-centric pretraining model can be developed that can benefit diverse
human-centric tasks and be efficiently adapted to downstream tasks?
Intuitively, we argue that pretraining such general
human-centric models is possible for two reasons. First,
there are obvious correlations among different humancentric tasks. For example, both human parsing and pose estimation predict the fine-grained parts of human bodies [29,
49] with differences in annotation granularities. Thus, the
annotations in one human-centric task may benefit other
human-centric tasks when trained together. Second, recent
achievements in foundation models [5, 11, 38, 65, 66, 80]
have shown that large-scale deep neural networks (e.g.,
transformers [13]) have the flexibility to handle diverse input modalities and the capacity to deal with different tasks.
For example, Uni-Percevier [115] and BEITv3 [85] are applicable to multiple vision and language tasks.
Despite the opportunities of processing multiple humancentric tasks with one pretraining model, there are two obstacles for developing general human-centric pretraining
models. First, although there are many benchmarks for every single human-centric task, there is still no benchmark
to fairly and comprehensively compare various pretraining
methods on a common ground for a broad range of humancentric tasks, data distributions, and application scenarios.
Second, different from most existing general foundation
models trained by unified global vision-language consistencies, pretraining human-centric models are required to
learn both global (e.g., person ReID and pedestrian detection) and fine-grained semantic features (e.g., pose estimation and human parsing) of human bodies from diverse annotation granularity simultaneously.
In this paper, we first build a benchmark, called HumanBench, based on existing datasets to enable pretrain-

21970

