This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion Information Propagation for Neural Video Compression
Jiahao Li 2
Bin Li2
Houqiang Li1
Yan Lu2
Linfeng Qi1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
qlf324@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lihq@ustc.edu.cn, {li.jiahao, libin, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Previous methods

Abstract
In most existing neural video codecs, the information
flow therein is uni-directional, where only motion coding
provides motion vectors for frame coding. In this paper, we
argue that, through information interactions, the synergy
between motion coding and frame coding can be achieved.
We effectively introduce bi-directional information interactions between motion coding and frame coding via our Motion Information Propagation. When generating the temporal contexts for frame coding, the high-dimension motion
feature from the motion decoder serves as motion guidance
to mitigate the alignment errors. Meanwhile, besides assisting frame coding at the current time step, the feature
from context generation will be propagated as motion condition when coding the subsequent motion latent. Through
the cycle of such interactions, feature propagation on motion coding is built, strengthening the capacity of exploiting
long-range temporal correlation. In addition, we propose
hybrid context generation to exploit the multi-scale context
features and provide better motion condition. Experiments
show that our method can achieve 12.9% bit rate saving
over the previous SOTA neural video codec.

1. Introduction
How to better utilize the temporal correlation across
video frames is one of the core problems throughout the line
of video compression research, for both traditional video
codec and neural video codec.
In traditional video codec, such as H.264 [41] and
HEVC [36], temporal correlation is captured by rule-based
motion-compensated prediction. It is assumed that the pixels within a block share the same motion. For the current coding block, the best motion vector corresponds to
the matching block that results in the least bit cost. It is
searched and then is used for motion compensation. Such
motion-compensated prediction is usually a local optimization limited to two frames. The correlation across multiple
* This work was done when Linfeng Qi was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.

Motion
Coding
Only provide
motion vectors
Frame
Coding

𝑇

Propagation

Motion
Coding

Information
interactions
Frame

𝑇

𝑇

Coding
Our method

Figure 1. Compared with previous methods, besides the propagation for frame coding, our method: 1. introduces bi-directional information interactions between motion coding and frame coding.
2. enables propagation for motion coding through the interactions.

frames is neglected, which limits the capacity to utilize the
temporal characteristics of videos.
With the flourish of deep learning, it is possible for
neural video codec [10, 12–14, 18, 25, 26, 45] to access
pixel-wise optical flow and long-range temporal information. Typically, the entire coding process can be roughly
divided into three steps: motion coding, context generation, and frame coding. The motion is firstly estimated and
transmitted. Then the temporal context (prediction is also a
kind of context in residual coding framework) is obtained
through motion compensation, where handcrafted blockwise matching is replaced by optical flow based pixel-wise
warping. Finally, with the assistance of temporal context,
the frame is encoded and decoded. Frame coding draws
more attention in most existing methods.
As shown in Figure 1, in the previous methods, the information flow therein is uni-directional, where only motion coding provides motion vectors for frame coding. By
contrast, we emphasize the synergy between motion coding
and frame coding. As far as we know, we are the first to introduce effective bi-directional information interactions between motion coding and frame coding. Through the cycle
of such interactions, feature propagation on motion coding

6111

