This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Monocular 3D Object Detection using
Multi-View Projection and Direction Consistency
Runzhou Tao1,3∗ , Wencheng Han2∗ , Zhongying Qiu3 , Cheng-zhong Xu2 , Jianbing Shen2†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau, 3 QCraft
{wencheng256, shenjiangbingcg}@gmail.com

https://github.com/weakmono3d/weakmono3d

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection has become a mainstream approach in automatic driving for its easy application. A prominent advantage is that it does not need LiDAR point clouds during the inference. However, most current methods still rely on 3D point cloud data for labeling
the ground truths used in the training phase. This inconsistency between the training and inference makes it hard
to utilize the large-scale feedback data and increases the
data collection expenses. To bridge this gap, we propose
a new weakly supervised monocular 3D objection detection method, which can train the model with only 2D labels
marked on images. To be specific, we explore three types
of consistency in this task, i.e. the projection, multi-view
and direction consistency, and design a weakly-supervised
architecture based on these consistencies. Moreover, we
propose a new 2D direction labeling method in this task
to guide the model for accurate rotation direction prediction. Experiments show that our weakly-supervised method
achieves comparable performance with some fully supervised methods. When used as a pre-training method, our
model can significantly outperform the corresponding fullysupervised baseline with only 1/3 3D labels.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection is a foundational research area in computer vision and plays an important role
in autonomous driving systems. It aims to identify the objects and estimate the 3D bounding boxes of the corresponding targets with a single image as input. Different from
3D point clouds detection methods like [42, 43, 47, 53, 61],
∗Equal contribution. †Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This
work was supported in part by the FDCT grant SKL-IOTSC(UM)-20212023, the FDCT Grant 0123/2022/AFJ, the Grant MYRG-CRG202200013-IOTSC-ICI, and the Grant SRG2022-00023-IOTSC.

2D ground truth

Consistent with
2D ground truth

Viewpoint
(a)

common solution of two viewpoints

Region
of projection

Viewpoint 1

Viewpoint 2
(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of the projection and multi-view consistency. (a) Only projection consistency cannot determine the
accurate position of the target because projection loss has more
than one optimal solution in the 3D space. For example, the two
dashed boxes in 3D space produce the same projection loss because they have the same projection in 2D space. (b) Constrained
by the multi-view consistency, the optimal solution must be the
common solution for two viewpoints, that is, the target location.

monocular 3D detection models [28, 34, 48, 49, 65] alleviate
the need of LiDAR sensors, making the self-driving system
easier to be applied.
However, there is still a challenging problem that limits the application of 3D object detection with pure camera vision data. That is, the ground truth 3D boxes used
in the training phases are usually labeled with 3D point
clouds [2, 10, 45]. Recently, self-driving systems with pure
camera vision inputs have become a new trend. But the
feedback video clips captured by the production cars cannot be utilized to improve the 3D object detection models because of the lack of training labels. Compared with
the data from the data-collection cars, the feedback images
from production cars have a larger scale diversity and contain more corner cases, which are crucial for improving the
robustness of models.
In this paper, we propose a new weakly supervised training method, which can train the 3D object detection models
with only camera images and 2D labels, making it possible
to utilize the feedback data from the production cars. To

17482

