This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Personalized High Quality Volumetric Head Avatars
from Monocular RGB Videos
Ziqian Bai1,2∗ Feitong Tan1 Zeng Huang1 Kripasindhu Sarkar1 Danhang Tang1
Di Qiu1 Abhimitra Meka1 Ruofei Du1 Mingsong Dou1 Sergio Orts-Escolano1
Rohit Pandey1 Ping Tan2 Thabo Beeler1 Sean Fanello1 Yinda Zhang1
1
2
Google
Simon Fraser University

Controllable Photorealistic Head Avatar

Monocular RGB Video

Figure 1. Our technique builds a 3D avatar representation of a person using just a single short monocular RGB video (e.g., 1-2 minutes). We
leverage a 3DMM to track the user’s expressions. By anchoring a neural radiance field to the 3DMM geometry, we generate a volumetric
photorealistic 3D avatar that can be rendered with user-defined expression and viewpoint. Note that our method works well on challenging
materials, e.g., hair and dramatic expressions. Please see our webpage augmentedperception.github.io/monoavatar for more results.

Abstract
We propose a method to learn a high-quality implicit
3D head avatar from a monocular RGB video captured
in the wild. The learnt avatar is driven by a parametric face model to achieve user-controlled facial expressions
and head poses. Our hybrid pipeline combines the geometry prior and dynamic tracking of a 3DMM with a neural
radiance field to achieve fine-grained control and photorealism. To reduce over-smoothing and improve out-of-model
expressions synthesis, we propose to predict local features
anchored on the 3DMM geometry. These learnt features
are driven by 3DMM deformation and interpolated in 3D
space to yield the volumetric radiance at a designated query
point. We further show that using a Convolutional Neural
Network in the UV space is critical in incorporating spatial
context and producing representative local features. Extensive experiments show that we are able to reconstruct highquality avatars, with more accurate expression-dependent
details, good generalization to out-of-training expressions,
and quantitatively superior renderings compared to other

state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Creating a controllable human avatar is a fundamental piece of technology for many downstream applications,
such as AR/VR communication [20,31], virtual try-on [37],
virtual tourism [13], games [42], and visual effects for
movies [12, 18]. Prior art in high-quality avatar generation
typically requires extensive hardware configurations (i.e.,
camera arrays [6, 12, 31], light stages [18, 29], dedicated
depth sensors [8]), or laborious manual intervention [1]. Alternatively, reconstructing avatars from monocular RGB
videos significantly relaxes the dependency on equipment
setup and broadens the application scenarios. However,
monocular head avatar creation is highly ill-posed due to
the dual problems of reconstructing and tracking highly
articulated and deformable facial geometry, while model∗ Work was conducted while Ziqian Bai was an intern at Google.

16890

