This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Primitive Generation and Semantic-related Alignment
for Universal Zero-Shot Segmentation

1

Shuting He1†
Henghui Ding2†
Wei Jiang1
2
Zhejiang University
Nanyang Technological University
https://henghuiding.github.io/PADing

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image segmentation aims to group pixels with different
semantics, e.g., category or instance [11]. Deep learning methods [9, 11, 27, 34, 35, 44] have greatly advanced
the performance of image segmentation with the powerful
learning ability of CNNs [28] and Transformer [54]. However, since deep learning methods are data-driven, great
† Equal contribution.

Corresponding author (henghui.ding@gmail.com).

Training

n
See

Seen person baseball bat fence surfboard rock sea
Unseen grass frisbee

es

⋯

Relationships
""

"!

"#

!"
!!

a
Im

ge

ou
Gr

nd

T ru

th

⋯

ag
Im

e

ou
Gr

nd

T ru

th

Semantic Knowledge

Seen and Unseen classes
Testing

We study universal zero-shot segmentation in this work
to achieve panoptic, instance, and semantic segmentation
for novel categories without any training samples. Such
zero-shot segmentation ability relies on inter-class relationships in semantic space to transfer the visual knowledge
learned from seen categories to unseen ones. Thus, it is
desired to well bridge semantic-visual spaces and apply
the semantic relationships to visual feature learning. We
introduce a generative model to synthesize features for
unseen categories, which links semantic and visual spaces
as well as address the issue of lack of unseen training
data. Furthermore, to mitigate the domain gap between
semantic and visual spaces, firstly, we enhance the vanilla
generator with learned primitives, each of which contains
fine-grained attributes related to categories, and synthesize
unseen features by selectively assembling these primitives.
Secondly, we propose to disentangle the visual feature
into the semantic-related part and the semantic-unrelated
part that contains useful visual classification clues but is
less relevant to semantic representation. The inter-class
relationships of semantic-related visual features are then
required to be aligned with those in semantic space, thereby
transferring semantic knowledge to visual feature learning.
The proposed approach achieves impressively state-of-theart performance on zero-shot panoptic segmentation, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation.

ss
cla

frisbee

grass

Image

w/o semantic
Segment seen classes only

w/ semantic
Segment seen & unseen

Figure 1. Zero-shot image segmentation aims to transfer the
knowledge learned from seen classes to unseen ones (i.e., never
shown up in training) with the help of semantic knowledge.

challenges are induced by the intense demand for largescale labeled training samples, which are labor-intensive
and time-consuming. To address this issue, zero-shot
learning (ZSL) [36,47] is proposed to classify novel objects
with no training samples. Recently, ZSL is extended
into segmentation tasks like zero-shot semantic segmentation (ZSS) [4, 57] and zero-shot instance segmentation
(ZSI) [63]. Herein, we further introduce zero-shot panoptic
segmentation (ZSP) and aim to build a universal framework
for zero-shot panoptic/semantic/instance segmentation with
the help of semantic knowledge, as shown in Fig. 1.
Different from image classification, segmentation requires pixel-wise classification and is more challenging in
terms of class representation learning. Substantial efforts
have been devoted to zero-shot semantic segmentation [4,
57] and can be categorized into projection-based methods [19, 57, 61] and generative model-based methods [4,
25, 38]. The generative model-based methods are usually superior to the projection-based methods because they
produce synthetic training features for the unseen group,
which contribute to alleviating the crucial bias issue [49] of
tending to classify objects into seen classes. Owing to the
above merits, we follow the paradigm of generative model-

11238

