This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Mask Correction for Click-Based Interactive Image Segmentation
Fei Du, Jianlong Yuan, Zhibin Wang, Fan Wang
Alibaba Group
{dufei.df, gongyuan.yjl, zhibin.waz, fan.w}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The goal of click-based interactive image segmentation
is to extract target masks with the input of positive/negative
clicks. Every time a new click is placed, existing methods
run the whole segmentation network to obtain a corrected
mask, which is inefficient since several clicks may be needed
to reach satisfactory accuracy. To this end, we propose
an efficient method to correct the mask with a lightweight
mask correction network. The whole network remains a
low computational cost from the second click, even if we
have a large backbone. However, a simple correction network with limited capacity is not likely to achieve comparable performance with a classic segmentation network.
Thus, we propose a click-guided self-attention module and
a click-guided correlation module to effectively exploits the
click information to boost performance. First, several templates are selected based on the semantic similarity with
click features. Then the self-attention module propagates
the template information to other pixels, while the correlation module directly uses the templates to obtain target outlines. With the efficient architecture and two click-guided
modules, our method shows preferable performance and efficiency compared to existing methods. The code will be
released at https://github.com/feiaxyt/EMCClick.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation aims to select the object of interest with minimal iterative interactions, which
can benefit various computer vision tasks, such as semantic
segmentation [30], instance segmentation [17], and medical image analysis [28]. As the success of these tasks often
requires large-scale mask-level annotations and it is timeconsuming to annotate the image manually, interactive segmentation is an attractive way to simplify the annotation
process and alleviate the annotation cost.
Different interaction strategies have been studied to simplify the interactive process, including bounding boxes [23,
37, 48], clicks [33, 40, 47], scribbles [1, 2], boundary

Figure 1. Comparison between the architectures of our method and
classic methods. Classic methods run the segmentation network in
every iteration, which is inefficient if a large network is adopted.
We update the mask via a lightweight mask correction network,
enabling an efficient interaction.

points [32], and extreme points [34]. However, due to the
complexity of the object boundary and appearance, the performance of methods based on bounding boxes may drop
if the bounding boxes are not tightly drawn [48]. Besides,
it requires more effort to identify the object boundary and
place bounding boxes, boundary points, or extreme points
on the image. In contrast, the click-based method only requires the users to progressively place positive and negative clicks on the foreground and background areas, respectively. It has recently attracted more attention due to its
simplicity and well-established training and evaluation protocols [40,47]. Hence, we focus on the click-based method.
In click-based interactive segmentation methods, the
model returns a corrected prediction mask after each click
from the users. Efficiency is of great importance to interactive segmentation methods since a typical segmentation process requires several interactive iterations. In recent years, deep learning-based interactive segmentation
methods have achieved considerably better performance
compared to traditional methods. However, some recent
works [20, 22, 39] achieve state-of-the-art performance by
employing inference-time optimization to refine the masks,
which significantly increases the computational cost. To

22773

