This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modular Memorability: Tiered Representations for Video Memorability
Prediction
Théo Dumont
Mines Paris, PSL – Research University
Paris, France

Juan Segundo Hevia
Memorable AI
Boston, USA

Camilo L. Fosco*
Memorable AI
Boston, USA

dumont.theo@protonmail.com

juan.hevia@memorable.io

camilo@memorable.io

Abstract
The question of how to best estimate the memorability of
visual content is currently a source of debate in the memorability community. In this paper, we propose to explore
how different key properties of images and videos affect
their consolidation into memory. We analyze the impact
of several features and develop a model that emulates the
most important parts of a proposed “pathway to memory”:
a simple but effective way of representing the different hurdles that new visual content needs to surpass to stay in memory. This framework leads to the construction of our M3-S
model, a novel memorability network that processes input
videos in a modular fashion. Each module of the network
emulates one of the four key steps of the pathway to memory: raw encoding, scene understanding, event understanding and memory consolidation. We find that the different
representations learned by our modules are non-trivial and
substantially different from each other. Additionally, we observe that certain representations tend to perform better at
the task of memorability prediction than others, and we introduce an in-depth ablation study to support our results.
Our proposed approach surpasses the state of the art on
the two largest video memorability datasets and opens the
door to new applications in the field. Our code is available
at https://github.com/tekal- ai/modularmemorability.

1. Introduction
The human brain is optimized to remember important
content and forget irrelevant information. Research has
shown that in the world of visual imagery, the brain’s recall
ability is influenced by the content itself: certain images and
videos tend to stay in memory for longer, no matter the audience it is shown to or the context it appears in [3, 9]. The
property of visual content that makes it more or less mem* Corresponding author.

Fusion
Low-level
understanding module

Video
Video

+

Mid-level
understanding module

Memorability
regression

m

High-level
understanding module
Contextual similarity
module

Figure 1. Our proposed modular framework. Our framework
predicts memorability by extracting low-level, mid-level and highlevel memorability-aware representations. These representations
are compared to a predefined visual context to extract features
measuring similarity with this given context. Our M3-S model
utilizes four modules to obtain these representations: a low-level
understanding module composed of traditional feature extractors,
a mid-level understanding module focused on scene and object
properties, a high-level understanding module that extracts temporal patterns and actions, and a contextual similarity module that
computes features through clustering. The feature vectors produced by the modules are fused and fed to a regression module
to produce memorability scores.

orable is referred to as memorability, and current research
studies this phenomenon as an intrinsic property. Memorability has been shown to be highly consistent across observers [10, 13, 28, 40], uncorrelated with aesthetics [28, 29]
and highly unintuitive [29]. Some studies are proposing that
it might be a proxy to the utility of the information carried
by visual content, as measured by the human brain [9].
Given its consistency, many previous works have tried
to develop systems to predict memorability scores from visual media directly. Some developments attempt to use
low-level image features and specific semantic information
[29, 30], while more recent work has focused on deep neural networks, leveraging their ability to learn rich representations through regressing ground-truth scores directly from
the pixel-level visual input [31]. Here, we argue that current

10751

