This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can’t Steal? Cont-Steal! Contrastive Stealing Attacks
Against Image Encoders
Zeyang Sha† Xinlei He† Ning Yu‡ Michael Backes† Yang Zhang†
†

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

‡

Salesforce Research

{zeyang.sha, xinlei.he, director, zhang}@cispa.de, ning.yu@salesforce.com

Abstract
Self-supervised representation learning techniques have
been developing rapidly to make full use of unlabeled images. They encode images into rich features that are oblivious to downstream tasks. Behind their revolutionary representation power, the requirements for dedicated model designs and a massive amount of computation resources expose image encoders to the risks of potential model stealing attacks - a cheap way to mimic the well-trained encoder performance while circumventing the demanding requirements. Yet conventional attacks only target supervised
classifiers given their predicted labels and/or posteriors,
which leaves the vulnerability of unsupervised encoders unexplored.
In this paper, we first instantiate the conventional stealing attacks against encoders and demonstrate their severer
vulnerability compared with downstream classifiers. To better leverage the rich representation of encoders, we further propose Cont-Steal, a contrastive-learning-based attack, and validate its improved stealing effectiveness in various experiment settings. As a takeaway, we appeal to our
community’s attention to the intellectual property protection of representation learning techniques, especially to the
defenses against encoder stealing attacks like ours. 1

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of applying deep learning (DL) to computer vision tasks. Different
from supervised DL models, self-supervised learning which
transforms unlabeled data samples into rich representations,
has gained more and more popularity.
Behind its powerful representation, it is non-trivial to obtain a state-of-the-art image encoder. For instance, SimCLR [6] uses 128 TPU v3 cores to pre-train a ResNet1 See our code in https://github.com/zeyangsha/ContSteal.

Figure 1. Model stealing attacks against classifiers (previous) v.s.
model stealing attacks against encoders (ours). Previous works
aim to steal a whole classifier using the predicted label or posteriors of a target model. In our work, we aim to steal the target encoder using its embeddings. The target encoder (Et ) is pre-trained
and fixed, as shown in the solid frame. The surrogate encoder (Es )
is trainable by the adversary, as shown in the dashed frame.

50 encoder with a batch size of 4096. Therefore, many
big companies provide cloud-based self-supervised learning encoder services for users. For instance, Cohere,2 OpenAI,3 and Clarifai4 provide the embedding API of images
and texts for commercial usage. There are many works
[10, 26, 30] exploring security issues of encoder-based API.
Therefore, it is a very important and urgent problem.
These kinds of service leave the possibility of model
stealing attacks [5, 25, 28, 37, 44, 48, 50, 51]. In these attacks, the adversary aims to steal the parameters or functionalities of target models with only query access to them.
A successful model stealing attack does not only threaten
2 https://cohere.ai/

3 https : / / beta . openai . com / docs / api - reference /
embeddings/
4 https://www.clarifai.com/models/general-imageembedding/

16373

