This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pixels, Regions, and Objects: Multiple Enhancement for Salient Object Detection
Yi Wang
DUT-RU International School of
Information Science and Engineering
Dalian University of Technology, China

Ruili Wang ∗
School of Mathematical and
Computational Sciences
Massey University, New Zealand

dlutwangyi@dlut.edu.cn

ruili.wang@massey.ac.nz

Xin Fan
DUT-RU International School
of Information Science and Engineering
Dalian University of Technology, China

Tianzhu Wang
School of Mathematical and
Computational Sciences
Massey University, New Zealand

xin.fan@dlut.edu.cn

wangtz@126.com

Xiangjian He *
School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham Ningbo China, Ningbo, China
sean.he@nottingham.edu.cn

Abstract
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to mimic the human
visual system (HVS) and cognition mechanisms to identify
and segment salient objects. However, due to the complexity of these mechanisms, current methods are not perfect.
Accuracy and robustness need to be further improved, particularly in complex scenes with multiple objects and background clutter. To address this issue, we propose a novel
approach called Multiple Enhancement Network (MENet)
that adopts the boundary sensibility, content integrity, iterative refinement, and frequency decomposition mechanisms of HVS. A multi-level hybrid loss is firstly designed
to guide the network to learn pixel-level, region-level, and
object-level features. A flexible multiscale feature enhancement module (ME-Module) is then designed to gradually
aggregate and refine global or detailed features by changing the size order of the input feature sequence. An iterative training strategy is used to enhance boundary features and adaptive features in the dual-branch decoder of
MENet. Comprehensive evaluations on six challenging
benchmark datasets show that MENet achieves state-of-theart results. Both the codes and results are publicly available
at https://github.com/yiwangtz/MENet.

* The corresponding authors

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to identify the most
visually conspicuous regions in an image that are consistent with the human visual system (HVS) and cognition
mechanisms [9,13,40]. SOD can eliminate redundant information and improve computational performance for many
high-level computer vision tasks, such as action recognition
[4, 60], image segmentation [3, 33], image captioning [52],
object tracking [14], and video summary [58]. Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) [25] based SOD models have
been particularly effective at improving SOD performance
in recent years [40]. However, accurately segmenting complex object boundaries remains a challenging task for SOD.
This is especially true when the geometry and/or boundaries
of these objects are complex, or when scenes are chaotic or
cluttered [9, 10], as shown in Fig. 1.
An intuitive solution for addressing this problem is to
explore the mechanisms of the human vision system (HVS)
[55] and some of which have been used to improve SOD
models, as described below. (i) A human tends to enhance
recognition by alternating between viewing the entire object
and the details of complex scenes, which has been utilized
for various visual tasks [16, 17, 22, 36]. (ii) HVS is sensitive to both boundary/contour and structural information,
so dual-branch feature refinement structures have been developed to incorporate extra-edge information to enhance
salient feature learning [11, 22, 24, 43, 47, 53, 57]. Some

10031

