This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Texts as Images in Prompt Tuning for Multi-Label Image Recognition
Zixian Guo1,2 * Bowen Dong1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology

2

Zhilong Ji2

Jinfeng Bai2
3

Tomorrow Advancing Life

Yiwen Guo4

Wangmeng Zuo1,2(

Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou

4

)

Independent Researcher

zixian guo@foxmail.com

cndongsky@gmail.com

zhilongji@hotmail.com

jfbai.bit@gmail.com

guoyiwen89@gmail.com

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Prompt tuning has been employed as an efficient way to
adapt large vision-language pre-trained models (e.g. CLIP)
to various downstream tasks in data-limited or label-limited
settings. Nonetheless, visual data (e.g., images) is by default prerequisite for learning prompts in existing methods.
In this work, we advocate that the effectiveness of imagetext contrastive learning in aligning the two modalities (for
training CLIP) further makes it feasible to treat texts as images for prompt tuning and introduce TaI prompting. In
contrast to the visual data, text descriptions are easy to collect, and their class labels can be directly derived. Particularly, we apply TaI prompting to multi-label image recognition, where sentences in the wild serve as alternatives to images for prompt tuning. Moreover, with TaI, double-grained
prompt tuning (TaI-DPT) is further presented to extract both
coarse-grained and fine-grained embeddings for enhancing the multi-label recognition performance. Experimental results show that our proposed TaI-DPT outperforms
zero-shot CLIP by a large margin on multiple benchmarks,
e.g., MS-COCO, VOC2007, and NUS-WIDE, while it can
be combined with existing methods of prompting from images to improve recognition performance further. The code
is released at https://github.com/guozix/TaI-DPT.

1. Introduction
Recent few years have witnessed rapid progress in large
vision-language (VL) pre-trained models [1, 16, 19, 24, 33,
36] as well as their remarkable performance on downstream
vision tasks. A VL pre-trained model generally involves
data encoders, and it is becoming increasingly popular to
exploit image-test contrastive loss [24] to align the embedding of images and texts into a shared space. When adapting to downstream tasks in data-limited or label-limited settings, it is often ineffective to fine-tune the entire model, due
to its high complexity. Then, prompt tuning as a representative parameter-efficient learning paradigm has emerged as
* This work was done when Zixian Guo was a research intern at TAL.

Figure 1. A comparison between prompting from images and
our text-as-image (TaI) prompting. (a) Prompting from images
(e.g., [41]) uses labeled images of task categories to learn the text
prompts. Instead, (b) our TaI prompting learn the prompts with
easily-accessed text descriptions containing target categories. (c)
After training, the learned prompts in (a) or (b) can be readily applied to test images.

an efficient way to adapt VL models to downstream tasks.
Albeit considerable achievements have been made, existing prompt tuning methods generally require visual data
to learn prompts (as shown in Fig. 1(a)). For example,
CoOp [41] learns from annotated images. CoCoOp [40]
further introduces generalizable input-conditional prompts.
DualCoOp [28] adapts CLIP to multi-label recognition
tasks by training pairs of positive and negative prompts with
partial-labeled images. Nonetheless, the performance of
these prompting methods may be limited when it is infeasible to obtain sufficient image data or annotate the required
images.
In this paper, we advocate treating Texts as Images for
prompt tuning, i.e., TaI prompting. It is considered feasible
as the image encoder and text encoder in many pre-trained
VL models [16, 24] encode images and texts into a shared
space. Given an image and its caption, the visual features
produced by the image encoder will be close to the text feature of the caption produced by the text encoder. There-

2808

