This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STMixer: A One-Stage Sparse Action Detector
Tao Wu1,*
Mengqi Cao1,*
Ziteng Gao1
Gangshan Wu1
Limin Wang1,2,
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Shanghai AI Lab
{wt,mg20370004}@smail.nju.edu.cn, gzt@outlook.com, {gswu, lmwang}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video action detection [14,18,20,30,32,44,46] is an important problem in video understanding, which aims to recognize all action instances present in a video and also localize them in both space and time. It has drawn a significant
amount of research attention, due to its wide applications in
many areas like security and sports analysis.
Since the proposal of large-scale action detection benchmarks [16, 22], action detection has made remarkable
progress. This progress is partially due to the advances
of video representation learning such as video convolution
*: Equal contribution.

: Corresponding author.

STMixer,ViT-B (from VideoMAE V2)

34

mAP

Traditional video action detectors typically adopt the
two-stage pipeline, where a person detector is first employed to generate actor boxes and then 3D RoIAlign is
used to extract actor-specific features for classification.
This detection paradigm requires multi-stage training and
inference, and cannot capture context information outside
the bounding box. Recently, a few query-based action detectors are proposed to predict action instances in an endto-end manner. However, they still lack adaptability in feature sampling and decoding, thus suffering from the issues
of inferior performance or slower convergence. In this paper, we propose a new one-stage sparse action detector,
termed STMixer. STMixer is based on two core designs.
First, we present a query-based adaptive feature sampling
module, which endows our STMixer with the flexibility of
mining a set of discriminative features from the entire spatiotemporal domain. Second, we devise a dual-branch feature mixing module, which allows our STMixer to dynamically attend to and mix video features along the spatial and
the temporal dimension respectively for better feature decoding. Coupling these two designs with a video backbone
yields an efficient end-to-end action detector. Without bells
and whistles, our STMixer obtains the state-of-the-art results on the datasets of AVA, UCF101-24, and JHMDB.

36

32

STMixer,CSN-152

STMixer,ViT-B (from VideoMAE)
VideoMAE,ViT-B

TubeR,CSN-152
30

STMixer,SF-R101-NL
SlowFast,SF-R101-NL

28

WOO,SF-R101-NL
150

200

250

GFLOPs

CSN,CSN-152
300

350

400

Figure 1. Comparion of mAP versus GFLOPs. We report
detection mAP on AVA v2.2. The GFLOPs of CSN, SlowFast,
and VideoMAE are the sum of Faster RCNN-R101-FPN detector
GFLOPs and classifier GFLOPs. Different methods are marked by
different makers and models with the same backbone are marked
in the same color. The results of CSN are from [53]. Our STMixer
achieves the best effectiveness and efficiency balance.

neural networks [5, 11, 39–41, 45, 50] and video transformers [1, 3, 9, 27, 38, 43, 52].
Most current action detectors adopt the two-stage Faster
R-CNN-alike detection paradigm [31]. They share two basic designs. First, they use an auxiliary human detector to
generate actor bounding boxes in advance. The training of
the human detector is decoupled from the action classification network. Second, in order to predict the action category
for each actor box, the RoIAlign [17] operation is applied on
video feature maps to extract actor-specific features. However, these two-stage action detection pipeline has several
critical issues. First, it requires multi-stage training of person detector and action classifier, which requires large computing resources. Furthermore, the RoIAlign [17] operation constrains the video feature sampling inside the actor
bounding box and lacks the flexibility of capturing context
information in its surroundings. To enhance RoI features,
recent works use an extra heavy module that introduces interaction features of context or other actors [29, 36].
Recently sparse query-based object detector [4, 35, 54]
has brought a new perspective on detection tasks. Several

14720

