This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transductive Few-shot Learning with Prototype-based Label Propagation by
Iterative Graph Refinement
Hao Zhu†,§ , Piotr Koniusz*,§,†
Australian National University § Data61rCSIRO
allenhaozhu@gmail.com, firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au
†

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) is popular due to its ability to
adapt to novel classes. Compared with inductive few-shot
learning, transductive models typically perform better as
they leverage all samples of the query set. The two existing classes of methods, prototype-based and graph-based,
have the disadvantages of inaccurate prototype estimation
and sub-optimal graph construction with kernel functions,
respectively. In this paper, we propose a novel prototypebased label propagation to solve these issues. Specifically,
our graph construction is based on the relation between
prototypes and samples rather than between samples. As
prototypes are being updated, the graph changes. We also
estimate the label of each prototype instead of considering
a prototype be the class centre. On mini-ImageNet, tieredImageNet, CIFAR-FS and CUB datasets, we show the proposed method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in
transductive FSL and semi-supervised FSL when some unlabeled data accompanies the novel few-shot task.

1. Introduction
With the availability of large-scale datasets and the rapid
development of deep convolutional architectures, supervised learning exceeds in computer vision, voice, and machine translation [23]. However, lack of data makes the existing supervised models fail during the inference on novel
tasks. As the annotation process may necessitate expert
knowledge, annotations are may be scarce and costly (e.g.,
annotation of medical images). In contrast, humans can
learn a novel concept from just a single example.
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to mimic the capabilities
of biological vision [7] and it leverages metric learning,
meta-learning, or transfer learning. The purpose of metricbased FSL is to learn a mapping from images to an embedding space in which images from the same class are closer
* The corresponding author.
allenhaozhu/protoLP

Code:

https : / / github . com /

Figure 1. Drawbacks of prototype-based and graph-based FSL.
(left) Some label assignments are incorrect due to the imperfect
decision boundary. (right) Some “strong” links in the fixed graph
are incorrect as they associate samples of different classes.

together and images from other classes are separated. Metalearning FSL performs task-specific optimisation with the
goal to generalize to other tasks well. Pre-training a feature extractor followed by adapting it for reuse on new class
samples is an example of transfer learning.
Several recent studies [6, 11, 13, 16, 22, 29, 34, 35] explored transductive inference for few-shot learning. At the
test time, transductive FSL infer the class label jointly for
all the unlabeled query samples, rather than for one sample/episode at a time. Thus, transductive FSL typically outperforms inductive FSL. We categorise transductive FSL
into: (i) FSL that requires the use of unlabeled data to estimate prototypes [2, 26, 27, 43, 44], and (ii) FSL that builds a
graph with some kernel function and then uses label propagation to predict labels on query sets [22, 29, 61]. However, the above two paradigms have their own drawbacks.
For prototype-based methods, they usually use the nearest
neighbour classifier, which is based on the assumption that
there exists an embedding where points cluster around a
single prototype representation for each class. Fig. 1 (left)
shows a toy example which is sensitive to the large withinclass variance and low between-class variance. Thus, the

23996

