This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generic-to-Specific Distillation of Masked Autoencoders
Wei Huang1, ,* Zhiliang Peng1,§, ,* Li Dong2 , Furu Wei2 , Jianbin Jiao1,† , Qixiang Ye1,†
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences1
Microsoft Research2
ViT-Tiny

Large vision Transformers (ViTs) driven by selfsupervised pre-training mechanisms achieved unprecedented progress. Lightweight ViT models limited by the
model capacity, however, benefit little from those pretraining mechanisms. Knowledge distillation defines a
paradigm to transfer representations from large (teacher)
models to small (student) ones. However, the conventional
single-stage distillation easily gets stuck on task-specific
transfer, failing to retain the task-agnostic knowledge crucial for model generalization. In this study, we propose
generic-to-specific distillation (G2SD), to tap the potential
of small ViT models under the supervision of large models pre-trained by masked autoencoders. In generic distillation, decoder of the small model is encouraged to align
feature predictions with hidden representations of the large
model, so that task-agnostic knowledge can be transferred.
In specific distillation, predictions of the small model are
constrained to be consistent with those of the large model,
to transfer task-specific features which guarantee task performance. With G2SD, the vanilla ViT-Small model respectively achieves 98.7%, 98.1% and 99.3% the performance
of its teacher (ViT-Base) for image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation, setting a solid baseline
for two-stage vision distillation. Code will be available at
https://github.com/pengzhiliang/G2SD.

1. Introduction
Vision transformers (ViTs) [11, 55] have been promising representation models, particularly when trained upon
large-scale datasets using self-supervised learning methods [5]. The masked image modeling (MIM) methods [4,
13], which train representation models by reconstructing
pixels [13, 52, 57], tokens [4, 8, 35] or features [2, 47], promoted the performance of large ViT models to a new height.
However, when acclaiming the promising performance
of large ViT models, we notice that small ViT models,
* Equal contribution. § Contribution during internship at Microsoft
Research. † Corresponding authors.

Top1-Acc(%)

Abstract

ViT-Small

78

S.D
S.D

76

72

G.D

G.D

74
DeiT MAE G2SD

82
81
80

DeiT MAE G2SD

Figure 1. Comparison of single-stage distillation models (from
scratch [41] and pre-trained by the self-supervised method
MAE [13]) with the two-stage distillation counterparts (G2SD)
using the same teacher model. G.D and S.D respectively denote
generic and specific distillation. ⚗ is the symbol of distillation.

e.g., ViT-Tiny and ViT-Small, unfortunately, benefit little
from either the big training data or self-supervised learning methods. For example, the ViT-Large model trained by
MAE [13] outperforms the CNN model [29] by 1.6 points
on ImageNet-1k, while the ViT-Small model is inferior to its
CNN counterpart [29]. In most scenarios with limited computational resources, e.g., front-end recognition systems,
CNNs [15, 19] remain the preferred models.
Do vanilla small ViT models really have no future? We
attempt to answer this question from the perspective of
knowledge distillation in this study. To fulfill this purpose, the first step is to revisit the conventional knowledge distillation methods [18, 38, 41] in the age of supervised learning. It is observed that task-oriented distillation [41] reports unsatisfactory performance, Fig. 1. One
reason could be that this kind of task-oriented distillation
only focus on task-specific knowledge while missing some
kind of task-agnostic knowledge which is beneficial to generalization ability improvement and can be effectively endowed by self-supervised teacher model. In natural language processing, two-stage distillation method, e.g., TinyBERT [22], was exploited to overcome the limitation and
transfer generic knowledge embedded from teacher to student models. Nevertheless, whether or not this paradigm
applicable to vision tasks remains unexplored.
In this study, we aim to establish a general-to-specific

15996

