This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOOD: Hierarchical Graphs for Generalized Modelling of Clothing Dynamics
Artur Grigorev1,2 , Michael J. Black2 , and Otmar Hilliges1
1

2

ETH Zurich, Department of Computer Science
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Figure 1. We combine graph neural networks, a hierarchical graph representation, and multi-level message passing with an unsupervised
training scheme to enable efficient prediction of realistic clothing dynamics for arbitrary types of garments and body shapes. Our method
models both tight-fitting and free-flowing clothes draped over arbitrary body shapes. At test time, the method generalizes to new, entirely
unseen, garments (left), and allows dynamic and unconstrained poses (right) and changes in material parameters and topology.

Abstract
We propose a method that leverages graph neural
networks, multi-level message passing, and unsupervised
training to enable efficient prediction of realistic clothing
dynamics. Whereas existing methods based on linear blend
skinning must be trained for specific garments, our method,
called HOOD, is agnostic to body shape and applies to
tight-fitting garments as well as loose, free-flowing clothing. Furthermore, HOOD handles changes in topology
(e.g., garments with buttons or zippers) and material properties at inference time. As one key contribution, we propose a hierarchical message-passing scheme that efficiently
propagates stiff stretching modes while preserving local detail. We empirically show that HOOD outperforms strong
baselines quantitatively and that its results are perceived as
more realistic than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The ability to model realistic and compelling clothing
behavior is crucial for telepresence, virtual try-on, video
games and many other applications that rely on high-fidelity
digital humans. A common approach to generate plausible
dynamic motions is physics-based simulation [2]. While
impressive results can be obtained, physical simulation
is sensitive to initial conditions, requires animator expertise, and is computationally expensive; state-of-the-art approaches [14, 22, 36] are not designed for the strict computation budgets imposed by real-time applications.
Deep learning-based methods have started to show
promising results both in terms of efficiency and quality.
However, there are several limitations that have so far prevented such approaches from unlocking their full potential: First, existing methods rely on linear-blend skinning
and compute clothing deformations primarily as a func-

16965

