This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask-free OVIS: Open-Vocabulary Instance Segmentation
without Manual Mask Annotations
Vibashan VS⋆ *, Ning Yu† , Chen Xing† , Can Qin‡ , Mingfei Gao† ,
Juan Carlos Niebles† , Vishal M. Patel⋆ , Ran Xu†
⋆
Johns Hopkins University, ‡ Northeastern University, † Salesforce Research
{vvishnu2, vpatel36}@jhu.edu, qin.ca@northeastern.edu,

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a challenging task as it requires
models to detect objects in an image while also precisely
* This work was done when Vibashan VS interned at Salesforce Research. Primary contact: vvishnu2@jhu.com

Strong Supervision
(Keyboard)
Task-specific
Information

(Base)
Weak Supervision (Cat)

Mask-RCNN

“A photo of cat
and keyboard”

Manual Mask
Annotations

Expensive
Base Annotations
+
Overfitting

No Instance-level
Base Annotations
+
No Overfitting

Novel Class Information

Image-Caption

A) Previous Methods
Pseudo-Mask
Annotations
Weak

“A photo of cat
and keyboard”
Image-Caption

Supervision
(Keyboard, Cat)

Our Pipeline

Existing instance segmentation models learn taskspecific information using manual mask annotations from
base (training) categories. These mask annotations require tremendous human effort, limiting the scalability to
annotate novel (new) categories. To alleviate this problem, Open-Vocabulary (OV) methods leverage large-scale
image-caption pairs and vision-language models to learn
novel categories. In summary, an OV method learns taskspecific information using strong supervision from base annotations and novel category information using weak supervision from image-captions pairs. This difference between strong and weak supervision leads to overfitting on
base categories, resulting in poor generalization towards
novel categories. In this work, we overcome this issue
by learning both base and novel categories from pseudomask annotations generated by the vision-language model
in a weakly supervised manner using our proposed Maskfree OVIS pipeline. Our method automatically generates
pseudo-mask annotations by leveraging the localization
ability of a pre-trained vision-language model for objects
present in image-caption pairs. The generated pseudomask annotations are then used to supervise an instance
segmentation model, freeing the entire pipeline from any
labour-expensive instance-level annotations and overfitting.
Our extensive experiments show that our method trained
with just pseudo-masks significantly improves the mAP
scores on the MS-COCO dataset and OpenImages dataset
compared to the recent state-of-the-art methods trained
with manual masks. Codes and models are provided in
https://vibashan.github.io/ovis-web/.

Human Annotator

Abstract

Mask-RCNN

{ning.yu, cxing, jniebles, ran.xu}@salesforce.com

(Base, Novel)

B) Our Method

Figure 1. A) Previous Methods: Learn task-specific information
(detection/segmentation) in a fully-supervised manner and novel
category information with weak supervision. During training, this
difference in strong and weak supervision signals leads to overfitting and requires expensive base annotations. B) Our method:
Given image-caption pairs, we generate pseudo-annotations for
both base and novel categories under weak supervision, solving
the problems of labour-expensive annotation and overfitting.

segment each object at the pixel-level. Although the rise of
deep neural networks has significantly boosted the state-ofthe-art instance segmentation performance [7, 15, 42], these
methods are still trained for a pre-defined set of object categories and are data-hungry [33]. Particularly, one needs
to manually annotate thousands of instance-level masks for
each object category, which takes around 78 seconds per instance mask [3]. If we look at this quantitatively on Open
Images [21], a large-scale dataset with 2.1M instance-level
mask annotations requires around 5 years of human labour.
Even after extensive annotation, these training datasets are
still limited to a small number of categories and segmenting
objects from a novel category requires further annotation.
Therefore, it is difficult to scale up existing methods to segment a large number of categories due to intensive labour.
Recently, Open-Vocabulary (OV) methods have gained
much attention due to their success in detecting [11, 14,

23539

