This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You Only Segment Once: Towards Real-Time Panoptic Segmentation
Jie Hu, Linyan Huang, Tianhe Ren, Shengchuan Zhang, Rongrong Ji, and Liujuan Cao*
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University

Abstract
In this paper, we propose YOSO, a real-time panoptic
segmentation framework. YOSO predicts masks via dynamic convolutions between panoptic kernels and image
feature maps, in which you only need to segment once for
both instance and semantic segmentation tasks. To reduce
the computational overhead, we design a feature pyramid
aggregator for the feature map extraction, and a separable dynamic decoder for the panoptic kernel generation.
The aggregator re-parameterizes interpolation-first modules in a convolution-first way, which significantly speeds
up the pipeline without any additional costs. The decoder
performs multi-head cross-attention via separable dynamic
convolution for better efficiency and accuracy. To the best
of our knowledge, YOSO is the first real-time panoptic segmentation framework that delivers competitive performance
compared to state-of-the-art models. Specifically, YOSO
achieves 46.4 PQ, 45.6 FPS on COCO; 52.5 PQ, 22.6 FPS
on Cityscapes; 38.0 PQ, 35.4 FPS on ADE20K; and 34.1
PQ, 7.1 FPS on Mapillary Vistas. Code is available at
https://github.com/hujiecpp/YOSO.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation is a task that involves assigning
a semantic label and an instance identity to each pixel of
an input image. The semantic labels are typically classified
into two types, i.e., stuff including amorphous and uncountable concepts (such as sky and road), and things consisting
of countable categories (such as persons and cars). This division of label types naturally separates panoptic segmentation into two sub-tasks: semantic segmentation for stuff and
instance segmentation for things. Thus, one of the major
challenges for achieving real-time panoptic segmentation is
the requirement for separate and computationally intensive
branches to perform semantic and instance segmentation respectively. Typically, instance segmentation employs boxes
or points to distinguish between different things, while se* Corresponding author

mantic segmentation predicts distribution maps over semantic categories for stuff. As shown in Fig. 1, numerous efforts [9, 16, 23, 24, 31, 45] have been made to unify panoptic
segmentation pipelines for improved speed and accuracy.
However, achieving real-time panoptic segmentation still
remains an open problem. On the one hand, heavy necks,
e.g., the multi-scale feature pyramid network (FPN) used
in [27, 54], and heads, e.g., the Transformer decoder used
in [10, 58], are required to ensure accuracy, making realtime processing unfeasible. On the other hand, reducing the
model size [16, 23, 24] leads to a decrease in model generalization. Therefore, developing a real-time panoptic segmentation framework that delivers competitive accuracy is
challenging yet highly desirable.
In this paper, we present YOSO, a real-time panoptic
segmentation framework. YOSO predicts panoptic kernels
to convolute image feature maps, with which you only need
to segment once for the masks of background stuff and
foreground things. To make the process lightweight, we
design a feature pyramid aggregator for extracting image
feature maps, and a separable dynamic decoder for generating panoptic kernels. In the aggregator, we propose
convolution-first aggregation (CFA) to re-parameterize the
interpolation-first aggregation (IFA), resulting in an approximately 2.6× speedup in GPU latency without compromising performance. Specifically, we demonstrate that the order, i.e., interpolation-first or convolution-first, of applying
bilinear interpolation and 1×1 convolution (w/o bias) does
not affect results, but the convolution-first way provides a
considerable speedup to the pipeline. In the decoder, we
propose separable dynamic convolution attention (SDCA)
to perform multi-head cross-attention in a weight-sharing
way. SDCA achieves better accuracy (+1.0 PQ) and higher
efficiency (approximately 1.2× faster GPU latency) than
traditional multi-head cross-attention.
In general, YOSO has three notable advantages. First,
CFA reduces computational burden without re-training the
model or compromising performance. CFA can be adapted
to any task that uses the combination of bilinear interpolation and 1×1 convolution operations. Second, SDCA performs multi-head cross-attention with better accuracy and

17819

