This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How can objects help action recognition?
Xingyi Zhou

Anurag Arnab Chen Sun
Google Research

Cordelia Schmid

{zhouxy, aarnab, chensun, cordelias}@google.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art video models process a video
clip as a long sequence of spatio-temporal tokens. However, they do not explicitly model objects, their interactions
across the video, and instead process all the tokens in the
video. In this paper, we investigate how we can use knowledge of objects to design better video models, namely to
process fewer tokens and to improve recognition accuracy.
This is in contrast to prior works which either drop tokens
at the cost of accuracy, or increase accuracy whilst also
increasing the computation required. First, we propose an
object-guided token sampling strategy that enables us to retain a small fraction of the input tokens with minimal impact on accuracy. And second, we propose an object-aware
attention module that enriches our feature representation
with object information and improves overall accuracy. Our
resulting model, ObjectViViT, achieves better performance
when using fewer tokens than strong baselines. In particular, we match our baseline with 30%, 40%, and 60% of
the input tokens on SomethingElse, Something-something
v2, and Epic-Kitchens, respectively. When we use ObjectViViT to process the same number of tokens as our baseline,
we improve by 0.6 to 4.2 points on these datasets.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a central task of computer vision and great progresses have been made recently with
transformer-based models which interpret a video as a sequence of spatio-temporal tokens [1, 3, 13, 16, 30, 55]. However, videos contain a large amount of redundancy [53], especially when there is little motion or when backgrounds remain static. Processing videos with all these tokens is both
inefficient and distracting. As objects conduct motions and
actions [19, 47], they present an opportunity to form a more
compact representation of a video, and inspire us to study
how we can use them to understand videos more accurately
and efficiently. Our intuition is also supported biologically
that we humans perceive the world by concentrating our focus on key regions in the scene [18, 42].

Figure 1. How can objects help action recognition? Consider
this action of picking up a bowl on a countertop packed with
kitchenware. Objects provide information to: (1) associate image
patches (colorful) from the same instance, and identify candidates
for interactions; (2) selectively build contextual information from
the redundant background patches (dark).

In this paper, we explore how we can use external object information in videos to improve recognition accuracy,
and to reduce redundancy in the input (Figure 1). Current approaches in the literature have proposed object-based
models which utilize external object detections to improve
action recognition accuracy [21, 35]. However, they aim
to build architectures to model objects and overall bring a
notable computational overhead. We show besides gaining accuracy, objects are extremely useful to reduce token
redundancy, and give a more compact video representation. Fewer tokens also enable stronger test strategies (e.g.,
multi-crop, longer videos), and overall improve accuracy
further. On the other hand, prior work on adaptive transformers [36, 45, 48, 50] dynamically reduce the number of
tokens processed by the network conditioned on the input.
Since these methods learn token-dropping policies end-toend without external hints, there can be a chicken-and-egg
problem: we need good features to know which token to
drop, and need many tokens to learn good features. As a result, they usually suffer from a performance decrease when
dropping tokens. We show we can perform both goals,
namely reducing tokens processed by the transformer, as
well as improving accuracy, within a unified framework.
Concretely, we propose an object-based video vision
transformer, ObjectViViT. As shown in Figure 2, we first
propose an object-guided token sampling strategy (OGS)
that uses object locations to identify foreground and background tokens. We retain relevant foreground tokens as
is, and aggressively downsample background tokens be-

2353

