This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DKT: Diverse Knowledge Transfer Transformer for Class Incremental Learning
Xinyuan Gao1 , Yuhang He2 ,* Songlin Dong2 , Jie Cheng3 , Xing Wei1∗ , Yihong Gong1
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
ACS Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
{gxy010317,hyh1379478,dsl972731417}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
chengjie8@huawei.com, {weixing,ygong}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In the context of incremental class learning, deep neural networks are prone to catastrophic forgetting, where the
accuracy of old classes declines substantially as new knowledge is learned. While recent studies have sought to address
this issue, most approaches suffer from either the stabilityplasticity dilemma or excessive computational and parameter requirements. To tackle these challenges, we propose a
novel framework, the Diverse Knowledge Transfer Transformer (DKT), which incorporates two knowledge transfer mechanisms that use attention mechanisms to transfer
both task-specific and task-general knowledge to the current
task, along with a duplex classifier to address the stabilityplasticity dilemma. Additionally, we design a loss function that clusters similar categories and discriminates between old and new tasks in the feature space. The proposed method requires only a small number of extra parameters, which are negligible in comparison to the increasing number of tasks. We perform extensive experiments
on CIFAR100, ImageNet100, and ImageNet1000 datasets,
which demonstrate that our method outperforms other competitive methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance.
Our source code is available at https://github.com/MIVXJTU/DKT.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have demonstrated notable success in the domain of class-fixed classification problems,
wherein the object classes are predetermined and constant
throughout the training and testing phases [12, 13]. Nevertheless, in practical scenarios, these models are frequently
employed in an ever-changing and dynamic environment,
necessitating the incorporation of capabilities to enable
them to learn and identify new classes that arise contin* Corresponding authors

Figure 1. The accuracy and parameters number comparisons
of different methods on CIFAR100 10-step. We report the final
parameter number and accuracy. The height of the green pillars
represents the number of final parameters, the polyline represents
the average accuracy of different methods. We can see that DKT
surpasses state-of-the-art methods with much fewer parameters.

uously. This challenge, commonly known as the ClassIncremental Learning (CIL) problem [4, 27], is of utmost
significance.
Numerous recent studies [9, 10, 15, 27, 36, 41, 44, 45]
have endeavored to address the challenges associated with
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL). Among these methods,
some [15,27,41,45] have adopted the concept of knowledge
distillation [14], which entails transferring prior knowledge
from a teacher model to a student model, to retain the previous knowledge encoded in the output logits of the network.
Meanwhile, other methods [10, 36, 44] have employed dynamic expandable networks to overcome the CIL issues.
These techniques involve dynamically augmenting the network architectures, such as feature extractors, by utilizing
supplementary parameters and memory. Despite recent advancements in addressing the CIL problem, several challenges persist. Firstly, knowledge distillation techniques,
as demonstrated in the literature [14], exhibit significant
feature degradation [44], leading to reduced performance
when transferring knowledge from prior to new tasks. Sec-

24236

