This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TokenHPE: Learning Orientation Tokens for Efficient Head Pose Estimation via
Transformers
Cheng Zhang1
1

Yongjian Deng2,3

Bochen Xie4

Youfu Li4,∗

National Engineering Research Center for E-Learning, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China
2

3

Hai Liu1, *

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China

Engineering Research Center of Intelligence Perception and Autonomous Control, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
4

Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China

zc2021@mails.ccnu.edu.cn, hailiu0204@ccnu.edu.cn, yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn,
boxie4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, meyfli@cityu.edu.hk

Challenge of facial part missing
vs. Finding of critical minority
relationships

Abstract
Head pose estimation (HPE) has been widely used in
the fields of human machine interaction, self-driving, and
attention estimation. However, existing methods cannot
deal with extreme head pose randomness and serious occlusions. To address these challenges, we identify three
cues from head images, namely, neighborhood similarities, significant facial changes, and critical minority relationships. To leverage the observed findings, we propose
a novel critical minority relationship-aware method based
on the Transformer architecture in which the facial part
relationships can be learned. Specifically, we design several orientation tokens to explicitly encode the basic orientation regions. Meanwhile, a novel token guide multiloss function is designed to guide the orientation tokens as
they learn the desired regional similarities and relationships. We evaluate the proposed method on three challenging benchmark HPE datasets. Experiments show that
our method achieves better performance compared with
state-of-the-art methods. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/zc2023/TokenHPE.

1. Introduction
Head pose estimation (HPE) is a popular research area in
computer vision and has been widely applied to driver assistance [29], human–computer interaction [36], virtual reality
[22], and attention detection [5]. In recent years, HPE has
been actively studied and the accuracy has been considerably improved in terms of utilizing extra facial landmark information [2,20], extra RGB-depth information [13,26–28],
extra temporal information [16], stage-wise regression strategy [42], multi-task learning [1, 38], and alternative parameterization of orientation [3, 15, 18, 19, 24]. Currently, many
methods focus on the representation of the head pose ori* : Corresponding author (Hai Liu, Youfu Li)

Neighbored orientations similarity
and significant facial part changes
(i)

Missing
parts

(ii)

Critical minority
parts

(iii)

Figure 1. Left part: Missing facial parts and our finding on critical
minority relationships. Although some of the facial parts are missing or occluded (marked with a red rectangle), the pose orientation
still can be inferred from the existing critical minority facial parts
(marked with a green circle). Right part: different head orientation
images in a panoramic overview. The rectangular boxes highlight
several significant facial changes, such as i) appearance of the eye
on one side, ii) appearance of the nostril, and iii) overlapping of
the nose and mouth. The circled areas show some regions in which
the facial part features are similar.

entation and have achieved impressive performance, but the
intrinsic facial part relationships are usually neglected. A
possible reason is that these relationships are difficult to
learn by existing CNN architectures. However, in some
challenging scenarios, as shown in the left part of Fig. 1,
many remarkable facial parts are missing. Consequently,
the remaining facial parts and their geometric relationships
must be leveraged to achieve robust and high-accuracy prediction. Therefore, how to leverage the facial part relationships for high-accuracy HPE is an attractive research topic.
To begin with, we firstly identify three implicit facial part
relationships in head poses. First, a local similarity in specific spatial orientation exists. Inside the circled region in
Fig. 1, the facial appearances are similar. Second, sev-

8897

