This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterative Next Boundary Detection for Instance Segmentation of Tree Rings
in Microscopy Images of Shrub Cross Sections
Alexander Gillert1 Giulia Resente2 Alba Anadon-Rosell3
Martin Wilmking2 Uwe Freiherr von Lukas1,4
1

2

Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics Research (IGD), Rostock
Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology, Ernst Moritz Arndt University, Greifswald
3
Centre for Research on Ecology and Forestry Applications (CREAF), Barcelona
4
Institute for Visual & Analytic Computing, University of Rostock
{alexander.gillert, uwe.freiherr.von.lukas}@igd-r.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
We address the problem of detecting tree rings in microscopy images of shrub cross sections. This can be regarded as a special case of the instance segmentation task
with several unique challenges such as the concentric circular ring shape of the objects and high precision requirements that result in inadequate performance of existing
methods.
We propose a new iterative method which we term Iterative Next Boundary Detection (INBD). It intuitively models
the natural growth direction, starting from the center of the
shrub cross section and detecting the next ring boundary in
each iteration step. In our experiments, INBD shows superior performance to generic instance segmentation methods
and is the only one with a built-in notion of chronological
order.
Our dataset and source code are available at
http://github.com/alexander-g/INBD .

1. Introduction
Dendrochronology is the science that provides methodologies to date tree rings [4], i.e. measuring and assigning
calendar years to the growth rings present in a wood stem.
By analyzing anatomical properties like ring widths or the
cell sizes within the rings, dendrochronology can be applied to dating archaeological manufactures, tracking timber sources or reconstructing past climate conditions [11].
For climate reconstruction in the Arctic, shrubs constitute the most important source of dendrochronological information, since they are the only woody plants able to
thrive there [23]. As temperature is a limiting factor for
shrub growth in the Arctic, it shows a strong relationship

Figure 1. Example microscopy images (left) of shrub cross sections from our new dataset and the outputs (right) of our proposed
method INBD for instance segmentation of tree rings

with climate, making these plants a reliable proxy to reconstruct past climate events [24]. Dendrochronological analyses on shrubs are usually performed on thin cross sections of
branches or roots and observed under the microscope with
a magnification that allows ring identification at a cellular
level. As of now, ecological studies are limited in size by
the amount of manual analysis work due to the lack of automatic tree ring detection methods.
With this paper we want to introduce this problem to the

14540

