This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evading Forensic Classifiers with Attribute-Conditioned Adversarial Faces
Fahad Shamshad Koushik Srivatsan Karthik Nandakumar
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE
{fahad.shamshad, koushik.srivatsan, karthik.nandakumar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
The ability of generative models to produce highly realistic synthetic face images has raised security and ethical
concerns. As a first line of defense against such fake faces,
deep learning based forensic classifiers have been developed. While these forensic models can detect whether a face
image is synthetic or real with high accuracy, they are also
vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Although such attacks
can be highly successful in evading detection by forensic
classifiers, they introduce visible noise patterns that are detectable through careful human scrutiny. Additionally, these
attacks assume access to the target model(s) which may not
always be true. Attempts have been made to directly perturb the latent space of GANs to produce adversarial fake
faces that can circumvent forensic classifiers. In this work,
we go one step further and show that it is possible to successfully generate adversarial fake faces with a specified set
of attributes (e.g., hair color, eye size, race, gender, etc.).
To achieve this goal, we leverage the state-of-the-art generative model StyleGAN with disentangled representations,
which enables a range of modifications without leaving the
manifold of natural images. We propose a framework to
search for adversarial latent codes within the feature space
of StyleGAN, where the search can be guided either by a
text prompt or a reference image. We also propose a metalearning based optimization strategy to achieve transferable performance on unknown target models. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed approach can
produce semantically manipulated adversarial fake faces,
which are true to the specified attribute set and can successfully fool forensic face classifiers, while remaining undetectable by humans. Code: https://github.com/
koushiksrivats/face_attribute_attack.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning such as generative adversarial networks (GAN) [9, 30] have enabled the generation of highly realistic and diverse human faces that do not
exist in reality [2]. While these synthetic/fake faces have
many positive applications in video games, make-up industry, and computer-aided designs [11], they can also be mis-

used for malicious purposes causing serious security and
ethical problems. For instance, recent news reports have
revealed the potential use of GAN-generated face images
in the US elections for creating fake social media profiles
to rapidly disseminate misinformation among the targeted
groups [6, 24]. In a similar incident, a 17-year-old high
school student successfully tricked Twitter into verifying a
fake face profile picture of a US Congress candidate [1] using a powerful generative model called StyleGAN2 [19].
To combat this problem of synthetically-generated fake
faces using GANs, several methods have been proposed to
distinguish fake GAN-generated faces from real ones [15,
36]. The results reported in these works tend to indicate that simple, supervised deep learning-based classifiers
are often highly effective at detecting GAN-generated images [35, 43]. Such classifiers can be referred to as forensic
classifiers/models. However, a smart attacker may attempt
to manipulate these fake images using tools from adversarial machine learning [4] to bypass forensic classifiers, while
maintaining high visual quality. A recent attempt in this direction is the work of Li et al. [20], which demonstrates
that adversarially exploring the manifold of the generative
model by optimizing over the latent space can generate realistic faces that are misclassified by the target forensic detectors. Furthermore, they show that the resulting adversarial
fake faces contain fewer artifacts compared to traditional
norm-constrained adversarial attacks in the image space.
While being the first to introduce the generative model
based adversarial attack to fool forensic face classifiers, the
work of Li et al. [20] suffers from one key limitation: the inability to control the attributes of the generated adversarial
faces like skin color, expression, or age. This kind of control over face attributes is essential for attackers to rapidly
disseminate false propaganda via social media to specific
ethnic or age groups. Therefore, it is imperative for image
forensics researchers to study and develop these attributeconditioned attacks to expose the vulnerabilities of existing
forensic face classifiers, with the eventual goal of designing
effective defense mechanisms in the future.
In this paper, we propose a method to generate realistic
image-driven or text-guided adversarial fake faces that are
misclassified by forensic face detectors. Our method lever-

16469

