This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fair Scratch Tickets: Finding Fair Sparse Networks without Weight Training
Pengwei Tang1,2,†

Wei Yao1,2,†

Zhicong Li1,2

Yong Liu1,2,*

1

2

Gaoling School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing

tangpwei@ruc.edu.cn, busyweiyao@gmail.com, mrﬁve558@gmail.com, liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent studies suggest that computer vision models come
at the risk of compromising fairness. There are extensive works to alleviate unfairness in computer vision using
pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing methods. In this paper, we lead a novel fairness-aware learning
paradigm for in-processing methods through the lens of the
lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) in the context of computer
vision fairness. We randomly initialize a dense neural network and ﬁnd appropriate binary masks for the weights to
obtain fair sparse subnetworks without any weight training.
Interestingly, to the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst
to discover that such sparse subnetworks with inborn fairness exist in randomly initialized networks, achieving an
accuracy-fairness trade-off comparable to that of dense
neural networks trained with existing fairness-aware inprocessing approaches. We term these fair subnetworks
as Fair Scratch Tickets (FSTs). We also theoretically provide fairness and accuracy guarantees for them. In our
experiments, we investigate the existence of FSTs on various datasets, target attributes, random initialization methods, sparsity patterns, and fairness surrogates. We also ﬁnd
that FSTs can transfer across datasets and investigate other
properties of FSTs.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNN) has become
one of the core technologies in computer vision (CV). However, it has been observed that CV models learn spurious
age, gender, and race correlations when trained for seemingly unrelated tasks [7, 67]. There are growing appeals
for fairness-aware learning [58]. A model should not discriminate against any demographic group with sensitive attributes [3, 15, 60, 63, 76].
†Equal Contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

Extensive work has been done to alleviate unfairness
in CV using pre-processing [37, 54, 64, 66], in-processing
[5, 6, 12, 57], and post-processing methods [39, 74]. Only
in-processing approaches can optimize notions of fairness
during model training. Such methods have direct control over the optimization function of the model [8] and
have attracted great attention in the research community.
Popular in-processing ideas include fairness regularization
[5, 12, 13, 33, 49, 52, 57, 69] and fairness-aware adversarial
training [6, 19, 44, 72]. Fairness regularization is to introduce regularization terms to penalize unfairness. Fairnessaware adversarial training uses an adversary to predict the
sensitive attribute and enforces the main classiﬁer to prevent the adversary from predicting successfully. However,
most in-processing methods leverage deep and dense neural
networks so that they are computationally intensive during
the inference phase [28]. But model compression methods
which scale down overparameterized models will introduce
or exacerbate unfairness [34, 35, 63].
In this paper, to ﬁll the research gap, we raise an intriguing and challenging question: Is there a learning paradigm
without weight training that is plug-and-play for bias mitigation approaches in computer vision? Intuitively, the recently proposed Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [20] is
a natural ﬁt for our needs. LTH focuses on ﬁnding sparse
trainable subnetworks (winning tickets) that reach test accuracy comparable to the original dense neural network. The
primal training method in [20] is iteratively pruning and retraining the neural network. Interestingly, some researchers
empirically discover that winning tickets can be found without weight training [53,75], which is theoretically validated
in [14, 45, 48, 50]. Both empirical observations and theoretical results have veriﬁed the feasibility of ﬁnding winning
tickets without training the weights of the neural networks.
Motivated by the above, we break down the original question into three sub-questions instead:
• Q1: Is there a fair winning ticket?
• Q2: How can we ﬁnd it without weight training?

24406

