This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdamsFormer for Spatial Action Localization in the Future
Hyung-gun Chi† 2 Kwonjoon Lee1 Nakul Agarwal1 Yi Xu1,3 Karthik Ramani2 Chiho Choi† 4
1

Honda Research Institute USA

2

Purdue University

{hgchi, ramani}@purdue.edu

3

Northeastern University

4

Samsung Semiconductor US

{kwonjoon lee, nakul agarwal}@honda-ri.com

xu.yi@northeastern.edu

chiho1.choi@samsung.com

Abstract
Predicting future action locations is vital for applications like human-robot collaboration. While some computer
vision tasks have made progress in predicting human actions, accurately localizing these actions in future frames
remains an area with room for improvement. We introduce a new task called spatial action localization in the
future (SALF), which aims to predict action locations in
both observed and future frames. SALF is challenging because it requires understanding the underlying physics of
video observations to predict future action locations accurately. To address SALF, we use the concept of NeuralODE,
which models the latent dynamics of sequential data by
solving ordinary differential equations (ODE) with neural
networks. We propose a novel architecture, AdamsFormer,
which extends observed frame features to future time horizons by modeling continuous temporal dynamics through
ODE solving. Specifically, we employ the Adams method,
a multi-step approach that efficiently uses information from
previous steps without discarding it. Our extensive experiments on UCF101-24 and JHMDB-21 datasets demonstrate
that our proposed model outperforms existing long-range
temporal modeling methods by a significant margin in terms
of frame-mAP.

1. Introduction
Human action understanding is essential in computer
vision, especially for applications like VR/AR [61, 64],
robotics [57, 60], and autonomous vehicles [28, 38]. These
applications help users by interpreting intentions or perceiving others’ actions in the environment. Considerable
progress has been made in human action perception, including action recognition [7, 10, 11], temporal action localization [3, 36], and spatio-temporal action localization
[2, 30, 42, 52].
Lately, predicting and anticipating human actions, such
as early action prediction [13, 23, 62], action anticipation [15, 16], and hand or pedestrian trajectory prediction
† Work done while at Honda Research Institute USA.

Figure 1. Future Spatial Action Localization (SALF) aims to identify diverse action patterns in both observed and future frames.
Green and red boxes represent observed and future frames, while
blue bounding boxes indicate predicted action locations.

[40,45,47], have gained attention due to the increasing need
to prepare for future events. While progress has been made
in predicting human actions, further exploration is needed
in localizing future actions, which is critical for various applications. For example, anticipatory behavior is essential
for effective collaboration in human-robot interaction [57].
Accurately predicting future activity locations enables robot
agents to support humans more efficiently.
In this work, we introduce Spatial Action Localization
in the Future (SALF), a novel task that expands upon traditional spatio-temporal action localization. SALF aims to
predict spatial locations and categorize actions in both longterm future and past observations, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
By enabling models to recognize and classify present actions while anticipating and localizing future actions, SALF
significantly enhances real-time decision-making and adaptive responses in complex environments. As demonstrated
in Table 1, SALF uniquely focuses on diverse, highly nonlinear motion patterns across various action categories, setting it apart from related tasks like pedestrian or hand trajectory prediction. Additionally, SALF differs in input and
target, utilizing only video input and predicting multiple
bounding boxes and action categories for both future and
observed frames. In contrast, trajectory predictions generally estimate the future path of specific objects, such as
hands or pedestrians, without requiring bounding boxes.
To address the challenges of SALF, we leverage the con-

17885

