This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HAAV: Hierarchical Aggregation of Augmented Views for Image Captioning
Chia-Wen Kuo
Georgia Tech
albert.cwkuo@gatech.edu

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Tech
zkira@gatech.edu

Abstract
A great deal of progress has been made in image captioning, driven by research into how to encode the image using
pre-trained models. This includes visual encodings (e.g. image grid features or detected objects) and more recently
textual encodings (e.g. image tags or text descriptions of
image regions). As more advanced encodings are available
and incorporated, it is natural to ask: how to efficiently and
effectively leverage the heterogeneous set of encodings? In
this paper, we propose to regard the encodings as augmented
views of the input image. The image captioning model encodes each view independently with a shared encoder efficiently, and a contrastive loss is incorporated across the
encoded views in a novel way to improve their representation
quality and the model’s data efficiency. Our proposed hierarchical decoder then adaptively weighs the encoded views
according to their effectiveness for caption generation by
first aggregating within each view at the token level, and then
across views at the view level. We demonstrate significant
performance improvements of +5.6% CIDEr on MS-COCO
and +12.9% CIDEr on Flickr30k compared to state of the
arts, and conduct rigorous analyses to demonstrate the importance of each part of our design.

1. Introduction
A large amount of progress has been made in visionand-language (VL) tasks such as image captioning [1, 8],
visual question answering [16, 23], and image-text retrieval.
For these tasks, recent methods [31, 36, 45, 61] observe that
encoding the input image by an object detector [42] pretrained on Visual Genome [30] into a set of detected objects
is not sufficient. To provide information complementary to
detected objects, recent works proposed to encode an input image by different pre-trained models and into different
modalities, and achieve substantial performance improvement by combining these heterogeneous encodings. For
example, some works encode from the visual perspective
(e.g. stronger object detector pre-trained on a larger vocabu-

Black bags sitting

on top of a ? .

Augmented views
• curtain are in hotel room
• bag leaning against furniture
• picture hotel room
• sofa in hotel room
• bag in front of sofa
• bag beside sofa
• coffee table in front of sofa
• …………

Detector Objects

Image Grid Features

Text Descriptions

Encoder

Encoder

Encoder

0.2

0.5

0.3

Contrastive Loss

Sofa

View
aggregation

Figure 1. HAAV, Hierarchical Aggregation of Augmented Views,
for image captioning at the step of predicting the word “sofa”. First,
heterogeneous views such as detected objects [4], image grid features [45], and text descriptions [31] are generated from the input
image by existing methods. We propose to regard these views as
augmentations of the input image, and independently encode each
view by a shared transformer encoder efficiently. A contrastive loss
is incorporated to improve the representation quality of heterogeneous views. Finally, our proposed hierarchical decoder models the
effectiveness of each view and adaptively weigh them according
to their effectiveness for predicting the current word “sofa”.

lary and datasets [61] or global image features [24]), while
other works encode from the textual perspective (e.g. image
tags [36] and text descriptions of image regions [31]).
Given the great success of incorporating various heterogeneous encodings or “views”, one research question emerges
naturally: how to efficiently and effectively leverage these
heterogeneous views for caption generation? For efficiency,
three factors are particularly important: computation, parameter count, and label efficiency. State-of-art VL and

11039

