This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized UAV Object Detection via Frequency Domain Disentanglement
Kunyu Wang, Xueyang Fu, Yukun Huang, Chengzhi Cao, Gege Shi, Zheng-Jun Zha∗
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{kunyuwang@mail., xyfu@, kevinh@mail., chengzhicao@mail., shigg@mail., zhazj@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
When deploying the Unmanned Aerial Vehicles object
detection (UAV-OD) network to complex and unseen realworld scenarios, the generalization ability is usually reduced due to the domain shift. To address this issue, this
paper proposes a novel frequency domain disentanglement
method to improve the UAV-OD generalization. Specifically, we first verified that the spectrum of different bands
in the image has different effects to the UAV-OD generalization. Based on this conclusion, we design two learnable
filters to extract domain-invariant spectrum and domainspecific spectrum, respectively. The former can be used
to train the UAV-OD network and improve its capacity for
generalization. In addition, we design a new instance-level
contrastive loss to guide the network training. This loss
enables the network to concentrate on extracting domaininvariant spectrum and domain-specific spectrum, so as
to achieve better disentangling results. Experimental results on three unseen target domains demonstrate that our
method has better generalization ability than both the baseline method and state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) equipped with cameras have been exploited in a wide variety of applications,
opening up a new frontier for computer vision applications
[7, 11, 22, 28]. As one of the fundamental functions for the
UAV-based applications, UAV object detection (UAV-OD)
has garnered considerable interest [23, 31, 38]. However,
the large mobility of UAV-mounted cameras leads to an unpredictable operating environment. The domain shift that
occurs when applying a UAV-OD network that has been
trained on a given dataset (i.e., source domain) to unseen
real-world data (i.e., target domain) typically results in in∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National
Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2020AAA0105702, the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 62225207,
62276243 and U19B2038, the University Synergy Innovation Program of
Anhui Province under Grant GXXT-2019-025.

(a) Baseline

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Detection results on unseen target domains. UAV-OD
network is trained on daylight images and tested on images with
various scene structures (1st row), diverse illumination conditions
(2nd row), and adverse weather conditions (3rd row). Green rectangular boxes denote new correct detections beyond the baseline.

adequate performance. In particular, unseen real-world data
consists of unexpected and unknown samples, such as images taken in various scene structures, diverse illumination
conditions, and adverse weather conditions. Therefore, it is
crucial to improve the generalization ability of UAV-OD.
To alleviate the domain shift impact, existing methods
broadly come in two flavors: Domain Adaptation (DA)
[3, 5, 8, 16, 17, 26, 37] and Domain Generalization (DG)
[19,20,27,30,40]. In general, DA aims to tackle the domain
shift problem by learning domain-invariant/aligned features
between the source and target domains. However, DA methods cannot be readily employed when it is hard to guarantee
the accessibility of the target data. The requirement to access both source and target data restricts the applicability of
DA approaches.
Recently, considerable attention has been drawn to the
field of DG. The goal of DG is to learn a model using
data from a single or multiple related but distinct source
domains so that the model can generalize well under distri-

1064

