This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VILA: Learning Image Aesthetics from User Comments
with Vision-Language Pretraining
Junjie Ke, Keren Ye, Jiahui Yu, Yonghui Wu, Peyman Milanfar, Feng Yang
Google Research
{junjiek, yek, jiahuiyu, yonghui, milanfar, fengyang}@google.com

Abstract
Assessing the aesthetics of an image is challenging, as
it is influenced by multiple factors including composition,
color, style, and high-level semantics. Existing image aesthetic assessment (IAA) methods primarily rely on humanlabeled rating scores, which oversimplify the visual aesthetic information that humans perceive. Conversely, user
comments offer more comprehensive information and are a
more natural way to express human opinions and preferences regarding image aesthetics. In light of this, we propose learning image aesthetics from user comments, and exploring vision-language pretraining methods to learn multimodal aesthetic representations. Specifically, we pretrain
an image-text encoder-decoder model with image-comment
pairs, using contrastive and generative objectives to learn
rich and generic aesthetic semantics without human labels.
To efficiently adapt the pretrained model for downstream
IAA tasks, we further propose a lightweight rank-based
adapter that employs text as an anchor to learn the aesthetic
ranking concept. Our results show that our pretrained aesthetic vision-language model outperforms prior works on
image aesthetic captioning over the AVA-Captions dataset,
and it has powerful zero-shot capability for aesthetic tasks
such as zero-shot style classification and zero-shot IAA, surpassing many supervised baselines. With only minimal finetuning parameters using the proposed adapter module, our
model achieves state-of-the-art IAA performance over the
AVA dataset. 1

1. Introduction
Image Aesthetic Assessment (IAA) aims to quantify the human perceived aesthetics of an image. It has many important applications, including photo recommendation, selection, and editing. IAA is challenging because it is inherently
subjective, and depends on various factors including image
1 Our model is available at https://github.com/googleresearch/google-research/tree/master/vila

Figure 1. We present VILA, a vision-language aesthetics learning
framework based on image and user comment pairs. By pretraining on a contrastive and generative target, it shows superior performance on aesthetic captioning as well as zero-shot aesthetic tasks,
e.g., IAA, and style classification. With a lightweight rank-based
adapter, we can efficiently adapt the pretrained model to IAA.

composition, color usage, photographic style, and subject
matter. In recent years, various learning-based IAA methods have been proposed by leveraging deep models such
as convolutional neural networks (CNN) [2, 12, 15, 42] and
transformers [19]. These approaches learn from humanlabeled IAA datasets where images are paired with aesthetic
ratings, and models are trained to regress towards the mean
opinion scores (MOS).
Directly learning IAA models on human-labeled aesthetic ratings, such as MOS, can be suboptimal as it lacks
context regarding why an image is aesthetically pleasing
or not. To provide richer supervision, various methods
have attempted to integrate external knowledge such as
theme [12, 33], human eye fixation [9], and aesthetic attributes [4, 24], to enhance IAA performance. These approaches typically rely on multitask training or cascade

10041

