This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Crossing the Gap: Domain Generalization for Image Captioning
Yuchen Ren12 , Zhendong Mao13 ,* Shancheng Fang1 , Yan Lu2 , Tong He2 ,
Hao Du1 , Yongdong Zhang13 and Wanli Ouyang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, China

Abstract
Existing image captioning methods are under the assumption that the training and testing data are from the
same domain or that the data from the target domain (i.e.,
the domain that testing data lie in) are accessible. However, this assumption is invalid in real-world applications
where the data from the target domain is inaccessible. In
this paper, we introduce a new setting called Domain Generalization for Image Captioning (DGIC), where the data
from the target domain is unseen in the learning process.
We first construct a benchmark dataset for DGIC, which
helps us to investigate models’ domain generalization (DG)
ability on unseen domains. With the support of the new
benchmark, we further propose a new framework called
language-guided semantic metric learning (LSML) for the
DGIC setting. Experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate the challenge of the task and the effectiveness of our
newly proposed benchmark and LSML framework.

1. Introduction
Image captioning (IC) builds a bridge between vision
and language, and it aims at understanding images [20, 28,
36, 37, 51, 69] and generating correct natural language descriptions. Many novel methods [3, 13, 26, 27, 45, 55, 58]
have made impressive progress under a domain-specific setting; namely, they assume the training and testing data are
from the same domain. However, this assumption may not
hold in real-world applications. To relax the reliance of different domains, many methods [10, 19, 24] are recently proposed. However, these approaches also have a strong assumption that the data from the target domain are available.
In real-world applications, this assumption will also be invalid. For example, in the medical report generation task,
the data from the target domain related to patient privacy is
hard to obtain. As a result, it is important to design an image captioning approach with domain generalization ability
to different unseen domains.
* Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

Training
Test
Target
YS = YT
data
data
access
PivotIC Dsrc-p , Dp-tar Dsrc-tar
✓
✓
NOIC
Dsrc , Dtar
Dtar
×
✓
DAIC
Dsrc , Dtar
Dtar
×
✓
DGIC
Dsrc
Dtar
×
×
Table 1. Comparison of domain-related tasks for image captioning. YS/T : distribution of source/target label space. Dsrc/tar/p
: source/target/pivot domain. Pivot image captioning (PivotIC),
novel object image captioning (NOIC), and domain adaptive image captioning (DAIC) are all assumed to be able to obtain the
data of the target domain. Domain generalizable image captioning
(DGIC) does not require the target domain data.
Task

To this end, we propose a new benchmark setting called
Domain Generalization for Image Captioning (DGIC) with
multi-source domain and cross-dataset setting in this work.
Specifically, we employ existing popular datasets from five
domains: common domain sourced from MSCOCO [35],
assistive domain sourced from Vizwiz [21], social domain
sourced from Flickr30k [62], avian domain sourced from
CUB-200 [44, 57], and floral domain sourced from Oxford102 [44, 57]. To explore the DGIC, we divide these domains into two parts: multiple source domains for training
and a target domain for testing, mimicking the unseen domain scenario and mining underlying patterns from multiple datasets. The difference between our DGIC setting and
other image captioning settings is summarized in Tab. 1.
With the help of this benchmark, we analyze the existing methods for unseen domains and observe the following
limitations: (1) The model can generate fluent captions but
cannot ensure semantic correctness when meeting an unseen domain without target data (Fig. 1a). In other words,
the generated captions are prone to overfit domain-specific
bias and only learn the domain-specific features. We argue that this is because the existing image captioning models are trained with maximum likelihood estimation, which
will cause the model lacks discriminative semantic information between different instances [5, 25]. So it is difficult
to distinguish the relationship between unseen domain data

2871

