This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid Active Learning via Deep Clustering for Video Action Detection
Aayush J Rana
Yogesh S Rawat
aayushjr@knights.ucf.edu
yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV)
University of Central Florida

1. Introduction
Video action detection requires spatio-temporal annotations which include bounding-box or pixel-wise annotation
on each frame of the video in addition to video level annotations [22, 27, 35, 50, 66]. Cost for such dense annotation
is much higher compared to classification task where only
video level annotations is sufficient [8, 18, 59, 60]. In this
work, we study how this high annotation cost for spatiotemporal detection can be reduced with minimal performance trade-off.
The existing works on label efficient learning for videos
are mainly focused on classification task [10, 23, 57]. Video
action detection methods focus on weakly-supervised or
semi-supervised methods to save annotation costs [12,31,39,
40, 64]. Weakly-supervised methods use partial annotations
such as point-level [39], video-level [3, 12], and temporal
annotations [9, 64]. Similarly, semi-supervised methods use

v-mAP @ 0.5

80
50

Inter
Intra

90%

80
50

20
20 1 2 3 4 5
2 3 4 5 (b)
(a) %1 Frames
annot.
% Frames annot.
40
0

80

f-mAP @ 0.5

80

v-mAP @ 0.5

In this work, we focus on reducing the annotation cost
for video action detection which requires costly frame-wise
dense annotations. We study a novel hybrid active learning
(AL) strategy which performs efficient labeling using both
intra-sample and inter-sample selection. The intra-sample
selection leads to labeling of fewer frames in a video as opposed to inter-sample selection which operates at video level.
This hybrid strategy reduces the annotation cost from two different aspects leading to significant labeling cost reduction.
The proposed approach utilize Clustering-Aware Uncertainty
Scoring (CLAUS), a novel label acquisition strategy which
relies on both informativeness and diversity for sample selection. We also propose a novel Spatio-Temporal Weighted
(STeW) loss formulation, which helps in model training under limited annotations. The proposed approach is evaluated
on UCF-101-24 and J-HMDB-21 datasets demonstrating
its effectiveness in significantly reducing the annotation cost
where it consistently outperforms other baselines. Project
details available at https://tinyurl.com/hybridclaus

Our
Our w/ Random

f-mAP @ 0.5

Abstract

40
0

2 3 4 5 (d) 1 2 3 4 5
(c) %1Frames
annot.
% Frames annot.

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed CLAUS based AL method
with random selection for video action detection. The plots show
scores for (a-b) UCF-101-24 and (c-d) J-HMDB-21 for different
annotation amount. The green line represents model performance
with 90% annotations.

unlabeled samples with the help of pseudo-labeling [40] and
prediction consistency [31]. Such approaches have been
effective for classification tasks, however spatio-temporal
detection is more challenging under limited annotations with
inferior performance compared to fully supervised methods.
One of the main limitation of these methods is lack of selection criteria which can guide in labeling only informative
samples. To overcome this limitation, we investigate the use
of active learning for label efficient video action detection.
Traditional active learning (AL) approach typically focuses on classification task where selection is performed at
sample level [19, 34, 61]. In video action detection, a framelevel spatio-temporal localization is required in addition to
video level class prediction. Therefore, active learning strategy should also consider detection on every frame within a
video apart from video-level decisions. We argue that framelevel informativeness is also crucial for spatio-temporal detection along with video-level informativeness. Motivated

18867

