This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rotation-Invariant Transformer for Point Cloud Matching
Hao Yu1 Zheng Qin2 Ji Hou3 Mahdi Saleh1,4 Dongsheng Li2 Benjamin Busam1,4 Slobodan Ilic1,5
1
TU Munich 2 NUDT 3 Meta Reality Labs 4 3Dwe.ai 5 Siemens AG, Munich
Abstract
The intrinsic rotation invariance lies at the core of
matching point clouds with handcrafted descriptors. However, it is widely despised by recent deep matchers that
obtain the rotation invariance extrinsically via data augmentation. As the ﬁnite number of augmented rotations
can never span the continuous SO(3) space, these methods usually show instability when facing rotations that are
rarely seen. To this end, we introduce RoITr, a RotationInvariant Transformer to cope with the pose variations
in the point cloud matching task. We contribute both on
the local and global levels. Starting from the local level,
we introduce an attention mechanism embedded with Point
Pair Feature (PPF)-based coordinates to describe the poseinvariant geometry, upon which a novel attention-based
encoder-decoder architecture is constructed. We further
propose a global transformer with rotation-invariant crossframe spatial awareness learned by the self-attention mechanism, which signiﬁcantly improves the feature distinctiveness and makes the model robust with respect to the low
overlap. Experiments are conducted on both the rigid and
non-rigid public benchmarks, where RoITr outperforms all
the state-of-the-art models by a considerable margin in the
low-overlapping scenarios. Especially when the rotations
are enlarged on the challenging 3DLoMatch benchmark,
RoITr surpasses the existing methods by at least 13 and 5
percentage points in terms of Inlier Ratio and Registration
Recall, respectively. Code is publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
The correspondence estimation between a pair of
partially-overlapping point clouds is a long-standing task
that lies at the core of many computer vision applications, such as tracking [17, 18], reconstruction [22, 23, 39],
pose estimation [19, 27, 50] and 3D representation learning [15, 16, 46], etc. In a typical solution, geometry is ﬁrst
encoded into descriptors, and correspondences are then established between two frames by matching the most similar
descriptors. As the two frames are observed from different
views, depicting the same geometry under different trans1 https://github.com/haoyu94/RoITr

Figure 1. Feature Matching Recall (FMR) on 3DLoMatch [19]
and Rotated 3DLoMatch. Distance to the diagonal represents the
robustness against rotations. Among all the state-of-the-art approaches, RoITr not only ranks ﬁrst on both benchmarks but also
shows the best robustness against the enlarged rotations.

formations identically, i.e., the pose-invariance, becomes
the key to success in the point cloud matching task.
Since the side effects caused by a global translation can
always be easily eliminated, e.g., by aligning the barycenter with the origin, the attention naturally shifts to coping
with the rotations. In the past, handcrafted local descriptors [11, 30, 31, 41] were designed to be rotation-invariant
so that the same geometry observed from different views
can be correctly matched. With the emergence of deep neural models for 3D point analysis, e.g., multilayer perceptrons (MLPs)-based like PointNet [25, 26], convolutionsbased like KPConv [6, 40], and the attention-based like
PointTransformer [33, 53], recent approaches [1, 7, 9, 10, 13,
19, 20, 27, 32, 48–51] propose to learn descriptors from raw
points as an alternative to handcrafted features that are less
robust to occlusion and noise. The majority of deep point
matchers [7, 10, 19, 20, 27, 34, 48, 50–52] is sensitive to rotations. Consequently, their invariance to rotations must be
obtained extrinsically via augmented training to ensure that
the same geometry under different poses can be depicted
similarly. However, as the training cases can never span the
continuous SO(3) space, they always suffer from instability when facing rotations that are rarely seen during training. This can be observed by a signiﬁcant performance drop
under enlarged rotations at inference time. (See Fig. 1.)
There are other works [1, 9, 13, 32, 44] that only lever-

5384

