This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Volumetric Memory for Visual Locomotion Control

1

Ruihan Yang1 Ge Yang2,3 Xiaolong Wang1
UC San Diego 2 Institute of AI and Fundamental Interactions 3 MIT CSAIL

Figure 1. Real-World Deployment: We deploy our policy in real-world environments with Stones, Stairs, Stages, Obstacles, and Unstructured Terrain. Our robot utilizes the volumetric memory of the surrounding 3D structure to successfully traverse complex environments.

Abstract
Legged robots have the potential to expand the reach of
autonomy beyond paved roads. In this work, we consider
the difficult problem of locomotion on challenging terrains
using a single forward-facing depth camera. Due to the
partial observability of the problem, the robot has to rely
on past observations to infer the terrain currently beneath
it. To solve this problem, we follow the paradigm in computer vision that explicitly models the 3D geometry of the
scene and propose Neural Volumetric Memory (NVM), a geometric memory architecture that explicitly accounts for the
SE(3) equivariance of the 3D world. NVM aggregates feature volumes from multiple camera views by first bringing
them back to the ego-centric frame of the robot. We test the
learned visual-locomotion policy on a physical robot and
show that our approach, which explicitly introduces geometric priors during training, offers superior performance
than more naı̈ve methods. We also include ablation studies
and show that the representations stored in the neural volumetric memory capture sufficient geometric information
to reconstruct the scene. Our project page with videos is
https://rchalyang.github.io/NVM

1. Introduction
Consider difficult locomotion tasks such as walking up and
down a flight of stairs and stepping over gaps (Figure 1).

The control of such behaviors requires tight coupling with
perception because vision is needed to provide details of
the terrain right beneath the robot and the 3D scene immediately around it. This problem is also partially-observable.
Immediately relevant terrain information is often occluded
from the robot’s current frame of observation, forcing it to
rely on past observations for control decisions. For this reason, while blind controllers that are learned in simulation
using reinforcement learning have achieved impressive results in agility and robustness [33, 36, 38], there are clear
limitations on how much they can do. How to incorporate
perception into the pipeline to produce an integrated visuomotor controller thus remains an open problem.
A recent line of work combines perception with locomotion using ego-centric cameras mounted on the robot.
The predominant approach for addressing partial observability is to do frame-stacking, where the robot maintains
a visual buffer of recent images. This naı̈ve heuristic suffers from two major problems: first, frame-stacking on a
moving robot ignores the equivariance structure of the 3D
environment, making learning a lot more difficult as policy success now relies on being able to learn to account for
spurious changes in camera poses. A second but subtler issue is that biological systems do not have the ability to save
detailed visual observations pixel-by-pixel. These concerns
motivate the creation of an intermediary, short-term memory mechanism to functionally aggregate streams of obser-

1430

