This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Are Binary Annotations Sufficient? Video Moment Retrieval
via Hierarchical Uncertainty-based Active Learning
Renjie Liang1 Zhedong Zheng1 * Wenqiao Zhang2 Shengyu Zhang2
Juncheng Li2 Mengze Li2 Tat-seng Chua1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Zhejiang University
{jiwei,t0924327,zdzheng,dcsts}@nus.edu.sg, {wenqiaozhang,sy zhang,junchengli,mengzeli}@zju.edu.cn
Wei Ji1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video Moment Retrieval (VMR) aims to localize the
temporal region of an untrimmed video corresponding to
query description, which is a fundamental task in the video
understanding area, and can benefit a lot of downstream
* Corresponding author.

Video：
Query: person drinks from a glass.

User

Is this frame corresponding to the query?
Yes.
Expert

User

How about this frame?
No.
Expert

User

And this one？
...

Recent research on video moment retrieval has mostly
focused on enhancing the performance of accuracy, efficiency, and robustness, all of which largely rely on the abundance of high-quality annotations. While the precise framelevel annotations are time-consuming and cost-expensive,
few attentions have been paid to the labeling process. In
this work, we explore a new interactive manner to stimulate the process of human-in-the-loop annotation in video
moment retrieval task. The key challenge is to select “ambiguous” frames and videos for binary annotations to facilitate the network training. To be specific, we propose a
new hierarchical uncertainty-based modeling that explicitly
considers modeling the uncertainty of each frame within the
entire video sequence corresponding to the query description, and selecting the frame with the highest uncertainty.
Only selected frame will be annotated by the human experts, which can largely reduce the workload. After obtaining a small number of labels provided by the expert, we
show that it is sufficient to learn a competitive video moment retrieval model in such a harsh environment. Moreover, we treat the uncertainty score of frames in a video as
a whole, and estimate the difficulty of each video, which
can further relieve the burden of video selection. In general, our active learning strategy for video moment retrieval
works not only at the frame level but also at the sequence
level. Experiments on two public datasets validate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Our code is released
at https://github.com/renjie-liang/HUAL.

(a)
Query frame

Expert

Unlabel Pool

Label Pool
Video Moment
Retrieval Model

Training model

(b)

Figure 1. We propose a new interactive method named HUAL
which only requires binary annotations to reduce the annotation
cost. (a) In each round, user (student) selects a frame with the
largest uncertainty, and the expert (teacher) returns the binary label of this frame as feedback. (b) With more labels provided, the
VMR model is retrained and the whole process can be treated in a
human-in-the-loop manner.

tasks, such as video question answering [19, 40, 53], dense
video captioning [4, 6], video relation detection [14, 34],
video dialog [29], etc. Recent methods on VMR mainly
focus on modeling the cross-modal context in temporal,
and have achieved significant performance gains in public
datasets, which heavily rely on the well-annotated datasets,
such as Charades [9], ActivityNet [35], etc.

23013

