This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit View-Time Interpolation of Stereo Videos using Multi-Plane Disparities
and Non-Uniform Coordinates
Avinash Paliwal1 Andrii Tsarov2 Nima Khademi Kalantari1
1
Texas A&M University 2 Leia Inc.
{avinashpaliwal,nimak}@tamu.edu, andrii.tsarov@leiainc.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an approach for view-time interpolation of stereo videos. Specifically, we build upon
X-Fields that approximates an interpolatable mapping between the input coordinates and 2D RGB images using a
convolutional decoder. Our main contribution is to analyze and identify the sources of the problems with using XFields in our application and propose novel techniques to
overcome these challenges. Specifically, we observe that XFields struggles to implicitly interpolate the disparities for
large baseline cameras. Therefore, we propose multi-plane
disparities to reduce the spatial distance of the objects in the
stereo views. Moreover, we propose non-uniform time coordinates to handle the non-linear and sudden motion spikes
in videos. We additionally introduce several simple, but important, improvements over X-Fields. We demonstrate that
our approach is able to produce better results than the state
of the art, while running in near real-time rates and having
low memory and storage costs.

1. Introduction
As the virtual reality (VR) and light field displays (e.g.,
Lume Pad [26]) become widespread, there is a growing
need for capturing the appropriate content for these devices
to provide an immersive virtual experience for the users.
This necessitates capturing a scene from different views and
at high frame rates. While this can be done using specialized hardware [3], such setups are usually bulky and expensive, and thus not suitable for an average user. To make the
content capture widespread, we should focus on standard
capturing devices like cellphone cameras. These devices,
however, are typically equipped with only two cameras and
are often not able to capture two videos at high frame rates.
This necessitates interpolating across time and view to reconstruct high frame rate videos from dense views.
For a system to be practical and can be deployed on display devices with limited storage, memory, and computational capability, it should have a few properties: 1) while

a reasonable amount of post-processing can be done on a
server, the approach should be able to generate results in
real-time, 2) it should not have a significant storage overhead on top of the input stereo video, and 3) it should have
a low memory cost.
Unfortunately, most existing approaches violate one or
more criteria. For example, while the approaches based
on multi-plane images (MPI) [47, 50, 55] can render novel
views in real-time, they require storing the estimated MPIs
for each frame (tens of megabytes per frame) and are additionally memory intensive. Moreover, to perform both
view and time interpolations, these approaches need to be
augmented with a video interpolation method which further adds to their memory and computational cost. The
more recent approaches based on neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [32] can perform both view and time interpolations [10, 29]. These methods encode the radiance field of
a scene into a small network, and thus have a small storage
and memory cost. However, they usually take a few seconds to render each novel view. Additionally, they require
the cameras to be calibrated, and thus have difficulty handling general videos.
In this paper, we build upon X-Fields [2] that optimizes
a coordinate-based network to learn an interpolatable implicit mapping between the input coordinates X (view or
time) and the observed images. Once the optimization for
a specific scene is performed, the network can be used to
generate an image given any X coordinate. This approach
satisfies all the properties, as the rendering is real-time (criterion 1) and the scene is encoded into a small network (criteria 2 and 3). Despite that, X-Fields struggles to produce
reasonable results for the specific problem of view-time interpolation of stereo videos.
Our main contribution is to analyze X-Fields, identify
the sources of the problems, and propose approaches that
address these shortfalls. Specifically, we identify two major
problems with X-Fields for stereo video interpolation. Our
first observation is that X-Fields struggles to interpolate the
disparities for cameras with large baselines. Second, we
observe that linear motion in the input videos is critical for

888

