This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMANet: Margin-aware Distillation and Modality-aware Regularization for
Incomplete Multimodal Learning
Shicai Wei
Chunbo Luo
Yang Luo
School of Information and Communication Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
shicaiwei@std.uestc.edu.cn {c.luo, luoyang}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal learning has shown great potentials in numerous scenes and attracts increasing interest recently.
However, it often encounters the problem of missing modality data and thus suffers severe performance degradation
in practice. To this end, we propose a general framework
called MMANet to assist incomplete multimodal learning. It consists of three components: the deployment network used for inference, the teacher network transferring
comprehensive multimodal information to the deployment
network, and the regularization network guiding the deployment network to balance weak modality combinations.
Specifically, we propose a novel margin-aware distillation (MAD) to assist the information transfer by weighing the sample contribution with the classification uncertainty. This encourages the deployment network to focus
on the samples near decision boundaries and acquire the
refined inter-class margin. Besides, we design a modalityaware regularization (MAR) algorithm to mine the weak
modality combinations and guide the regularization network to calculate prediction loss for them. This forces
the deployment network to improve its representation ability for the weak modality combinations adaptively. Finally, extensive experiments on multimodal classification
and segmentation tasks demonstrate that our MMANet outperforms the state-of-the-art significantly. Code is available
at: https://github.com/shicaiwei123/MMANet

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning has achieved great success on many
vision tasks such as classification [21, 33, 46], object detection [26, 45, 53], and segmentation [5, 23, 41]. However,
most successful methods assume that the models are trained
and tested with the same modality data. In fact, limited
by device [32, 39], user privacy [13, 25], and working condition [3, 29], it is often very costly or even infeasible to

Modality

Customized

Unified

Drop

RGB
Depth
IR
RGB+Depth
RGB+IR
Depth+IR
RGB+Depth+IR

10.01
4.45
11.65
3.41
6.32
3.54
1.23

11.75
5.87
16.62
4.61
6.68
4.95
2.21

-1.65
-1.42
-4.97
-1.2
-0.36
-1.41
-0.98

Table 1. The performance of customized models and the unified model for different modality combinations on the CASIASURF dataset using the average classification error rate. The
‘customized‘ means to train a model for each combination independently while the ‘unified’ means to train only one model for
all the combinations. The architectures of all the models are the
same and the feature map of missing modality (such as the IR for
RGB+Depth) is set as zero.

collect complete modality data during the inference stage.
There is thus substantial interest in assisting the incomplete
or even single modality inference via the complete modality
data during training.
A typical solution is to reconstruct the sample or feature
of the missing modalities from the available ones [10, 14,
15, 20, 29, 32]. Nevertheless, this needs to build a specific
model for each modality from all possible modality combinations and thus has high complexity. Recent studies focus
on learning a unified model, instead of a bunch of networks,
for different modality combinations. Generally, many such
approaches [6, 11, 12, 17, 51, 52] attempt to leverage feature
fusion strategies to capture modality-invariant representation so that the model can adapt to all possible modality
combinations. For example, RFNet [11] designs the regionaware fusion module to fuse the features of available image
modalities.
Although the existing unified models are indeed able to
increase the efficiency of training and deployment of the
multimodal models, their performance is likely to be sub-

20039

