This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CREPE: Can Vision-Language Foundation Models Reason Compositionally?
Zixian Ma1 *, Jerry Hong1 *, Mustafa Omer Gul2 *, Mona Gandhi3 , Irena Gao1 , Ranjay Krishna4
Stanford University1 , Cornell University2 , University of Pennsylvania3 , University of Washington4
{zixianma, jerryhong, irena}@cs.stanford.edu mog29@cornell.edu mona09@seas.upenn.edu
ranjay@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
A fundamental characteristic common to both human vision and natural language is their compositional nature. Yet,
despite the performance gains contributed by large vision
and language pretraining, we find that—across 7 architectures trained with 4 algorithms on massive datasets—they
struggle at compositionality. To arrive at this conclusion, we
introduce a new compositionality evaluation benchmark,
CREPE, which measures two important aspects of compositionality identified by cognitive science literature: systematicity and productivity. To measure systematicity, CREPE
consists of a test dataset containing over 370K image-text
pairs and three different seen-unseen splits. The three splits
are designed to test models trained on three popular training
datasets: CC-12M, YFCC-15M, and LAION-400M. We also
generate 325K, 316K, and 309K hard negative captions
for a subset of the pairs. To test productivity, CREPE contains 17K image-text pairs with nine different complexities
plus 278K hard negative captions with atomic, swapping
and negation foils. The datasets are generated by repurposing the Visual Genome scene graphs and region descriptions
and applying handcrafted templates and GPT-3. For systematicity, we find that model performance decreases consistently when novel compositions dominate the retrieval
set, with Recall@1 dropping by up to 9%. For productivity,
models’ retrieval success decays as complexity increases,
frequently nearing random chance at high complexity. These
results hold regardless of model and training dataset size.

1. Introduction
Compositionality, the understanding that “the meaning
of the whole is a function of the meanings of its parts” [11],
is held to be a key characteristic of human intelligence.
In language, the whole is a sentence, made up of words.
In vision, the whole is a scene, made up of parts like
objects, their attributes, and their relationships [31, 35].
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. We introduce CREPE, a benchmark to evaluate whether
vision-language foundation models demonstrate two fundamental
aspects of compositionality: systematicity and productivity. To evaluate systematicity, CREPE utilizes Visual Genome and introduces
three new test datasets for the three popular pretraining datasets:
CC-12M, YFCC-15M, and LAION-400M. These enable evaluating
models’ abilities to systematically generalize their understanding
to seen compounds, unseen compounds, and even unseen atoms.
To evaluate productivity, CREPE introduces examples of nine complexities, with three types of hard negatives for each.

Through compositional reasoning, humans can understand
new scenes and generate complex sentences by combining
known parts [6, 27, 30]. Despite compositionality’s importance, there are no large-scale benchmarks directly evaluating whether vision-language models can reason compositionally. These models are pretrained using large-scale imagecaption datasets [62, 64, 74], and are already widely applied
for tasks that benefit from compositional reasoning, including retrieval, text-to-image generation, and open-vocabulary
classification [10, 57, 60]. Especially as such models become
ubiquitous “foundations” for other models [5], it is critical
to understand their compositional abilities.
Previous work has evaluated these models using imagetext retrieval [32,56,82]. However, the retrieval datasets used
either do not provide controlled sets of negatives [45, 74]
or study narrow negatives which vary along a single axis

10910

