This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Intrinsic Image Decomposition with LiDAR Intensity
Shogo Sato1 , Yasuhiro Yao1 , Taiga Yoshida1 ,
Takuhiro Kaneko2 , Shingo Ando1 , Jun Shimamura1
1
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories, 2 NTT Communication Science Laboratories
{shogo.sato.wv, taiga.yoshida.ry, jun.shimamura.ec}@hco.ntt.co.jp,
yao-yasuhiro@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp, ando@info.shonan-it.ac.jp

Abstract
Intrinsic image decomposition (IID) is the task that decomposes a natural image into albedo and shade. While
IID is typically solved through supervised learning methods, it is not ideal due to the difficulty in observing ground
truth albedo and shade in general scenes. Conversely, unsupervised learning methods are currently underperforming
supervised learning methods since there are no criteria for
solving the ill-posed problems. Recently, light detection and
ranging (LiDAR) is widely used due to its ability to make
highly precise distance measurements. Thus, we have focused on the utilization of LiDAR, especially LiDAR intensity, to address this issue. In this paper, we propose unsupervised intrinsic image decomposition with LiDAR intensity (IID-LI). Since the conventional unsupervised learning
methods consist of image-to-image transformations, simply inputting LiDAR intensity is not an effective approach.
Therefore, we design an intensity consistency loss that computes the error between LiDAR intensity and gray-scaled
albedo to provide a criterion for the ill-posed problem. In
addition, LiDAR intensity is difficult to handle due to its
sparsity and occlusion, hence, a LiDAR intensity densification module is proposed. We verified the estimating quality
using our own dataset, which include RGB images, LiDAR
intensity and human judged annotations. As a result, we
achieved an estimation accuracy that outperforms conventional unsupervised learning methods.

1. Introduction
Intrinsic image decomposition (IID) is the task that aims
to decompose a natural image into an illumination-invariant
component (albedo) and an illumination-variant component
(shade), and contributes to high level computer vision tasks
such as relighting and scene understanding. Research on
decomposing a natural image has a long history, beginning
with the proposal of the Retinex theory [19] and IID [2].
Focusing on Lambertian scenes, decomposition of a natural

Figure 1. Our proposed approach (IID-LI) is unsupervised intrinsic image decomposition utilizing LiDAR intensity. We densified
LiDAR intensity to be robust for LiDAR sparsity or occlusions by
a LiDAR intensity densification module. In addition, we designed
an intensity consistency loss to provide a criterion for the albedo
in IID of ill-posed problems.

image I is expressed as follows.
 \label {eq1} I=R \cdot S, 

(1)

where, R and S denote albedo and shade, respectively. “·”
represents a channel-wise multiplication. To solve the illposed problem, some researchers assumed that sharp and
smooth color variation are caused by albedo and shade
change, respectively [12, 19, 41, 44]. As other methods, IID
was performed by defining and minimizing energy based
on the assumptions such as albedo flatness [3, 4]. Moreover, since shades depend on object geometry, IID methods
with a depth map were also proposed [8, 15, 22]. With the
development of deep learning, supervised learning methods began to be used for IID [9, 29, 32–34, 45, 46]. Due
to the difficulty of observing ground truth albedo and shade
in a practical scenario, supervised learning methods are typically either small [12], synthetic [6,7,24] or sparsely anno-

13466

