This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Swept-Angle Synthetic Wavelength Interferometry
Alankar Kotwal1 , Anat Levin2 , and Ioannis Gkioulekas1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Technion
Abstract

1. Introduction
Depth sensing is among the core problems of computer
vision and computational imaging, with widespread applications in medicine, industry, and robotics. An array of
techniques is available for acquiring depth maps of threedimensional (3D) scenes at different scales. In particular,
micrometer-resolution depth sensing, our focus in this paper, is important in biomedical imaging because biological
features are often micron-scale, industrial fabrication and
inspection of critical parts that must conform to their specifications (Figure 1), and robotics to handle fine objects.
Active illumination depth sensing techniques such as lidar, structured light, and correlation time-of-flight (ToF)
cannot provide micrometer axial resolution. Instead, we
focus on interferometric techniques that can achieve such
resolutions. The operational principles and characteristics
of interferometric techniques vary, depending on the type of
active illumination and optical configurations they use.
The choice of illumination spectrum leads to techniques
such as optical coherence tomography (OCT), which uses
broadband illumination, and phase-shifting interferometry
(PSI), which uses monochromatic illumination. We consider

airplane
wing section

inspection

3D-printed
coin

We present a new imaging technique, swept-angle synthetic wavelength interferometry, for full-field micron-scale
3D sensing. As in conventional synthetic wavelength interferometry, our technique uses light consisting of two narrowlyseparated optical wavelengths, resulting in per-pixel interferometric measurements whose phase encodes scene depth.
Our technique additionally uses a new type of light source
that, by emulating spatially-incoherent illumination, makes
interferometric measurements insensitive to aberrations and
(sub)surface scattering, effects that corrupt phase measurements. The resulting technique combines the robustness to
such corruptions of scanning interferometric setups, with
the speed of full-field interferometric setups. Overall, our
technique can recover full-frame depth at a lateral and axial resolution of 5 µm, at frame rates of 5 Hz, even under
strong ambient light. We build an experimental prototype,
and use it to demonstrate these capabilities by scanning a
variety of objects, including objects representative of applications in inspection and fabrication, and objects that
contain challenging light scattering effects.

fabrication
1 mm

1 mm

photo of
image of
scanned object scanned scene

swept-angle
(ours)

without
swept-angle

Figure 1. Applications of swept-angle SWI in industrial inspection and fabrication. We show depth reconstructions for two
scenes representative of these applications: millimeter-scale dents
on an aircraft fuselage section, and a 3D-printed coin.

synthetic wavelength interferometry (SWI), which operates
between these two extremes: By using illumination consisting of two narrowly-separated optical wavelengths, SWI
provides a controllable trade-off between the large unambiguous depth range of OCT, and the large axial resolution of
PSI. SWI can achieve micrometer resolution at depth ranges
in the order of hundreds of micrometers.
The choice of optical configuration results in full-field
versus scanning implementations, which offer different tradeoffs. Full-field implementations acquire entire 2D depth
maps, offering simultaneously fast operation and pixel-level
lateral resolutions. However, full-field implementations are
very sensitive to effects that corrupt depth estimation, such
as imperfections in free-space optics (e.g., lens aberrations)
and indirect illumination (e.g., subsurface scattering). By
contrast, scanning implementations use beam steering to sequentially scan points in a scene and produce a 2D depth
map. Scanning implementations offer robustness to depth
corruption effects, through the use of fiber optics to reduce
aberrations, and co-axial illumination and sensing to eliminate most indirect illumination. However, scanning makes
acquiring depth maps with pixel-level lateral resolution and
megapixel sizes impractically slow.
We develop a 3D sensing technique, swept-angle synthetic wavelength interferometry, that combines the complementary advantages of full-field and scanning implementations. We draw inspiration from previous work showing

8233

