This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

“Seeing” Electric Network Frequency from Events
Lexuan Xu1 ,* Guang Hua2 ,* Haijian Zhang1†, Lei Yu1†, Ning Qiao3
1
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
3
SynSense Tech. Co. Ltd., Chengdu, China
{lexuan.xu,haijian.zhang,ly.wd}@whu.edu.cn,huag@i2r.a-star.edu.sg,ning.qiao@synsense.ai

Abstract

1. Introduction
Light flicker is a nuisance in video [33] but can be exploited to detect and estimate the Electric Network Fre* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

The research was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62271354 and the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province, China under Grants 2022CFB084 and
2021CFB467.

Event Camera

Event Stream

Estimated ENF

Dynamic Scenes

Static Scenes

(a) Processing Pipeline for E-ENF Extraction

Extreme Lighting

Most of the artificial lights fluctuate in response to the
grid’s alternating current and exhibit subtle variations in
terms of both intensity and spectrum, providing the potential to estimate the Electric Network Frequency (ENF) from
conventional frame-based videos. Nevertheless, the performance of Video-based ENF (V-ENF) estimation largely relies on the imaging quality and thus may suffer from significant interference caused by non-ideal sampling, motion,
and extreme lighting conditions. In this paper, we show
that the ENF can be extracted without the above limitations from a new modality provided by the so-called event
camera, a neuromorphic sensor that encodes the light intensity variations and asynchronously emits events with extremely high temporal resolution and high dynamic range.
Specifically, we first formulate and validate the physical
mechanism for the ENF captured in events, and then propose a simple yet robust Event-based ENF (E-ENF) estimation method through mode filtering and harmonic enhancement. Furthermore, we build an Event-Video ENF Dataset
(EV-ENFD) that records both events and videos in diverse
scenes. Extensive experiments on EV-ENFD demonstrate
that our proposed E-ENF method can extract more accurate ENF traces, outperforming the conventional V-ENF by
a large margin, especially in challenging environments with
object motions and extreme lighting conditions. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
xlx-creater/E-ENF.

(b) Video Sequences

(c) Event Streams

(d) ENF Estimates

Figure 1. Illustrations of (a) the processing pipeline for E-ENF
extraction and comparative experimental results under (b) different
recording environments, in terms of (c) recorded event streams and
(d) extracted V-ENF and E-ENF.

quency (ENF) [10, 11], which is the power line transmission frequency in a grid, unlocking the potential of multimedia forensic verification [7, 9], electrical load monitoring [23,24], recording device identification [1,28], etc. This
is enabled by the discovery that the ENF fluctuates slightly
and randomly around the nominal value (50 or 60 Hz) and
consistently across the entire intra-grid nodes [13].
Existing Video-based ENF (V-ENF) extraction methods
attempt to restore the illumination fluctuations by averag-

18022

