This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-Sculptor: Zero-Shot Generation of High-Fidelity and Diverse Shapes from
Natural Language
Aditya Sanghi†
Rao Fu‡
Vivian Liu§
Karl D.D. Willis†
Hooman Shayani†
†
‡
Amir H. Khasahmadi
Srinath Sridhar
Daniel Ritchie‡
Autodesk Research†

Brown University‡

“a baseball cap” “a skateboard” “a motor bike” “a formula one car”

“a delta wing”

Columbia University§

“a truck that
“a travel bag”
looks like a limo”

“a round shaped lamp”

“an office chair”

“an airplane”

Figure 1. CLIP-Sculptor is a zero-shot text-to-shape generation method. Left Top/Bottom: It generates diverse shapes that reflect the
semantic meaning of the text input without requiring any text data during training. Right: The method also generates high-fidelity
shapes.

Abstract
Recent works have demonstrated that natural language
can be used to generate and edit 3D shapes. However,
these methods generate shapes with limited fidelity and diversity. We introduce CLIP-Sculptor, a method to address
these constraints by producing high-fidelity and diverse
3D shapes without the need for (text, shape) pairs during
training. CLIP-Sculptor achieves this in a multi-resolution
approach that first generates in a low-dimensional latent
space and then upscales to a higher resolution for improved shape fidelity. For improved shape diversity, we
use a discrete latent space which is modeled using a transformer conditioned on CLIP’s image-text embedding space.
We also present a novel variant of classifier-free guidance, which improves the accuracy-diversity trade-off. Finally, we perform extensive experiments demonstrating that
CLIP-Sculptor outperforms state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been rapid progress in textconditioned image generation [31, 32, 35], which has been
driven by advances in multimodal understanding learned
from web-scaled paired (text, image) data. These advances

have led to applications in domains ranging from content
creation [21, 22, 31] to human–robot interaction [40]. Unfortunately, developing the analogue of a text-conditioned
3D shape generator is challenging because it is difficult to
obtain (text, 3D shape) pairs at large scale. Prior work has
attempted to address this problem by collecting text-shape
paired data [2, 5, 9, 23, 26], but these approaches have been
limited to a small number of object categories.
A promising way around this data bottleneck is to use
weak supervision from large-scale vision/language models such as CLIP [30]. One approach is to directly optimize a 3D representation such that (text, image render)
pairs are aligned when projected into the CLIP embedding
space. Prior work has applied this approach to stylize 3D
meshes [25, 41] and to create abstract “dreamlike” objects
using neural radiance fields [18] or meshes [19]. However,
neither of the aforementioned methods produce realistic object geometry, and they can require expensive optimization.
Another approach, more in line with text-to-image generators [31, 32], is to train a conditional generative model.
The CLIP-Forge system [37] builds such a model without
paired (text, shape) data by using rendered images of shapes
at training time and leveraging the CLIP embedding space
to bridge the modalities of image and text at inference time.
CLIP-Forge demonstrates compelling zero-shot generation

18339

