This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive Segmentation of Radiance Fields
Rahul Goel*

Dhawal Sirikonda*

Saurabh Saini

P J Narayanan

CVIT, Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems (KCIS), IIIT Hyderabad
{rahul.goel, dhawal.sirikonda, saurabh.saini}@research.iiit.ac.in, pjn@iiit.ac.in

Figure 1. We present ISRF, an interactive method to segment objects in radiance fields. Users can draw positive strokes to segment
multiple objects at a time in 3D and negative strokes to remove unwanted regions repeatedly. In the figure, the W OODEN TABLE T OP is
segmented using one positive and one negative stroke as shown.

Abstract
Radiance Fields (RF) are popular to represent casuallycaptured scenes for new view synthesis and several applications beyond it. Mixed reality on personal spaces
needs understanding and manipulating scenes represented
as RFs, with semantic segmentation of objects as an important step. Prior segmentation efforts show promise but
don’t scale to complex objects with diverse appearance.
We present the ISRF method to interactively segment objects with fine structure and appearance. Nearest neighbor
feature matching using distilled semantic features identifies
high-confidence seed regions. Bilateral search in a joint
spatio-semantic space grows the region to recover accurate segmentation. We show state-of-the-art results of segmenting objects from RFs and compositing them to another
scene, changing appearance, etc., and an interactive segmentation tool that others can use.

1. Introduction
Scene representation is a crucial step for any scene understanding or manipulation task. Relevant scene parameters, be it shape, appearance, or illumination, can be represented using various modalities like 2D (depth/texture)
maps, point clouds, surface meshes, voxels, parametric
functions, etc. Each modality has its strengths and weakProject Page: https://rahul-goel.github.io/isrf/
∗ Equal Contribution

nesses. For example, shape correspondence is straightforward between point clouds compared to surface meshes but
compromises rendering fidelity. Thus, choosing an appropriate representation has a major impact on downstream
analyses and applications.
Neural implicit representations have emerged as a
promising modality for 3D analysis recently. Although initially proposed only for shapes [28, 34], they have been
extended to encode complete directional radiance at a
point [30], other rendering parameters like lightfields, specularity, textual context, object semantics, etc. [1, 9, 11,
12, 16, 19, 50]. The representation was extended beyond
static inward-looking and front-facing scenes to complex
outward-looking unbounded 360◦ views, dynamic clips, occluded egocentric videos, and unconstrained images.
Radiance fields have also been used beyond Novel View
Synthesis (NVS) for other applications [5, 26, 35, 43, 46, 48,
52, 55, 58]. Segmenting objects of the scene representation
is a first step towards its understanding and manipulation
for different downstream tasks. There have been a few efforts at segmenting and editing of radiance fields. Recently,
N3F [47], and DFF [21] presented preliminary solutions to
this in the neural space of radiance fields. Both use distillation for feature matching between user-provided cues
with the learned 3D feature volume, with N3F using userprovided patches and DFF using textual prompts or patches
as the segmentation cues. These methods struggle to segment objects with a wide appearance variation. The NVOS
system provides segmentation with strokes but have poor
quality and non-interactive computations [37].

4201

