This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Knowledge Distillation for 6D Pose Estimation by
Aligning Distributions of Local Predictions
Shuxuan Guo1 , Yinlin Hu2 , Jose M. Alvarez3 , Mathieu Salzmann1,4
1
CVLab, EPFL 2 MagicLeap 3 NVIDIA 4 ClearSpace
shuxuan.guo@epfl.ch

yhu@magicleap.com

josea@nvidia.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation facilitates the training of a compact student network by using a deep teacher one. While
this has achieved great success in many tasks, it remains
completely unstudied for image-based 6D object pose estimation. In this work, we introduce the first knowledge distillation method driven by the 6D pose estimation task. To
this end, we observe that most modern 6D pose estimation
frameworks output local predictions, such as sparse 2D keypoints or dense representations, and that the compact student network typically struggles to predict such local quantities precisely. Therefore, instead of imposing predictionto-prediction supervision from the teacher to the student,
we propose to distill the teacher’s distribution of local predictions into the student network, facilitating its training.
Our experiments on several benchmarks show that our distillation method yields state-of-the-art results with different
compact student models and for both keypoint-based and
dense prediction-based architectures.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D position and 3D orientation, a.k.a. 6D
pose, of an object relative to the camera from a single 2D
image has a longstanding history in computer vision, with
many real-world applications, such as robotics, autonomous
navigation, and virtual and augmented reality. Modern
methods that tackle this task [7, 20, 21, 25, 28, 33, 40, 45, 47]
all rely on deep neural networks. The vast majority of
them draw their inspiration from the traditional approach,
which consists of establishing correspondences between the
object’s 3D model and the input image and compute the
6D pose from these correspondences using a Perspectiven-Point (PnP) algorithm [2, 23, 27, 42] or a learnable PnP
network. Their main differences then lie in the way they
extract correspondences. While some methods predict the
2D image locations of sparse 3D object keypoints, such as
the 8 3D bounding box corners [19–21] or points on the ob-

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Ground-truth

(a) Student

Student

(b) Our Distilled Student

Teacher

(c) Teacher

Figure 1. Student vs teacher keypoint predictions. The large
backbone of the teacher allows it to produce accurate keypoints,
indicated by tight clusters. By contrast, because of its more compact backbone, the student struggles to predict accurate keypoints
when trained with keypoint-to-keypoint supervision. We therefore
propose to align the student’s and teacher’s keypoint distributions.

ject surface [33], others produce dense representations, such
as 3D locations [7, 45] or binary codes [40], from which the
pose can be obtained.
In any event, these methods rely on large models, which,
while achieving impressive accuracy, are impractical deployment on embedded platforms and edge devices. As, to
the best of our knowledge, no compact and efficient 6D pose
estimation models have yet been proposed, a simple way to
reduce the size of these networks consists of replacing their
large backbones with much smaller ones. Unfortunately,
this typically comes with a significant accuracy drop. In
this paper, we address this by introducing a knowledge distillation strategy for 6D pose estimation networks.
Knowledge distillation aims to transfer information from
a deep teacher network to a compact student one. The research on this topic has tackled diverse tasks, such as image
classification [17, 37, 48], object detection [10, 11, 49] and
semantic segmentation [14, 30]. While some techniques,
such as feature distillation [15, 37, 48, 49], can in principle
generalize to other tasks, no prior work has studied knowledge distillation in the context of 6D pose estimation.

18633

