This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published
version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
Time

Time

BundleSDF: Neural 6-DoF Tracking and 3D Reconstruction of Unknown Objects
Bowen Wen

Jonathan Tremblay Valts Blukis Stephen Tyree Thomas Müller
Alex Evans Dieter Fox Jan Kautz Stan Birchfield
NVIDIA

Figure 1. Given a monocular RGBD sequence and 2D object mask (in the first frame only), our method performs causal 6-DoF tracking and 3D reconstruction of an unknown object. Without any prior knowledge of the object or interaction agent, our method generalizes well, handling flat and untextured
surfaces, specular highlights, thin structures, severe occlusion, and a variety of interaction agents (human hand / body / robotic arm). The visualized meshes
are directly output by the method.

Abstract
We present a near real-time (10Hz) method for 6-DoF
tracking of an unknown object from a monocular RGBD
video sequence, while simultaneously performing neural 3D
reconstruction of the object. Our method works for arbitrary rigid objects, even when visual texture is largely absent. The object is assumed to be segmented in the first
frame only. No additional information is required, and no
assumption is made about the interaction agent. Key to our
method is a Neural Object Field that is learned concurrently with a pose graph optimization process in order to
robustly accumulate information into a consistent 3D representation capturing both geometry and appearance. A dynamic pool of posed memory frames is automatically maintained to facilitate communication between these threads.
Our approach handles challenging sequences with large
pose changes, partial and full occlusion, untextured surfaces, and specular highlights. We show results on HO3D,
YCBInEOAT, and BEHAVE datasets, demonstrating that
our method significantly outperforms existing approaches.
Project page: https://bundlesdf.github.io/

1. Introduction
Two fundamental (and closely related) problems in computer vision are 6-DoF (“degree of freedom”) pose tracking
and 3D reconstruction of an unknown object from a monocular RGBD video. Solving these problems will unlock
a wide range of applications in areas such as augmented
reality [34], robotic manipulation [22, 70], learning-fromdemonstration [71], and sim-to-real transfer [1, 15].

Prior efforts often consider these two problems separately. For example, neural scene representations have
achieved great success in creating high quality 3D object
models from real data [3, 40, 44, 59, 68, 81]. These approaches, however, assume known camera poses and/or
ground-truth object masks. Furthermore, capturing a static
object by a dynamically moving camera prevents full 3D
reconstruction (e.g., the bottom of the object is never seen
if resting on a table). On the other hand, instance-level
6-DoF object pose estimation and tracking methods often require a textured 3D model of the test object beforehand [24, 28, 66, 72, 73] for pre-training and/or online template matching. While category-level methods enable generalization to new object instances within the same category [7,27,62,67,74], they struggle with out-of-distribution
object instances and unseen object categories.
To overcome these limitations, in this paper we propose to solve these two problems jointly. Our method assumes that the object is rigid, and it requires a 2D object
mask in the first frame of the video. Apart from these
two requirements, the object can be moved freely throughout the video, even undergoing severe occlusion. Our approach is similar in spirit to prior work in object-level
SLAM [35, 36, 50–52, 64, 85], but we relax many common
assumptions, allowing us to handle occlusion, specularity,
lack of visual texture and geometric cues, and abrupt object
motion. Key to our method is an online pose graph optimization process, a concurrent Neural Object Field to reconstruct the 3D shape and appearance, and a memory pool
to facilitate communication between the two processes. The

606

