This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Linking Garment with Person via Semantically Associated
Landmarks for Virtual Try-On
Keyu Yan1,2,3 * Tingwei Gao1 * Hui Zhang2,3 Chengjun Xie2†
1
Alibaba Group
2
Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{keyu,hui928}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tingwei.gtw@alibaba-inc.com, cjxie@iim.ac.cn
Person

Garment

VITON-HD

HR-VITON

Ours

Person

Garment

Original Try-on

Sleeve Control

Hemline Control

Collar Control

Figure 1. Comparing SAL-VTON with the recent state-of-the-art methods on the VITON-HD testing dataset (left) and controlling the
original try-on results of SAL-VTON via manually manipulating semantically associated landmarks (right).

Abstract
In this paper, a novel virtual try-on algorithm, dubbed
SAL-VTON, is proposed, which links the garment with the
person via semantically associated landmarks to alleviate
misalignment. The semantically associated landmarks are
a series of landmark pairs with the same local semantics on the in-shop garment image and the try-on image.
Based on the semantically associated landmarks, SALVTON effectively models the local semantic association
between garment and person, making up for the misalignment in the overall deformation of the garment. The
outcome is achieved with a three-stage framework: 1) the
semantically associated landmarks are estimated using the
landmark localization model; 2) taking the landmarks as
input, the warping model explicitly associates the corresponding parts of the garment and person for obtaining
the local flow, thus refining the alignment in the global
flow; 3) finally, a generator consumes the landmarks
to better capture local semantics and control the try-on
results. Moreover, we propose a new landmark dataset
with a unified labelling rule of landmarks for diverse
styles of garments. Extensive experimental results on
* Co-first authors contributed equally, † Corresponding author.

popular datasets demonstrate that SAL-VTON can handle
misalignment and outperform state-of-the-art methods both
qualitatively and quantitatively. The dataset is available on
https://modelscope.cn/datasets/damo/SAL-HG/summary.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid popularization of online
shopping, virtual try-on [6, 9, 16, 32, 52] has attracted
extensive attention for its potential applications. Imagebased virtual try-on [4, 34, 49] aims to synthesize a photorealistic try-on image by transferring a garment image onto
the corresponding region of a person. Commonly, there
are significant spatial geometric gaps between the in-shop
garment image and the person image, leading to garments
failing to align the corresponding body parts of person.
To address the above issue, prior arts take geometric
deformation models to align the garment with the person’s
body. Early works [16, 22, 43] widely use the ThinPlate Spline (TPS) deformation model [39], whereas the
smoothness constraint of TPS transformation limits the
warping capacity. Recently, the flow operation is applied,
with a high dimension of freedom to warp garments [5, 11,
15, 18]. Nonetheless, the flow operation falls short on gar-

17194

