This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Better Gradient Consistency for Neural Signed Distance Functions via
Level Set Alignment
Baorui Ma1∗, Junsheng Zhou1∗ , Yu-Shen Liu1†, Zhizhong Han2
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
1

{mbr18,zhoujs21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Neural signed distance functions (SDFs) have shown remarkable capability in representing geometry with details. However, without signed distance supervision, it is still
a challenge to infer SDFs from point clouds or multi-view
images using neural networks. In this paper, we claim that
gradient consistency in the field, indicated by the parallelism of level sets, is the key factor affecting the inference accuracy. Hence, we propose a level set alignment loss to
evaluate the parallelism of level sets, which can be minimized to achieve better gradient consistency. Our novelty lies in that we can align all level sets to the zero level set by constraining gradients at queries and their projections on the zero level set in an adaptive way. Our insight is to propagate the zero level set to everywhere in the
field through consistent gradients to eliminate uncertainty
in the field that is caused by the discreteness of 3D point
clouds or the lack of observations from multi-view images.
Our proposed loss is a general term which can be used upon different methods to infer SDFs from 3D point clouds
and multi-view images. Our numerical and visual comparisons demonstrate that our loss can significantly improve
the accuracy of SDFs inferred from point clouds or multiview images under various benchmarks. Code and data
are available at https://github.com/mabaorui/
TowardsBetterGradient.

1. Introduction
Signed distance functions (SDFs) have shown remarkable abilities in representing high fidelity 3D geometry [6,
14,16,28,32,36,38,41,42,45,51,52,54,55,62,63,67–69,76].
Current methods mainly use neural networks to learn SDFs
∗ Equal contribution.
† The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported

by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and in part
by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

as a mapping from 3D coordinates to signed distances. Using gradient descent, we can train neural networks by adjusting parameters to minimize errors to either signed distance ground truth [9, 31, 45, 51, 52] or signed distances inferred from 3D point clouds [1,2,11,22,38,60,77] or multiview images [19, 24, 66–69, 73, 74, 76]. However, factors
like the discreteness in point clouds and the lack of observations in multi-view images result in 3D ambiguity, which
makes inferring SDFs without ground truth signed distances
remain a challenge.
Recent solutions [1,23,32,60,68] impose additional constraints on gradients with respect to input coordinates. The
gradients determine the rate of change of signed distances in
a field, which is vital for the accuracy of SDFs. Specifically,
Eikonal term [1,23,32] is widely used to learn SDFs, which
constrains the norm of gradients to be one at any location
in the field. This regularization ensures the networks to predict valid signed distances. NeuralPull [38] constrains the
directions of gradients to pull arbitrary queries onto the surface. One issue here is that these methods merely constrain
gradients at single locations, without considering gradient
consistency to their corresponding projections on different
level sets. This results in inconsistent gradients in the field,
indicated by level sets with poor parallelism, which drastically decreases the accuracy of inferred SDFs.
To resolve this issue, we introduce a level set alignment
loss to pursue better gradient consistency for SDF inference
without ground truth signed distances. Our loss is a general
term which can be used to train different networks for learning SDFs from either 3D point clouds or multi-view images.
Our key idea is to constrain gradients at corresponding locations on different level sets of the inferred SDF to be consistent. We achieve this by minimizing the cosine distance
between the gradient of a query and the gradient of its projection on the zero level set. Minimize our loss is equivalent
to aligning all level sets onto a reference, i.e. the zero level set, in a pairwise way. This enables us to propagate the
zero level set to everywhere in the field, which eliminates
uncertainty in the field that is caused by the discreteness of

17724

