This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Rotation Averaging: Uncertainties and Robust Losses
Ganlin Zhang
ETH Zürich

Viktor Larsson
Lund University

Daniel Barath
ETH Zürich

zhangga@student.ethz.ch

viktor.larsson@math.lth.se

dbarath@inf.ethz.ch

(a) Uncertainty = 0.63
Rotation error = 0.05◦ , Translation error = 6.30◦

(b) Uncertainty = 7.61
Rotation error = 4.81◦ , Translation error = 21.12◦

Figure 1. Two example pairs where, even though the relative pose estimation found a large number of correct inliers (shown by green
line segments), the quality of the estimated poses differs greatly. The uncertainties, used as weighting terms, help in rotation averaging to
account for this quality difference. Here, the shown numbers as the uncertainties are the traces of the covariance matrices.

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the rotation averaging problem
applied in global Structure-from-Motion pipelines. We argue that the main problem of current methods is the minimized cost function that is only weakly connected with the
input data via the estimated epipolar geometries. We propose to better model the underlying noise distributions by
directly propagating the uncertainty from the point correspondences into the rotation averaging. Such uncertainties are obtained for free by considering the Jacobians
of two-view refinements. Moreover, we explore integrating a variant of the MAGSAC loss into the rotation averaging problem, instead of using classical robust losses
employed in current frameworks. The proposed method
leads to results superior to baselines, in terms of accuracy, on large-scale public benchmarks. The code is public.
https://github.com/zhangganlin/GlobalSfMpy

1. Introduction
Building large 3D reconstructions from unordered image collections is an essential component in any system that
relies on crowd-sourced mapping. The current paradigm
is to perform this reconstruction via Structure-from-Motion
[29] which jointly estimates the camera parameters and the
scene geometry represented with a 3D point cloud. Meth-

ods for Structure-from-Motion can generally be categorized
into two classes; Incremental methods [29, 32, 33, 38] that
sequentially grows a seed reconstruction by alternating triangulation and registering new images, and Global methods [8, 22, 24, 27] which first estimate pairwise geometries
and then aggregate them in a bottom-up approach. Historically, incremental methods are more robust and accurate,
but the need for frequent bundle adjustment [35] comes with
significant computational cost which limits their scalability. In contrast, global (or non-sequential) methods require
much lower computational effort and can in principle scale
to larger image collections. However, in practice, current
methods are held back by the lack of accuracy and have not
enjoyed the same level of success as incremental methods.
Global methods work by first estimating a set of pairwise epipolar geometries between co-visible images. Next,
via rotation averaging, a set of globally consistent rotations
are estimated by ensuring they agree with the pairwise relative rotations. Once the rotations are known, the camera
positions and 3D structure are estimated, and refined jointly
in a single final bundle adjustment.
Rotation averaging has a long history in computer vision
(see e.g. [16,22] for early works) and is a well-studied problem. Most methods formulate it as an optimization problem,
finding the rotation assignment that minimizes some energy.
A common choice is the chordal distance, measuring the

17215

