This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conjugate Product Graphs for Globally Optimal 2D-3D Shape Matching

Lähner [28]

Paul Roetzer1
Zorah Lähner2
Florian Bernard1
University of Bonn1
University of Siegen2

Ours

→

Results of Lähner et al. [28] (top) and ours (bottom) on the TOSCA dataset.

(i) Matching with our approach

(ii) 2D to 3D deformation transfer

Figure 1. We propose a novel formalism for globally optimal 2D contour to 3D shape matching based on shortest paths in the conjugate
product graph. For the first time we make it possible to incorporate higher-order costs within a shortest path-based matching formalism,
which in turn enables to integrate powerful priors, e.g. favouring locally rigid deformations. Left: Our method produces compelling 2D3D matchings that significantly outperform the previous state of the art [28]. Right: Sketch-based 2D to 3D deformation transfer by (i)
computing a 2D-3D matching using our approach, (ii) manipulating the 2D sketch, and then transferring 2D deformations to the 3D shape.

Abstract
We consider the problem of finding a continuous and
non-rigid matching between a 2D contour and a 3D mesh.
While such problems can be solved to global optimality by
finding a shortest path in the product graph between both
shapes, existing solutions heavily rely on unrealistic prior
assumptions to avoid degenerate solutions (e.g. knowledge
to which region of the 3D shape each point of the 2D contour is matched). To address this, we propose a novel 2D3D shape matching formalism based on the conjugate product graph between the 2D contour and the 3D shape. Doing so allows us for the first time to consider higher-order
costs, i.e. defined for edge chains, as opposed to costs defined for single edges. This offers substantially more flexibility, which we utilise to incorporate a local rigidity prior.
By doing so, we effectively circumvent degenerate solutions
and thereby obtain smoother and more realistic matchings,
even when using only a one-dimensional feature descriptor. Overall, our method finds globally optimal and continuous 2D-3D matchings, has the same asymptotic complexity as previous solutions, produces state-of-the-art results
for shape matching and is even capable of matching partial
shapes. Our code is publicly available.1
1 https://github.com/paul0noah/sm-2D3D

1. Introduction
In recent years the computer vision community has put
great effort into the matching of either two 2D or two 3D
shapes. However, the task of matching a 2D shape to a
3D shape is a problem that has received less attention, even
though it has a high practical relevance due to its wide variety of applications. For example, 2D-3D shape matching has the potential to bridge the gap between the 2D and
3D domain by making interaction with 3D objects more accessible to non-experts, who typically find the manipulation of 2D shapes more intuitive than operating 3D modelling tools. In addition to the modelling and manipulation of 3D shapes using 2D sketches (see Fig. 1), 2D-3D
shape matching is relevant for 3D shape retrieval from 2D
queries (e.g. searching a hand-drawn sketch in a 3D shape
database), for augmented reality interactions (e.g. using
hand-gestures to select 3D objects), for 3D image analysis
based on 2D images (e.g. matching 2D X-ray image segmentations to 3D CT image segmentations), or for multimodal 2D-3D shape analysis.
2D-3D shape matching can be framed as finding a continuous mapping of a 2D contour (e.g. a sketch of an animal outline) to a 3D shape (e.g. a 3D model of this animal), see Fig. 1 (left). Here, the matched 2D contour that
is deformed to the 3D shape should resemble the original

21866

