This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Focal Knowledge from Imperfect Expert for 3D Object Detection
Jia Zeng1,2 Li Chen1 Hanming Deng3 Lewei Lu3
Junchi Yan2,1 Yu Qiao1 Hongyang Li1,2 *
1
OpenDriveLab, Shanghai AI Lab 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 SenseTime Research
{zengjia,lichen,qiaoyu,lihongyang}@pjlab.org.cn
{denghanming,luotto}@sensetime.com

yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn

Foreground region

Abstract
Multi-camera 3D object detection blossoms in recent
years and most of state-of-the-art methods are built up on
the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) representations. Albeit remarkable performance, these works suffer from low efﬁciency.
Typically, knowledge distillation can be used for model
compression. However, due to unclear 3D geometry reasoning, expert features usually contain some noisy and confusing areas. In this work, we investigate on how to distill the
knowledge from an imperfect expert. We propose FD3D, a
Focal Distiller for 3D object detection. Speciﬁcally, a set of
queries are leveraged to locate the instance-level areas for
masked feature generation, to intensify feature representation ability in these areas. Moreover, these queries search
out the representative ﬁne-grained positions for reﬁned distillation. We verify the effectiveness of our method by applying it to two popular detection models, BEVFormer and
DETR3D. The results demonstrate that our method achieves
improvements of 4.07 and 3.17 points respectively in terms
of NDS metric on nuScenes benchmark. Code is hosted
at https : / / github . com / OpenPerceptionX /
BEVPerception-Survey-Recipe.

Expert
Abstraction

(a) Global distillation

(b) Attentive distillation
Query mask

Random mask

Apprentice
Representation
Generator

Generator

Query offset

(c) Generative distillation
with random mask

(d) Generative and focal
distillation (ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed generative and focal distillation method. Compared with others, the proposed manner in 1 (d)
leverages queries to generate instance masks for masked generative distillation, rather than random masks in 1 (c). Moreover, the
queries meanwhile search for the representative position to perform reﬁned distillation, where the distillation region selection is
more ﬁne-grained and ﬂexible than 1 (b).

1. Introduction
Accurate 3D object detection is a vital component in autonomous driving. To achieve this, most methods [14, 37]
resort to LiDAR sensors and dominate the public benchmarks [1, 27]. Despite the performance gap, pure vision
approaches are still worthy of in-depth inquiry, since cameras can provide rich semantic information and are low-cost
and easy-to-deploy. Among these, bird’s-eye-view (BEV)
detection has drawn extensive attention from both industry
and academia, and shown great potential to narrow down
the performance gap [15, 21]. However, such models tend
to be computationally consuming.

In common practice, knowledge distillation can compress the model and is usually applied to alleviate computation overhead. One possible solution is to utilize the
LiDAR-based model as the expert [4, 17], but this requires
complex spatial-temporal calibrations and also needs to
handle heterogeneous problems from different modalities.
An intuitive question is, can we distill these models solely
based on camera sensors? In this work, we intend to address this problem and focus on the camera-only distillation
setting. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst
solution tailored for this setting.
Distillation methods in 2D object detection have derived

* Corresponding author at lihongyang@pjlab.org.cn

992

