This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlexNeRF: Photorealistic Free-viewpoint Rendering of Moving Humans
from Sparse Views
Vinoj Jayasundara1 *, Amit Agrawal2 , Nicolas Heron2 , Abhinav Shrivastava1 , Larry S. Davis1,2
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

Amazon.com, Inc.

{vinoj, lsdavis}@umd.edu, {aaagrawa, heron}@amazon.com, abhinav@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We present FlexNeRF, a method for photorealistic freeviewpoint rendering of humans in motion from monocular
videos. Our approach works well with sparse views, which
is a challenging scenario when the subject is exhibiting
fast/complex motions. We propose a novel approach which
jointly optimizes a canonical time and pose configuration,
with a pose-dependent motion field and pose-independent
temporal deformations complementing each other. Thanks
to our novel temporal and cyclic consistency constraints
along with additional losses on intermediate representation
such as segmentation, our approach provides high quality
outputs as the observed views become sparser. We empirically demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art on public benchmark datasets as well as
a self-captured fashion dataset. The project page is available at: https://flex-nerf.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Free-viewpoint rendering of a scene is an important
problem often attempted under constrained settings: on
subjects demonstrating simple motion carefully captured
with multiple cameras [17, 19, 20]. However, photorealistic free-viewpoint rendering of moving humans captured
from a monocular video still remains an unsolved challenging problem, especially with sparse views.
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) have emerged as a popular tool to learn radiance fields from images/videos for
novel view-point rendering. Previous approaches assume
multiple view-points and often fail on non-rigid human motions. Human-specific NeRFs have recently become popular for learning models using input videos [27, 40]. The
current state-of-art approaches such as HumanNeRF [40]
have shown impressive progress in this domain. However,
there remain several challenges. Firstly, approaches such
as HumanNeRF [40] utilize a pose prior and use a canoni* Part of the work was done while the author was an intern at Amazon.

cal configuration (e.g. T-pose) for optimization, which may
be well outside the set of observed poses. The underlying
optimization becomes challenging especially as the number of observed views become sparse. In contrast, we select a pose from the available set of poses as the canonical pose-configuration, similar to previous pose-free approaches such as D-NeRF [29]. This enables best of both
worlds; it becomes easier to learn a motion field mapping
due to smaller deformations while using a pose prior. In
addition, having the canonical view in the training data provides a strong prior for the optimization of the canonical
pose itself. Finally, it allows us to optimize the canonical
configuration with our novel pose-independent temporal deformation. We demonstrate that this architectural change
provides significantly better results compared to existing
approaches [24, 40].
In addition, approaches such as HumanNeRF [40] depend on the estimated pose for the canonical configuration
optimization. Errors in the initial pose estimation, for example, due to strong motion blur cause challenges in pose
correction. The underlying assumption that the non-rigid
motion is pose-dependent often fails in scenarios with complex clothing and accessories, hair styles, and large limb
movements. Our proposed pose-independent temporal deformation helps to supplement the missing information in
its pose-dependent counterpart.
To this end, we introduce FlexNeRF, a novel approach
for jointly learning a pose-dependent motion field and poseindependent temporal deformation within the NeRF framework for modeling human motions. Moreover, we introduce a novel cycle consistency loss in our framework, further capitalizing on the fact that our canonical pose corresponds to one of the captured frames. The consistency regularizes the estimated deformation fields by mapping back
and forth between each view and the canonical pose. Moreover, the information content of any frame in a motion sequence has a strong similarity to that of its neighbours.
Hence, we propose to utilize this contextual information
present in a consecutive set of frames to aid learning by

21118

