This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compressing Volumetric Radiance Fields to 1 MB
Lingzhi Li∗ , Zhen Shen∗ , Zhongshu Wang, Li Shen, Liefeng Bo
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
{llz273714, zackary.sz, zhongshu.wzs, liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com, lshen.lsh@gmail.com

Abstract
Approximating radiance fields with discretized volumetric grids is one of promising directions for improving NeRFs, represented by methods like DVGO, Plenoxels and TensoRF, which achieve super-fast training convergence and real-time rendering. However, these methods typically require a tremendous storage overhead, costing up to hundreds of megabytes of disk space and runtime memory for a single scene. We address this issue in
this paper by introducing a simple yet effective framework,
called vector quantized radiance fields (VQRF), for compressing these volume-grid-based radiance fields. We first
present a robust and adaptive metric for estimating redundancy in grid models and performing voxel pruning by better exploring intermediate outputs of volumetric rendering.
A trainable vector quantization is further proposed to improve the compactness of grid models. In combination with
an efficient joint tuning strategy and post-processing, our
method can achieve a compression ratio of 100× by reducing the overall model size to 1 MB with negligible loss on
visual quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed framework is capable of achieving unrivaled performance and well generalization across multiple methods
with distinct volumetric structures, facilitating the wide use
of volumetric radiance fields methods in real-world applications. Code is available at https://github.com/
AlgoHunt/VQRF.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis aims to realize photo-realistic rendering for a 3D scene at unobserved viewpoints, given a set
of images recorded from multiple views with known camera poses. The topic has growing importance because of its
potential use in a wide range of Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality applications. Neural radiance fields (NeRF)
[29] have demonstrated compelling ability on this topic by
modelling and rendering 3D scenes effectively through the
∗ denote equal contribution

Figure 1. The pipeline can realize 100× compression rate on volumetric models while highly preserving the rendering quality.

use of deep neural networks, which are learned to map each
3D location given a viewing direction to its corresponding view-dependent color and volume density according to
volumetric rendering techniques [27]. The rendering process relies on sampling a huge number of points and feeding them through a cumbersome network, incurring considerable computational overhead during training and inference. Recent progress following radiance fields reconstruction shows that integrating voxel-based structures [23]
into the learning of representations can significantly boost
training and inference efficiency. These volumetric radiance fields methods typically store features on voxels and
retrieve sampling points (including color features and volume densities) by performing efficient trilinear interpolation without neural network [44] or only equipped with a
lightweight neural network [37] instead of cumbersome networks. However, the use of volumetric representations inevitably introduces considerable storage cost, e.g., costing
over one hundred megabytes to represent a scene, which is
prohibitive in real-world applications.
In this paper, we aim to counteract the storage issue
of representations induced by using voxel grids meanwhile
retaining rendering quality. In order to better understand
the characteristic of grid models, we estimated the distribution of voxel importance scores (shown in Fig. 4) and

4222

