This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Identity-Preserving Talking Face Generation with
Landmark and Appearance Priors
Weizhi Zhong1
Chaowei Fang2
Yinqi Cai1
Pengxu Wei1
3
1
Gangming Zhao
Liang Lin
Guanbin Li1 *
1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

Xidian University

3

The University of Hong Kong

{zhongwzh5, caiyq27}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, chaoweifang@outlook.com
{weipx3, liguanbin, linlng}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, gangmingzhao@gmail.com

Abstract
Generating talking face videos from audio attracts lots of
research interest. A few person-specific methods can generate vivid videos but require the target speaker’s videos for
training or fine-tuning. Existing person-generic methods
have difficulty in generating realistic and lip-synced videos
while preserving identity information. To tackle this problem, we propose a two-stage framework consisting of audioto-landmark generation and landmark-to-video rendering
procedures. First, we devise a novel Transformer-based
landmark generator to infer lip and jaw landmarks from the
audio. Prior landmark characteristics of the speaker’s face
are employed to make the generated landmarks coincide
with the facial outline of the speaker. Then, a video rendering model is built to translate the generated landmarks
into face images. During this stage, prior appearance information is extracted from the lower-half occluded target
face and static reference images, which helps generate realistic and identity-preserving visual content. For effectively
exploring the prior information of static reference images,
we align static reference images with the target face’s pose
and expression based on motion fields. Moreover, auditory
features are reused to guarantee that the generated face images are well synchronized with the audio. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method can produce more
realistic, lip-synced, and identity-preserving videos than existing person-generic talking face generation methods.

1. Introduction
Audio-driven talking face video generation is valuable
in a wide range of applications, such as visual dubbing
[19, 26, 37], digital assistants [32], and animation movies
[46]. Based on the training paradigm and data requirement,
* Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

Sketch

Masked Target

Reference 1

Reference 2

Reference 3

Generated

Ground Truth

Sketch

Masked Target

Reference 1

Reference 2

Reference 3

Generated

Ground Truth

Audio

Figure 1. This paper is targeted at generating a talking face video
for a speaker which is coherent with input audio. We implement
this task by completing the lower-half face of the speaker’s original video. The outline of the mouth and jaw is inferred from the
input audio and then used to guide the video completion process.
Moreover, multiple static reference images are used to supply prior
appearance information.

the talking face generation methods can generally be categorized as person-specific or person-generic types. Personspecific methods [11, 20, 21, 28, 32, 41] can generate photorealistic talking face videos but need to be re-trained or finetuned with the target speaker’s videos, which might be inaccessible in some real-world scenarios. Hence, learning to
generate person-generic talking face videos is a more significant and challenging problem in this field. This topic
also attracts lots of research attention [14, 19, 24, 26, 37, 45].
In this paper, we focus on tackling the person-generic talking face video generation by completing the lower-half face
of the speaker’s original video under the guidance of audio
data and multiple reference images, as shown in Figure 1.
The main challenges of the person-generic talking face
video generation include two folds: 1) How can the model
generate videos having facial motions, especially mouth
and jaw motions, which are coherent with the input audio? 2) How can the model produce visually realistic frames
while preserving the identity information? To address the
first problem, many methods [3, 5, 6, 17, 37, 46] leverage facial landmarks as intermediate representation when generating person-generic talking face videos. However, translation from audio to facial landmarks is an ambiguous task,
considering the same pronunciation may correspond to mul-

9729

