This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trace and Pace: Controllable Pedestrian Animation
via Guided Trajectory Diffusion
Davis Rempe∗,1,2
1

NVIDIA

Zhengyi Luo∗,1,3
Xue Bin Peng1,4
Ye Yuan1
Karsten Kreis1
Sanja Fidler1,5,6
Or Litany1
2

Stanford University
5

3

Carnegie Mellon University
6

University of Toronto

4

Kris Kitani3

Simon Fraser University

Vector Institute

Figure 1. (Left) We propose TRACE, a trajectory diffusion model that enables user control through test-time guidance. (Right) Generated
trajectories are passed to a novel physics-based humanoid controller (PACER), forming a closed-loop pedestrian animation system.

Abstract
We introduce a method for generating realistic pedestrian trajectories and full-body animations that can be controlled to meet user-defined goals. We draw on recent advances in guided diffusion modeling to achieve test-time
controllability of trajectories, which is normally only associated with rule-based systems. Our guided diffusion model
allows users to constrain trajectories through target waypoints, speed, and specified social groups while accounting
for the surrounding environment context. This trajectory
diffusion model is integrated with a novel physics-based humanoid controller to form a closed-loop, full-body pedestrian animation system capable of placing large crowds in
a simulated environment with varying terrains. We further propose utilizing the value function learned during RL
training of the animation controller to guide diffusion to
produce trajectories better suited for particular scenarios
such as collision avoidance and traversing uneven terrain.
Video results are available on the project page.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing high-level human behavior, in the form
of 2D positional trajectories, is at the core of modeling
pedestrians for applications like autonomous vehicles, urban planning, and architectural design. An important feature of such synthesis is controllability – generating tra∗ Equal contribution

jectories that meet user-defined objectives, edits, or constraints. For example, a user may place specific waypoints
for characters to follow, specify social groups for pedestrians to travel in, or define a social distance to maintain.
Attaining controllability is straightforward for algorithmic or rule-based models of human behavior, since they
have built-in objectives. In the simplest case, human trajectories can be determined by the shortest paths between
control points [11], but more sophisticated heuristics have
also been developed for pedestrians [2,14], crowds [22,46],
and traffic [29, 53]. Unfortunately, algorithmically generated trajectories often appear unnatural. Learning-based approaches, on the other hand, can improve naturalness by
mimicking real-world data. These methods often focus on
short-term trajectory prediction using a single forward pass
of a neural network [1, 10, 49, 61]. However, the ability to
control these models is limited to sampling from an output trajectory distribution [34, 58] or using an expensive latent space traversal [45]. As a result, learning-based methods can predict implausible motions such as collisions with
obstacles or between pedestrians. This motivates another
notion of controllability – maintaining realistic trajectories
during agent-agent and agent-environment interactions.
In this work, we are particularly interested in using controllable pedestrian trajectory models for character animation. We envision a simple interface where a user provides
high-level objectives, such as waypoints and social groups,
and a system converts them to physics-based full-body human motion. Compared to existing kinematic motion mod-

13756

