This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Temporal Transformer for 3D Hand Pose Estimation and Action
Recognition from Egocentric RGB Videos
Yilin Wen1 Hao Pan2 Lei Yang3,1 Jia Pan1 Taku Komura1 Wenping Wang4
1 The University of Hong Kong 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 TransGP 4 Texas A&M University
{ylwen,jpan,taku}@cs.hku.hk haopan@microsoft.com l.yang@transgp.hk wenping@tamu.edu

Abstract
Understanding dynamic hand motions and actions from
egocentric RGB videos is a fundamental yet challenging
task due to self-occlusion and ambiguity. To address occlusion and ambiguity, we develop a transformer-based framework to exploit temporal information for robust estimation.
Noticing the different temporal granularity of and the semantic correlation between hand pose estimation and action recognition, we build a network hierarchy with two
cascaded transformer encoders, where the first one exploits
the short-term temporal cue for hand pose estimation, and
the latter aggregates per-frame pose and object information over a longer time span to recognize the action. Our
approach achieves competitive results on two first-person
hand action benchmarks, namely FPHA and H2O. Extensive ablation studies verify our design choices.

1. Introduction
Perceiving dynamic interacting human hands is fundamental in fields such as human-robot collaboration, imitation learning, and VR/AR applications. Viewing through
the egocentric RGB video is especially challenging, as there
are frequent self-occlusions between hands and objects, as
well as severe ambiguity of action types judged from individual frames (e.g. see Fig. 1 where the actions of pour
milk and place milk can only be discerned at complete sequences).
Recent years have witnessed tremendous improvement
in 3D hand pose estimation and action recognition. While
many works focus on only one of these tasks [10, 12, 13, 18,
23,39,51,56], unified frameworks [27,47,52] have also been
proposed to address both tasks simultaneously, based on the
critical observation that the temporal context of hand poses
Work is partially done during the internship of Y. Wen with Microsoft
Research Asia. Code and data are available at https://github.com/
fylwen/HTT.

Figure 1. Image sequences for pour milk and place milk under egocentric view from H2O [27], with frequently occluded hand joints
and ambiguous action type judged by individual frames. Using
temporal information can benefit both tasks of 3D hand pose estimation and action recognition.

helps resolve action ambiguity, implemented via models
like LSTM, graph convolutional network or temporal convolutional network. However, we note that temporal information can also benefit hand pose estimation: while interacting hands are usually under partial occlusion and truncation, especially in the egocentric view, they can be inferred
more reliably from neighboring frames with different views
by temporal motion continuity. Indeed, this idea has not
been fully utilized yet among the existing works [27,47,52]:
e.g., [27, 47] perform hand pose estimation at each frame,
leaving the temporal dimension unexplored, and [52] jointly
refines action and hand pose through hand-crafted multipleorder motion features and a complex iterative scheme.
We build a simple end-to-end trainable framework to exploit the temporal dimension and achieve effective hand
pose estimation and action recognition with a single feedforward pass. To exploit the relationship among frames, we
adopt the transformer architecture [48] which has demonstrated superior performance in sequence modeling. However, action and pose have different temporal granularity:
while the action is related to longer time spans lasting for
several seconds, the hand pose depicts instantaneous motions. Correspondingly, we use two transformer encoders
with different window sizes to respectively leverage the
short-term and long-term temporal cues for the per-frame

21243

