This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physically Realizable Natural-Looking Clothing Textures Evade Person
Detectors via 3D Modeling
Zhanhao Hu1∗ Wenda Chu2,1∗ Xiaopei Zhu3,1 Hui Zhang4 Bo Zhang1 Xiaolin Hu1,5,6†
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
School of Integrated Circuits, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Beijing Institute of Fashion Technology, Beijing, China
5
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, THBI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
6
Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR), Beijing, China
{huzhanha17, chuwd19, zxp18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
fzyzhh@bift.edu.cn, {dcszb, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent works have proposed to craft adversarial clothes
for evading person detectors, while they are either only effective at limited viewing angles or very conspicuous to humans. We aim to craft adversarial texture for clothes based
on 3D modeling, an idea that has been used to craft rigid
adversarial objects such as a 3D-printed turtle. Unlike rigid
objects, humans and clothes are non-rigid, leading to difficulties in physical realization. In order to craft naturallooking adversarial clothes that can evade person detectors
at multiple viewing angles, we propose adversarial camouflage textures (AdvCaT) that resemble one kind of the typical
textures of daily clothes, camouflage textures. We leverage
the Voronoi diagram and Gumbel-softmax trick to parameterize the camouflage textures and optimize the parameters via 3D modeling. Moreover, we propose an efficient
augmentation pipeline on 3D meshes combining topologically plausible projection (TopoProj) and Thin Plate Spline
(TPS) to narrow the gap between digital and real-world objects. We printed the developed 3D texture pieces on fabric
materials and tailored them into T-shirts and trousers. Experiments show high attack success rates of these clothes
against multiple detectors.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks(DNNs) have been widely used in
many real-world systems such as face recognition and object detection [31, 32, 36, 48]. However, it is well known
∗ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Visualization of several adversarial clothes. (a) Adversarial patch [38]. (b) Adversarial T-shirt [43]. (c) Naturalistic
patch [18]. (d) Adversarial Texture [19]. (e) Left: daily camouflage texture; Right: our adversarial camouflage texture.

that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [16, 35].
Adversarial examples can be crafted by adding small perturbations to the clean inputs, rendering the DNNs’ outputs
incorrect. Such vulnerabilities could result in severe safety
problems when deploying DNN-based systems. This has
become a hot research topic recently [7, 11, 23, 26–28].
Adversarial examples were first identified in the digital world. However, adversarial examples also exist in the
physical world, posing more risks in real-world scenarios.
Recently, many works [1,12–14,33,39–41,45–47] have designed physical adversarial examples to deceive DNNs in
the real world. Among them, hiding persons [18–20, 38,
42,43] from DNN-based object detectors is especially challenging due to the difficulties of modeling non-rigid object
surfaces (i.e., clothes). Most works [18, 20, 38, 42, 43] print

16975

