This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhanced Stable View Synthesis
Nishant Jain*
Indian Institute of Technology
Roorkee, India

Suryansh Kumar∗†
ETH Zürich
Switzerland

Luc Van Gool
ETH Zürich
Switzerland

njain@cs.iitr.ac.in

sukumar@ethz.ch

vangool@ethz.ch

Abstract
We introduce an approach to enhance the novel view synthesis from images taken from a freely moving camera. The
introduced approach focuses on outdoor scenes where recovering accurate geometric scaffold and camera pose is
challenging, leading to inferior results using the state-ofthe-art stable view synthesis (SVS) method. SVS and related
methods fail for outdoor scenes primarily due to (i) overrelying on the multiview stereo (MVS) for geometric scaffold recovery and (ii) assuming COLMAP computed camera
poses as the best possible estimates, despite it being wellstudied that MVS 3D reconstruction accuracy is limited to
scene disparity and camera-pose accuracy is sensitive to
key-point correspondence selection. This work proposes a
principled way to enhance novel view synthesis solutions
drawing inspiration from the basics of multiple view geometry. By leveraging the complementary behavior of MVS and
monocular depth, we arrive at a better scene depth per view
for nearby and far points, respectively. Moreover, our approach jointly refines camera poses with image-based rendering via multiple rotation averaging graph optimization.
The recovered scene depth and the camera-pose help better
view-dependent on-surface feature aggregation of the entire
scene. Extensive evaluation of our approach on the popular benchmark dataset, such as Tanks and Temples, shows
substantial improvement in view synthesis results compared
to the prior art. For instance, our method shows 1.5 dB of
PSNR improvement on the Tank and Temples. Similar statistics are observed when tested on other benchmark datasets
such as FVS, Mip-NeRF 360, and DTU.

1. Introduction
Image-based rendering, popularly re-branded as view
synthesis, is a long-standing problem in computer vision
and graphics [42, 44]. This problem aims to develop a
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author (k.sur46@gmail.com)

method that allows the user to seamlessly explore the scene
via rendering of the scene from a sparse set of captured images [2, 20, 42]. Furthermore, the rendered images must
be as realistic as possible for a better user experience
[34–36]. Currently, among the existing approaches, Riegler
and Koltun stable view synthesis (SVS) approach [36] has
shown excellent results and demonstrated photorealism in
novel view synthesis, without using synthetic gaming engine 3D data, unlike [34]. SVS is indeed stable in rendering photorealistic images from novel viewpoints for largescale scenes. Yet, it assumes MVS [39, 40] based dense 3D
scene reconstruction and camera poses from COLMAP [39]
are correct. The off-the-shelf algorithms used for 3D data
acquisition and camera poses from images are, of course,
popular, and to assume these algorithms could provide favorable 3D reconstruction and camera poses is not an outlandish assumption. Nonetheless, taking a step forward, in
this paper, we argue that although choices made by SVS
for obtaining geometric scaffold and camera poses in the
pursuit of improving view synthesis is commendable, we
can do better by making mindful use of fundamentals from
multiple-view geometry [11,12] and recent developments in
deep-learning techniques for 3D computer vision problems.
To start with, we would like to emphasize that it is clearly
unreasonable, especially in an outdoor setting, to assume
that multi-view stereo (MVS) can provide accurate depth
for all image pixels. It is natural that pixels with low disparity will not be reconstructed well using state-of-the-art
MVS approaches [8, 39, 40, 46]. Even a precise selection
of multiple view images with reasonable distance between
them (assume good baseline for stereo) may not be helpful
due to loss of common scene points visibility, foreshortening issue, etc. [43]. Such issues compel the practitioner to
resort to post-processing steps for refining the MVS-based
3D geometry so that it can be helpful for rendering pipeline
or neural-rendering network at train time.
Another critical component to view synthesis, which is
often brushed aside in the literature is the accurate recovery
of the camera poses. In neural view synthesis approaches
such as [36], if the camera pose is wrong, the feature ag-

13208

