This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Evolved Part Masking for Self-Supervised Learning
Zhanzhou Feng1 Shiliang Zhang1,2
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
fengzz@stu.pku.edu.cn, slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing Masked Image Modeling methods apply fixed
mask patterns to guide the self-supervised training. As
those patterns resort to different criteria to mask local regions, sticking to a fixed pattern leads to limited vision cues
modeling capability. This paper proposes an evolved partbased masking to pursue more general visual cues modeling in self-supervised learning. Our method is based on
an adaptive part partition module, which leverages the vision model being trained to construct a part graph, and
partitions parts with graph cut. The accuracy of partitioned parts is on par with the capability of the pre-trained
model, leading to evolved mask patterns at different training
stages. It generates simple patterns at the initial training
stage to learn low-level visual cues, which hence evolves
to eliminate accurate object parts to reinforce the learning of object semantics and contexts. Our method does
not require extra pre-trained models or annotations, and
effectively ensures the training efficiency by evolving the
training difficulty. Experiment results show that it substantially boosts the performance on various tasks including image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. For example, it outperforms the recent MAE by 0.69%
on imageNet-1K classification and 1.61% on ADE20K segmentation with the same training epochs.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a boom in continuously
growing representation learning capability and data demands of deep neural networks like CNN [21, 37] and
vision transformers [14, 27, 33]. To tackle the increasing demand for labelled data, Masked Language Modeling (MLM) [3, 13] has been adopted to train natural language processing models through self-supervised learning
on large-scale data. Inspired by the success of MLM, many
works propose Masked Image Modeling (MIM) to pre-train
vision models on unlabeled images for a series of down-

(a) Grid

(b) Random

(c) Block

Early

Median

Final

(d) Evolved mask patterns at different training stages

Figure 1. (a), (b), and (c) are three basic mask patterns adopted in
existing MIM methods. (d) illustrates the proposed evolved part
masking, where the generated mask patterns evolve with the capability of vision model being trained.

stream tasks [2,18,38]. MLM masks several words in the input sentences and supervises the network to recover masked
words according to semantics provided by remaining words.
MIM follows a similar idea of MLM to mask a portion of
regions in input images, then trains the vision model to recover masked contents from visible regions. As images are
not structured representations like sentences, different MIM
works have to resort to different criteria to generate mask
patterns.
Mask patterns in existing works can be divided into three
categories according to their masked image cues. Some
works like MAE [18] and SimMIM [38] do not differentiate
visual cues in images, and randomly mask local regions or
patches. Another line of the works, such as MST [24], propose to preserve crucial cues in the image to enhance the
learning of local context. The third line of works such as
AttnMask [22] and SemMAE [23] propose to completely
mask cues like object region in images to pose a more chal-

10386

