This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuralField-LDM: Scene Generation with Hierarchical Latent Diffusion Models
Seung Wook Kim1,2,3* Bradley Brown1,5*†
Kangxue Yin1 Karsten Kreis1
Katja Schwarz6†
1
7†
4
Daiqing Li
Robin Rombach
Antonio Torralba
Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1

NVIDIA

2

University of Toronto
6

3

Vector Institute

4

CSAIL, MIT

University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center

7

5

University of Waterloo

LMU Munich

Figure 1. We introduce NeuralField-LDM, a generative model for complex open-world 3D scenes. This figure contains a panorama
constructed from NeuralField-LDM’s generated scene. We visualize different parts of the scene by placing cameras on them.

Abstract
Automatically generating high-quality real world 3D
scenes is of enormous interest for applications such as virtual reality and robotics simulation. Towards this goal, we
introduce NeuralField-LDM, a generative model capable of
synthesizing complex 3D environments. We leverage Latent
Diffusion Models that have been successfully utilized for efficient high-quality 2D content creation. We first train a
scene auto-encoder to express a set of image and pose pairs
as a neural field, represented as density and feature voxel
grids that can be projected to produce novel views of the
scene. To further compress this representation, we train a
latent-autoencoder that maps the voxel grids to a set of latent representations. A hierarchical diffusion model is then
fit to the latents to complete the scene generation pipeline.
We achieve a substantial improvement over existing stateof-the-art scene generation models. Additionally, we show
how NeuralField-LDM can be used for a variety of 3D content creation applications, including conditional scene generation, scene inpainting and scene style manipulation.

1. Introduction
There has been increasing interest in modelling 3D realworld scenes for use in virtual reality, game design, digi* Equal contribution.
† Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

tal twin creation and more. However, designing 3D worlds
by hand is a challenging and time-consuming process, requiring 3D modeling expertise and artistic talent. Recently,
we have seen success in automating 3D content creation
via 3D generative models that output individual object assets [15, 46, 73]. Although a great step forward, automating
the generation of real-world scenes remains an important
open problem and would unlock many applications ranging
from scalably generating a diverse array of environments
for training AI agents (e.g. autonomous vehicles) to the design of realistic open-world video games. In this work, we
take a step towards this goal with NeuralField-LDM (NFLDM), a generative model capable of synthesizing complex
real-world 3D scenes. NF-LDM is trained on a collection
of posed camera images and depth measurements which are
easier to obtain than explicit ground-truth 3D data, offering
a scalable way to synthesize 3D scenes.
Recent approaches [2, 6, 8] tackle the same problem of
generating 3D scenes, albeit on less complex data. In [6, 8],
a latent distribution is mapped to a set of scenes using adversarial training, and in GAUDI [2], a denoising diffusion
model is fit to a set of scene latents learned using an autodecoder. These models all have an inherent weakness of
attempting to capture the entire scene into a single vector
that conditions a neural radiance field. In practice, we find
that this limits the ability to fit complex scene distributions.
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a very powerful class of generative models, capable of generating high-

8496

