This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VectorFloorSeg: Two-Stream Graph Attention Network for Vectorized
Roughcast Floorplan Segmentation

1

Bingchen Yang1 , Haiyong Jiang1§, Hao Pan2 , Jun Xiao1∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Microsoft Research Asia
yangbingchen211@mails.ucas.ac.cn, haiyong.jiang@ucas.ac.cn
haopan@microsoft.com, xiaojun@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Vector graphics (VG) are ubiquitous in industrial designs. In this paper, we address semantic segmentation
of a typical VG, i.e., roughcast floorplans with bare wall
structures, whose output can be directly used for further
applications like interior furnishing and room space modeling. Previous semantic segmentation works mostly process well-decorated floorplans in raster images and usually yield aliased boundaries and outlier fragments in segmented rooms, due to pixel-level segmentation that ignores
the regular elements (e.g. line segments) in vector floorplans. To overcome these issues, we propose to fully utilize the regular elements in vector floorplans for more integral segmentation. Our pipeline predicts room segmentation from vector floorplans by dually classifying line segments as room boundaries, and regions partitioned by line
segments as room segments. To fully exploit the structural
relationships between lines and regions, we use two-stream
graph neural networks to process the line segments and partitioned regions respectively, and devise a novel modulated
graph attention layer to fuse the heterogeneous information
from one stream to the other. Extensive experiments show
that by directly operating on vector floorplans, we outperform image-based methods in both mIoU and mAcc. In addition, we propose a new metric that captures room integrity
and boundary regularity, which confirms that our method
produces much more regular segmentations. Source code is
available at https://github.com/DrZiji/VecFloorSeg.

1. Introduction
Vector graphics are widely used in industrial designs, including graphic designs [26], 2D interfaces [5] and floorplans [15]. In particular, 2D floorplans consisting of geometric primitives (e.g., lines and curves) are the de-facto
§ Haiyong is the Project Lead.
∗ Corresponding Author.

(a)Input

(b)Furnished Counterpart

(c)3D Rendering

(d)Label

(e)Ours

(f)Image Based
Segmentation

Figure 1. Comparing the results of our vector graphics based
method (e) and raster image-based method [39] (f). Our result has
straight boundaries and consistent region labels, compared with
image-based result where red squares highlight semantic confusion and the green square underscores missing room prediction.

data representation for interior designs, indoor construction
and property development. In contrast to raster images with
fixed resolutions, vector graphics can be arbitrarily scaled
without artifacts such as blurring and aliasing details. On
the other hand, due to the irregularly structured data, it is
difficult to apply image-based backbone networks directly
to vector graphics for various applications.
Semantic segmentation of roughcast floorplans into
rooms with labeled types (e.g. bedroom, kitchen, etc.) is a
fundamental task for downstream applications. Interior designers usually first draw the roughcast floorplan, including
basic elements like wall blocks and pipe barrels for property
development (Fig. 1(a)) [29, 34]. Afterwards, interior furnishing, furniture layout, and 3D room spaces can be constructed and customized (Fig. 1(b)&(c)) [33]. During this
procedure, it is important to obtain semantic segmentation
of room spaces to cater to above needs. While recognizing room layouts from wall structures is straightforward for
humans, automatic recognition with accurate semantics and
clean boundaries is challenging.

1358

