This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIANet: Aggregating Unbiased Instance and General Information for Few-Shot
Semantic Segmentation
Yong Yang1 Qiong Chen1 * Yuan Feng1,2 Tianlin Huang1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence in Medical Image Analysis and Application
1

Abstract

Support mask

Support image
Extract
features

Existing few-shot segmentation methods are based on
the meta-learning strategy and extract instance knowledge
from a support set and then apply the knowledge to segment target objects in a query set. However, the extracted
knowledge is insufficient to cope with the variable intraclass differences since the knowledge is obtained from a
few samples in the support set. To address the problem,
we propose a multi-information aggregation network (MIANet) that effectively leverages the general knowledge, i.e.,
semantic word embeddings, and instance information for
accurate segmentation. Specifically, in MIANet, a general
information module (GIM) is proposed to extract a general
class prototype from word embeddings as a supplement to
instance information. To this end, we design a triplet loss
that treats the general class prototype as an anchor and
samples positive-negative pairs from local features in the
support set. The calculated triplet loss can transfer semantic similarities among language identities from a word embedding space to a visual representation space. To alleviate the model biasing towards the seen training classes
and to obtain multi-scale information, we then introduce a
non-parametric hierarchical prior module (HPM) to generate unbiased instance-level information via calculating the
pixel-level similarity between the support and query image
features. Finally, an information fusion module (IFM) combines the general and instance information to make predictions for the query image. Extensive experiments on
PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i show that MIANet yields superior performance and set a new state-of-the-art. Code is
available at github.com/Aldrich2y/MIANet.

1. Introduction
The challenge of few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS)
is how to effectively use one or five labeled samples to segment a novel class. Existing few-shot segmentation meth* Corresponding author (csqchen@scut.edu.cn).

CNN

Query image

Guidance
information
Prediction

Extract
features

Classifier

(a) Existing few-shot segmentation methods

Query image
Extract
features

CNN

Extract
features

Support image

Instance Info
Generation

Prediction

Category Labels
bottle

dog

sheep

tv

boat

cat
bird

person

Info
Fusion

General Info
Generation

bottle

w2v
get the vector

Instance Info Path

Main Path

General Info Path

(b) Our semantic segmentation network

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) existing FSS methods and (b)
proposed MIANet. (a) Existing methods extract instance-level
knowledge from the support images, which is not able to cope with
large intra-class variation. (b) our MIANet extracts instance-level
knowledge from the support images and obtains general class information from word embeddings. These two types of information
benefit the final segmentation.

ods [28, 30, 33, 37] adopt the metric-based meta-learning
strategy [26, 29]. The strategy is typically composed of
two stages: meta-training and meta-testing. In the metatraining stage, models are trained by plenty of independent
few-shot segmentation tasks. In meta-testing, models can
thus quickly adapt and extrapolate to new few-shot tasks of
unseen classes and segment the novel categories since each
training task involves a different seen class.
As shown in Figure 2, natural images of same categories
have semantic differences and perspective distortion, which
leads to intra-class differences. Current FSS approaches
segment a query image by matching the guidance information from the support set with the query features (Figure 1
(a)). Unfortunately, the correlation between the support image and the query image is not enough to support the match-

7131

