This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracking through Containers and Occluders in the Wild
Basile Van Hoorick1 Pavel Tokmakov2 Simon Stent3 Jie Li2 Carl Vondrick1
1
Columbia University 2 Toyota Research Institute 3 Woven Planet
tcow.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Tracking objects with persistence in cluttered and dynamic environments remains a difficult challenge for computer vision systems. In this paper, we introduce TCOW,
a new benchmark and model for visual tracking through
heavy occlusion and containment. We set up a task where
the goal is to, given a video sequence, segment both the projected extent of the target object, as well as the surrounding
container or occluder whenever one exists. To study this
task, we create a mixture of synthetic and annotated real
datasets to support both supervised learning and structured
evaluation of model performance under various forms of
task variation, such as moving or nested containment. We
evaluate two recent transformer-based video models and
find that while they can be surprisingly capable of tracking targets under certain settings of task variation, there remains a considerable performance gap before we can claim
a tracking model to have acquired a true notion of object
permanence.

1. Introduction
The interplay between containment and occlusion can
present a challenge to even the most sophisticated visual
reasoning systems. Consider the pictorial example in Figure 1a. Given four frames of evidence, where is the red ball
in the final frame? Could it be anywhere else? What visual
evidence led you to this conclusion?
In this paper, we explore the problem of tracking and
segmenting a target object as it becomes occluded or contained by other dynamic objects in a scene. This is an
essential skill for a perception system to attain, as objects
of interest in the real world routinely get occluded or contained. Acquiring this skill could, for example, help a robot
to better track objects around a cluttered kitchen or warehouse [10], or a road agent to understand traffic situations
more richly [62]. There are also applications in augmented
reality, smart cities, and assistive technology.
It has long been known that this ability, commonly referred to as object permanence, emerges early on in a child’s
lifetime (see e.g. [2, 3, 5–8, 49, 54–57]). But how far away

Figure 1. Containment (a) and occlusion (b) happen constantly
in the real world. We introduce a novel task and dataset for evaluating the object permanence capabilities of neural networks under
diverse circumstances.

are computer vision systems from attaining the same?
To support the study of this question, we first propose a
comprehensive benchmark video dataset of occlusion- and
containment-rich scenes of multi-object interactions. These
scenes are sourced from both simulation, in which ground
truth masks can be perfectly synthesized, and from the real
world, which we hand-annotate with object segments. To
allow for an extensive analysis of the behaviours of existing tracking systems, we ensure that our evaluation set covers a wide range of different types of containment and occlusion. For example, even though an object undergoing
containment is already a highly non-trivial event, containers can move, be nested, be deformable, become occluded,
and much more. Occlusion can introduce considerable uncertainty, especially when the occludee, the occluder, or the
camera are in motion on top of everything else.
Using our dataset, we explore the performance of two recent state-of-the-art video transformer architectures, which
we repurpose for the task of tracking and segmenting a
target object through occlusion and containment in RGB
video. We show through careful quantitative and qualitative
analyses that while our models achieve reasonable tracking
performance in certain settings, there remains significant
room for improvement in terms of reasoning about object
permanence in complicated, realistic environments. By releasing our dataset and benchmark along with this paper, we
hope to draw attention to this challenging milestone on the
path toward strong spatial reasoning capabilities.
13802

