This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Geometry-aware Representations by Sketching
Hyundo Lee, Inwoo Hwang, Hyunsung Go, Won-Seok Choi, Kibeom Kim, Byoung-Tak Zhang
AI Institute, Seoul National University
{hdlee, iwhwang, hsgo, wchoi, kbkim, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Since geometric principles form the bedrock of our physical world, many real-world scenarios involve geometric
concepts such as position, shape, distance, and orientation. For example, grabbing an object requires estimating
its shape and relative distance. Understanding geometric
concepts is also essential for numerous vision tasks such
as image segmentation, visual reasoning, and pose estimation [27]. Thus, it is crucial to learn a visual representation
of the image that can preserve such information [76], which
we call geometry-aware representation.
However, there is still a challenge in learning geometryaware representations in a compact way that can be useful
for various downstream tasks. Previous approaches have
focused on capturing geometric features of an image in a
2D grid structure, using methods such as handcrafted feature extraction [2, 4, 14, 31], segmentation maps [21, 57], or

Sketch
Stroke Generator

Understanding geometric concepts, such as distance and
shape, is essential for understanding the real world and
also for many vision tasks. To incorporate such information
into a visual representation of a scene, we propose learning
to represent the scene by sketching, inspired by human behavior. Our method, coined Learning by Sketching (LBS),
learns to convert an image into a set of colored strokes
that explicitly incorporate the geometric information of the
scene in a single inference step without requiring a sketch
dataset. A sketch is then generated from the strokes where
CLIP-based perceptual loss maintains a semantic similarity between the sketch and the image. We show theoretically that sketching is equivariant with respect to arbitrary
affine transformations and thus provably preserves geometric information. Experimental results show that LBS substantially improves the performance of object attribute classification on the unlabeled CLEVR dataset, domain transfer between CLEVR and STL-10 datasets, and for diverse
downstream tasks, confirming that LBS provides rich geometric information.

Image
Stroke 1

Stroke 1

1
Stroke n
1

Downstream Tasks
Task

Stroke
Representation

Task

Task

Inference

Inference

Geometric
Information
Inference

Figure 1. Overview of LBS, which aims to generate sketches that
accurately reflect the geometric information of an image. A sketch
consists of a set of strokes represented by a parameterized vector that specifies curve, color, and thickness. We leverage it as a
geometry-aware representation for various downstream tasks.

convolution features [36, 55]. Although these methods are
widely applicable to various domains, they often lack compactness based on a high-level understanding of the scene
and tend to prioritize nuisance features such as the background. Another line of work proposes architectures that
guarantee to preserve geometric structure [12,13,23,58,73]
or disentangle prominent factors in the data [8, 28, 39, 51].
Although these methods can represent geometric concepts
in a compact latent space, they are typically designed to
learn features that are specific to a particular domain and
often face challenges in generalizing to other domains [64].
In this study, we present a novel approach to learning
geometry-aware representations via sketching. Sketching,
which is the process of converting the salient features of
an image into a set of color-coded strokes, as illustrated in
Figure 1, is the primary means by which humans represent
images while preserving their geometry. Our key idea is
that sketches can be a compact, high-level representation
of an image that accurately reflects geometric information.
Sketching requires a high-level understanding of the scene,
as it aims to capture the most salient features of the image
and abstract them into a limited number of strokes. In addition, a sketch can be represented as a set of parameters
by replacing each stroke with parametric curves. Sketch-

23315

