This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCOTCH and SODA: A Transformer Video Shadow Detection Framework
Lihao Liu1 , Jean Prost2 , Lei Zhu3,4 , Nicolas Papadakis2 , Pietro Liò1 ,
Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb1 , Angelica I Aviles-Rivero1
1
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
2
Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251, F-33400 Talence, France
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, HK SAR, China

Abstract

Block 1
Block 2

Shadows in videos are difficult to detect because of the
large shadow deformation between frames. In this work,
we argue that accounting for shadow deformation is essential when designing a video shadow detection method. To
this end, we introduce the shadow deformation attention
trajectory (SODA), a new type of video self-attention module, specially designed to handle the large shadow deformations in videos. Moreover, we present a new shadow
contrastive learning mechanism (SCOTCH) which aims at
guiding the network to learn a unified shadow representation from massive positive shadow pairs across different videos. We demonstrate empirically the effectiveness
of our two contributions in an ablation study. Furthermore,
we show that SCOTCH and SODA significantly outperforms
existing techniques for video shadow detection. Code is
available at the project page: https://lihaoliucambridge.github.io/scotch_and_soda/

1. Introduction
Shadow is an inherent part of videos, and they have
an adverse effect on a wide variety of video vision tasks.
Therefore, the development of robust video shadow detection techniques, to alleviate those negative effects, is of
great interest for the community. Video shadow detection
is usually formulated as a segmentation problem for videos,
however and due to the nature of the problem, shadow detection greatly differs from other segmentation tasks such
as object segmentation. For inferring the presence of shadows in an image, one has to account for the global content
information such as light source orientation, and the presence of objects casting shadows. Importantly, in a given
video, shadows considerably change appearance (deformation) from frame to frame due to light variation and object
motion. Finally, shadows can span over different backgrounds over different frames, making approaches relying

Block 3

! #
t×$%
× × c2
$%
! #
t×&'
× × c3
&'

Encoder

Input Video

Stage 1

t=1

Shadow Feature

t×!"×#" ×c1

z1 z2 z3

t=3

t=2

Shadow Contrast

t=4

Deformation Trajectory Attention
Stage 2
z" z" z"

Non-shadow Feature
Get Similar
Get Different
A is the input of B
Deformation Trajectory

!

#

$

! #
t×&'
× × c3
&'
! #
t×$%
× × c2
$%

t×!"×#" ×c1

MLP
Layer
Upsample

Layer

Decoder
Stage 3

Segmentation Masks

Figure 1. Overview of our SCOTCH and SODA framework. A MiT
encoder extracts multi-scale features for each frame of the video
(stage 1). Then, our deformation attention trajectory is applied
to features individually to incorporate temporal information (stage
2). Finally, an MLP layer combines the multi-scale information to
generate the segmentation masks (stage 3). The model is trained
to contrast shadow and non-shadow features, by minimising our
shadow contrastive loss with massive positive shadow pairs.

on texture information unreliable.
Particularly, video shadow detection methods can be
broadly divided into two main categories. The first category
refers to image shadow detection (ISD) [9,15,35,36,43,46].
This family of techniques computes the shadow detection frame by frame. Although computationally saving,
these methods are incapable of handling temporal information. The second category refers to video shadow detection
(VSD) [6, 9, 14, 16, 25]. These methods offer higher performance as the analysis involves spatial-temporal information. Hence, our main focus is video shadow detection.

10449

