This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynamicDet: A Unified Dynamic Architecture for Object Detection
Zhihao Lin Yongtao Wang† Jinhe Zhang Xiaojie Chu
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
linzhihao@stu.pku.edu.cn, wyt@pku.edu.cn
jinhezhang17@gmail.com, chuxiaojie@stu.pku.edu.cn

57

Dynamic neural network is an emerging research topic
in deep learning. With adaptive inference, dynamic models can achieve remarkable accuracy and computational
efficiency. However, it is challenging to design a powerful dynamic detector, because of no suitable dynamic architecture and exiting criterion for object detection. To
tackle these difficulties, we propose a dynamic framework
for object detection, named DynamicDet. Firstly, we carefully design a dynamic architecture based on the nature of
the object detection task. Then, we propose an adaptive
router to analyze the multi-scale information and to decide the inference route automatically. We also present a
novel optimization strategy with an exiting criterion based
on the detection losses for our dynamic detectors. Last, we
present a variable-speed inference strategy, which helps to
realize a wide range of accuracy-speed trade-offs with only
one dynamic detector. Extensive experiments conducted
on the COCO benchmark demonstrate that the proposed
DynamicDet achieves new state-of-the-art accuracy-speed
trade-offs. For instance, with comparable accuracy, the
inference speed of our dynamic detector Dy-YOLOv7-W6
surpasses YOLOv7-E6 by 12%, YOLOv7-D6 by 17%, and
YOLOv7-E6E by 39%. The code is available at https:
//github.com/VDIGPKU/DynamicDet.

56

1. Introduction
Object detection is an essential topic in computer vision,
as it is a fundamental component for other vision tasks,
e.g., autonomous driving [26, 40, 56], multi-object tracking [52,57], intelligent transportation [36,55], etc. In recent
years, tremendous progress has been made toward more accurate and faster detectors, such as Network Architecture
Search (NAS)-based detectors [10,25,48] and YOLO series
models [2, 9, 11, 21, 44, 45]. However, these methods need
to design and train multiple models to achieve a few good
trade-offs between accuracy and speed, which is not flexible
enough for various application scenarios. To alleviate this
† Corresponding author.

COCO APtest (%)

Abstract

55
Dy-YOLOv7 (Ours)
YOLOv7
PP-YOLOE+
YOLOv5 (r6.2)
YOLOv6

54
53
52

12.5

15.0

17.5

20.0

22.5

25.0

27.5

V100 batch 1 inference time (ms)

30.0

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed dynamic detectors and other
efficient object detectors. Our method can achieve a wide range
of state-of-the-art trade-offs between accuracy and speed with a
single model.

“Easy” image

“Hard” image

Figure 2. Examples of “easy” and “hard” images for the object
detection task.

problem, we focus on dynamic inference for the object detection task, and attempt to use only one dynamic detector
to achieve a wide range of good accuracy-speed trade-offs,
as shown in Fig. 1.
The human brain inspires many fields of deep learning,
and the dynamic neural network [12] is a typical one. As
two examples shown in Fig. 2, we can quickly identify
all objects on the left “easy” image, while we need more
time to achieve the same effect for the right one. In other
words, the processing speeds of images are different in our
brains [18, 34], which depend on the difficulties of the images. This property motivates the image-wise dynamic neural network, and many exciting works have been proposed

6282

