This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Token Boosting for Robust Self-Supervised Visual Transformer Pre-training
Tianjiao Li1†

Lin Geng Foo1† Ping Hu2 Xindi Shang3 Hossein Rahmani4
Zehuan Yuan3 Jun Liu1‡
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
Boston University 3 ByteDance 4 Lancaster University

{tianjiao li,lingeng foo}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, pinghu@bu.edu, shangxindi@bytedance.com
h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk, yuanzehuan@bytedance.com, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Learning with large-scale unlabeled data has become a
powerful tool for pre-training Visual Transformers (VTs).
However, prior works tend to overlook that, in real-world
scenarios, the input data may be corrupted and unreliable. Pre-training VTs on such corrupted data can be challenging, especially when we pre-train via the masked autoencoding approach, where both the inputs and masked
“ground truth” targets can potentially be unreliable in this
case. To address this limitation, we introduce the Token Boosting Module (TBM) as a plug-and-play component for VTs that effectively allows the VT to learn to extract clean and robust features during masked autoencoding pre-training. We provide theoretical analysis to show
how TBM improves model pre-training with more robust
and generalizable representations, thus benefiting downstream tasks. We conduct extensive experiments to analyze
TBM’s effectiveness, and results on four corrupted datasets
demonstrate that TBM consistently improves performance
on downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Having rapidly risen in popularity in recent years, Vision Transformer (ViT) [16] and its variants [19] have
shown impressive performance across various computer vision tasks, such as image classification, video recognition
and 3D action analysis [2, 20, 31, 51, 60]. Amongst this
wave of research on Visual Transformers (VTs), there has
emerged a popular paradigm – self-supervised VT pretraining [2, 6, 20, 60] – which has attracted a lot of attention
in the research community. These works [2, 6, 20, 60] generally pre-train VTs on a large dataset in a self-supervised
manner, allowing them to extract semantically meaningful
and generalizable features without the need for annotated
† equal contribution
‡ corresponding author

data. These pre-trained VTs are practical and effective,
showing good downstream performance with only slight
fine-tuning, and have quickly become an important research
direction.
Among the various self-supervised pre-training strategies, masked autoencoding [2, 16, 20] is a prominent approach that has been widely explored. Masked autoencoding [2, 11, 16, 20, 33, 60, 61, 71] works by randomly masking
a portion of input tokens or patches, and letting the VT reconstruct them. Thus, in order to successfully reconstruct
the masked tokens or patches, the VT is driven to learn
the underlying structure and semantic information of the input data. Due to its natural compatibility with the tokenwise representation in VTs, masked autoencoding has been
explored for pre-training VTs on data across many fields,
such as RGB images [2, 20, 61], pose data [11, 33] and 3D
data [71].
However, in many real-world scenarios, the input data
can be of low quality and can be unreliable, which is often overlooked. For example, in adverse weather conditions
[22], the quality of captured images can be quite bad, with
many corrupted pixels that degrade the image. Depth images, which are commonly used for 3D analysis, also often
contain errors and noticeable perturbations due to measurement errors introduced by the depth camera sensors [26].
Skeleton data can also have distortions in the joint coordinates [14, 37, 59] due to noise introduced by the sensors,
e.g., the pose tracking function of Kinect v2 often introduces average offsets of 50-100 mm per joint [59]. Examples of such corrupted data are depicted in Fig. 1.
In many cases, we have access to large-scale unlabeled
data containing such corruptions and noise, and would like
to exploit them to pre-train a VT that can be effectively
adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks [2, 11, 20, 61].
Yet, this can be rather challenging since the data corruptions can interfere with the learning of representations during self-supervised pre-training, leading to unreliable features and predictions in downstream tasks. This is the case

24027

