This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Regularize implicit neural representation by itself
Zhemin Li1
Hongxia Wang*1
Deyu Meng2,3
1
National University of Defense Technology 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Macau University of Science and Technology
lizhemin@nudt.edu.cn,wanghongxia@nudt.edu.cn,dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a regularizer called Implicit Neural
Representation Regularizer (INRR) to improve the generalization ability of the Implicit Neural Representation (INR).
The INR is a fully connected network that can represent signals with details not restricted by grid resolution. However,
its generalization ability could be improved, especially with
non-uniformly sampled data. The proposed INRR is based
on learned Dirichlet Energy (DE) that measures similarities
between rows/columns of the matrix. The smoothness of the
Laplacian matrix is further integrated by parameterizing
DE with a tiny INR. INRR improves the generalization of
INR in signal representation by perfectly integrating the signal’s self-similarity with the smoothness of the Laplacian
matrix. Through well-designed numerical experiments, the
paper also reveals a series of properties derived from INRR,
including momentum methods like convergence trajectory
and multi-scale similarity. Moreover, the proposed method
could improve the performance of other signal representation methods.

1. Introduction
INR uses a fully connected network (FCN) ϕθ (x) :
Rd 7→ Ro to approximate the explicitsolution of an implicit
function F x, ϕθ , ∇x ϕθ , ∇2x ϕθ , . . . = 0. For an example,
we can represent a gray-scale image X ∈ Rm×n with an
INR ϕθ (x) : R2 7→ R which satisfied ϕθ ( mi , nj ) = Xij , i ∈
{1, . . . , m} , j ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Compared with traditional grid
representation X, INR’s representation ability to details is
not restricted by grid resolution m, n as INR can predict the
pixel value at any location (x, y) ∈ R2 even not equals to
( mi , nj ).
Besides the representation ability of INR, generalization
ability is critical for a neural network. We explore the em-

pirical generalization ability via a 256 × 256 gray-scale
non-uniformly sampled image inpainting task as Figure 2(a)
shows. Although INR fits training data perfectly in Figure 2(b), its prediction outside training data is unreasonable.
Theoretical analysis of INR illustrates that a hyper-parameter
controls the smoothness degree of ϕθ (x). Moreover, the experiments show that the best hyper-parameter varies with
the missing rate (the percentage of unsampled pixels) as Figure 3 shows. Adjusting this hyper-parameter cannot make
the non-uniformly missing case perform best, as different
locations might have different missing rates.
A carefully designed regularizer is proposed to improve
the generalization ability of INR. It is based on Adaptive and
Implicit Regularization (AIR) which is a learned Dirichlet
Energy (DE) [12] that measures similarities or correlations
between rows/columns of X. The smoothness of the Laplacian matrix is further integrated by parameterizing DE with
a tiny INR. The structure of the proposed implicit neural
representation regularizer (INRR) is shown in Figure 1(b).
Because a smooth Laplacian matrix represents non-local
prior and large-scale local prior in vision data, INRR can
improve the generalization of INR in image representation.
Numerous numerical experiments show that INRR outperforms various classical regularizers, including total variation
(TV), L2 energy, and so on. As a regularizer both in a new
form and with new meaning, INRR can be combined with
other signal representation methods, such as deep matrix
factorization (DMF) [1].
To summarize, the contributions of our work include the
following:
• Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) [1] theoretically analyzes
the generalization ability of INR and why INR performs
poorly with nonuniform sampling is given.
• A tiny INR parameterized regularizer named INRR
is proposed based on DE, which perfectly integrates
the image’s self-similarity with the smoothness of the
Laplacian matrix.

* This work was supported by the National Key Research ,Development
Program (2020YFA0713504), the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (61977065) and the Macao Science and Technology Development
Fund (061/2020/A2).

• A series of properties derived from INRR, including
momentum methods, multi-scale similarity, and gener-

10280

