This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Consistent 3D LiDAR Representation Learning
for Semantic Perception in Autonomous Driving
Lucas Nunes∗
Louis Wiesmann∗
∗
Xieyuanli Chen
Jens Behley∗
∗

Rodrigo Marcuzzi∗
Cyrill Stachniss∗,⋆,‡

University of Bonn, ⋆ University of Oxford, ‡ Lamarr Institute
{firstname.lastname}@igg.uni-bonn.de

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic perception is essential for safe interaction between autonomous vehicles and their surrounding. For
learning-based perception, a massive amount of training
data is usually required for training high-performance models. However, the data annotation is the bottleneck of collecting such large training sets, especially for dense prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation [60, 80], instance
1 Code: https://github.com/PRBonn/TARL

Panoptic segmentation
TARL vs Scratch
2x less labels

10x less labels

55

60

50

55
50

PQ (%)

mIoU (%)

Semantic perception is a core building block in autonomous driving, since it provides information about the
drivable space and location of other traffic participants.
For learning-based perception, often a large amount of diverse training data is necessary to achieve high performance. Data labeling is usually a bottleneck for developing
such methods, especially for dense prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation or panoptic segmentation. For 3D LiDAR data, the annotation process demands even more effort
than for images. Especially in autonomous driving, point
clouds are sparse, and objects appearance depends on its
distance from the sensor, making it harder to acquire large
amounts of labeled training data. This paper aims at taking
an alternative path proposing a self-supervised representation learning method for 3D LiDAR data. Our approach
exploits the vehicle motion to match objects across time
viewed in different scans. We then train a model to maximize the point-wise feature similarities from points of the
associated object in different scans, which enables to learn
a consistent representation across time. The experimental
results show that our approach performs better than previous state-of-the-art self-supervised representation learning
methods when fine-tuning to different downstream tasks. We
furthermore show that with only 10% of labeled data, a network pre-trained with our approach can achieve better performance than the same network trained from scratch with
all labels for semantic segmentation on SemanticKITTI. 1

Semantic segmentation
TARL vs Scratch

40

30

20

Scratch
TARL

28
0.1 1

10

Labels (%)

50

100

Scratch
TARL

4
0.1 1

10

50

100

Labels (%)

Figure 1. Our pre-training (TARL) can reduce the amount of necessary labels during fine-tuning on SemanticKITTI [4, 22]. Our
method requires only 10% of labels to surpass the network trained
from scratch with the full dataset for semantic segmentation. For
panoptic segmentation, our method requires only half of the labels.

segmentation [46, 73], and panoptic segmentation [45, 79],
which require fine-grained labels. In the context of autonomous driving, recent approaches exploit 3D LiDAR
data [20, 54, 55, 61], where the data annotation process is
more complex than on 2D RGB images due to the sparsity
of the point cloud and object appearance varying with its
distance to the sensor.
Recent self-supervised representation learning methods [10, 11, 13–15, 25, 27, 76] tackle the lack of annotated
data with a pre-training step requiring no labels. Those
methods use data augmentation to generate different views
from one data sample and train the network to learn an
embedding space able to have similar representations for
the generated augmented views. Other approaches [52, 63,
65, 69, 78] propose optimizing the pixel embedding space
to learn a dense representation suited to be fine-tuned to
more fine-grained tasks. For 3D point cloud data, recent
approaches [21, 42, 49, 56] focus on synthetic point clouds
of single objects to learn a robust representation for object
classification. Other approaches [31,36,50,67,74,75] target
real-world data representation, such as LiDAR or RGB-D
data, but fewer target autonomous driving scenarios.

5217

