This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V IND LU
Feng Cheng1

: A Recipe for Effective Video-and-Language Pretraining
Xizi Wang2

Jie Lei1 David Crandall2 Mohit Bansal1
1
UNC Chapel Hill 2 Indiana University

{fengchan,jielei,mbansal,gedas}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
The last several years have witnessed remarkable
progress in video-and-language (VidL) understanding.
However, most modern VidL approaches use complex and
specialized model architectures and sophisticated pretraining protocols, making the reproducibility, analysis and comparisons of these frameworks difficult. Hence, instead of
proposing yet another new VidL model, this paper conducts
a thorough empirical study demystifying the most important
factors in the VidL model design. Among the factors that we
investigate are (i) the spatiotemporal architecture design,
(ii) the multimodal fusion schemes, (iii) the pretraining objectives, (iv) the choice of pretraining data, (v) pretraining
and finetuning protocols, and (vi) dataset and model scaling. Our empirical study reveals that the most important design factors include: temporal modeling, video-to-text multimodal fusion, masked modeling objectives, and joint training on images and videos. Using these empirical insights,
we then develop a step-by-step recipe, dubbed V IND LU,
for effective VidL pretraining. Our final model trained using our recipe achieves comparable or better than state-ofthe-art results on several VidL tasks without relying on external CLIP pretraining. In particular, on the text-to-video
retrieval task, our approach obtains 61.2% on DiDeMo,
and 55.0% on ActivityNet, outperforming current SOTA
by 7.8% and 6.1% respectively. Furthermore, our model
also obtains state-of-the-art video question-answering results on ActivityNet-QA, MSRVTT-QA, MSRVTT-MC and
TVQA. Our code and pretrained models are publicly available at: https://github.com/klauscc/VindLU .

1. Introduction
Fueled by the growing availability of video-and-text
data [2, 8, 9, 24, 41, 43, 48] and advances in the Transformer
model design [12, 54], the last few years have witnessed
incredible progress in video-and-language (VidL) understanding [26,31,40,64,75,80]. Since the initial transformerbased models for VidL, such as ClipBERT [26], the text-tovideo retrieval accuracy has improved from 22.0%, 22.4%,
and 21.3% on MSR-VTT [65], DiDeMo [1], and Activi-

Gedas Bertasius1

{xiziwang, djcran}@iu.edu

A Recipe for Video-Language Pretraining
Starting Ingredients:
Videos

Image Encoder
Input Video
Frames

Text Encoder

Legend:
Existing
Components
Newly Added
Components

VTC

Step 1: Add temporal attention to an image transformer.
Image Encoder

+ Temporal
Attention

Video Encoder

Step 2: Add a multimodal fusion encoder.
Video Encoder
Text Encoder

Multimodal Fusion
Encoder

Step 3: Add video-text matching, masked video modeling,
and masked language modeling pretraining objectives.
VTC

VTM

MVM

MLM

Step 4: Add images for joint Step 5: Add more frames
image-video pretraining.
for finetuning & inference.
Videos

…
…
Input Video Frames

Images

Step 6: Scale up the
pretraining data and
the model size.

Data

Model

Figure 1. We present a recipe for effective video-language pretraining. Our recipe starts with image and text transformer encoders trained on video-text pairs using a contrastive objective
(VTC). We then progressively add more components to our framework while also studying the importance of each component along
the way. Our final recipe includes the steps for (1) adding temporal
attention, (2) injecting a multimodal fusion encoder, (3) incorporating masked modeling pretraining objectives, (4) jointly training
on images and videos, (5) using more frames during fine-tuning
and inference, and lastly, (6) scaling up the data and the model.

tyNet [23] to > 45% R@1 accuracy on all three of these
datasets, thus, marking an extraordinary relative improvement of more than 100% in less than 2 years.
At the same time, the model architectures and pretraining/finetuning protocols used by modern VidL approaches

10739

