This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spherical Transformer for LiDAR-based 3D Recognition
Xin Lai1
Yukang Chen1
Fanbin Lu1
Jianhui Liu2
Jiaya Jia1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 SmartMore

Abstract
LiDAR-based 3D point cloud recognition has benefited
various applications. Without specially considering the LiDAR point distribution, most current methods suffer from
information disconnection and limited receptive field, especially for the sparse distant points. In this work, we
study the varying-sparsity distribution of LiDAR points and
present SphereFormer to directly aggregate information
from dense close points to the sparse distant ones. We design radial window self-attention that partitions the space
into multiple non-overlapping narrow and long windows.
It overcomes the disconnection issue and enlarges the receptive field smoothly and dramatically, which significantly
boosts the performance of sparse distant points. Moreover,
to fit the narrow and long windows, we propose exponential splitting to yield fine-grained position encoding and
dynamic feature selection to increase model representation
ability. Notably, our method ranks 1st on both nuScenes and
SemanticKITTI semantic segmentation benchmarks with
81.9% and 74.8% mIoU, respectively. Also, we achieve
the 3rd place on nuScenes object detection benchmark with
72.8% NDS and 68.5% mAP. Code is available at https:
// github.com/ dvlab-research/ SphereFormer.git.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, point clouds can be easily collected by LiDAR sensors. They are extensively used in various industrial applications, such as autonomous driving and robotics.
In contrast to 2D images where pixels are arranged densely
and regularly, LiDAR point clouds possess the varyingsparsity property — points near the LiDAR are quite dense,
while points far away from the sensor are much sparser, as
shown in Fig. 2 (a).
However, most existing work [12, 13, 24, 25, 55, 70–72]
does not specially consider the the varying-sparsity point
distribution of outdoor LiDAR point clouds. They inherit
from 2D CNNs or 3D indoor scenarios, and conduct local
operators (e.g., SparseConv [24, 25]) uniformly for all locations. This causes inferior results for the sparse distant
points. As shown in Fig. 1, although decent performance

(%) mIoU
90
80

78.79 79.21

80.8

70
60.78

60
51.54

54.31

50
40
30.38

30
19.31

20
13.28
10
0

close (<20m)

SparseConv

medium (>=20m, <50m)

Cubic Self-attention

far (>=50m)

Ours

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation performance on nuScenes val set
for points at different distances.

is yielded for the dense close points, it is difficult for these
methods to deal with the sparse distant points optimally.
We note that the root cause lies in limited receptive field.
For sparse distant points, there are few surrounding neighbors. This not only results in inconclusive features, but also
hinders enlarging receptive field due to information disconnection. To verify this finding, we visualize the Effective
Receptive Field (ERF) [40] of the given feature (shown with
the yellow star) in Fig. 2 (d). The ERF cannot be expanded
due to disconnection, which is caused by the extreme sparsity of the distant car.
Although window self-attention [22, 30], dilated selfattention [42], and large-kernel CNN [10] have been proposed to conquer the limited receptive field, these methods
do not specially deal with LiDAR point distribution, and remain to enlarge receptive field by stacking local operators
as before, leaving the information disconnection issue still
unsolved. As shown in Fig. 1, the method of cubic selfattention brings a limited improvement.
In this paper, we take a new direction to aggregate longrange information directly in a single operator to suit the
varying-sparsity point distribution. We propose the module
of SphereFormer to perceive useful information from points

17545

