This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding and Improving Features Learned in Deep Functional Maps
Souhaib Attaiki
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris

attaiki@lix.polytechnique.fr

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Before

1. Introduction
Computing dense correspondences between 3D shapes
is a classical problem in Geometry Processing, Computer
Vision, and related fields, and remains at the core of many
tasks including statistical shape analysis [8, 52], registration
[80], deformation [7] or texture transfer [14] among others.
Since its introduction, the functional map (fmap) pipeline
[49] has become a de facto tool for addressing this problem. This framework relies on representing correspondences
as linear transformations across functional spaces, by encoding them as small matrices using the Laplace-Beltrami

feature 2

Deep functional maps have recently emerged as a successful paradigm for non-rigid 3D shape correspondence tasks.
An essential step in this pipeline consists in learning feature
functions that are used as constraints to solve for a functional
map inside the network. However, the precise nature of the information learned and stored in these functions is not yet well
understood. Specifically, a major question is whether these
features can be used for any other objective, apart from their
purely algebraic role in solving for functional map matrices.
In this paper, we show that under some mild conditions, the
features learned within deep functional map approaches can
be used as point-wise descriptors and thus are directly comparable across different shapes, even without the necessity
of solving for a functional map at test time. Furthermore,
informed by our analysis, we propose effective modifications
to the standard deep functional map pipeline, which promote
structural properties of learned features, significantly improving the matching results. Finally, we demonstrate that
previously unsuccessful attempts at using extrinsic architectures for deep functional map feature extraction can be
remedied via simple architectural changes, which encourage
the theoretical properties suggested by our analysis. We thus
bridge the gap between intrinsic and extrinsic surface-based
learning, suggesting the necessary and sufficient conditions
for successful shape matching. Our code is available at
https://github.com/pvnieo/clover.

After

feature 1

Abstract

Figure 1. Left: Features learned in existing deep functional map
pipelines are used in a purely algebraic manner as constraints for
a linear system, thus lacking interpretability and clear geometric
content. Right: We propose a theoretically-justified modification to
this pipeline, which leads to learning robust and repeatable features
that enable matching via nearest neighbor search.

basis. Methods based on this approach have been successfully applied with hand-crafted features [5, 67, 71] to many
scenarios including near-isometric, [20, 30, 44, 61, 70], nonisometric [17, 32] and partial [12, 35, 36, 63, 76, 77] shape
matching. In recent years, a growing body of literature has
advocated improving the functional map pipeline by using
deeply learned features, pioneered by [34], and built upon by
many follow-up works [3, 16, 19, 29, 39, 40, 68, 69]. In all of
these methods, the learned features are only used to constrain
the linear system when estimating the functional maps inside
the network. Thus, no attention is paid to their geometric
nature, or potential utility beyond this purely algebraic role.
On the other hand, features learned in other deep matching paradigms are the main focus of optimization, and
they represent either robust descriptive geometric features
that are used directly for matching using nearest neighbor
search [6, 13, 24, 33, 37, 78, 79], or as distributions that, at
every point, are interpreted as vertex indices on some tem-

1316

