This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-time Controllable Denoising for Image and Video
Zhaoyang Zhang1 * Yitong Jiang1 * Wenqi Shao1,3
1

Xiaogang Wang1

2

Ping Luo2,3

Kaimo Lin4

Jinwei Gu1,3

3

4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
The Univesity of Hong Kong
Shanghai AI Laboratory
SenseBrain
{zhaoyangzhang@link, ytjiang@link,weqish@link, xgwang@ee,jwgu@}.cuhk.edu.hk
linkaimo1990@gmail.com, pluo@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Controllable image denoising aims to generate clean
samples with human perceptual priors and balance sharpness and smoothness. In traditional filter-based denoising
methods, this can be easily achieved by adjusting the filtering strength. However, for NN (Neural Network)-based
models, adjusting the final denoising strength requires performing network inference each time, making it almost impossible for real-time user interaction. In this paper, we introduce Real-time Controllable Denoising (RCD), the first
deep image and video denoising pipeline that provides a
fully controllable user interface to edit arbitrary denoising levels in real-time with only one-time network inference.
Unlike existing controllable denoising methods that require
multiple denoisers and training stages, RCD replaces the
last output layer (which usually outputs a single noise map)
of an existing CNN-based model with a lightweight module
that outputs multiple noise maps. We propose a novel Noise
Decorrelation process to enforce the orthogonality of the
noise feature maps, allowing arbitrary noise level control
through noise map interpolation. This process is networkfree and does not require network inference. Our experiments show that RCD can enable real-time editable image
and video denoising for various existing heavy-weight models without sacrificing their original performance.

1. Introduction
Image and video denoising are fundamental problems
in computational photography and computer vision. With
the development of deep neural networks [12, 26, 49, 59],
model-based denoising methods have achieved tremendous
success in generating clean images and videos with superior
denoising scores [4,55,57]. However, it should be noted that
the improvement in reconstruction accuracy (e.g., PSNR,
SSIM) is not always accompanied by an improvement in
visual quality, which is known as the Perception-Distortion
trade-off [6]. In traditional denoising approaches, we can
easily adjust the denoising level by tuning related control
* Equal contribution.

Noisy Sample
Initial Results

A

C

Tuning

D
B

Perception
Real-time tuning for user preference

E

GT

Intensity

Perception

Distortion

Figure 1. Real-time controllable denoising allows users further
tuning the restored results to achieve Perception-Distortion tradeoff. A-B: tuning with changing denoising intensity. C-E: tuning
without changing denoising intensity.

parameters and deriving our preferred visual results. However, for typical deep network methods, we can only restore
the degraded image or video to a fixed output with a predetermined restoration level.
In recent years, several modulation methods have been
proposed to generate continuous restoration effects between two pre-defined denoising levels. These methods can
be categorized into two kinds: interpolation-based methods [17,24,50,51], which use deep feature interpolation layers, and condition-network-based methods, which import an
extra condition network for denoising control [9, 25, 39].
Essentially, both types of methods are designed based on
the observation that the outputs of the network change continuously with the modulation of features/filters. This observation enables deep denoising control, but it also introduces several limitations. First, there is a lack of explainability, as the relationship between the control parameters
(how to modulate features) and the control operation (how
the network outputs are changed) is unclear [24]. This indicates that black-box operators (network layers) must be
used to encode them. Second, the use of control parameters as network inputs requires entire network propagation
each time control parameters change, resulting in a lack of
efficiency. Lastly, current modulation methods often require an explicit degradation level during training, which
is hard to obtain for real-world samples. As a result, current controllable denoising methods only focus on synthetic

14028

