This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Detect Mirrors from Videos via Dual Correspondences
Jiaying Lin1 *
Xin Tan2⇤
Rynson W.H. Lau1†
1
2
City University of Hong Kong
East China Normal University
jiayinlin5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, xtan@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Detecting mirrors from static images has received significant research interest recently. However, detecting mirrors
over dynamic scenes is still under-explored due to the lack
of a high-quality dataset and an effective method for video
mirror detection (VMD). To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to address the VMD problem from a deeplearning-based perspective. Our observation is that there
are often correspondences between the contents inside (reflected) and outside (real) of a mirror, but such correspondences may not always appear in every frame, e.g., due to
the change of camera pose. This inspires us to propose a
video mirror detection method, named VMD-Net, that can
tolerate spatially missing correspondences by considering
the mirror correspondences at both the intra-frame level as
well as inter-frame level via a dual correspondence module that looks over multiple frames spatially and temporally for correlating correspondences. We further propose
a first large-scale dataset for VMD (named VMD-D), which
contains 14,987 image frames from 269 videos with corresponding manually annotated masks. Experimental results
show that the proposed method outperforms SOTA methods
from relevant fields. To enable real-time VMD, our method
efficiently utilizes the backbone features by removing the
redundant multi-level module design and gets rid of postprocessing of the output maps commonly used in existing
methods, making it very efficient and practical for real-time
video-based applications. Code, dataset, and models are
available at https:// jiaying.link/ cvpr2023-vmd/

1. Introduction
Mirrors appear everywhere. They can adversely affect
the performance of computer vision tasks (e.g., depth estimation [35], vision-and-language navigation [2], semantic
segmentation [49]), due to their fundamental property that
they reflect objects from their surroundings. Thus, it is nec* Joint first authors.
† Corresponding author.

Image

VCNet

intra-frame correspondence

Ours

GT

inter-frame correspondence

Figure 1. Although state-of-the-art single-image mirror detection
method VCNet [36] performs well on a single image (e.g., the first
row) by using implicitly intra-frame correspondence, it may fail
when the intra-frame cue is weak or even absent in some video
frames (e.g., the second and third rows). The lack in exploiting
inter-frame information causes the current mirror detection methods to produce inaccurate and inconsistent results when applied to
VMD. In contrast, our method can perform well in both situations
by utilizing the proposed dual correspondence module to exploit
intra-frame (spatial) and inter-frame (temporal) correspondences.

essary to build a robust computer vision model that can distinguish mirrors from their surrounding objects correctly.
Existing single-image mirror detection methods exploit
different cues, such as context contrast [42], explicity correspondences [22], semantics association [14], and chirality
and implicit correspondences [36], to detect mirrors from
single RGB input images. Despite these recent efforts being
put into the mirror detection problem, none of them focuses
on detecting mirrors from videos. However, a lot of realworld computer vision applications are video-based (e.g.,
robotic navigation, autonomous driving, and surveillance),
rather than image-based. Hence, solving the video mirror
detection (VMD) problem can benefit these applications.
In this paper, we aim to address the VMD problem.
There are two major challenges with this problem. First, to
the best of our knowledge, there are no existing large-scale
datasets that can be used for training and evaluation on the
VMD problem. Second, existing mirror detection methods,

9109

