This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VDN-NeRF: Resolving Shape-Radiance Ambiguity via View-Dependence
Normalization

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the geometry and appearance of a 3D
scene from a set of 2D images is one of the fundamental tasks in computer vision and graphics. Recently, based
on volume rendering, neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have
shown great potential in capturing detailed appearance of
the scene, evidenced by their high-quality view synthesis.
However, the reconstructed geometry is still far from satisfying. Since geometry is critical for physical interaction
leveraging such scene representations, many recent works
have started to improve the geometric reconstruction within
the context of volume rendering, e.g., with surface rendering or external signals that are more informative of the ge* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors (yanchaoy@hku.hk, youyizheng@zju.edu.cn).
‡ The State Key Lab of CAD&CG.
§ The department of EEE and the Institute of Data Science.

NeuS

OurS

Ground Truth

Geometry

We propose VDN-NeRF, a method to train neural radiance fields (NeRFs) for better geometry under nonLambertian surface and dynamic lighting conditions that
cause significant variation in the radiance of a point when
viewed from different angles. Instead of explicitly modeling the underlying factors that result in the view-dependent
phenomenon, which could be complex yet not inclusive, we
develop a simple and effective technique that normalizes
the view-dependence by distilling invariant information already encoded in the learned NeRFs. We then jointly train
NeRFs for view synthesis with view-dependence normalization to attain quality geometry. Our experiments show
that even though shape-radiance ambiguity is inevitable,
the proposed normalization can minimize its effect on geometry, which essentially aligns the optimal capacity needed
for explaining view-dependent variations. Our method applies to various baselines and significantly improves geometry without changing the volume rendering pipeline, even
if the data is captured under a moving light source. Code is
available at: https://github.com/BoifZ/VDN-NeRF.

Rendered image

Abstract

Input images

Bingfan Zhu∗1 Yanchao Yang∗†2,3 Xulong Wang1 Youyi Zheng†1 Leonidas Guibas3
1
Zhejiang University‡ 2 The University of Hong Kong§ 3 Stanford University

Figure 1. We aim for quality geometry with NeRF reconstruction
under inconsistency when viewing the same 3D point, for example, with images captured under a dynamic light field (top row),
shown by the light spots on the truck cast from a torch moving
with the camera. The middle two rows compare the reconstructed
geometry from NeuS [41] (first column) and our method (second
column). As observed, our method produces more details and better estimates the truck’s structure. The last row shows a novel view
rendering from both methods. Even though our method normalizes the view-dependence, it does not lose details on the synthesized images thanks to the regularity induced by better geometry.

ometry, like depth scans.
Nevertheless, most improvements do not explicitly study
the shape-radiance ambiguity that could induce degenerated geometric reconstructions. This ambiguity persists as
long as some capacity is needed to account for the directional variations in the radiance, which is further amplified

35

