This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Omnimatte3D: Associating Objects and their Effects
in Unconstrained Monocular Video
Mohammed Suhail1,2
1

Erika Lu4
Leonid Sigal1,2,3

University of British Columbia

Input RGB

Input Masks

2

Zhengqi Li4
Noah Snavely4
4
Forrester Cole

Vector Institute for AI

Input Depth

3

Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Layer 1 + Background

4

Google

Layer 2 + Background

Figure 1. Layer decomposition under strong camera parallax. Given an input video with unconstrained camera motion and approximate
object masks and depth (left), our method estimates a layered representation composed of a background layer and object layers containing
the subjects of interest and their associated effects (e.g. shadows). Results of combining object layers and background are shown on right.

Abstract
We propose a method to decompose a video into a background and a set of foreground layers, where the background
captures stationary elements while the foreground layers
capture moving objects along with their associated effects
(e.g. shadows and reflections). Our approach is designed for
unconstrained monocular videos, with an arbitrary camera
and object motion. Prior work that tackles this problem
assumes that the video can be mapped onto a fixed 2D canvas, severely limiting the possible space of camera motion.
Instead, our method applies recent progress in monocular
camera pose and depth estimation to create a full, RGBD
video layer for the background, along with a video layer
for each foreground object. To solve the underconstrained
decomposition problem, we propose a new loss formulation
based on multi-view consistency. We test our method on
challenging videos with complex camera motion and show
significant qualitative improvement over current approaches.

1. Introduction
Decomposing a video into meaningful layers (as show in
Fig. 1) is a long-standing and complex problem [42] that has

seen a recent surge in progress with the application of deep
neural networks [17, 24, 25, 46]. A challenging variant of
layer decomposition is the omnimatte [25] task, which aims
to separate an input video into a background and multiple
foreground layers, each containing an object of interest along
with its correlated effects such as shadows and reflections,
thus enabling video editing applications such as object removal, background replacement and retiming. The original
work on omnimatte [24, 25] introduced a self-supervised approach for decomposing a video by assuming the background
can be unwrapped onto a single static 2D background canvas
using homography warping. Following work [17,46] relaxed
the homography restriction, but maintained the necessity of
unwrapping onto a 2D canvas.
This 2D modelling, however, limits the applicability of
these methods to camera motions that have limited or zero
parallax; intuitively, only panning camera motions are allowed. If the camera’s center of projection moves a significant distance over the video, 2D methods are unable to
learn an accurate background and are forced to place the
background detail in a foreground layer (Figure 2). Since
camera parallax is quite common, 2D methods are severely
restricted in practice.
To handle camera parallax, we exploit another recent line

630

