This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blur Interpolation Transformer for Real-World Motion from Blur
Zhihang Zhong1,2
Mingdeng Cao1
1
The University of Tokyo, Japan
zhong@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Xiang Ji1,
Yinqiang Zheng1
Imari Sato1,2
2
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
{cmd,jixiang}@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper studies the challenging problem of recovering
motion from blur, also known as joint deblurring and interpolation or blur temporal super-resolution. The challenges
are twofold: 1) the current methods still leave considerable
room for improvement in terms of visual quality even on the
synthetic dataset, and 2) poor generalization to real-world
data. To this end, we propose a blur interpolation transformer (BiT) to effectively unravel the underlying temporal
correlation encoded in blur. Based on multi-scale residual
Swin transformer blocks, we introduce dual-end temporal
supervision and temporally symmetric ensembling strategies to generate effective features for time-varying motion
rendering. In addition, we design a hybrid camera system to collect the first real-world dataset of one-to-many
blur-sharp video pairs. Experimental results show that BiT
has a significant gain over the state-of-the-art methods on
the public dataset Adobe240. Besides, the proposed realworld dataset effectively helps the model generalize well
to real blurry scenarios. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/zzh-tech/BiT.

1. Introduction
Aside from time-lapse photography, motion blur is usually one of the most undesirable artifacts during photo
shooting. Many works have been devoted to studying how
to recover sharp details from the blur, and great progress
has been made. Recently, starting from Jin et al. [9], the
community has focused on the more challenging task of recovering high-frame-rate sharp videos from blurred images,
which can be collectively termed joint deblurring and interpolation [37, 38] or blur temporal super-resolution [26, 33–
35]. This joint task can serve various applications, such as
video visual perception enhancement, slow motion generation [26], and fast moving object analysis [33–35]. For
brevity, we will refer to this task as blur interpolation.
Recent works [7, 8, 37] demonstrate that the joint approach outperforms schemes that cascade separate deblur-

imarik@nii.ac.jp

ring and video frame interpolation methods. Most joint
approaches follow the center-frame interpolation pipeline,
which means that they can only generate latent frames
for middle moments in a recursive manner. DeMFI [26]
breaks this constraint by combining self-induced featureflow-based warping and pixel-flow-based warping to synthesize latent sharp frame at arbitrary time t. However, even
on synthetic data, the performance of current methods is
still far from satisfactory for human perception. We find that
the potential temporal correlation in blur has been underutilized, which allows huge space for performance improvement of the blur interpolation algorithm. In addition, blur
interpolation suffers from the generalization issue because
there is no real-world dataset to support model training.
The goal of this work is to resolve the above two issues.
In light of the complex distribution of time-dependent reconstruction and temporal symmetry property, we propose
dual-end temporal supervision (DTS) and temporally symmetric ensembling (TSE) strategies to enhance the shared
temporal features of blur interpolation transformer (BiT) for
time-varying motion reconstruction. In addition, a multiscale residual Swin transformer block (MS-RSTB) is introduced to empower the model with the ability to effectively
handle the blur in different scales and to fuse information
from adjacent frames. Due to our design, BiT achieves
state-of-the-art on the public benchmark performance even
without optical flow-based warping operations. Meanwhile,
to provide a real-world benchmark to the community, we
further design an accurate hybrid camera system following [32, 51] to capture a dataset (RBI) containing timealigned low-frame-rate blurred and high-frame-rate sharp
video pairs. Thanks to RBI, the real data generalization
problem of blur interpolation can be greatly alleviated, and
a more reasonable evaluation platform becomes available.
With these improvements, our model presents impressive
arbitrary blur interpolation performance, and we show an
example of extracting 30 frames of sharp motion from the
blurred image in Fig. 1 for reference.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) We
propose a novel transformer-based model, BiT, for arbitrary

5713

