This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Geometric-aware Properties in 2D Representation Using Lightweight
CAD Models, or Zero Real 3D Pairs
Pattaramanee Arsomngern

Sarana Nutanong
VISTEC, Thailand

Supasorn Suwajanakorn

{pattaramanee.a s19, snutanon, supasorn.s}@vistec.ac.th

Abstract
Cross-modal training using 2D-3D paired datasets, such
as those containing multi-view images and 3D scene scans,
presents an effective way to enhance 2D scene understanding by introducing geometric and view-invariance priors into 2D features. However, the need for large-scale
scene datasets can impede scalability and further improvements. This paper explores an alternative learning method
by leveraging a lightweight and publicly available type of
3D data in the form of CAD models. We construct a 3D
space with geometric-aware alignment where the similarity
in this space reflects the geometric similarity of CAD models based on the Chamfer distance. The acquired geometricaware properties are then induced into 2D features, which
boost performance on downstream tasks more effectively
than existing RGB-CAD approaches. Our technique is not
limited to paired RGB-CAD datasets. By training exclusively on pseudo pairs generated from CAD-based reconstruction methods, we enhance the performance of SOTA
2D pre-trained models that use ResNet-50 or ViT-B backbones on various 2D understanding tasks. We also achieve
comparable results to SOTA methods trained on scene scans
on four tasks in NYUv2, SUNRGB-D, indoor ADE20k,
and indoor/outdoor COCO, despite using lightweight CAD
models or pseudo data. Please visit our page: https:
//GeoAware2dRepUsingCAD.github.io/

1. Introduction
Recent 2D visual representation learning approaches,
such as contrastive learning [3, 6, 10, 17, 28] or masked autoencoder [20], are widely used to tackle various problems
in computer vision due to their ability to encode rich visual features. While these methods have shown exceptional
results on 2D image classification, they still have shortcomings in other 2D understanding tasks that involve instancelevel reasoning. Prior research [25] also shows that models
pre-trained using image augmentations [8,21] or supervised

Training images

2D Understanding tasks
Semantic segmentation

2D Encoder

Transfer
learning

2D-3D embedding space
CD = Chamfer Distance

Object detection &
Instance segmentation

Bed
Low CD
High CD

Chair

Object retrieval

Same shape
(Viewpoint-inv.)
Similar shape
Different shape

Figure 1. Overview concept of our solution. We leverage CAD
models to train a joint 2D-3D space such that images of objects
with similar shapes, based on the Chamfer distance, are attracted
to each other, while images with different shapes are separated.
This results in a continuous geometric-aware space where the distance between two points reflects their geometric similarity, which
could be utilized for downstream 2D object understanding tasks.

labels [13] could not deliver satisfactory results when applied to downstream tasks such as semantic segmentation,
instance segmentation, and object detection [12, 42].
To alleviate this, Hou et al. [25] proposed to learn 3D
geometric priors, such as view-invariance, from 3D data
and transfer the learned priors to 2D representations. In
particular, their model is first pre-trained on ScanNet [12],
a database of multi-view RGB-D scans, using contrastive
learning and later used as initialization for fine-tuning networks on downstream tasks. Chen et al. [5] further extend
this work by utilizing additional priors through learning to
group nearby points that refer to the same object part from
3D scenes.
The key concept of their introduced new paradigm is to
share useful 3D priors from 3D data with 2D representa-

21371

