This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TarViS: A Unified Approach for Target-based Video Segmentation
Ali Athar1
1

Alexander Hermans1

Jonathon Luiten1,2

RWTH Aachen University, Germany

2

Deva Ramanan2

Carnegie Mellon University, USA

{athar,hermans,luiten,leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

1. Introduction
The ability to understand video scenes has been a longstanding goal of computer vision research because of wideranging applications in intelligent vehicles and robots.
Early approaches tackled simpler tasks involving contourbased [33, 39] and box-level tracking [21, 25, 40, 52], background subtraction [20, 61], and motion segmentation [8,
49]. The deep learning boom then revolutionized the landscape by enabling methods to perform pixel-precise segmentation on challenging, real-world videos. In the past
few years, a number of benchmarks have emerged, which
evaluate how well methods can perform video segmentation according to various task formulations. Over time,
these tasks/benchmarks have ballooned into separate re-

deva@cs.cmu.edu

BEFORE

NOW

Task-specific models

Task-specific targets

Abstract

VPS

VOS

PET

TarViS

VPS

VIS

VIS

VOS/PET

The general domain of video segmentation is currently
fragmented into different tasks spanning multiple benchmarks. Despite rapid progress in the state-of-the-art, current methods are overwhelmingly task-specific and cannot
conceptually generalize to other tasks. Inspired by recent
approaches with multi-task capability, we propose TarViS:
a novel, unified network architecture that can be applied to
any task that requires segmenting a set of arbitrarily defined ‘targets’ in video. Our approach is flexible with respect to how tasks define these targets, since it models the
latter as abstract ‘queries’ which are then used to predict
pixel-precise target masks. A single TarViS model can be
trained jointly on a collection of datasets spanning different tasks, and can hot-swap between tasks during inference without any task-specific retraining. To demonstrate
its effectiveness, we apply TarViS to four different tasks,
namely Video Instance Segmentation (VIS), Video Panoptic
Segmentation (VPS), Video Object Segmentation (VOS) and
Point Exemplar-guided Tracking (PET). Our unified, jointly
trained model achieves state-of-the-art performance on 5/7
benchmarks spanning these four tasks, and competitive performance on the remaining two. Code and model weights
are available at: https://github.com/Ali2500/TarViS

Bastian Leibe1

Figure 1. Predicted results from a jointly trained TarViS model for
four different video segmentation tasks.

search sub-communities. Although existing methods are
rapidly improving the state-of-the-art for these benchmarks,
each of them typically tackles only one narrowly-defined
task, and generalizing them is non-trivial since the task definition is baked into the core approach.
We argue that this fragmentation is unnecessary because video target segmentation tasks all require the same
high-level capability, namely that of identifying, localizing
and tracking rich semantic concepts. Meanwhile, recent
progress on Transformer networks has enabled the wider
AI research community to move towards unified, multi-task
architectures [1, 30, 31, 38, 58], because the attention operation [62] is well-suited for processing feature sets with
arbitrary structure and data modality. These developments
give us the opportunity to unify the fractured landscape of
target-based video segmentation. In this paper, we propose
TarViS: a novel architecture which enables a single, unified
model to be jointly trained for multiple video segmentation
tasks. During inference, the same model can perform differ-

18738

