This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Preserving Linear Separability in Continual Learning
by Backward Feature Projection
Qiao Gu
University of Toronto

Dongsub Shim
LG AI Research

Florian Shkurti
University of Toronto

qgu@cs.toronto.edu

dongsub.shim@lgresearch.ai

florian@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting has been a major challenge in
continual learning, where the model needs to learn new
tasks with limited or no access to data from previously seen
tasks. To tackle this challenge, methods based on knowledge distillation in feature space have been proposed and
shown to reduce forgetting [16, 17, 25]. However, most feature distillation methods directly constrain the new features
to match the old ones, overlooking the need for plasticity.
To achieve a better stability-plasticity trade-off, we propose
Backward Feature Projection (BFP), a method for continual learning that allows the new features to change up to
a learnable linear transformation of the old features. BFP
preserves the linear separability of the old classes while allowing the emergence of new feature directions to accommodate new classes. BFP can be integrated with existing
experience replay methods and boost performance by a significant margin. We also demonstrate that BFP helps learn
a better representation space, in which linear separability is
well preserved during continual learning and linear probing achieves high classification accuracy.

1. Introduction
Despite their many successes, deep neural networks
remain prone to catastrophic forgetting [37], whereby a
model’s performance on old tasks degrades significantly
while it is learning to solve new tasks. Catastrophic forgetting has become a major challenge for continual learning
(CL) scenarios, where the model is trained on a sequence
of tasks, with limited or no access to old training data.
The ability to learn continually without forgetting is crucial to many real-world applications, such as computer vision [36, 46], intelligent robotics [30], and natural language
processing [6, 23]. In these settings, an agent learns from
a stream of new data or tasks, but training on the old data
is restricted due to limitations in storage, scaling of training
time, or even concerns about privacy.
The continual learning problem has received significant

Backward Feature Projection
𝐿𝐵𝐹𝑃 (𝐴, 𝑧) = 𝐴𝑧 − 𝑧Ƹ 2

Continual Learning

Features space 𝑧Ƹ (t-SNE)
after training on task 1

Task 1
Class 1
Class 2

Task 2
Class 3
Class 4

Feature space 𝑧 (t-SNE)
after training on task 2

Figure 1. Feature distribution before and after training on a task
in a class incremental learning experiment on MNIST, visualized
by t-SNE. Left: before training on task 2, seen classes (1,2) are
learned to be separable along the horizontal axis for classification,
while unseen classes (3, 4) are not separable. Right: after training
on task 2, the new vertical axis is learned to separate new classes
(3,4). Based on this observation, we propose the Backward Feature Projection loss LBF P , which allows new feature dimensions
to emerge to separate new classes in feature space and also preserves the linear separability of old classes to reduce catastrophic
forgetting.

attention and multiple solution themes have emerged. Experience replay methods [8, 33], for example, store a limited number of (or generate) old training examples and use
them together with new data in continual learning. Parameter regularization methods [29,50] restrict the change of important network parameters. Knowledge distillation methods [16, 17, 31] regularize the intermediate output of the
CL model to preserve the knowledge from old tasks. Architectural methods [34, 42, 48] adopt expansion and isolation techniques with neural networks to prevent forgetting.
All these methods strive to balance learning new knowledge
(plasticity) and retaining old knowledge (stability).
We present a continual learning algorithm, focusing on
knowledge distillation (KD) in feature space. In the continual learning context, KD treats the continual learning
model as the student and its old checkpoint as the teacher
and regularizes the network intermediate outputs to reduce
forgetting [4,8,11,16,17,25,31]. Although recent CL meth-

24286

