This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NS3D: Neuro-Symbolic Grounding of 3D Objects and Relations
Joy Hsu
Stanford University

Jiayuan Mao
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

joycj@stanford.edu

jiayuanm@mit.edu

jiajunwu@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Grounding object properties and relations in 3D scenes is
a prerequisite for a wide range of artificial intelligence tasks,
such as visually grounded dialogues and embodied manipulation. However, the variability of the 3D domain induces
two fundamental challenges: 1) the expense of labeling and
2) the complexity of 3D grounded language. Hence, essential
desiderata for models are to be data-efficient, generalize to
different data distributions and tasks with unseen semantic
forms, as well as ground complex language semantics (e.g.,
view-point anchoring and multi-object reference). To address these challenges, we propose NS3D, a neuro-symbolic
framework for 3D grounding. NS3D translates language into
programs with hierarchical structures by leveraging large
language-to-code models. Different functional modules in
the programs are implemented as neural networks. Notably,
NS3D extends prior neuro-symbolic visual reasoning methods by introducing functional modules that effectively reason
about high-arity relations (i.e., relations among more than
two objects), key in disambiguating objects in complex 3D
scenes. Modular and compositional architecture enables
NS3D to achieve state-of-the-art results on the ReferIt3D
view-dependence task, a 3D referring expression comprehension benchmark. Importantly, NS3D shows significantly
improved performance on settings of data-efficiency and generalization, and demonstrate zero-shot transfer to an unseen
3D question-answering task.

1. Introduction
Interacting with the physical world requires 3D visual
understanding; it entails the ability to interpret 3D objects
and relations among multiple entities, as well as reason
about 3D instances in a scene from language expressions.
However, due to the variability of the 3D domain, there
are two prevalent challenges: the expense of annotating
3D labels and the complexity of 3D grounded language.
In this paper, we tackle these two challenges on a specific
task of 3D scene understanding, the referring expression
comprehension (3D-REC) task. As shown in Figure 1, in a
3D-REC task, the input contains a sentence and a 3D scene,

Complex 3D Grounding in 3D-REC
Instruction: Looking at the front of
the copier, pick the printer that is to
the right of the copier.

Instruction: Facing the front of the
cabinet, choose the lamp that is on
the left of it.

NS3D
Zero-Shot Transfer

Data Efficiency
Generalization
n% Train
Train
Test
Test novel
settings

Train 3D-REC
Task
Test 3D-QA
Task

Figure 1. NS3D achieves grounding of 3D objects and relations
in complex scenes, while showing state-of-the-art results in data
efficiency, generalization, and zero-shot transfer.

usually given as a collection of object point clouds; the goal
is to identify the correct referred object in the scene. The task
is challenging: obtaining high-quality annotations for such
tasks is expensive; the referring expressions often require
reasoning about multiple objects, such as anchoring speaker
viewpoints (i.e., facing X, select the object Y behind Z) and
utilizing multiple objects in the scene as reference points.
Many prior works have studied end-to-end methods to
tackle this problem [1, 2, 16–18, 20, 30, 37, 39, 40], jointly attending over features from language and point clouds. These
methods report strong performance, but generally require
large amounts of data to train and are prone to dataset biases, such as object co-occurrences. Meanwhile, the learned
3D representations cannot be directly transferred to related
downstream tasks, such as 3D question answering. In addition, most prior works in 3D grounding are based on Transformers [33], which reduce the set of realizable functions to a
subset of reasoning tasks with binary relations [26, 33]. This
has limited their ability to resolve complex 3D grounded
languages, empirically leading to a noticeable performance

2614

