This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HandNeRF: Neural Radiance Fields for Animatable Interacting Hands
Min Wang2
Li Li1
Houqiang Li1,2 *
Zhiyang Guo1
Wengang Zhou1,2 *
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department,
University
Science
Technology
China hands under novel views / poses
Multi-view images
Unified modeling
and of
rendering
for and
photo-realistic
single / of
interacting
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
guozhiyang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lil1, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, wangmin@iai.ustc.edu.cn

Figure 1. Given a set of multi-view images capturing a pose sequence of a single hand or two interacting hands (left), HandNeRF models
the scene in a unified manner with neural radiance fields, enabling rendering of novel hand poses from arbitrary viewing directions (right).

Abstract
We propose a novel framework to reconstruct accurate appearance and geometry with neural radiance fields
(NeRF) for interacting hands, enabling the rendering of
photo-realistic images and videos for gesture animation
from arbitrary views. Given multi-view images of a single
hand or interacting hands, an off-the-shelf skeleton estimator is first employed to parameterize the hand poses. Then
we design a pose-driven deformation field to establish correspondence from those different poses to a shared canonical space, where a pose-disentangled NeRF for one hand
is optimized. Such unified modeling efficiently complements
the geometry and texture cues in rarely-observed areas for
both hands. Meanwhile, we further leverage the pose priors
to generate pseudo depth maps as guidance for occlusionaware density learning. Moreover, a neural feature distillation method is proposed to achieve cross-domain alignment
for color optimization. We conduct extensive experiments
to verify the merits of our proposed HandNeRF and report
a series of state-of-the-art results both qualitatively and
quantitatively on the large-scale InterHand2.6M dataset.

* Corresponding Authors.

1. Introduction
As a dexterous tool to interact with the physical world
and convey rich semantic information, the modeling and reconstruction of human hands have attracted substantial attention from the research community. Typically, the synthesis of realistic hand images or videos with different postures
in motion has a wide range of applications, e.g., humancomputer interaction, sign language production, virtual and
augmented reality technologies such as telepresence, etc.
Classic hand-modeling works are mainly built upon parameterized mesh models such as MANO [31]. They fit the
geometry of hands to polygon meshes manipulated by shape
and pose parameters, and then complete coloring via texture
mapping. Despite being widely adopted, those models have
the following limitations. On the one hand, high-frequency
details are hard to present on low-resolution meshes, hindering the production of photo-realistic images. On the other
hand, no special design is developed for interacting hands,
which is a non-trivial scenario involving complex postures
with self-occlusion.
To address the above issues and push the boundary of realistic human hand modeling, motivated by the recent success of NeRF [17] in modeling human body [11, 25, 26],
we propose HandNeRF, a novel framework that unifiedly
models the geometry and texture of animatable interacting

21078

