This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Building Self-Aware Object Detectors via Reliable Uncertainty
Quantification and Calibration
Kemal Oksuz, Tom Joy, Puneet K. Dokania
Five AI Ltd., United Kingdom
{kemal.oksuz, tom.joy, puneet.dokania}@five.ai

Abstract
The current approach for testing the robustness of object
detectors suffers from serious deficiencies such as improper
methods of performing out-of-distribution detection and using calibration metrics which do not consider both localisation and classification quality. In this work, we address
these issues, and introduce the Self Aware Object Detection
(SAOD) task, a unified testing framework which respects
and adheres to the challenges that object detectors face in
safety-critical environments such as autonomous driving.
Specifically, the SAOD task requires an object detector to
be: robust to domain shift; obtain reliable uncertainty estimates for the entire scene; and provide calibrated confidence scores for the detections. We extensively use our
framework, which introduces novel metrics and large scale
test datasets, to test numerous object detectors in two different use-cases, allowing us to highlight critical insights
into their robustness performance. Finally, we introduce
a simple baseline for the SAOD task, enabling researchers
to benchmark future proposed methods and move towards
robust object detectors which are fit for purpose. Code is
available at: https://github.com/fiveai/saod.

1. Introduction
The safe and reliable usage of object detectors in safety
critical systems such as autonomous driving [10,65,73], depends not only on its accuracy, but also critically on other
robustness aspects which are often only considered in addition or not all. These aspects represent its ability to be robust to domain shift, obtain well-calibrated predictions and
yield reliable uncertainty estimates at the image-level, enabling it to flag the scene for human intervention instead of
making unreliable predictions. Consequently, the development of object detectors for safety critical systems requires
a thorough evaluation framework which also accounts for
these robustness aspects, a feature lacking in current evaluation methodologies.

Figure 1. (Top) The vanilla object detection task vs. (Bottom)
the self-aware object detection (SAOD) task. Different from the
vanilla approach; the SAOD task requires the detector to: predict
â ∈ {0, 1} representing whether the image X is accepted or not
for further processing; yield accurate and calibrated detections;
and be robust to domain shift. Accordingly, for SAOD we evaluate
on ID, domain-shift and OOD data using our novel DAQ measure.
Here, {ĉi , b̂i , p̂i }N are the predicted set of detections.

Whilst object detectors are able to obtain uncertainty at
the detection-level, they do not naturally produce uncertainty at the image-level. This has lead researchers to often evaluate uncertainty by performing out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection at the detection-level [13, 21], which cannot be clearly defined. Thereby creating a misunderstanding
between OOD and in-distribution (ID) data. This leads to
an improper evaluation, as defining OOD at the detection
level is non-trivial due to the presence of known-unknowns
or background objects [12]. Furthermore, the test sets for
OOD in such evaluations are small, typically containing
around 1-2K images [13, 21].
Moreover, as there is no direct access to the labels of the
test sets and the evaluation servers only report accuracy [18,
43], researchers have no choice but to use small validation
sets as testing sets to report robustness performance, such
as calibration and performance under domain shift. As a
result, either the training set [11, 59]; the validation set [13,
21]; or a subset of the validation set [36] is employed for
cross-validation, leading to an unideal usage of the dataset
splits and a poor choice of the hyper-parameters.
Finally, prior work typically focuses on only one of: calibration [35, 36]; OOD detection [13]; domain-shift [45,

9263

