This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two-view Geometry Scoring Without Correspondences
Axel Barroso-Laguna1
Eric Brachmann1
Victor Adrian Prisacariu1,2
Gabriel Brostow1,3
Daniyar Turmukhambetov1
1

2
3
Niantic
University of Oxford
University College London
www.github.com/nianticlabs/scoring-without-correspondences

Abstract
Camera pose estimation for two-view geometry traditionally relies on RANSAC. Normally, a multitude of image
correspondences leads to a pool of proposed hypotheses,
which are then scored to find a winning model. The inlier
count is generally regarded as a reliable indicator of “consensus”. We examine this scoring heuristic, and find that it
favors disappointing models under certain circumstances.
As a remedy, we propose the Fundamental Scoring Network (FSNet), which infers a score for a pair of overlapping images and any proposed fundamental matrix. It does
not rely on sparse correspondences, but rather embodies
a two-view geometry model through an epipolar attention
mechanism that predicts the pose error of the two images.
FSNet can be incorporated into traditional RANSAC loops.
We evaluate FSNet on fundamental and essential matrix estimation on indoor and outdoor datasets, and establish that
FSNet can successfully identify good poses for pairs of images with few or unreliable correspondences. Besides, we
show that naively combining FSNet with MAGSAC++ scoring approach achieves state of the art results.

1. Introduction
How to determine the relative camera pose between two
images is one of the cornerstone challenges in computer vision. Accurate camera poses underpin numerous pipelines
such as Structure-from-Motion, odometry, SLAM, and visual relocalization, among others [26, 37, 47, 48, 56]. Much
of the time, an accurate fundamental matrix can be estimated by existing means, but the failures are prevalent
enough to hurt real-world tasks, and are hard to anticipate [23]. Where are the mistakes coming from?
Traditional approaches first detect then describe a set
of interest points in each image, and establish correspondences between the two sets while possibly filtering them,
e.g., checking for mutual nearest neighbors or applying
Lowe’s ratio test [36]. Then, random subsets of correspondences are sampled and a 5-point or 7-point algorithm is

Reference frame
Destination frame
F-Mat Hypothesis
MAGSAC++
FSNet

Figure 1. Example where SuperPoint-SuperGlue [19, 46] correspondences are highly populated by outliers, but there are still
enough inliers to produce a valid fundamental matrix hypothesis. In such scenarios with unreliable correspondences, current
top scoring methods fail (MAGSAC++ [5]), while our proposed
FSNet model, a correspondence-free scoring approach, is able to
pick out the best fundamental matrix.

used to estimate many essential or fundamental matrix hypotheses, respectively, (i.e., two-view geometry models). A
RANSAC [25] loop iterates over the generated hypotheses,
and ranks them. Conventionally, the ranking is scored by
counting inliers, i.e. the number of correspondences within
a threshold of that two-view geometry hypothesis. Finally,
the top-ranked hypothesis is further refined by using all inlier correspondences.
As the research in robust model estimation advances [2,
5, 13, 15, 41, 58], the different stages of the pipeline are being revisited, e.g., local feature detection and description is
learned with neural networks, outlier correspondences are
filtered with learned models, hypotheses are sampled more
efficiently, or the inlier threshold is optimized. Although the
latest matching pipelines produce very accurate and robust
correspondences [19, 46, 50], correspondence-based scoring methods are still sensitive to the ratio of inliers, number of correspondences, or the accuracy of the keypoints

8979

