This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Not All Image Regions Matter:
Masked Vector Quantization for Autoregressive Image Generation
Mengqi Huang1 , Zhendong Mao1, 3 *, Quan Wang2 , Yongdong Zhang1, 3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China; 2 MOE Key Laboratory of Trustworthy,
Distributed Computing and Service, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China;
3
Institute of Artificial intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
1

huangmq@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zdmao, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, wangquan@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing autoregressive models follow the two-stage generation paradigm that first learns a codebook in the latent space for image reconstruction and then completes
the image generation autoregressively based on the learned
codebook. However, existing codebook learning simply
models all local region information of images without distinguishing their different perceptual importance, which
brings redundancy in the learned codebook that not only
limits the next stage’s autoregressive model’s ability to
model important structure but also results in high training cost and slow generation speed. In this study, we borrow the idea of importance perception from classical image coding theory and propose a novel two-stage framework, which consists of Masked Quantization VAE (MQVAE) and Stackformer, to relieve the model from modeling redundancy. Specifically, MQ-VAE incorporates an
adaptive mask module for masking redundant region features before quantization and an adaptive de-mask module for recovering the original grid image feature map to
faithfully reconstruct the original images after quantization. Then, Stackformer learns to predict the combination
of the next code and its position in the feature map. Comprehensive experiments on various image generation validate our effectiveness and efficiency. Code will be released
at https : / / github . com / CrossmodalGroup /
MaskedVectorQuantization.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models of images have received significant improvements over the past few years and broadly
fall into two categories: likelihood-based models, which
include VAEs [24], flow-based [36], diffusion models [17]
and autoregressive models [40], and generative adversarial
* Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) Existing works model
all local regions without distinguishing their perceptual importance in stage 1, which not only brings redundancy (e.g., the textural regions like the background) in the learned codebook but also
make the autoregressive models overly focus on modeling this redundancy and hinder other important structural regions modeling.
(b) The codebook learning in our method only includes the important regions, e.g., the structural regions like corners and edges,
since other unimportant ones can be restored even if missing, and
thus autoregressive model could focus on modeling these important regions in stage 2 and results in better generation quality.

networks (GANs) [14], which use discriminator networks to
distinguish samples from generator networks and real examples. Compared with GANs, likelihood-based models’
training objective, i.e., the negative log-likelihood (NLL) or
its upper bound, incentives learning the full data distribution
and allows for detecting overfitting.
Among the likelihood-based models, autoregressive
models have recently attracted increasing attention for their
impressive modeling ability and scalability. Recent autoregressive image generation [10, 12, 13, 28, 28, 34, 35, 37, 39]
follows the two-stage generation paradigm, i.e., the first
stage learns a codebook in the latent space for image reconstruction and the second stage completes the image generation in the raster-scan [13] order by autoregressive models

2002

