This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-vocabulary Attribute Detection
Marı́a A. Bravo

Sudhanshu Mittal

Simon Ging

Thomas Brox

{bravoma,mittal,gings,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

University of Freiburg, Germany
https://ovad-benchmark.github.io/

Abstract
Vision-language modeling has enabled open-vocabulary
tasks where predictions can be queried using any text
prompt in a zero-shot manner. Existing open-vocabulary
tasks focus on object classes, whereas research on object
attributes is limited due to the lack of a reliable attributefocused evaluation benchmark. This paper introduces the
Open-Vocabulary Attribute Detection (OVAD) task and the
corresponding OVAD benchmark. The objective of the
novel task and benchmark is to probe object-level attribute
information learned by vision-language models. To this
end, we created a clean and densely annotated test set covering 117 attribute classes on the 80 object classes of MS
COCO. It includes positive and negative annotations, which
enables open-vocabulary evaluation. Overall, the benchmark consists of 1.4 million annotations. For reference,
we provide a first baseline method for open-vocabulary attribute detection. Moreover, we demonstrate the benchmark’s value by studying the attribute detection performance of several foundation models.

1. Introduction
One of the main goals of computer vision is to develop
models capable of localizing and recognizing an open set of
visual concepts in an image. This has been the main direction for the recently proposed Open-Vocabulary Detection
(OVD) task [50] for object detection, where the goal is to
detect a flexible set of object classes that are only defined
at test time via a text query. Classical supervised object detection methods are bound to predict objects from a fixed
set of pre-defined classes, and extending them to a very
large number of classes is limited by the annotation effort.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) - 57440921 Research Grants - Doctoral
Programmes in Germany, 2019/20. This work was partially funded by the
German Research Foundation (DFG) - 401269959 and 417962828. We
thank Philipp Schröppel, Silvio Galesso and Jan Bechtold for their critical
feedback on the paper. We thank all OVAD annotators especially Mariana
Sarmiento and Jorge Bravo for their help, time, and effort.

Figure 1. Example from the presented open vocabulary attribute
detection benchmark. The objective is to detect all objects and
visual attributes of each object in the image. Objects and attributes
are only specified at test time via text prompts.

OVD methods overcome this constraint by utilizing visionlanguage modeling to learn about novel objects using the
weak supervision of image-text pairs.
OVD methods for object detection have made fast
progress and have even surpassed supervised baselines for
rare (tail) classes [16]. Best OVD methods [16, 35, 53, 54]
train with extra weak supervision using image classification
datasets, which are focused on retrieving object information. However, it is unclear on how well OVD methods
generalize information beyond the object class. This paper focuses on object-level attribute information, such as
the object’s state, size, and color.
Attributes play a significant role in an object’s identity.
A small change of an attribute in a description can modify our understanding of an object’s appearance and perception. Imagine driving in a forest where you encounter a bear
like the one in Figure 1. Even if you do not distinguish or
know the type of bear, recognizing that it is made of wood is
enough to realize that it is fake and harmless. A model capable of detecting object attributes enables a richer reasoning
ability via combining objects and attributes. It allows the
model to potentially extrapolate to novel object classes.

7041

