This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Fairness in Facial Albedo Estimation via Visual-Textual Cues
Xingyu Ren Jiankang Deng* Chao Ma* Yichao Yan Xiaokang Yang
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{rxy sjtu,chaoma,yanyichao,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, jiankangdeng@gmail.com

Input

Ours
Rendered

Ours
Albedo

Lighting
Probe

Unbiased Albedo Reconstruction

Realistic Head Rendering

Figure 1. We introduce ID2Albedo, a high-quality, unbiased albedo reconstruction method. ID2Albedo maps the facial identity features to
the latent space of the albedo generator and uses novel visual-textual cues to constrain albedo attributes. Our approach can alleviate the
illumination/albedo ambiguity and generate high-fidelity albedo maps for realistic rendering. Images are all from FFHQ [30] dataset.

Abstract
Recent 3D face reconstruction methods have made significant advances in geometry prediction, yet further cosmetic improvements are limited by lagged albedo because
inferring albedo from appearance is an ill-posed problem.
Although some existing methods consider prior knowledge
from illumination to improve albedo estimation, they still
produce a light-skin bias due to racially biased albedo models and limited light constraints. In this paper, we reconsider the relationship between albedo and face attributes
and propose a ID2Albedo to directly estimate albedo without constraining illumination. Our key insight is that intrinsic semantic attributes such as race, skin color, and age
can be used to constrain the albedo map. We first introduce
visual-textual cues and design a semantic loss to supervise
facial albedo estimation. Specifically, we pre-define text labels such as race, skin color, age, and wrinkles. Then, we
employ the text-image model (CLIP) to compute the similarity between the text and the input image, and assign a
* Corresponding authors.

pseudo-label to each facial image. We constrain generated
albedos in the training phase to have the same attributes
as the inputs. In addition, we train a high-quality, unbiased facial albedo generator and utilize the semantic loss
to learn the mapping from illumination-robust identity features to the albedo latent codes. Finally, our ID2Albedo is
trained in a self-supervised way and outperforms state-ofthe-art albedo estimation methods in terms of accuracy and
fidelity. It is worth mentioning that our approach has excellent generalizability and fairness, especially on in-the-wild
data.

1. Introduction
3D face reconstruction is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision and graphics. It aims to estimate
realistic 3D face shapes and appearances from 2D images,
given only multi-view or single-view images. 3D face reconstruction plays a vital role in numerous vision applications, such as face manipulation [52], speech-driven facial animation [51], and video conferencing [56]. Since the
pioneering work of 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [54],
monocular face reconstruction methods have made remark-

4511

