This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FAME-ViL: Multi-Tasking Vision-Language Model
for Heterogeneous Fashion Tasks
Xiao Han1,2 Xiatian Zhu1,3 Licheng Yu Li Zhang4 Yi-Zhe Song1,2 Tao Xiang1,2
1
CVSSP, University of Surrey 2 iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3
Surrey Institute for People-Centred Artiﬁcial Intelligence 4 Fudan University
{xiao.han, xiatian.zhu, y.song, t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk
lichengyu24@gmail.com

lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In the fashion domain, there exists a variety of visionand-language (V+L) tasks, including cross-modal retrieval,
text-guided image retrieval, multi-modal classiﬁcation, and
image captioning. They differ drastically in each individual input/output format and dataset size. It has been common to design a task-speciﬁc model and ﬁne-tune it independently from a pre-trained V+L model (e.g., CLIP).
This results in parameter inefﬁciency and inability to exploit inter-task relatedness. To address such issues, we propose a novel FAshion-focused Multi-task Efﬁcient learning method for Vision-and-Language tasks (FAME-ViL) in
this work. Compared with existing approaches, FAME-ViL
applies a single model for multiple heterogeneous fashion
tasks, therefore being much more parameter-efﬁcient. It
is enabled by two novel components: (1) a task-versatile
architecture with cross-attention adapters and task-speciﬁc
adapters integrated into a uniﬁed V+L model, and (2) a stable and effective multi-task training strategy that supports
learning from heterogeneous data and prevents negative
transfer. Extensive experiments on four fashion tasks show
that our FAME-ViL can save 61.5% of parameters over
alternatives, while signiﬁcantly outperforming the conventional independently trained single-task models. Code is
available at https://github.com/BrandonHanx/FAME-ViL.

Figure 1. By multi-task learning a single model for heterogeneous
fashion tasks, our FAME-ViL can signiﬁcantly improve parameter
efﬁciency, while boosting the model performance per task over
existing independently ﬁne-tuned single-task models. Note, each
axis is normalized according to the respective maximum value for
easier visualization.

heterogeneous in terms of (1) different input and output
formats (e.g., text-guided garment retrieval [83] and image
captioning [85] have completely different inputs and outputs); (2) different dataset sizes as the annotation difﬁculty
of each task differ (e.g., the labeling effort for text-guided
image retrieval is much harder than that for text-to-image
retrieval [48, 83]).
Due to the heterogeneous nature of the V+L fashion
tasks, existing methods [21, 24, 33, 87, 94] typically take
a pre-trained generic V+L model [7, 38, 41–43, 49, 60, 67,
72, 79] and ﬁne-tune it on every single task independently.
Such an approach suffers from two limitations. (1) Low parameter efﬁciency: Each real-world application requires the
deployment of its dedicated ﬁne-tuned model, where there
is no parameter or inference computation sharing. This
leads to a linearly increasing storage and inference compute redundancy in the long run. (2) Lack of inter-task
relatedness: Though the fashion tasks are heterogeneous

1. Introduction
A variety of real-world multi-modal, particularly Visionand-Language (V+L) tasks exist in the fashion domain, including multi-modal recognition [44, 53, 61], multi-modal
retrieval [21, 83] and image captioning [85]. The models
developed for these tasks have been applied in diverse ecommerce applications, improving product discoverability,
seller-buyer engagement, and customer conversion rate after catalogue browsing. Intrinsically, those V+L tasks are
2669

