This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WINNER: Weakly-supervised hIerarchical decompositioN and aligNment for
spatio-tEmporal video gRounding
Mengze Li 1 *

Han Wang 1 *

Wenqiao Zhang 2

Shengyu Zhang 1†
1
3

Zhejiang University,

Wei Ji 2†
2

Jiaxu Miao 1

Zhou Zhao 1,3,4†

Fei Wu 3,4,1

National university of Singapore,

Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University, 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

{mengzeli, zhouzhao, sy zhang}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatio-temporal video grounding aims to localize the
aligned visual tube corresponding to a language query.
Existing techniques achieve such alignment by exploiting
dense boundary and bounding box annotations, which can
be prohibitively expensive. To bridge the gap, we investigate the weakly-supervised setting, where models learn
from easily accessible video-language data without annotations. We identify that intra-sample spurious correlations
among video-language components can be alleviated if the
model captures the decomposed structures of video and language data. In this light, we propose a novel framework,
namely WINNER, for hierarchical video-text understanding. WINNER first builds the language decomposition tree
in a bottom-up manner, upon which the structural attention
mechanism and top-down feature backtracking jointly build
a multi-modal decomposition tree, permitting a hierarchical understanding of unstructured videos. The multi-modal
decomposition tree serves as the basis for multi-hierarchy
language-tube matching. A hierarchical contrastive learning objective is proposed to learn the multi-hierarchy correspondence and distinguishment with intra-sample and
inter-sample video-text decomposition structures, achieving
video-language decomposition structure alignment. Extensive experiments demonstrate the rationality of our design
and its effectiveness beyond state-of-the-art weakly supervised methods, even some supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal video grounding (STVG) is a fundamental task for video-language understanding [34, 41]. It
aims to localize the spatio-temporal tube described by the
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Authors.

weiji0523@gmail.com

language query from the untrimmed video. The essence of
grounding lies in the semantic alignment of video and language components [34, 35, 41, 55]. To achieve such alignment, existing works fully exploit the fine-grained spatialtemporal annotations (e.g., temporal boundaries, and spatial bounding boxes). For example, the spatial and temporal GCN modules in STGRN [55] require region-by-region
frame-by-frame annotations for training convolutions.
Despite substantial research literature in this vein, the
dense annotations (i.e., video-by-video temporal boundary
and frame-by-frame spatial bounding boxes) necessary for
effective alignment require tremendous labor costs, which
are, however, not routinely available. In addition, massive video-language data without spatial-temporal annotations are easily accessible but without exploitation. To reduce human labeling costs, we investigate the weakly supervised setting, where models learn to localize spatialtemporal tubes on easily accessible video-language data.
In the weakly-supervised setting, the absence of spatialtemporal annotations (i.e., the exactly matched temporal
boundaries and spatial bounding boxes) drives the videolanguage alignment problematic. Language semantics
might get spuriously correlated with unmatched visual components in the untrimmed video. For example, when we
inspect the sample shown in Figure 1 at either the videosentence or the object-word hierarchy (i.e., single-hierarchy
understanding), the right-side woman can be hard to distinguish from the target woman to be localized. We identify that such spurious correlations could be alleviated if
the model captures that the second woman is being pointed
at when inspecting the sample at an intermediate videolanguage hierarchy. In this regard, we present a novel perspective for grounding-oriented video disambiguation and
understanding under the weakly-supervised setting, i.e., decomposing multiple aligned video-language hierarchies.
There are mainly two technical challenges to achieving
such hierarchical alignment. On the one hand, the highly

23090

