This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DyLiN: Making Light Field Networks Dynamic
Heng Yu1
1

Joel Julin1

Zoltán Á. Milacski1

Koichiro Niinuma2

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

{hengyu, jjulin, zmilacsk}@andrew.cmu.edu

Ground Truth
Video

HyperNeRF [28]
Render time: 3 s

2

László A. Jeni1

Fujitsu Research of America

kniinuma@fujitsu.com

laszlojeni@cmu.edu

TiNeuVox [8]
Ours
Render time: 7 s Render time: 0.1 s

Figure 1. Our proposed DyLiN for dynamic 3D scene rendering achieves higher quality than its HyperNeRF teacher model and the stateof-the-art TiNeuVox model, while being an order of magnitude faster. Right: DyLiN is of moderate storage size (shown by dot radii). For
each method, the relative improvement in Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio over NeRF (∆PSNR) is measured for the best-performing scene.

Abstract
Light Field Networks, the re-formulations of radiance
fields to oriented rays, are magnitudes faster than their coordinate network counterparts, and provide higher fidelity
with respect to representing 3D structures from 2D observations. They would be well suited for generic scene representation and manipulation, but suffer from one problem:
they are limited to holistic and static scenes. In this paper, we propose the Dynamic Light Field Network (DyLiN)
method that can handle non-rigid deformations, including
topological changes. We learn a deformation field from input rays to canonical rays, and lift them into a higher dimensional space to handle discontinuities. We further introduce CoDyLiN, which augments DyLiN with controllable
attribute inputs. We train both models via knowledge distillation from pretrained dynamic radiance fields. We evaluated DyLiN using both synthetic and real world datasets
that include various non-rigid deformations. DyLiN qualitatively outperformed and quantitatively matched state-ofthe-art methods in terms of visual fidelity, while being 25 −
71× computationally faster. We also tested CoDyLiN on attribute annotated data and it surpassed its teacher model.
Project page: https://dylin2023.github.io.

1. Introduction
Machine vision has made tremendous progress with respect to reasoning about 3D structure using 2D observa-

tions. Much of this progress can be attributed to the emergence of coordinate networks [6,21,26], such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] and its variants [2, 20, 22, 39].
They provide an object agnostic representation for 3D
scenes and can be used for high-fidelity synthesis for unseen
views. While NeRFs mainly focus on static scenes, a series
of works [10,27,29,34] extend the idea to dynamic cases via
additional components that map the observed deformations
to a canonical space, supporting moving and shape-evolving
objects. It was further shown that by lifting this canonical
space to higher dimensions the method can handle changes
in scene topology as well [28].
However, the applicability of NeRF models is considerably limited by their computational complexities. From
each pixel, one typically casts a ray from that pixel, and numerically integrates the radiance and color densities computed by a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) across the ray,
approximating the pixel color. Specifically, the numerical integration involves sampling hundreds of points across
the ray, and evaluating the MLP at all of those locations.
Several works have been proposed for speeding up static
NeRFs. These include employing a compact 3D representation structure [9, 18, 43], breaking up the MLP into multiple smaller networks [30, 31], leveraging depth information
[7, 24], and using fewer sampling points [17, 24, 42]. Yet,
these methods still rely on integration and suffer from sampling many points, making them prohibitively slow for realtime applications. Recently, Light Field Networks (LFNs)
[32] proposed replacing integration with a direct ray-to-

12397

