This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAESTER: Masked Autoencoder Guided Segmentation at Pixel Resolution for
Accurate, Self-Supervised Subcellular Structure Recognition
Ronald Xie1,2,3,4, *,†
1

Kuan Pang1,4, *
2

Gary D. Bader1,3,4,‡

3

Bo Wang1,2,3,‡

4

University of Toronto, Vector Institute, University Health Network, The Donnelly Centre

{ronald.xie, kuan.pang, gary.bader}@mail.utoronto.ca , bowang@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Accurate segmentation of cellular images remains an
elusive task due to the intrinsic variability in morphology
of biological structures. Complete manual segmentation is
unfeasible for large datasets, and while supervised methods have been proposed to automate segmentation, they
often rely on manually generated ground truths which are
especially challenging and time consuming to generate in
biology due to the requirement of domain expertise. Furthermore, these methods have limited generalization capacity, requiring additional manual labels to be generated for
each dataset and use case. We introduce MAESTER (Masked
AutoEncoder guided SegmenTation at pixEl Resolution), a
self-supervised method for accurate, subcellular structure
segmentation at pixel resolution. MAESTER treats segmentation as a representation learning and clustering problem.
Specifically, MAESTER learns semantically meaningful token representations of multi-pixel image patches while simultaneously maintaining a sufficiently large field of view
for contextual learning. We also develop a cover-and-stride
inference strategy to achieve pixel-level subcellular structure segmentation. We evaluated MAESTER on a publicly
available volumetric electron microscopy (VEM) dataset of
primary mouse pancreatic islets β cells and achieved upwards of 29.1% improvement over state-of-the-art under
the same evaluation criteria. Furthermore, our results are
competitive against supervised methods trained on the same
tasks, closing the gap between self-supervised and supervised approaches. MAESTER shows promise for alleviating
the critical bottleneck of ground truth generation for imaging
related data analysis and thereby greatly increasing the rate
of biological discovery.
Code available at https : / / github . com /
bowang-lab/MAESTER

* Equal contribution
† Project lead
‡ Co-senior author

1. Introduction
Imaging is widely used in biology to study the organization, morphology, and function of cells and subcellular
structures [13, 26, 28, 31, 32]. Segmentation of structures
and objects of interest in the acquired images is often critical for downstream analysis. Recent innovations in high
throughput imaging technology enables larger scale datasets
to be collected more quickly and cost efficiently [23, 24, 32].
Scalable and accurate segmentation hence becomes a crucial
bottleneck to overcome. For example, volumetric electron
microscopy (VEM) can generate terabytes of imaging data
in a single run, enabling biologists to uncover ultrastructural
features of cells at unprecedented resolution and scale in
3D [24]. Manual segmentation of such datasets are unfeasible and especially when substantial domain knowledge is
required for annotation of structures captured in the imaging
volume.
With recent advancements in the field of machine learning, automatic methods involving convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been developed to aid the segmentation
process to great success [8, 18]. However, these methods
often require extensive manual labels to train in the first
place. Furthermore, supervised models often exhibit limited generalization capacity, necessitating additional ground
truth generation efforts for each new dataset or use case.
Presently, there is a dire need for a self-supervised segmentation method to bypass the initial bottleneck of manual label
generation, particularly when the cost and time of acquiring training supervision far exceeds the capacity to generate
unlabelled data.
In addition to being self-supervised, the method needs to
incorporate a few inductive biases to tackle the challenges of
biological image segmentation. First, the texture of objects
from the same class often remains consistent, despite great
variability in shapes and sizes that cellular structures can
exhibit. Therefore, the model needs to learn semantically
meaningful representation of small image patches belonging
to each structure of interest and distinguish between different
textures. Second, the model needs to be capable of producing

3292

