This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Cropping with Spatial-aware Feature and Rank Consistency
Chao Wang, Li Niu*, Bo Zhang, Liqing Zhang∗
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{wangchaojfj,ustcnewly,bo-zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn,zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image cropping aims to find visually appealing crops in
an image. Despite the great progress made by previous
methods, they are weak in capturing the spatial relationship
between crops and aesthetic elements (e.g., salient objects,
semantic edges). Besides, due to the high annotation cost
of labeled data, the potential of unlabeled data awaits to be
excavated. To address the first issue, we propose spatialaware feature to encode the spatial relationship between
candidate crops and aesthetic elements, by feeding the concatenation of crop mask and selectively aggregated feature
maps to a light-weighted encoder. To address the second
issue, we train a pair-wise ranking classifier on labeled
images and transfer such knowledge to unlabeled images
to enforce rank consistency. Experimental results on the
benchmark datasets show that our proposed method performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The task of image cropping aims to find good crops in
an image that can improve the image quality and meet aesthetic requirement. Image cropping is a prevalent and critical operation in numerous photography-related applications
like image thumbnailing, view recommendation, and camera view adjustment suggestion.
Many Researchers [2, 4–7, 12, 21, 23, 36, 43, 46, 52, 54,
60, 62, 63] have studied automatic image cropping in the
past decades with the goal to reduce the workload of manual cropping. Earlier works [2, 3, 12, 31, 43, 44] mainly
used saliency detection [49, 59] to detect salient objects
and crop around salient objects. Another group of methods [6, 12, 26, 33, 54, 62] designed hand-crafted features
to represent specific composition rules in photography.
With the construction of moderate-sized image cropping
datasets [4, 52, 54, 56], recently proposed image cropping
methods [4, 5, 7, 21, 23, 36, 52, 56, 57, 63] are usually datadriven manner and directly learn how to crop visually ap* Corresponding author

Source Image

Low-level

High-level

Figure 1. Two examples of the spatial relationship between crops
(yellow bounding box) and aesthetic elements (e.g., semantic
edges and salient objects). The first column shows the source images, and the second (resp., third) column shows their low-level
(resp., high-level) feature maps extracted by a pre-trained MobileNetv2 [39] network with channel-wise max pooling. It can
be seen that low-level feature maps emphasize semantic edges and
high-level feature maps highlight salient objects.

pealing views from the labeled data. Although these approaches have achieved impressive improvement on image
cropping task, there still exist some drawbacks which will
be discussed below.
One problem is that when considering the spatial relationship between crops and aesthetic elements (e.g., salient
objects, semantic edges), which is very critical for image
cropping, previous methods usually designed some intuitive rules. For example, the crop should enclose the salient
object [2, 43, 44], or should not cut through the semantic
edges [2, 54]. However, these hand-crafted rules did not
consider the spatial layout of all aesthetic elements as a
whole, and may not generalize well to various scenes because the rules designed for specific subjects can not cover
complex image cropping principles [10].
In this work, we explore learnable spatial-aware features, which encode the spatial relationship between crops
and aesthetic elements. We observe that the feature map
obtained using channel-wise max pooling can emphasize
some aesthetic elements. In Figure 1, we show several
pooled feature maps from MobileNetv2 [39], from which

10052

