This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Diffusion Prior for Unified Image Restoration and Enhancement
Ben Fei1,2,∗ , Zhaoyang Lyu2,∗ , Liang Pan3 , Junzhe Zhang3 ,
Weidong Yang1,† , Tianyue Luo1 , Bo Zhang2 , Bo Dai2,†
1
Fudan University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Original

Low-res

Output

Original

Occluded

Output

Original

Gray

Output

Original

(a)

Super-resolution

Deblur

Inpainting

(b)

Low-light Image Enhancement

Colorization

Low-res & gray

Output

Occluded & gray

bfei21@m.fudan.edu.cn, wdyang@fudan.edu.cn, (lvzhaoyang,daibo)@pjlab.org.cn
Blurred

Input

Output

Original

Multi-degradation recovery

Long

Medium

Long

Medium

Short

Output

Short

Output

Brightness Control

HDR Image Recovery

Figure 1. Generative Diffusion Prior (GDP) is capable of generating high-fidelity restoration across various tasks. GDP gives faithful
image recovery on (a) linear and multi-linear restoration.. In addition, GDP also enables novel applications of (b) blind, non-linear,
multiple-guidance, or any-size image, including low-light enhancement and HDR recovery.

Abstract
Existing image restoration methods mostly leverage the
posterior distribution of natural images. However, they
often assume known degradation and also require supervised training, which restricts their adaptation to complex
real applications. In this work, we propose the Generative
Diffusion Prior (GDP) to effectively model the posterior
distributions in an unsupervised sampling manner. GDP
utilizes a pre-train denoising diffusion generative model
(DDPM) for solving linear inverse, non-linear, or blind
problems. Specifically, GDP systematically explores a protocol of conditional guidance, which is verified more practical than the commonly used guidance way. Furthermore,
GDP is strength at optimizing the parameters of degradation model during the denoising process, achieving blind
image restoration. Besides, we devise hierarchical guidance and patch-based methods, enabling the GDP to generate images of arbitrary resolutions. Experimentally, we
demonstrate GDP ’s versatility on several image datasets
for linear problems, such as super-resolution, deblurring,
inpainting, and colorization, as well as non-linear and blind
issues, such as low-light enhancement and HDR image re∗Equal contribution, †Corresponding author.

covery. GDP outperforms the current leading unsupervised
methods on the diverse benchmarks in reconstruction quality and perceptual quality. Moreover, GDP also generalizes well for natural images or synthesized images with arbitrary sizes from various tasks out of the distribution of
the ImageNet training set. The project page is available at
https://generativediffusionprior.github.io/

1. Introduction
Image quality often degrades during capture, storage,
transmission, and rendering. Image restoration and enhancement [42] aim to inverse the degradation and improve the image quality. Typically, restoration and enhancement tasks can be divided into two main categories: 1)
Linear inverse problems, such as image super-resolution
(SR) [24, 38], deblurring [36, 75], inpainting [88], colorization [37, 94], where the degradation model is usually linear
and known; 2) Non-linear or blind problems [1], such as
image low-light enhancement [39] and HDR image recovery [10, 79], where the degradation model is non-linear and
unknown. For a specific linear degradation model, image
restoration can be tackled through end-to-end supervised
training of neural networks [16,94]. Nonetheless, corrupted
images in the real world often have multiple complex degradations [57], where fully supervised approaches suffer to

9935

