This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to Backdoor Diffusion Models?
Sheng-Yen Chou *

Pin-Yu Chen †

Tsung-Yi Ho ‡

Abstract
Diffusion models are state-of-the-art deep learning empowered generative models that are trained based on the
principle of learning forward and reverse diffusion processes via progressive noise-addition and denoising. To
gain a better understanding of the limitations and potential
risks, this paper presents the first study on the robustness of
diffusion models against backdoor attacks. Specifically, we
propose BadDiffusion, a novel attack framework that engineers compromised diffusion processes during model training for backdoor implantation. At the inference stage, the
backdoored diffusion model will behave just like an untampered generator for regular data inputs, while falsely generating some targeted outcome designed by the bad actor
upon receiving the implanted trigger signal. Such a critical risk can be dreadful for downstream tasks and applications built upon the problematic model. Our extensive
experiments on various backdoor attack settings show that
BadDiffusion can consistently lead to compromised diffusion models with high utility and target specificity. Even
worse, BadDiffusion can be made cost-effective by simply
finetuning a clean pre-trained diffusion model to implant
backdoors. We also explore some possible countermeasures
for risk mitigation. Our results call attention to potential
risks and possible misuse of diffusion models. Our code is
available on https://github.com/IBM/BadDiffusion.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, diffusion models [2,4,9–11,21,24,
26, 28, 30–34] trained with deep neural networks and highvolume training data have emerged as cutting-edge tools for
content creation and high-quality generation of synthetic
data in various domains, including images, texts, speech,
molecules, among others [12–15, 18, 19, 22, 41]. In particular, with the open-source of Stable Diffusion, one of
the state-of-the-art and largest text-based image generation
* National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, R.O.C (Taiwan);
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong;

unaxultraspaceos5@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
† IBM Research, New York, USA; pin-yu.chen@ibm.com
‡ The

Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong;

tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Figure 1. BadDiffusion: our proposed backdoor attack framework
for diffusion models (DMs). Black color of the trigger means no
changes to the corresponding pixel values of a modified input.

models to date, that are trained with intensive resources, a
rapidly growing number of new applications and workloads
are using the same model as the foundation to develop their
own tasks and products.
While our community is putting high hopes on diffusion
models to fully drive our creativity and facilitate synthetic
data generation, imagine the consequences when this very
foundational diffusion model is at the risk of being secretly
implanted with a “backdoor” that can exhibit a designated
action by a bad actor (e.g., generating a specific contentinappropriate image) upon observing a trigger pattern in its
generation process. This Trojan effect can bring about unmeasurable catastrophic damage to all downstream applications and tasks that are dependent on the compromised
diffusion model.
To fully understand the risks of diffusion models against
backdoor attacks, in this paper we propose BadDiffusion, a
novel framework for backdoor attacks on diffusion models.
Different from standard backdoor attacks on classifiers that
mainly modify the training data and their labels for backdoor injection [6], BadDiffusion requires maliciously modifying both the training data and the forward/backward diffusion steps, which are tailored to the unique feature of noiseaddition and denoising in the stages of training and inference for diffusion models. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the threat
model considered in this paper is that the attacker aims to
train a backdoored diffusion model satisfying two primary
objectives: (i) high utility – the model should have a similar performance to a clean (untampered) diffusion model

4015

