This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMPConv: Self-moving Point Representations for Continuous Convolution
Sanghyeon Kim1
Eunbyung Park1,2 *
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University

Abstract
Continuous convolution has recently gained prominence
due to its ability to handle irregularly sampled data and
model long-term dependency. Also, the promising experimental results of using large convolutional kernels have
catalyzed the development of continuous convolution since
they can construct large kernels very efficiently. Leveraging neural networks, more specifically multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), is by far the most prevalent approach
to implementing continuous convolution. However, there
are a few drawbacks, such as high computational costs,
complex hyperparameter tuning, and limited descriptive
power of filters. This paper suggests an alternative approach to building a continuous convolution without neural networks, resulting in more computationally efficient
and improved performance. We present self-moving point
representations where weight parameters freely move, and
interpolation schemes are used to implement continuous
functions. When applied to construct convolutional kernels, the experimental results have shown improved performance with drop-in replacement in the existing frameworks. Due to its lightweight structure, we are first to
demonstrate the effectiveness of continuous convolution in
a large-scale setting, e.g., ImageNet, presenting the improvements over the prior arts. Our code is available on
https://github.com/sangnekim/SMPConv

1. Introduction
There has been a recent surge of interest in representing the convolutional kernel as a function over a continuous input domain. It can easily handle irregularly sampled
data both in time [1, 59] and space [61, 65], overcoming
the drawbacks of the discrete convolution operating only on
discretized sampled data with pre-defined resolutions and
grids. With the progress in modeling and training continuous kernels, it has enjoyed great success in many practical
scenarios, such as 3D point cloud classification and segmen* Corresponding authors

tation [36,41,52,58,64], image super resolution [57], object
tracking [10], to name a few. Furthermore, the recent trends
of using large convolutional kernels with strong empirical
results urge us to develop a more efficient way to implement
it [13,32], and the continuous convolution will be a promising candidate because of its capability to readily construct
arbitrarily large receptive fields [44, 45].
One of the dominant approaches to modeling the continuous kernel is to use a particular type of neural network
architecture, taking as inputs low-dimensional input coordinates and generating the kernel values [44, 45], known as
neural fields [38, 49] or simply MLPs. Using neural fields
to represent the kernels, we can query kernel values at arbitrary resolutions in parallel and construct the large kernels
with a fixed parameter budget, as opposed to the conventional discrete convolutions requiring more parameters to
enlarge receptive fields. Thanks to recent advances to overcome the spectral bias on training neural fields [49], they
can also represent functions with high-frequency components, which enables learned kernels to capture fine details
of input data.
While promising in various tasks and applications, this
approach has a few downsides. First, it incurs considerable computational burdens to already computation-heavy
processes of training deep neural networks. Each training iteration involves multiple forward and backward passes
of MLPs to generate kernels and update the parameters of
MLPs. This additional complexity prevents it from being
applied to large-scale problems, such as ImageNet-scale,
since it needs deeper and wider MLP architectures to construct more complex kernels with more input and output
channels. Although MLPs can generate larger sizes and
numbers of kernels without adding more parameters, it has
been known that the size of MLPs mainly determines the
complexity of the functions they represent and, eventually,
the performance of the CNNs.
Furthermore, the kernels generated by an MLP depend
heavily on the architectural priors. As a universal function
approximator, a neural network with sufficient depth and
width can express any continuous functions [25]. However,
we have empirically observed strong evidence that the ar-

10289

