This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conditional Image-to-Video Generation with Latent Flow Diffusion Models
Haomiao Ni1 *

1

Kai Li3
Sharon X. Huang1
Martin Renqiang Min3
Changhao Shi2 *
1
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
2
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
3
NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ, USA

{hfn5052, suh972}@psu.edu

2

cshi@ucsd.edu

3

{kaili, renqiang}@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Conditional image-to-video (cI2V) generation aims to
synthesize a new plausible video starting from an image
(e.g., a person’s face) and a condition (e.g., an action class
label like smile). The key challenge of the cI2V task lies
in the simultaneous generation of realistic spatial appearance and temporal dynamics corresponding to the given
image and condition. In this paper, we propose an approach for cI2V using novel latent flow diffusion models
(LFDM) that synthesize an optical flow sequence in the latent space based on the given condition to warp the given
image. Compared to previous direct-synthesis-based works,
our proposed LFDM can better synthesize spatial details
and temporal motion by fully utilizing the spatial content of
the given image and warping it in the latent space according to the generated temporally-coherent flow. The training
of LFDM consists of two separate stages: (1) an unsupervised learning stage to train a latent flow auto-encoder for
spatial content generation, including a flow predictor to estimate latent flow between pairs of video frames, and (2) a
conditional learning stage to train a 3D-UNet-based diffusion model (DM) for temporal latent flow generation. Unlike previous DMs operating in pixel space or latent feature
space that couples spatial and temporal information, the
DM in our LFDM only needs to learn a low-dimensional
latent flow space for motion generation, thus being more
computationally efficient. We conduct comprehensive experiments on multiple datasets, where LFDM consistently
outperforms prior arts. Furthermore, we show that LFDM
can be easily adapted to new domains by simply finetuning the image decoder. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/nihaomiao/CVPR23_LFDM .

1. Introduction
Image-to-video (I2V) generation is an appealing topic
and has many potential applications, such as artistic cre* Work done during the internship at NEC Laboratories America.

“Surprise”

“Draw circle
clockwise”

“Fold wings”

Figure 1. Examples of generated video frames and latent flow sequences using our proposed LFDM. The first column shows the
given images x0 and conditions y. The latent flow maps are backward optical flow to x0 in the latent space. We use the color coding
scheme in [4] to visualize flow, where the color indicates the direction and magnitude of the flow.

ation, entertainment and data augmentation for machine
learning [30]. Given a single image x0 and a condition
y, conditional image-to-video (cI2V) generation aims to
synthesize a realistic video with frames 0 to k, x̂K
=
0
{x0 , x̂1 , . . . , x̂K }, starting from the given frame x0 and satisfying the condition y. Similar to conditional image synthesis works [43, 82], most existing cI2V generation methods [16, 19, 21, 30, 36, 77] directly synthesize each frame in
the whole video based on the given image x0 and condition
y. However, they often struggle with simultaneously preserving spatial details and keeping temporal coherence in
the generated frames. In this paper, we propose novel latent

18444

