This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-path Adaptation from Image to Video Transformers
Jungin Park1∗
1

Yonsei University

2

Jiyoung Lee2∗
3

NAVER AI Lab

Kwanghoon Sohn1,3†

Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

{newrun, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

lee.j@navercorp.com

Abstract

88

DUALPATH ViT/L-14

1. Introduction
Recognizing when, where, and what happened is a fundamental capability in the human cognition system to understand our natural world. The research for video understanding inspires such capability for machine intelligence
to comprehend scenes over time flow. Over the last decade,
the development of deep neural networks [10,33,66,73] has
contributed towards advances in video understanding.
Vision Transformer (ViT) [17] has recently emerged,
making an upheaval in the research field of computer vision.
ViT and its variants [16, 46, 72, 78] have demonstrated remarkable generalizability and transferability of their repre∗ Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.
Official code: https://github.com/park-jungin/DualPath
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP)
(NRF2021R1A2C2006703).

2203

X-CLIP-L/14

86

K400 Top 1 Accuracy (%)

In this paper, we efficiently transfer the surpassing representation power of the vision foundation models, such as
ViT and Swin, for video understanding with only a few trainable parameters. Previous adaptation methods have simultaneously considered spatial and temporal modeling with a
unified learnable module but still suffered from fully leveraging the representative capabilities of image transformers.
We argue that the popular dual-path (two-stream) architecture in video models can mitigate this problem. We propose a novel D UAL PATH adaptation separated into spatial
and temporal adaptation paths, where a lightweight bottleneck adapter is employed in each transformer block. Especially for temporal dynamic modeling, we incorporate consecutive frames into a grid-like frameset to precisely imitate vision transformers’ capability that extrapolates relationships between tokens. In addition, we extensively investigate the multiple baselines from a unified perspective in
video understanding and compare them with D UAL PATH.
Experimental results on four action recognition benchmarks
prove that pretrained image transformers with D UAL PATH
can be effectively generalized beyond the data domain.

87

DUALPATH ViT/B-16
85
84

AIM ViT/B-16
83
82

EVL ViT/B-16

ST-Adatper ViT/B-16

ViViT-L/16x2 FE

81

80
10

60

110

160

210

260

410

460

Number of Trainable Parameters (M)

Figure 1. Performance comparison on the Kinetics-400 [38]
dataset. We depict the action recognition performance (vertical
axis, %) with respect to the number of trainable parameters (horizontal axis). The size of circles indicates GFLOPs for inference.

sentations with scaled-up foundation models [34, 53, 63, 69,
77, 79] and large-scale web-collected image data (e.g. JFT3B [79], LAION-5B [58]). To capitalize on well-trained visual foundation models, finetuning entire parameters of the
pretrained models with task-specific objectives has been the
most popular transfer technique. However, it requires highquality training data and plenty of computational resources
to update the whole parameters for each downstream task,
making overwhelming efforts for training. While partial
finetuning [28], which trains additional multilayer perceptron (MLP) layers to the top of the model, has also been
widely used for affordable training costs, unsatisfactory performance has been pointed out as a problem.
Most recently, parameter-efficient transfer learning
(PETL) methods [25, 26, 31, 32, 41, 61] have been proposed
as an alternative to finetuning in the natural language processing area to adapt the large-scale language model, such
as GPT series [8, 54, 55] and T5 [56], for each task. They
have successfully attained comparable or even surpassing
performance to full-tuning parameters by learning a small
number of extra trainable parameters only while keeping the
original parameters of the pretrained model frozen. Thanks
to their effectiveness and simplicity, they have been ex-

