This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PaletteNeRF: Palette-based Appearance Editing of Neural Radiance Fields
Zhengfei Kuang1 ,* Fujun Luan2 , Sai Bi2 , Zhixin Shu2 , Gordon Wetzstein1 , Kalyan Sunkavalli2
1
2
Stanford University
Adobe Research
{zhengfei,gordonwz}@stanford.edu

{fluan,sbi,zshu,sunkaval}@adobe.com

Illumination Editing

View #1
View #1

(a) Training Images

View #2

Style Transfer

View #2

(b) Palette-Based Bases

(c) Recoloring

(d) Applications

Figure 1. We propose PaletteNeRF, a novel method for efficient appearance editing of neural radiance fields (NeRF). Taking (a) multi-view
photos as training input, our approach reconstructs a NeRF and decomposes its appearance into a set of (b) 3D palette-based color bases.
This enables (c) intuitive and photorealistic recoloring of the scene with 3D consistency across arbitrary views. Further, we show that (d)
our method supports various palette-based editing applications such as illumination modification and 3D photorealistic style transfer.

Abstract
Recent advances in neural radiance fields have enabled
the high-fidelity 3D reconstruction of complex scenes for
novel view synthesis. However, it remains underexplored
how the appearance of such representations can be efficiently edited while maintaining photorealism. In this work,
we present PaletteNeRF, a novel method for photorealistic appearance editing of neural radiance fields (NeRF)
based on 3D color decomposition. Our method decomposes the appearance of each 3D point into a linear combination of palette-based bases (i.e., 3D segmentations defined by a group of NeRF-type functions) that are shared
across the scene. While our palette-based bases are viewindependent, we also predict a view-dependent function to
capture the color residual (e.g., specular shading). During training, we jointly optimize the basis functions and
the color palettes, and we also introduce novel regularizers to encourage the spatial coherence of the decomposi* Parts of this work were done when Zhengfei Kuang was an intern at
Adobe Research.

tion. Our method allows users to efficiently edit the appearance of the 3D scene by modifying the color palettes. We
also extend our framework with compressed semantic features for semantic-aware appearance editing. We demonstrate that our technique is superior to baseline methods
both quantitatively and qualitatively for appearance editing of complex real-world scenes. Our project page is
https://palettenerf.github.io.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] and its variants
[8, 25, 27, 39] have received increasing attention in recent
years for their ability to robustly reconstruct real-world 3D
scenes from 2D images and enable high-quality, photorealistic novel view synthesis. However, such volumetric representations are challenging to edit due to the fact that scene
appearance is implicitly encoded in neural features and network weights that do not support local manipulation or intuitive modification.
Multiple approaches have been proposed to support edit-

20691

