This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniObject3D: Large-Vocabulary 3D Object Dataset for
Realistic Perception, Reconstruction and Generation
Tong Wu1,2 , Jiarui Zhang1,3 , Xiao Fu1 , Yuxin Wang1,4 , Jiawei Ren5 , Liang Pan5 ,
Wayne Wu1 , Lei Yang1,3 , Jiaqi Wang1 , Chen Qian1 , Dahua Lin1,2B , Ziwei Liu5B
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3 SenseTime Research,
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Textured meshes

Point clouds

Rendered images

Real-captured videos

Perception

Novel View Synthesis

Surface Reconstruction

Generation

Figure 1. OmniObject3D is a large vocabulary 3D object dataset with massive high-quality real-scanned 3D objects and rich
annotations. It supports various research topics, e.g., perception, novel view synthesis, neural surface reconstruction, and 3D generation.

Abstract
Recent advances in modeling 3D objects mostly rely
on synthetic datasets due to the lack of large-scale realscanned 3D databases. To facilitate the development of
3D perception, reconstruction, and generation in the real
world, we propose OmniObject3D, a large vocabulary 3D
object dataset with massive high-quality real-scanned 3D
objects. OmniObject3D has several appealing properties:
1) Large Vocabulary: It comprises 6,000 scanned objects
in 190 daily categories, sharing common classes with popular 2D datasets (e.g., ImageNet and LVIS), benefiting the
pursuit of generalizable 3D representations. 2) Rich Annotations: Each 3D object is captured with both 2D and
B Corresponding authors. https://omniobject3d.github.io/

3D sensors, providing textured meshes, point clouds, multiview rendered images, and multiple real-captured videos. 3)
Realistic Scans: The professional scanners support highquality object scans with precise shapes and realistic appearances. With the vast exploration space offered by OmniObject3D, we carefully set up four evaluation tracks: a)
robust 3D perception, b) novel-view synthesis, c) neural surface reconstruction, and d) 3D object generation. Extensive
studies are performed on these four benchmarks, revealing
new observations, challenges, and opportunities for future
research in realistic 3D vision.

1. Introduction
Sensing, understanding, and synthesizing realistic 3D
objects is a long-standing problem in computer vision, with

803

