This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bidirectional Copy-Paste for Semi-Supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Yunhao Bai1
1

Duowen Chen1

Qingli Li1

Wei Shen2

Yan Wang1 *

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{yhbai@stu., duowen chen@stu., qlli@cs., ywang@cee.}ecnu.edu.cn, wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In semi-supervised medical image segmentation, there
exist empirical mismatch problems between labeled and unlabeled data distribution. The knowledge learned from the
labeled data may be largely discarded if treating labeled
and unlabeled data separately or in an inconsistent manner. We propose a straightforward method for alleviating
the problem − copy-pasting labeled and unlabeled data
bidirectionally, in a simple Mean Teacher architecture. The
method encourages unlabeled data to learn comprehensive
common semantics from the labeled data in both inward and
outward directions. More importantly, the consistent learning procedure for labeled and unlabeled data can largely
reduce the empirical distribution gap. In detail, we copypaste a random crop from a labeled image (foreground)
onto an unlabeled image (background) and an unlabeled
image (foreground) onto a labeled image (background), respectively. The two mixed images are fed into a Student
network and supervised by the mixed supervisory signals
of pseudo-labels and ground-truth. We reveal that the simple mechanism of copy-pasting bidirectionally between labeled and unlabeled data is good enough and the experiments show solid gains (e.g., over 21% Dice improvement
on ACDC dataset with 5% labeled data) compared with
other state-of-the-arts on various semi-supervised medical
image segmentation datasets. Code is avaiable at https:
//github.com/DeepMed-Lab-ECNU/BCP.

1. Introduction
Segmenting internal structures from medical images
such as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is essential for many clinical applications
[34]. Various techniques based on supervised learning for
medical image segmentation have been proposed [4,13,45],
which usually requires a large amount of labeled data. But,
due to the tedious and expensive manual contouring process
when labeling medical images, semi-supervised segmenta* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the mismatch problem under semisupervised leaning setting. Assume the training set is drawn from
a latent distribution in (a). But the empirical distributions of small
amount of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data are
(b) and (c), respectively. It’s hard to use few labeled data to construct the precise distribution of the whole dataset. (d) By using
our BCP, the empirical distributions of labeled and unlabeled features are aligned. (e) But other methods such as SSNet [35] or
cross unlabeled data copy-paste cannot address the empirical distribution mismatch issue. All distributions are kernel density estimations of voxels belonging to myocardium class in ACDC [2].

tion attracts more attention in recent years, and has become
ubiquitous in the field of medical image analysis.
Generally speaking, in semi-supervised medical image
segmentation, the labeled and unlabeled data are drawn
from the same distribution, (Fig. 1 (a)). But in real-world
scenario, it’s hard to estimate the precise distribution from
labeled data because they are few in number. Thus, there
always exists empirical distribution mismatch between a
large amount of unlabeled and a very small amount of labeled data [30] (Fig. 1(b) and (c)). Semi-supervised segmentation methods always attempt to train labeled and unlabeled data symmetrically, in a consistent manner. E.g.,
self-training [1,48] generates pseudo-labels to supervise unlabeled data in a pseudo-supervised manner. Mean Teacher
based methods [40] adopt consistency loss to “supervise”
unlabeled data with strong augmentations, in analogy with
supervising labeled data with ground-truth. DTC [16]
proposed a dual-task-consistency framework, applicable to

11514

