This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarially Robust Neural Architecture Search for Graph Neural Networks
Beini Xie1 *

Ziwei Zhang1
Heng Chang1 *
Zhiqiang Zhang2
Rex Ying3
1
2
Tsinghua University
Ant Group

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) obtain tremendous success in modeling relational data. Still, they are prone to
adversarial attacks, which are massive threats to applying
GNNs to risk-sensitive domains. Existing defensive methods neither guarantee performance facing new data/tasks
or adversarial attacks nor provide insights to understand
GNN robustness from an architectural perspective. Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) has the potential to solve this
problem by automating GNN architecture designs. Nevertheless, current graph NAS approaches lack robust design
and are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. To tackle these
challenges, we propose a novel Robust Neural Architecture
search framework for GNNs (G-RNA). Specifically, we design a robust search space for the message-passing mechanism by adding graph structure mask operations into the
search space, which comprises various defensive operation
candidates and allows us to search for defensive GNNs. Furthermore, we define a robustness metric to guide the search
procedure, which helps to filter robust architectures. In this
way, G-RNA helps understand GNN robustness from an architectural perspective and effectively searches for optimal
adversarial robust GNNs. Extensive experimental results on
benchmark datasets show that G-RNA significantly outperforms manually designed robust GNNs and vanilla graph
NAS baselines by 12.1% to 23.4% under adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks are well-known for modeling
relational data and are applied to various downstream realworld applications like recommender systems [37], knowledge graph completion [25], traffic forecasting [6], drug
production [45], etc. Meanwhile, like many other deep neural networks, GNNs are notorious for their vulnerability
under adversarial attacks [33], especially in risk-sensitive
domains, such as finance and healthcare. Since GNNs model
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Xin Wang1†
Daixin Wang2
Wenwu Zhu1†
3
Yale University

node representations by aggregating the neighborhood information, an attacker could perform attacks by perturbing
node features and manipulating relations among nodes [55].
For example, in the user-user interaction graph, a fraudster
may deliberately interact with other important/fake users
to mislead the recommender system or fool credit scoring
models [36].
A series of defense methods on graph data have
been developed to reduce the harm of adversarial attacks.
Preprocessing-based approaches like GCN-SVD [8] and
GCN-Jaccard [38] conduct structure cleaning before training
GNNs, while attention-based models like RGCN [51] and
GNN-Guard [46] learn to focus less on potential perturbed
edges. However, these methods rely on prior knowledge of
the attacker. For example, GCN-SVD leverages the highrank tendency of graph structure after Nettack [53], and
GCN-Jaccard depends on the homophily assumption on the
graph structure. As a result, current approaches may fail to
adapt to scenarios when encountering new data and tasks
or when new attack methods are proposed. Additionally,
previous methods largely neglect the role of GNN architectures in defending against adversarial attacks, lacking an
architectural perspective in understanding GNN robustness.
In order to reduce human efforts in neural architecture
designs, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has become increasingly popular in both the research field and industry.
Though NAS has the potential of automating robust GNN
designs, existing graph NAS methods [1, 10, 24, 49, 50] are
inevitably susceptible to adversarial attacks since they do
not consider adversarial settings and lack robustness designs [48]. Therefore, how to adopt graph NAS to search
for optimal robust GNNs in various environments, and in
the meantime, fill the gap of understanding GNN robustness
from an architectural perspective, remains a huge challenge.
To address the aforementioned problems and to understand GNN robustness from an architectural perspective, we
propose a novel Robust Neural Architecture search framework for Graph neural networks (G-RNA), which is the first
attempt to exploit powerful graph neural architecture search
in robust GNNs, to our best knowledge. Specifically, we
first design a novel, expressive, and robust search space with

8143

