This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstructPix2Pix: Learning to Follow Image Editing Instructions
Tim Brooks*

Aleksander Holynski*

Alexei A. Efros

University of California, Berkeley
“Swap sunflowers with roses”

“Add fireworks to the sky”

“Replace the fruits with cake”

“What would it look like if it were snowing?”

“Turn it into a still from a western”

“Make his jacket out of leather”

Figure 1. Given an image and an instruction for how to edit that image, our model performs the appropriate edit. Our model does not
require full descriptions for the input or output image, and edits images in the forward pass without per-example inversion or fine-tuning.

Abstract
We propose a method for editing images from human instructions: given an input image and a written instruction
that tells the model what to do, our model follows these instructions to edit the image. To obtain training data for
this problem, we combine the knowledge of two large pretrained models—a language model (GPT-3) and a text-toimage model (Stable Diffusion)—to generate a large dataset
of image editing examples. Our conditional diffusion model,
InstructPix2Pix, is trained on our generated data, and generalizes to real images and user-written instructions at inference time. Since it performs edits in the forward pass and
does not require per-example fine-tuning or inversion, our
model edits images quickly, in a matter of seconds. We show
compelling editing results for a diverse collection of input
images and written instructions.
*Denotes equal contribution
More results on our project page: timothybrooks.com/instruct-pix2pix

1. Introduction
We present a method for teaching a generative model to
follow human-written instructions for image editing. Since
training data for this task is difficult to acquire at scale,
we propose an approach for generating a paired dataset
that combines multiple large models pretrained on different
modalities: a large language model (GPT-3 [7]) and a textto-image model (Stable Diffusion [51]). These two models
capture complementary knowledge about language and images that can be combined to create paired training data for
a task spanning both modalities.
Using our generated paired data, we train a conditional
diffusion model that, given an input image and a text instruction for how to edit it, generates the edited image. Our
model directly performs the image edit in the forward pass,
and does not require any additional example images, full descriptions of the input/output images, or per-example finetuning. Despite being trained entirely on synthetic examples (i.e., both generated written instructions and generated

18392

