This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Residual Degradation Learning Unfolding Framework with Mixing Priors across
Spectral and Spatial for Compressive Spectral Imaging
Yubo Dong

Dahua Gao ∗ Tian Qiu Yuyan Li Minxi Yang Guangming Shi
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University

{ybdong, tianqiu, liyuyan, mxyang}@stu.xidian.edu.cn

{dhgao, gmshi}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
To acquire a snapshot spectral image, coded aperture
snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) is proposed. A core
problem of the CASSI system is to recover the reliable and
fine underlying 3D spectral cube from the 2D measurement. By alternately solving a data subproblem and a prior
subproblem, deep unfolding methods achieve good performance. However, in the data subproblem, the used sensing
matrix is ill-suited for the real degradation process due to
the device errors caused by phase aberration, distortion; in
the prior subproblem, it is important to design a suitable
model to jointly exploit both spatial and spectral priors.
In this paper, we propose a Residual Degradation Learning Unfolding Framework (RDLUF), which bridges the gap
between the sensing matrix and the degradation process.
Moreover, a MixS 2 Transformer is designed via mixing priors across spectral and spatial to strengthen the spectralspatial representation capability. Finally, plugging the
MixS 2 Transformer into the RDLUF leads to an end-to-end
trainable neural network RDLUF-MixS 2 . Experimental results establish the superior performance of the proposed
method over existing ones. Code is available: https:
//github.com/ShawnDong98/RDLUF_MixS2

1. Introduction
With the application of coded aperture snapshot spectral
imaging (CASSI) [1, 22, 30, 34], it has become feasible to
acquire a spectral image using a coded aperture and dispersive elements to modulate the spectral scene. By capturing
a multiplexed 2D projection of the 3D data cube, CASSI
technique provides an efficient approach for acquiring spectral data. Nonetheless, the reconstruction of an accurate
and detailed 3D hyperspectral image (HSI) cube from the
2D measurements poses a fundamental challenge for the
CASSI system.
Based on CASSI, various reconstruction techniques have
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0706604), the Natural Science
Foundation (NSF) of China (Nos. 61976169, 62293483).
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of PSNR-Parameters with previous HSI reconstruction methods. The PSNR (in dB) is plotted on the vertical
axis, while memory cost parameters are represented on the horizontal axis. Our proposed Residual Degradation Learning Unfolding Framework with Mixing priors across Spatial and Spectral (RDLUF-MixS 2 ) Transformers outperforms previous methods while requiring fewer parameters.

been developed to reconstruct the 3D HSI cube from 2D
measurements. These methods range from model-based
techniques [15, 17, 18, 30, 33, 35, 38, 43], to end-to-end approaches [5, 13, 16, 22, 23], and deep unfolding methods
[14, 31, 32]. Among them, deep unfolding methods have
demonstrated superior performance by transferring conventional iterative optimization algorithms into a series of deep
neural network (DNN) blocks. Typically, the deep unfolding methods tackle a data subproblem and a prior subproblem iteratively.
The data subproblem is highly related to the degradation process. The ways to acquire the degradation matrix
in the data subproblem can be classified into two types, the
first directly uses the sensing matrix as the degradation matrix [19, 21, 32] and the other learns the degradation matrix
using a neural network [14,24,44]. However, since the sensing matrix is obtained from the equidistant lasers of different wavelengths on the sensor, it cannot reflect the device
errors caused by phase aberration, distortion and alignment
of the continuous spectrum. Thus, the earlier kind does not
take into account the gap between the sensing matrix and
1
22262

