This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probing neural representations of scene perception in a hippocampally
dependent task using artificial neural networks
Markus Frey1,2
1

Christian F. Doeller1,2

Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience, NTNU, Norway
3

2

Caswell Barry3

Max-Planck-Insitute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Germany

Cell & Developmental Biology, UCL, United Kingdom

Abstract
Deep artificial neural networks (DNNs) trained through
backpropagation provide effective models of the mammalian visual system, accurately capturing the hierarchy of
neural responses through primary visual cortex to inferior
temporal cortex (IT) [41, 43]. However, the ability of these
networks to explain representations in higher cortical areas
is relatively lacking and considerably less well researched.
For example, DNNs have been less successful as a model
of the egocentric to allocentric transformation embodied by
circuits in retrosplenial and posterior parietal cortex. We
describe a novel scene perception benchmark inspired by a
hippocampal dependent task, designed to probe the ability
of DNNs to transform scenes viewed from different egocentric perspectives. Using a network architecture inspired by
the connectivity between temporal lobe structures and the
hippocampus, we demonstrate that DNNs trained using a
triplet loss can learn this task. Moreover, by enforcing a
factorized latent space, we can split information propagation into ”what” and ”where” pathways, which we use to
reconstruct the input. This allows us to beat the state-ofthe-art for unsupervised object segmentation on the CATER
and MOVi-A,B,C benchmarks.

of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [3,34]. However, experimental
knowledge regarding the interplay across multiple interacting brain regions is limited and new computational models
are needed to better explain the single-cell responses across
the whole transformation circuit.
Here, we developed a scene recognition model to better
understand the intrinsic computations governing the transformation from egocentric to allocentric reference frames,
which controls successful view synthesis in humans and
other animals. For this, we developed a novel hippocampally dependent task, inspired by the 4-MountainsTest [18], which is used in clinics to predict early-onset
Alzheimer’s disease [40]. We tested this task by creating
a biologically realistic model inspired by recent work in
scene perception, in which scenes need to be re-imagined
from several different viewpoints.
The main contributions of our paper are the following:
• We introduce and open-source the allocentric scene
perception (ASP) benchmark for training view synthesis models based on a hippocampally dependent task
which is frequently used to predict AD.
• We show that a biologically realistic neural network
model trained using a triplet loss can accurately distinguish between hundreds of scenes across many different viewpoints and that it can disentangle object information from location information when using a factorized latent space.

1. Introduction
Recently, it has been shown that neural networks trained
with large datasets can produce coherent scene understanding and are capable of synthesizing novel views [12, 21].
These models are trained on egocentric (self-centred) sensory input and can construct allocentric (world-centred) responses. In animals, this transformation is governed by
structures along the hierarchy from the visual cortex to the
hippocampal formation, an important model system related
to navigation and memory [20, 30]. Notably, the hippocampus is a necessary component of the network supporting
memory and perception of places and events and is one of
the first brain regions compromised during the progression

• Lastly, we show that by using a reconstruction loss
combined with a pixel-wise decoder we can perform
unsupervised object segmentation, outperforming the
state-of-the-art models on the CATER, MOVi-A,B,C
benchmarks.

2. Related work
2.1. Related work in neuroscience
The study of scene perception in neuroscience was
first systematically explored in behavioural experiments in

2113

