This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Architecture Search with Random Features
Xuanyang Zhang*1 Yonggang Li*2 Xiangyu Zhang1 Yongtao Wang2 Jian Sun1
1
MEGVII Technology, 2 Peking University
xuanyang91.zhang@gmail.com {zhangxiangyu, sunjian}@megvii.com
{liyonggang, wangyongtao}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Differentiable architecture search (DARTS) has significantly promoted the development of NAS techniques because of its high search efficiency and effectiveness but suffers from performance collapse. In this paper, we make
efforts to alleviate the performance collapse problem for
DARTS from two aspects. First, we investigate the expressive power of the supernet in DARTS and then derive a
new setup of DARTS paradigm with only training BatchNorm. Second, we theoretically find that random features
dilute the auxiliary connection role of skip-connection in
supernet optimization and enable search algorithm focus on
fairer operation selection, thereby solving the performance
collapse problem. We instantiate DARTS and PC-DARTS
with random features to build an improved version for each
named RF-DARTS and RF-PCDARTS respectively. Experimental results show that RF-DARTS obtains 94.36% test accuracy on CIFAR-10 (which is the nearest optimal result in
NAS-Bench-201), and achieves the newest state-of-the-art
top-1 test error of 24.0% on ImageNet when transferring
from CIFAR-10. Moreover, RF-DARTS performs robustly
across three datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and SVHN)
and four search spaces (S1-S4). Besides, RF-PCDARTS
achieves even better results on ImageNet, that is, 23.9%
top-1 and 7.1% top-5 test error, surpassing representative
methods like single-path, training-free, and partial-channel
paradigms directly searched on ImageNet.

improve DARTS by introducing additional modules, such
as Gumbel-softmax [13], early stop criterion [23], auxiliary
skip-connection [10], etc. We have witnessed tremendous
improvements in the image recognition task, but it is getting
farther away from exploring how DARTS works. Newly, in
this work, we intend to demystify DARTS by disassembling
key modules rather than make it more complex.
We overview the vanilla DARTS paradigm, and summary three key modules, namely dataset, evaluation metric, and supernet as follows:
• Dataset. DARTS [27] searches on proxy dataset
and then transfers to target dataset due to huge
requirements for GPU memory. PC-DARTS [36]
proves that proxy datasets inhibit the effectiveness of
DARTS and directly searching on target dataset obtains more promising architectures. UnNAS [25] and
RLNAS [46] ablate the role of labels in DARTS, and
further conclude that ground truth labels are not necessary for DARTS.
• Evaluation metric. DARTS [27] introduces architecture parameters to reflect the strengths of the candidate
operations. PT-DARTS [32] suspects the effectiveness
of architecture parameters and shows that the magnitude of architecture parameters does not necessarily
indicate how much the operation contributes to the supernet’s performance. FreeNAS [45] and TE-NAS [7]
further put forward training-free evaluation metrics to
predict the performance of candidate architectures.

1. Introduction

• Supernet. DARTS encodes all candidate architectures
in search space into the supernet. The search cell of
supernet will change as the search space changes. RDARTS [41] proposes four challenging search spaces
S1-S4 where DARTS obtains inferior performance
than the Random-search baseline. R-DARTS attributes
the failure of vanilla DARTS to the dominant skipconnections. Thus R-DARTS concludes that the topology of supernet has great influence on the efficacy
of DARTS. P-DARTS [9] finds that the depth gap

Differentiable architecture search (DARTS) [27] has
demonstrated both higher search efficiency and better
search efficacy than early pioneering neural architecture
search (NAS) [1,50,51] attempts in the image classification
task. In the past few years, many following works further
* Equal contributions.This work is done during Yonggang Li’s internship at MEGVII Technology. This work is supported by Science
and Technology Innovation 2030-New Generation Artificial Intelligence
(2020AAA0104401).

16060

