This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Locally Editable Virtual Humans
Hsuan-I Ho
Lixin Xue
Jie Song
Otmar Hilliges
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel hybrid representation and end-to-end trainable network architecture to model
fully editable and customizable neural avatars. At the core
of our work lies a representation that combines the modeling power of neural fields with the ease of use and inherent 3D consistency of skinned meshes. To this end, we
construct a trainable feature codebook to store local geometry and texture features on the vertices of a deformable
body model, thus exploiting its consistent topology under
articulation. This representation is then employed in a
generative auto-decoder architecture that admits fitting to
unseen scans and sampling of realistic avatars with varied appearances and geometries. Furthermore, our representation allows local editing by swapping local features
between 3D assets. To verify our method for avatar creation and editing, we contribute a new high-quality dataset,
dubbed CustomHumans, for training and evaluation. Our
experiments quantitatively and qualitatively show that our
method generates diverse detailed avatars and achieves better model fitting performance compared to state-of-the-art
methods. Our code and dataset are available at https:
//ait.ethz.ch/custom-humans.

1. Introduction
3D Avatars are an important aspect of many emerging
applications such as 3D games or the Metaverse. Allowing
for easy personalization of such avatars, holds the promise
of increased user engagement. Traditionally, editing 3D assets requires knowledge of computer graphics tools and relies on standardized data formats to represent shapes and
appearances. While methods for reconstruction or generative modeling of learned avatars achieve impressive results,
it is unknown how such neural avatars can be edited and
customized. Thus, the goal of our work is to contribute a
simple, yet powerful data-driven method for avatar creation
and customization (Fig. 1): our method enables (a) the ability to transfer partial geometric and appearance details between 3D assets, and (b) the ability to author details via
2D-3D transfer. The resulting avatars (c) retain consistent
local details when posed.

Input Avatar

Unseen Scans

Feature Editing

Texture Drawing

(a)

(b)

Reposing

(c)

Figure 1. Creating locally editable avatars: Given an input
avatar, (a) the avatar can be edited by transferring clothing geometry and color details from existing, yet unseen 3D assets. (b) Users
can customize clothing details such as logos and letters via drawing on 2D images. (c) The avatars retain local detail consistently
under pose changes.

Existing methods do not allow for such capabilities.
While 3D generative models of articulated human bodies [5, 21, 25, 42, 75] leverage differentiable neural rendering to learn from images, they cannot control local details due to highly entangled color and geometry in the
2D supervision signal. Generative models trained on 3D
data [9, 13, 36, 44, 45] can produce geometric details for
surfaces and clothing. However, the diversity of generated
samples is low due to the lack of high-quality 3D human
scans and not all methods model appearance.
At the core of the issue lies the question of representation: graphics tools use meshes, UV, and texture maps
which provide consistent topologies under deformation.
However, human avatar methods that are built on meshbased representations and linear blend skinning (LBS) are
limited in their representational power with respect to challenging geometry (e.g., puffy garments) and flexible topologies (e.g., jackets), even with adaptations of additional displacement parameters [36] and mesh subdivision [66].

21024

