This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MDQE: Mining Discriminative Query Embeddings to Segment
Occluded Instances on Challenging Videos
Minghan Li
Shuai Li
Wangmeng Xiang
Lei Zhang*
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
liminghan0330@gmail.com, {csshuaili, cswxiang, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
While impressive progress has been achieved, video instance segmentation (VIS) methods with per-clip input often fail on challenging videos with occluded objects and
crowded scenes. This is mainly because instance queries
in these methods cannot encode well the discriminative embeddings of instances, making the query-based segmenter
difficult to distinguish those ‘hard’ instances. To address
these issues, we propose to mine discriminative query embeddings (MDQE) to segment occluded instances on challenging videos. First, we initialize the positional embeddings and content features of object queries by considering
their spatial contextual information and the inter-frame object motion. Second, we propose an inter-instance mask
repulsion loss to distance each instance from its nearby
non-target instances. The proposed MDQE is the first VIS
method with per-clip input that achieves state-of-the-art results on challenging videos and competitive performance on
simple videos. In specific, MDQE with ResNet50 achieves
33.0% and 44.5% mask AP on OVIS and YouTube-VIS 2021,
respectively. Code of MDQE can be found at https:
//github.com/MinghanLi/MDQE_CVPR2023.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) [51] aims to obtain
pixel-level segmentation masks for instances of different
classes over the entire video. The current VIS methods
can be roughly divided into two paradigms: per-frame input based methods [3, 18, 20, 26, 47, 51, 52] and per-clip
input based methods [1, 19, 27, 45, 46, 48, 53]. The former paradigm first partitions the whole video into individual
frames to segment objects frame by frame, and then associate the predicted instance masks across frames, while the
latter takes per-clip spatio-temporal features as input to predict multi-frame instance masks with the help of embedding
learning [1], graph neural networks [41] and transformer
* Corresponding author.

networks [17, 19, 45, 46].
The recently proposed per-clip VIS methods [19, 45,
46, 48] have set new records on the YouTube-VIS datasets
[51], achieving significant performance improvement over
the per-frame VIS methods [3, 5, 12, 14, 26, 52, 54]. SeqFormer [46] and VITA [17] locate an instance in each frame
and aggregate temporal information to learn powerful representations of video-level instances via a naive weighted
manner and a video-level decoder, respectively. However,
on the challenging OVIS dataset [37], which includes occluded or similar-looking instances in crowded scenes, the
per-clip VIS methods lag behind the per-frame ones. Actually, the recently developed per-frame method IDOL [47]
records state-of-the-art performance on OVIS by introducing contrastive learning [10, 35, 44] to learn inter-frame instance embeddings. We argue that the per-clip VIS methods should be able to exploit richer spatial-temporal features and achieve better performance than their per-frame
counterparts. However, there are two main issues that limit
the existing per-clip methods to achieve this goal.
First, existing query-based VIS methods adopt zero or
random input as the positional embeddings and content features of object queries in decoder layers, which cannot encode spatio-temporal prior of objects, resulting in poor results on challenging videos. Second, during training, the
existing mask prediction loss mainly forces each query to
match the pixels of its target instance [21,42] and mismatch
the pixels of other instances and the background. No further inter-instance clue has been exploited to teach the segmenter to distinguish mutually occluded instances.
To address the above issues, we propose to mine discriminative query embeddings (MDQE) to better segment
hard instances on challenging videos for per-clip VIS methods. First, we propose to improve the initialization of object queries to specify discriminative spatial-temporal priors. We divide the activation map of each frame into several
patches via a grid and select the peak point in each patch as
the initial positions of frame-level queries, and then associate them across frames by embedding similarity to ensure
that frame-level queries in the same grid of the video clip

10524

