This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProxyFormer: Proxy Alignment Assisted Point Cloud Completion with Missing
Part Sensitive Transformer
Shanshan Li, Pan Gao*, Xiaoyang Tan, Mingqiang Wei
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
{markli, pan.gao, x.tan, mqwei}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Problems such as equipment defects or limited viewpoints will lead the captured point clouds to be incomplete.
Therefore, recovering the complete point clouds from the
partial ones plays an vital role in many practical tasks, and
one of the keys lies in the prediction of the missing part. In
this paper, we propose a novel point cloud completion approach namely ProxyFormer that divides point clouds into
existing (input) and missing (to be predicted) parts and each
part communicates information through its proxies. Specifically, we fuse information into point proxy via feature and
position extractor, and generate features for missing point
proxies from the features of existing point proxies. Then,
in order to better perceive the position of missing points,
we design a missing part sensitive transformer, which converts random normal distribution into reasonable position
information, and uses proxy alignment to refine the missing
proxies. It makes the predicted point proxies more sensitive
to the features and positions of the missing part, and thus
makes these proxies more suitable for subsequent coarse-tofine processes. Experimental results show that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art completion networks on several benchmark datasets and has the fastest inference speed.

1. Introduction
3D data is used in many different fields, including
autonomous driving, robotics, remote sensing, and more
[5, 12, 14, 17, 43]. Point cloud has a very uniform structure, which avoids the irregularity and complexity of composition. However, in practical applications, due to the occlusion of objects, the difference in the reflectivity of the
target surface material, and the limitation of the resolution
and viewing angle of the visual sensor, the collected point
cloud data is often incomplete. The resultant missing geometric and semantic information will affect the subsequent
3D tasks [26]. Therefore, how to use a limited amount of in* Corresponding author.

Input

GT

GRNet

ProxyFormer

PoinTr

Figure 1. Visual comparison of point cloud completion results.
Compared with GRNet [38] and PoinTr [41]. ProxyFormer completely retains the partial input (blue bounding box) and restores
the missing part with details (purple bounding box).

complete data to complete point cloud and restore the original shape has become a hot research topic, and is of great
significance to downstream tasks [3, 4, 10, 19, 34, 39].
With the great success of PointNet [23] and PointNet++
[24], direct processing of 3D coordinates has become a
mainstream method for point cloud analysis. In recent
years, there have been many point cloud completion methods [1, 11, 37, 38, 41, 42, 48], and the emergence of these
networks has also greatly promoted the development of this
area. Many methods [1, 38, 42] adopt the common encoderdecoder structure, which usually get global feature from the
incomplete input by pooling operation and map this feature
back to the point space to obtain a complete one. This kind
of feature can predict the approximate shape of the complete
point cloud. However, there are two drawbacks: (1) The
global feature is extracted from partial input and thus lack
the ability to represent the details of the missing part; (2)
These methods discard the original incomplete point cloud
and regenerate the complete shape after extracting features,
which will cause the shape of the original part to deform

9466

