This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RILS: Masked Visual Reconstruction in Language Semantic Space
Shusheng Yang1, ,* Yixiao Ge2,† , Kun Yi2 , Dian Li3 , Ying Shan2 , Xiaohu Qie4 , Xinggang Wang1,†
1

2

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
3
ARC Lab, 4 Tencent PCG
Foundation Technology Center, 4 Tencent PCG

{shushengyang, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn {yixiaoge, kunyi, goodli, yingsshan, tigerqie}@tencent.com

Abstract

M

V-Enc

Both masked image modeling (MIM) and natural language supervision have facilitated the progress of transferable visual pre-training. In this work, we seek the synergy between two paradigms and study the emerging properties when MIM meets natural language supervision. To
this end, we present a novel masked visual Reconstruction
In Language semantic Space (RILS) pre-training framework, in which sentence representations, encoded by the text
encoder, serve as prototypes to transform the vision-only
signals into patch-sentence probabilities as semantically
meaningful MIM reconstruction targets. The vision models
can therefore capture useful components with structured information by predicting proper semantic of masked tokens.
Better visual representations could, in turn, improve the text
encoder via the image-text alignment objective, which is
essential for the effective MIM target transformation. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method
not only enjoys the best of previous MIM and CLIP but
also achieves further improvements on various tasks due to
their mutual benefits. RILS exhibits advanced transferability on downstream classification, detection, and segmentation, especially for low-shot regimes. Code is available at
https://github.com/hustvl/RILS.

1. Introduction
Learning transferable representation lies a crucial task in
deep learning. Over the past few years, natural language
processing (NLP) has achieved great success in this line
of research [18, 45, 60]. To explore similar trajectories in
the vision domain, researchers tend to draw upon the successes of NLP and have made tremendous progress: (i)
Inspired by the advanced model architecture [60] as well
as self-supervised learning paradigm [18] in NLP, vision
Transformers (ViT) [21, 42] and masked image modeling
* This work was done while S. Yang was an intern at ARC Lab, Tencent
PCG. † X. Wang and Y. Ge are the corresponding authors.

V-Dec

M
M

X

prediction

M

Image

Recon
X

V-Enc

//
target

Contra

Texts

L-Enc

Figure 1. Overview of our RILS. Recon and Contra represent
masked reconstruction loss and image-text contrastive loss. During pre-training, RILS learns to perform masked image modeling
and image-text contrastive simultaneously. Masked predictions
and corresponding targets are transformed to probabilistic distributions in language space by leveraging text features as semanticrich prototypes. Under such a scheme, both objective are unified
and achieve mutual benefits from each other. Vision encoder obtains the ability to capture meaningful and fine-grained context information, sparking decent transfer capacity.

(MIM) [3, 28] open a new era of self-supervised visual
representation learning, and show unprecedented transferability on various tasks, especially on fine-grained tasks
such as object detection [22, 39]. (ii) Inspired by the great
scalability brought by leveraging web-scale collections of
texts as training data in NLP [5, 48, 49, 72], CLIP [47] and
ALIGN [35] bring such a principle to vision and manifest
the immense potential of leveraging natural language supervision for scalable visual pre-training. Strong transferability
of pre-trained visual models on low-shot regimes ensues. It
also facilitates diverse applications by extracting contextualized image or text features [26, 50, 52].
The remarkable attainment achieved by these two research lines pushes us to ponder: Is it possible to unify both
masked image modeling and natural language supervision
to pursuit better visual pre-training? A straightforward way
towards this goal is to simply combine masked image modeling (MIM) with image-text contrastive learning (ITC) for
multi-task learning. Although the naı̈ve combination is feasible to inherit the above advantages, we find it remains un-

23304

