This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correlational Image Modeling for Self-Supervised Visual Pre-Training
Wei Li, Jiahao Xie, Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{wei.l, jiahao003, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Correlate
Augment

Compare

Mask

Predict

Cr

op

(a) MV-SSL

(b) MIM

(c) CIM

Figure 1. Schematic of pretext tasks in self-supervised visual pre-training. (a) Multi-View Self-Supervised Learning (MV-SSL) follows an
augment-and-compare paradigm. (b) Masked Image Modeling (MIM) conducts a mask-and-predict pretext task within a single view. (c)
Correlational Image Modeling (CIM) formulates a novel crop-and-correlate scheme.

Abstract
We introduce Correlational Image Modeling (CIM), a
novel and surprisingly effective approach to self-supervised
visual pre-training. Our CIM performs a simple pretext
task: we randomly crop image regions (exemplars) from
an input image (context) and predict correlation maps between the exemplars and the context. Three key designs
enable correlational image modeling as a nontrivial and
meaningful self-supervisory task. First, to generate useful
exemplar-context pairs, we consider cropping image regions
with various scales, shapes, rotations, and transformations.
Second, we employ a bootstrap learning framework that involves online and target encoders. During pre-training, the
former takes exemplars as inputs while the latter converts the
context. Third, we model the output correlation maps via a
simple cross-attention block, within which the context serves
as queries and the exemplars offer values and keys. We show
that CIM performs on par or better than the current state of
the art on self-supervised and transfer benchmarks. Code
is available at https://github.com/weivision/
Correlational-Image-Modeling.git.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in self-supervised visual pre-training
have shown great capability in harvesting meaningful
representations from hundreds of millions of—often eas-

ily accessible—unlabeled images. Among existing pretraining paradigms, Multi-View Self-Supervised Learning
(MV-SSL) [8–12, 21, 23] and Masked Image Modeling
(MIM) [2, 22, 54, 68] are two leading methods in the selfsupervised learning racetrack, thanks to their nontrivial and
meaningful self-supervisory pretext tasks.
MV-SSL follows an augment-and-compare paradigm
(Figure 1(a)) – randomly transforming an input image into
two augmented views and then comparing two different
views in the representation space. Such an instance-wise
discriminative task is rooted in view-invariant learning [43],
i.e., changing views of data does not affect the conveyed
information. On the contrary, following the success of
Masked Language Modeling (MLM) [16], MIM conducts
a mask-and-predict pretext task within a single view (Figure 1(b)) – removing a proportion of random image patches
and then learning to predict the missing information. This
simple patch-wise generative recipe enables Transformerbased deep architectures [17] to learn generalizable representations from unlabeled images.
Beyond augment-and-compare or mask-and-predict pretext tasks in MV-SSL and MIM, in this paper, we endeavor
to investigate another simple yet effective paradigm for selfsupervised visual representation learning. We take inspiration from visual tracking [70] in computer vision that defines
the task of estimating the motion or trajectory of a target
object (exemplar) in a sequence of scene images (contexts).
To cope with challenging factors such as scale variations,
deformations, and occlusions, one typical tracking pipeline
15105

