This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ImageNet-E: Benchmarking Neural Network Robustness via Attribute Editing
Xiaodan Li1 , Yuefeng Chen1⇤ , Yao Zhu2 , Shuhui Wang3⇤ , Rong Zhang1 , Hui Xue1
1
2
3
Alibaba Group
Zhejiang University
Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, China
{fiona.lxd, yuefeng.chenyf, stone.zhangr, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com
ILSVRC2012_val_00009393

ee zhuy@zju.edu.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn
ILSVRC2012_val_00005614

ILSVRC2012_val_00004577

Adversarial Examples

Background

Size

Position & Direction

ImageNet-C
ImageNet-E
Figure 1. Examples of the proposed ImageNet-E dataset. In contrast to adversarial examples or datasets like ImageNet-C [22] who add
perturbation or corruptions to original images, we edit the object attributes with controls of backgrounds, sizes, positions and directions.

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that higher accuracy on ImageNet usually leads to better robustness against different corruptions. Therefore, in this paper, instead of following the traditional research paradigm that investigates
new out-of-distribution corruptions or perturbations deep
models may encounter, we conduct model debugging in indistribution data to explore which object attributes a model
may be sensitive to. To achieve this goal, we create a toolkit
for object editing with controls of backgrounds, sizes, positions, and directions, and create a rigorous benchmark
named ImageNet-E(diting) for evaluating the image classifier robustness in terms of object attributes. With our
ImageNet-E, we evaluate the performance of current deep
learning models, including both convolutional neural networks and vision transformers. We find that most models
are quite sensitive to attribute changes. A small change
in the background can lead to an average of 9.23% drop
⇤ Corresponding author.
This research is supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Progrem of China under Grant No.2020AAA0140000.

on top-1 accuracy. We also evaluate some robust models
including both adversarially trained models and other robust trained models and find that some models show worse
robustness against attribute changes than vanilla models.
Based on these findings, we discover ways to enhance attribute robustness with preprocessing, architecture designs,
and training strategies. We hope this work can provide
some insights to the community and open up a new avenue for research in robust computer vision. The code
and dataset are available at https : / / github . com /
alibaba/easyrobust.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has triggered the rise of artificial intelligence and has become the workhorse of machine intelligence. Deep models have been widely applied in various fields such as autonomous driving [28], medical science [33], and finance [38]. With the spread of these techniques, the robustness and safety issues begin to be essential, especially after the finding that deep models can be
easily fooled by negligible noises [16]. As a result, more
researchers contribute to building datasets for benchmark-

20371

