This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Partial Correlation based Deep Visual Representation for Image
Classification
Saimunur Rahman1,2 , Piotr Koniusz* ,1,3 , Lei Wang2 , Luping Zhou4 , Peyman Moghadam1,5 , Changming Sun1
1
Data61rCSIRO, 2 University of Wollongong, 3 Australian National University,
4
University of Sydney, 5 Queensland University of Technology
name.surname@data61.csiro.au, leiw@uow.edu.au, luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning effective visual representation is a central issue
in computer vision. In the past two decades, describing images with local features and pooling them to a global representation has shown promising performance. As one of
the pooling methods, covariance matrix based pooling has
attracted much attention due to its exploitation of secondorder correlation information of features. A variety of tasks
* Corresponding author. Code: https://github.com/csiro-robotics/iSICE

dimensions

Visual representation based on covariance matrix has
demonstrates its efficacy for image classification by characterising the pairwise correlation of different channels in
convolutional feature maps. However, pairwise correlation will become misleading once there is another channel
correlating with both channels of interest, resulting in the
“confounding” effect. For this case, “partial correlation”
which removes the confounding effect shall be estimated instead. Nevertheless, reliably estimating partial correlation
requires to solve a symmetric positive definite matrix optimisation, known as sparse inverse covariance estimation
(SICE). How to incorporate this process into CNN remains
an open issue. In this work, we formulate SICE as a novel
structured layer of CNN. To ensure end-to-end trainability, we develop an iterative method to solve the above matrix optimisation during forward and backward propagation
steps. Our work obtains a partial correlation based deep visual representation and mitigates the small sample problem
often encountered by covariance matrix estimation in CNN.
Computationally, our model can be effectively trained with
GPU and works well with a large number of channels of
advanced CNNs. Experiments show the efficacy and superior classification performance of our deep visual representation compared to covariance matrix based counterparts.

confounding
variable

samples
precision
matrix

partial
correlation

Figure 1. Understanding the partial correlation (a 3D toy case).
Unlike the ordinary covariance (pairwise correlation of say x and
y corresponding to channels), partial correlation between variables
x and y removes the influence of the confounding variable z. Let
the number of samples n = 3 and channels d = 3. For the 3D case,
x and y are projected onto a plane perpendicular to z. Then ρ xy =
cos φ xy (and ρ xz and ρyz can be computed by analogy). Projected
“residuals” rx and ry are computed as indicated in the plot, w′x =
P
arg minw 3i=1 (xi − w⊤x zi ) where zi = [zi , 1]⊤ (and w′y is computed
by analogy). The green box: for d > 3, the computation of partial
correlation requires covariance inversion [7].

such as fine-grained image classification [27], image segmentation [16], generic image classification [24, 26, 34],
image set classification [44], action recognition [18], fewshot classification [50] and few-shot detection [52–54] have
benefited from the covariance matrix based representation.
A few pioneering works have integrated covariance matrix as a pooling method within convolutional neural networks (CNN) and investigated associated issues such as
matrix function backpropagation [16], matrix normalisation [23,28,38], compact matrix estimation [11,49] and kernel based extension [9]. The above works further improved
visual representations based on covariance matrix.
Despite the above progress, covariance matrix merely
measures the pairwise correlation (more accurately, covariance) of two variables without taking any other variables
into account. This can be easily verified because its (i, j)th entry solely depends on the i-th and j-th variables on a

6231

