This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Privacy-preserving Adversarial Facial Features
Zhibo Wang†,≀,∗ , He Wang† , Shuaifan Jin† , Wenwen Zhang‡ , Jiahui Hu† , Yan Wang‡
Peng Sun♯ , Wei Yuan♮ , Kaixin Liu♮ , Kui Ren†
†
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P. R. China
≀
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center ‡ Alibaba Group, P. R. China
♯
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, P. R. China
♮
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, P. R. China
{zhibowang, wanghe 71, shuaifanjin}@zju.edu.cn, karida.zww@alibaba-inc.com, jiahuihu@zju.edu.cn
wy84378@alibaba-inc.com, psun@hnu.edu.cn, {wyuan, kxliu777}@whu.edu.cn, kuiren@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Face recognition service providers protect face privacy
by extracting compact and discriminative facial features
(representations) from images, and storing the facial features for real-time recognition. However, such features can
still be exploited to recover the appearance of the original
face by building a reconstruction network. Although several privacy-preserving methods have been proposed, the
enhancement of face privacy protection is at the expense of
accuracy degradation. In this paper, we propose an adversarial features-based face privacy protection (AdvFace) approach to generate privacy-preserving adversarial features,
which can disrupt the mapping from adversarial features
to facial images to defend against reconstruction attacks.
To this end, we design a shadow model which simulates
the attackers’ behavior to capture the mapping function
from facial features to images and generate adversarial latent noise to disrupt the mapping. The adversarial features
rather than the original features are stored in the server’s
database to prevent leaked features from exposing facial
information. Moreover, the AdvFace requires no changes
to the face recognition network and can be implemented
as a privacy-enhancing plugin in deployed face recognition systems. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that AdvFace outperforms the state-of-the-art face privacypreserving methods in defending against reconstruction attacks while maintaining face recognition accuracy.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is a way of identifying an individual’s
identity using their face, which has been widely used in
many security-sensitive applications. Undoubtedly, biometric facial images are private and discriminative information
∗ Zhibo Wang is the corresponding author.

to each person that should be protected. Recently, much attention has been paid to privacy protection, such as the General Data Protection Regulation, making the preservation
of face privacy increasingly important. In order to avoid
direct leakage of facial images, mainstream face recognition systems usually adopt a client-server mode that extracts
features from facial images with a feature extractor on the
client side and stores the facial features rather than facial
images on the server side for future online identification.
As facial features suppress the visual information of faces,
face privacy protection can be realized to some extent.
However, recent studies showed that it is possible to
reconstruct original images from facial features, which is
called reconstruction attack, including optimization-based
[9, 29] and learning-based reconstruction attacks [7, 13, 23,
37]. The former gradually adjusts the pixels of the input
image to make the output of the feature extractor as close
as possible to a particular feature until the facial image (the
input image) corresponding to this feature is reconstructed
[9, 29]. The latter trains a feature-image decoder with a deconvolutional neural network (D-CNN) to reconstruct images directly from facial features [7, 13, 23, 37]. These studies imply that existing face recognition systems suffer from
severe privacy threats once the features in their database
were leaked. Therefore, it is essential to provide approaches
to prevent facial features from being reconstructed.
Several approaches have been proposed to protect face
privacy. [1, 10, 18, 22] transform the features into the
encrypted space and perform face recognition based on
the cryptographic primitives and security protocols, which
however bear prohibitive computation and communication
costs for face recognition systems. [3, 24] utilize differential privacy to protect face privacy by perturbing features
with noises, which however suffers from a significant accuracy drop in face recognition. [19, 34] proposed adversarial

8212

