This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HandsOff: Labeled Dataset Generation With
No Additional Human Annotations
Austin Xu*

Mariya I. Vasileva

Achal Dave†

Arjun Seshadri

Georgia Institute of Technology

Amazon AWS

Toyota Research Institute

Amazon Style

Abstract
Recent work leverages the expressive power of generative adversarial networks (GANs) to generate labeled synthetic datasets. These dataset generation methods often
require new annotations of synthetic images, which forces
practitioners to seek out annotators, curate a set of synthetic
images, and ensure the quality of generated labels. We introduce the HandsOff framework, a technique capable of
producing an unlimited number of synthetic images and corresponding labels after being trained on less than 50 preexisting labeled images. Our framework avoids the practical drawbacks of prior work by unifying the field of GAN inversion with dataset generation. We generate datasets with
rich pixel-wise labels in multiple challenging domains such
as faces, cars, full-body human poses, and urban driving
scenes. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
in semantic segmentation, keypoint detection, and depth estimation compared to prior dataset generation approaches
and transfer learning baselines. We additionally showcase
its ability to address broad challenges in model development which stem from fixed, hand-annotated datasets, such
as the long-tail problem in semantic segmentation. Project
page: austinxu87.github.io/handsoff.

1. Introduction
The strong empirical performance of machine learning
(ML) models has been enabled, in large part, by vast quantities of labeled data. The traditional machine learning
paradigm, where models are trained with large amounts of
human labeled data, is typically bottlenecked by the significant monetary, time, and infrastructure investments needed
to obtain said labels. This problem is further exacerbated
when the data itself is difficult to collect. For example, collecting images of urban driving scenes requires physical car
infrastructure, human drivers, and compliance with relevant
government regulations. Finally, collecting real labeled data

Figure 1. The HandsOff framework uses a small number of existing labeled images and a generative model to produce infinitely
many labeled images.

can often lead to imbalanced datasets that are unrepresentative of the overall data distribution. For example, in longtail settings, the data used to train a model often does not
contain rare, yet crucial edge cases [39].
These limitations make collecting ever increasing
amounts of hand labeled data unsustainable. We advocate
for a shift away from the standard paradigm towards a world
where training data comes from an infinite collection of automatically generated labeled images. Such a dataset generation approach can allow ML practitioners to synthesize
datasets in a controlled manner, unlocking new model development paradigms such as controlling the quality of generated labels and mitigating the long-tail problem.
In this work, we propose HandsOff, a generative adversarial network (GAN) based dataset generation framework.
HandsOff is trained on a small number of existing labeled
images and capable of producing an infinite set of synthetic
images with corresponding labels (Fig. 1). To do so, we
unify concepts from two disparate fields: dataset generation and GAN inversion. While the former channels the
expressive power of GANs to dream new ideas in the form
of images, the latter connects those dreams to the knowledge captured in annotations. In this way, our work brings
together what it means to dream and what it means to know.
Concretely, our paper makes the following contributions:
1. We propose a novel dataset generating framework,
called HandsOff, which unifies the fields of dataset

* Work done as an intern at Amazon. axu@gatech.edu
† Work done while at Amazon

7991

