This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human Body Shape Completion with Implicit Shape and Flow Learning
Boyao Zhou
Di Meng
Jean-Sébastien Franco
Edmond Boyer
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
{boyao.zhou, di.meng, jean-sebastien.franco, edmond.boyer}@inria.fr

Figure 1. Human shape completions with various methods given 2 depth images. NPMs [31] and our approach provide also motion flows.

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate how to complete human
body shape models by combining shape and flow estimation
given two consecutive depth images. Shape completion is
a challenging task in computer vision that is highly underconstrained when considering partial depth observations.
Besides model based strategies that exploit strong priors,
and consequently struggle to preserve fine geometric details, learning based approaches build on weaker assumptions and can benefit from efficient implicit representations.
We adopt such a representation and explore how the motion
flow between two consecutive frames can contribute to the
shape completion task. In order to effectively exploit the
flow information, our architecture combines both estimations and implements two features for robustness: First, an
all-to-all attention module that encodes the correlation between points in the same frame and between corresponding
points in different frames; Second, a coarse-dense to finesparse strategy that balances the representation ability and
the computational cost. Our experiments demonstrate that
the flow actually benefits human body model completion.
They also show that our method outperforms the state-ofthe-art approaches for shape completion on 2 benchmarks,
considering different human shapes, poses, and clothing.

1. Introduction
The inference of human body shape information from
depth observations has become a standard problem in computer vision. Depth sensors are now common and enable
the digitization of humans using every day devices such as
tablets or mobile phones, in turn opening a way to new consumer applications that build on this ability, e.g. virtual try
on or avatar applications. Solving the problem efficiently is
however difficult given human body observations that are,
by construction, incomplete with a single frame. Considering several frames over time, as often available, can however improve the body shape estimation, provided that temporal consistency is effectively exploited. In this paper we
consider how to build complete human shape models given
these partial depth observations. Particularly we investigate
how the combination of shape and motion flow estimations
can benefit such shape completion tasks.
Different strategies for shape completion have been explored that exploit various priors over human shapes. Parametric body models such as SMPL [24] can be used as
in [5, 31, 34]. The strong prior assumed with a parametric model ensures spatially and temporally coherent human
shape predictions. However these predictions are inherently
restricted to limited shape spaces. The preservation of the
geometric details that can be present in depth maps, e.g.

12901

