This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Arbitrary-Scale Image Super-Resolution via Scale-Equivariance Pursuit
Xiaohang Wang1 * Xuanhong Chen1 * Bingbing Ni1† Hang Wang2 Zhengyan Tong1 Yutian Liu1
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Huawei
{xygz2014010003,chen19910528,nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The ability of scale-equivariance processing blocks
plays a central role in arbitrary-scale image superresolution tasks. Inspired by this crucial observation, this
work proposes two novel scale-equivariant modules within
a transformer-style framework to enhance arbitrary-scale
image super-resolution (ASISR) performance, especially in
high upsampling rate image extrapolation. In the feature
extraction phase, we design a plug-in module called Adaptive Feature Extractor, which injects explicit scale information in frequency-expanded encoding, thus achieving scaleadaption in representation learning. In the upsampling
phase, a learnable Neural Kriging upsampling operator
is introduced, which simultaneously encodes both relative
distance (i.e., scale-aware) information as well as feature
similarity (i.e., with priori learned from training data) in
a bilateral manner, providing scale-encoded spatial feature
fusion. The above operators are easily plugged into multiple stages of a SR network, and a recent emerging pretraining strategy is also adopted to impulse the model’s
performance further. Extensive experimental results have
demonstrated the outstanding scale-equivariance capability offered by the proposed operators and our learning
framework, with much better results than previous SOTA
methods at arbitrary scales for SR. Our code is available
at https://github.com/neuralchen/EQSR.

1. Introduction
Arbitrary-scale image super-resolution (ASISR), which
aims at upsampling the low-resolution (LR) images to highresolution (HR) counterparts by any proper real-valued
magnifications with one single model, has become one of
the most interesting topics in low-level computer vision
research for its flexibility and practicality. Unfortunately,
compared with fixed-scale SISR models [2,3,11,19,20,22],
existing methods on ASISR [4,9,18,33] usually offer much
lower SR performances (e.g., PSNR), hindering their prac* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

ArbSR

Bicubic

ArbSR

Bicubic

ArbSR

Bicubic

ArbSR

Bicubic

Ours

HR GT

Ours

HR GT

Ours

HR GT

Ours

HR GT

×2
SR
Model

100%
98%

×4
-2.8%
-5.4%

96%
94%

×6

×12

-3.2%

-3.6%

-6.5%
-8.5%

92%
90%

×2

×4
Fixed-Scale Model Ours

ArbSR

×6

Figure 1. Scale-equivariance of our network. We compare the
PSNR degradation rate of our method and ArbSR [33]. Taking
the SOTA fixed-scale method HAT [3] as reference, our model
presents a more stable degradation as the scale increases, reflecting
the equivariance of our method. Please enlarge the pdf for details.

tical applications. The major causes of the defects of previous ASISR methods are due to lack of scale-equivariance
in dealing with scale-varying image features, as explained
in detail as follows.
On the one hand, the model’s backbone should possess
the capability of adaptively processing features according to
the sampling scale in order to achieve scale-equivariance in
the feature extraction phase. To be concrete, since ASISR
models rely on only one single backbone to handle different
scales, designing a scale-equivariant feature learning module that extracts, transforms, and pool image information
from adaptively adjusted sampling positions (i.e., according to the scaled distance) to obtain scale-equivariant feature maps from the same source image with different scales
is essential. As shown in Figure 2, we analyze a series of
fixed-scale HAT [3] models and find that the extracted features show apparent divergences from the middle of the network to handle different scale factors, demonstrating that
features for different scales should be extracted adaptively.
On the other hand, we also expect the model to possess
suitable scale-equivariant properties in the image/feature
upsampling stage. Namely, the upsampling module should

1786

