This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-Guided Audio-Visual Source Separation via Trimodal Consistency
Reuben Tan1

Arijit Ray1 Andrea Burns1 Bryan A. Plummer1 Justin Salamon 2
Oriol Nieto2 Bryan Russell2 Kate Saenko1,3
1
Boston University, 2 Adobe Research, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
{rxtan, aburns4, array, bplum, saenko}@bu.edu, {salamon, onieto, brussell}@adobe.com
Prior work: strong supervision with object detectors

Abstract
We propose a self-supervised approach for learning to
perform audio source separation in videos based on natural language queries, using only unlabeled video and audio pairs as training data. A key challenge in this task is
learning to associate the linguistic description of a soundemitting object to its visual features and the corresponding components of the audio waveform, all without access
to annotations during training. To overcome this challenge, we adapt off-the-shelf vision-language foundation
models to provide pseudo-target supervision via two novel
loss functions and encourage a stronger alignment between
the audio, visual and natural language modalities. During inference, our approach can separate sounds given text,
video and audio input, or given text and audio input alone.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our self-supervised approach on three audio-visual separation datasets, including MUSIC, SOLOS and AudioSet, where we outperform
state-of-the-art strongly supervised approaches despite not
using object detectors or text labels during training. Our
project page including publicly available code can be found
at https://cs-people.bu.edu/rxtan/projects/VAST.

1. Introduction
Our everyday audiovisual world is composed of many
visible sound sources, often with multiple sources layering
on top of one another. For example, consider the video of
the guitar and cello musicians playing together in Fig. 1.
The two instruments have distinct timbres, and the musicians play non-unison, but complementary melodies. Despite hearing both instruments simultaneously, humans have
an innate ability to identify and isolate the melody of a single source object. In this paper, we define the corresponding
machine task as follows: given a natural language query that
selects a sounding object, such as “person playing a guitar”,
separate its sound source from the input audio waveform
and localize it in the input video, without any supervision.
This task is challenging. First, there is no approach for

Category label:
“Guitar”
Audio waveform

Video with detected objects

Audio
separation

Separated audio for
the detected object

Ours: self- supervised without object detectors
Natural language query:
“person playing a guitar”

Separated audio and
localized regions

Audio waveform

Video

Audio
separation
and
localization

Figure 1. We propose to separate and localize audio sources based
on a natural language query, by learning to align the modalities on
completely unlabeled videos. In comparison, prior audio-visual
sound separation approaches require object label supervision.

associating the linguistic description of a sound-emitting
object to its visual features and the corresponding components of the audio waveform without access to annotations
during training. Existing audio-visual methods [5, 14, 41]
do not generalize to natural language queries due to their
dependence on discrete object class labels. Second, an
ideal solution would jointly identify and localize soundemitting objects in videos as well as separate the corresponding components in the audio waveform without strong
supervision. Although prior audio-visual work has demonstrated the benefits of aligning relevant object regions in
the video with their corresponding sounds [5, 14], these approaches require strong supervision including object label
10575

