This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overcoming the Trade-off Between Accuracy and Plausibility
in 3D Hand Shape Reconstruction
Ziwei Yu1 Chen Li1 Linlin Yang1 Xiaoxu Zheng2 Michael Bi Mi2 Gim Hee Lee1 Angela Yao1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Huawei International Pte Ltd, Singapore
{yuziwei, lichen}@u.nus.edu, {mu4yang, zhengxiaoxu66}@gmail.com, michaelbimi@yahoo.com
{gimhee.lee, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Direct mesh ﬁtting for 3D hand shape reconstruction is
highly accurate. However, the reconstructed meshes are
prone to artifacts and do not appear as plausible hand
shapes. Conversely, parametric models like MANO ensure
plausible hand shapes but are not as accurate as the nonparametric methods. In this work, we introduce a novel
weakly-supervised hand shape estimation framework that
integrates non-parametric mesh ﬁtting with MANO model
in an end-to-end fashion. Our joint model overcomes the
tradeoff in accuracy and plausibility to yield well-aligned
and high-quality 3D meshes, especially in challenging twohand and hand-object interaction scenarios.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art monocular RGB-based 3D hand reconstruction methods [6, 10, 17, 21, 22, 28] focus on recovering highly accurate 3D hand meshes. As accuracy is measured by an average joint or vertex position error, recovered hand meshes may be well-aligned in 3D space but
still be physically implausible. The 3D mesh surface may
have irregular protrusions or collapsed regions (see Fig. 1),
especially around the ﬁngers. The meshes may also suffer from incorrect contacts or penetrations when there are
hand-object or two-hand interactions. Yet methods that prioritize physical plausibility, especially in interaction settings [3,8,10,14,20,21], are signiﬁcantly less accurate in 3D
alignment. In summary, the current body of work predominantly favours either 3D alignment accuracy or physical
plausibility, but cannot achieve both.
A closer examination reveals that the trade-off between
3D alignment and plausibility is also split methodologywise. Methods that use the MANO model [30] produce
plausible hand poses and hand shapes [2, 7, 38, 40, 42] due
to the statistical parameterization of MANO. However, it
is challenging to directly regress these parameters, since

Figure 1. The vertex error vs. edge length error indicates that
existing methods trade-off alignment accuracy with plausibility.
MANO-based methods (triangles) vs. non-parametric modelbased methods (circles) have a trade-off between vertex error and
edge length error; our combined method (stars) can overcome this
trade-off to yield well-aligned and plausible meshes. Plot of results from InterHand2.6M [27]; visualization from FreiHand [42].

the mapping from an image to the MANO parameter space
is highly non-linear. As a consequence, MANO-based
methods lag in 3D alignment accuracy compared to nonparametric methods.
Non-parametric methods [6, 10, 11, 17, 18, 21, 22, 28] directly ﬁt a 3D mesh to image observations. Direct mesh
ﬁtting is accurate but is prone to surface artifacts. In scenarios with hand-object or hand-hand interactions, mesh penetrations cannot be resolved meaningfully even with regularizers such as contact losses [14] due to the unconstrained
544

