This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causally-Aware Intraoperative Imputation for Overall Survival Time Prediction
Xiang Li1,∗ , Xuelin Qian1,∗ , Litian Liang1,∗ , Lingjie Kong1 , Qiaole Dong1 , Jiejun Chen2
Dingxia Liu2 , Xiuzhong Yao2,† , Yanwei Fu1,†
1

2

School of Data Science, Fudan University
Department of Radiology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University

{li x20,xlqian,ltliang19,qldong18,jjchen20,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn
{jkong22,dxliu21}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Pre-operative
indicators

Patients

yao.xiuzhong@zs-hospital.sh.cn

Intra-operative
indicators

MRI
T1ce-AP

Overall Performance Comparison of F1-score

Patient A

50

Patient B

45

A
Aged 45

Cause: PLC

109mths

HBV: (+)

Pred

B
Aged 39

……

HCV: (-)

Pred

Pred

≥9yrs

42.21

40
33.83

35

31.88

30
23.15

25

Pred
A0: Clinicopathologic hepatocirrhosis
A1: Clinicopathologic cancer embolus
A2: G-score
A4: Cirrhosis nodules
A3: S-score
A5: Hepatocirrhosis

16mths

≥9yrs
≤3yrs

20
Random
Random

MRI
MRI

MRI+Pre
MRI+Pre

Ours (CAWIM)

Ours (CAWIM)

Figure 1. Our idea illustration. Patient A and B have different OS time (109 months and 16 months, respectively) but similar pre-operative
image-based patterns and indexes; thus, preoperative based model fails to distinguish A and B (their predicted OS time are both larger
than 9 years). However, their intra-operative attributes, which can describe the severity of disease in a more informative way, are very
different from each other (e.g., G-score, S-score, Clinicopathologic hepatocirrhosis). Therefore, it can help the model discriminate A and
B. In the right image, we show that our CAWIM – that leverages intra-operative indexes in the training stage – can largely improve the
prediction power than other methods. Our method managed to correctly classify these two cases, and the overall performance of our
CAWIM surpasses other baseline models by approximately 10 points on 4-category classification task.

Abstract
Previous efforts in vision community are mostly made on
learning good representations from visual patterns. Beyond
this, this paper emphasizes the high-level ability of causal
reasoning. We thus present a case study of solving the challenging task of Overall Survival (OS) time in primary liver
cancers. Critically, the prediction of OS time at the early
stage remains challenging, due to the unobvious image patterns of reflecting the OS. To this end, we propose a causal
inference system by leveraging the intraoperative attributes
and the correlation among them, as an intermediate supervision to bridge the gap between the images and the final
OS. Particularly, we build a causal graph, and train the images to estimate the intraoperative attributes for final OS
prediction. We present a novel Causally-aware Intraoperative Imputation Model (CAWIM) that can sequentially
predict each attribute using its parent nodes in the estimated causal graph. To determine the causal directions,
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

we propose a splitting-voting mechanism, which votes for
the direction for each pair of adjacent nodes among multiple predictions obtained via causal discovery from heterogeneity. The practicability and effectiveness of our method
are demonstrated by the promising results on liver cancer
dataset of 361 patients with long-term observations.

1. Introduction
The success of recent deep learning model is largely attributed to learning the good representations for visual patterns. Such representations essentially facilitate various vision task, such as recognition and synthesis [15, 25, 33].
Nevertheless, one important goal for the vision community is to model and summarize the relationships of observed variables of a system, in order to enable well predictions on similar data. Essentially, it is desirable to understand how the system is changed if one modifies these
relationships under certain conditions, e.g., the effects of
a treatment in healthcare. Thus this demands the high-

15681

