This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object-Goal Visual Navigation via
Effective Exploration of Relations among Historical Navigation States
Heming Du1,3 , Lincheng Li2 , Zi Huang3 , Xin Yu3 *
Australian National University 2 Netease Fuxi AI Lab 3 The University of Queensland

Field of View

Agent

⋯

Abstract

⋯

1

1. Introduction
Object-goal visual navigation is to direct an agent to
move consecutively toward an object of a specific category.
Without knowing the environment map beforehand, at each
navigation step, an agent first needs to represent its visual
observations, then estimate its navigation states from the
visual representations and the preceding states, and at last
predict the corresponding action. Therefore, to achieve an
effective and efficient navigation system, learning instructive visual representations and navigation states is critical.
Prevailing visual navigation works [13, 14, 50] focus on
* Corresponding author

low-profile
sofa

MoveAhead

Fa
ile
d

𝑠!"#

𝑠!

MoveAhead

⋯

⋯

𝑠!$#

Fa
ile
d

MoveAhead

(a) Demonstration of inefficient action predictions caused by highlycorrelated navigation states. Our agent is stuck by an obstacle, i.e., lowprofile sofa, and repeatedly predicts an invalid action, i.e., MoveAhead.
𝑠!

𝑠"

𝑠!

𝑠"

1

𝑠"

-1

𝑠"

LSTM

Correlation Coefficient

Object-goal visual navigation aims at steering an agent
toward an object via a series of moving steps. Previous
works mainly focus on learning informative visual representations for navigation, but overlook the impacts of navigation states on the effectiveness and efficiency of navigation. We observe that high relevance among navigation states will cause navigation inefficiency or failure for
existing methods. In this paper, we present a Historyinspired Navigation Policy Learning (HiNL) framework to
estimate navigation states effectively by exploring relationships among historical navigation states. In HiNL, we propose a History-aware State Estimation (HaSE) module to
alleviate the impacts of dominant historical states on the
current state estimation. Meanwhile, HaSE also encourages an agent to be alert to the current observation changes,
thus enabling the agent to make valid actions. Furthermore,
we design a History-based State Regularization (HbSR) to
explicitly suppress the correlation among navigation states
in training. As a result, our agent can update states more effectively while reducing the correlations among navigation
states. Experiments on the artificial platform AI2-THOR
(i.e., iTHOR and RoboTHOR) demonstrate that HiNL significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on both Success Rate and SPL in unseen testing environments.

Fa
ile
d

Obstacle
Target

HiNL

(b) Demonstration of the correlation coefficients among navigation states
trained in two manners. Navigation states estimated via LSTM are highlyrelevant. In contrast, our HiNL produce low-correlated navigation states.

Figure 1. Motivation of our proposed History-inspired Navigation
Learning (HiNL) framework.

extracting informative visual representations, while some
methods [13, 49] adjust navigation policy during inference.
All these approaches commonly employ recurrent neural
networks (e.g., LSTM) to estimate navigation states. However, we observe that the navigation states of existing methods [13, 14, 49] exhibit high relevance, as demonstrated in
Figure 1b, and the highly-correlated navigation states would
lead to inefficient navigation policy (i.e., failure to respond
to observation changes rapidly). For instance, as shown in
Figure 1a, an agent is stuck by the low-profile sofa and fails
to take proper actions to circumvent the obstacle. Hence,
we aim to endow an agent with the capability of updating
its navigation states effectively while avoiding producing
highly-correlated states.
In this work, we propose a History-inspired Navigation

2563

