This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Human Motion from Textual Descriptions with
Discrete Representations
Jianrong Zhang1,3∗ , Yangsong Zhang2,3∗ , Xiaodong Cun3 , Yong Zhang3 , Hongwei Zhao1
Hongtao Lu2 , Xi Shen3,† , Shan Ying3
∗

1

Jilin University

Equal contribution
2

†

Corresponding author

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

3

Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
In this work, we investigate a simple and must-known conditional generative framework based on Vector QuantisedVariational AutoEncoder (VQ-VAE) and Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) for human motion generation
from textural descriptions. We show that a simple CNNbased VQ-VAE with commonly used training recipes (EMA
and Code Reset) allows us to obtain high-quality discrete representations. For GPT, we incorporate a simple corruption
strategy during the training to alleviate training-testing discrepancy. Despite its simplicity, our T2M-GPT shows better
performance than competitive approaches, including recent
diffusion-based approaches. For example, on HumanML3D,
which is currently the largest dataset, we achieve comparable performance on the consistency between text and generated motion (R-Precision), but with FID 0.116 largely outperforming MotionDiffuse of 0.630. Additionally, we conduct
analyses on HumanML3D and observe that the dataset size
is a limitation of our approach. Our work suggests that VQVAE still remains a competitive approach for human motion
generation. Our implementation is available on the project
page: https://mael-zys.github.io/T2M-GPT/.

Figure 1. Visual results on HumanML3D [22]. Our approach is
able to generate precise and high-quality human motion consistent
with challenging text descriptions. More visual results are on the
project page.

1. Introduction
Generating motion from textual descriptions can be used
in numerous applications in the game industry, film-making,
and animating robots. For example, a typical way to access
new motion in the game industry is to perform motion capture, which is expensive. Therefore automatically generating
motion from textual descriptions, which allows producing
meaningful motion data, could save time and be more economical.
Motion generation conditioned on natural language is
challenging, as motion and text are from different modalities. The model is expected to learn precise mapping from

the language space to the motion space. To this end, many
works propose to learn a joint embedding for language and
motion using auto-encoders [3, 21, 65] and VAEs [52, 53].
MotionClip [65] aligns the motion space to CLIP [55] space.
ACTOR [52] and TEMOES [53] propose transformer-based
VAEs for action-to-motion and text-to-motion respectively.
These works show promising performances with simple descriptions and are limited to producing high-quality motion
when textual descriptions become long and complicated.
Guo et al. [22] and TM2T [23] aim to generate motion

14730

