This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PivoTAL: Prior-Driven Supervision for Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action
Localization
Gaurav Mittal⋆†
Ye Yu†
Matthew Hall†
‡
Mubarak Shah
Mei Chen†
†
‡
Microsoft
University of Central Florida

Mamshad Nayeem Rizve⋆‡

Sandra Sajeev†

{gaurav.mittal, yu.ye, mathall, ssajeev, mei.chen}@microsoft.com
nayeemrizve@knights.ucf.edu

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Ground-Truth

Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization
(WTAL) attempts to localize the actions in untrimmed
videos using only video-level supervision. Most recent
works approach WTAL from a localization-by-classification
perspective where these methods try to classify each video
frame followed by a manually-designed post-processing
pipeline to aggregate these per-frame action predictions
into action snippets. Due to this perspective, the model
lacks any explicit understanding of action boundaries and
tends to focus only on the most discriminative parts of
the video resulting in incomplete action localization. To
address this, we present PivoTAL, Prior-driven Supervision
for Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization,
to approach WTAL from a localization-by-localization
perspective by learning to localize the action snippets
directly. To this end, PivoTAL leverages the underlying
spatio-temporal regularities in videos in the form of
action-specific scene prior, action snippet generation prior,
and learnable Gaussian prior to supervise the localizationbased training. PivoTAL shows significant improvement
(of at least 3% avg mAP) over all existing methods on the
benchmark datasets, THUMOS-14 and ActivitNet-v1.3.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) [5,24,43,46,47,56]
refers to the task of predicting where and what category
of action happens in an arbitrarily long untrimmed video.
While TAL is crucial in a wide variety of applications ranging from sports, robotics, and safety, it is challenging as it
requires the model to develop a strong temporal and spatial
understanding of the video scene and events for effective localization. Furthermore, fully-supervised TAL relies on the
⋆ Authors with equal contribution.

This work was done as Mamshad’s internship project at Microsoft.

Base WTAL (Localization-by-Classification)

PivoTAL (Localization-by-Localization)

Figure 1. Left: Green denotes ground truth action snippets, Purple
denotes true positive action snippets, and Pink denotes false positive action snippets. We observe that PivoTAL significantly outperforms Base WTAL by detecting all the ground-truth instances
correctly. Right: Improvement of PivoTAL over the previous stateof-the-art on THUMOS’14 at different IoU thresholds.

availability of expensive dense annotations in terms of the
start and end of each action snippet in the training videos.
Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization
(WTAL) serves to mitigate this dependency on dense annotations by operating only on video-level annotations (i.e.,
knowing which actions occur without knowing their precise
locations in a video) during training while still being able to
predict the start and end of the action snippet in test videos.
Several methods [20, 32, 33, 38, 45, 50, 53] have attempted
to perform WTAL by employing different techniques
which include Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [20, 33]
and attention mechanism [45, 50]. However, to the best
of our knowledge, all of these previous works approach
WTAL from a localization-by-classification perspective
where the underlying method tries to classify each video
frame into zero or more action categories followed by a
manually-designed post-processing pipeline to aggregate
these per-frame action predictions into action snippets with
explicit boundaries.
Fig. 1 shows the final action snippet predictions on a
video with Long Jump action from a typical localizationby-classification method which we refer to as Base WTAL
in the figure. We observe that Base WTAL suffers from some

22992

