This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PolyFormer: Referring Image Segmentation as Sequential Polygon Generation
Jiang Liu1,†, * Hui Ding2,† Zhaowei Cai2 Yuting Zhang2
Ravi Kumar Satzoda2 Vijay Mahadevan2 R. Manmatha2
Johns Hopkins University1 AWS AI Labs2
https://polyformer.github.io/

Abstract
In this work, instead of directly predicting the pixel-level
segmentation masks, the problem of referring image segmentation is formulated as sequential polygon generation,
and the predicted polygons can be later converted into segmentation masks. This is enabled by a new sequence-tosequence framework, Polygon Transformer (PolyFormer),
which takes a sequence of image patches and text query tokens as input, and outputs a sequence of polygon vertices
autoregressively. For more accurate geometric localization,
we propose a regression-based decoder, which predicts the
precise floating-point coordinates directly, without any coordinate quantization error. In the experiments, PolyFormer
outperforms the prior art by a clear margin, e.g., 5.40%
and 4.52% absolute improvements on the challenging RefCOCO+ and RefCOCOg datasets. It also shows strong
generalization ability when evaluated on the referring video
segmentation task without fine-tuning, e.g., achieving competitive 61.5% J &F on the Ref-DAVIS17 dataset.

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation (RIS) [7, 19, 21, 29–32,
39, 45, 50, 61, 73, 78, 86, 87] combines vision-language understanding [42, 55, 57, 75, 92] and instance segmentation
[2, 8, 16, 25, 52], and aims to localize the segmentation
mask of an object given a natural language query. It generalizes traditional object segmentation from a fixed number of predefined categories to any concept described by
free-form language, which requires a deeper understanding
of the image and language semantics. The conventional
pipeline [7, 19, 21, 29–32, 45, 50, 61, 73, 87] first extracts
features from the image and text inputs, and then fuses the
multi-modal features together to predict the mask.
A segmentation mask encodes the spatial layout of an
object, and most instance segmentation models [8, 16, 25,
52] rely on a dense binary classification network to deter* Work done during internship at AWS AI. † Equal contribution.

mine whether each pixel belongs to the object. This pixelto-pixel prediction is preferred by a convolutional operation, but it neglects the structure among the output predictions. For example, each pixel is predicted independently of
other pixels. In contrast, a segmentation mask can also be
represented by a sparse set of structured polygon vertices
delineating the contour of the object [1, 6, 41, 47, 49, 81].
This structured sparse representation is cheaper than a dense
mask representation and is the preferred annotation format
for most instance segmentation datasets [15, 49, 70]. Thus,
it is also tempting to predict structured polygons directly.
However, how to effectively predict this type of structured
outputs is challenging, especially for convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and previous efforts have not shown
much success yet [41, 47, 81].
We address this challenge by resorting to a sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) framework [3, 14, 65, 66, 74], and propose Polygon transFormer (PolyFormer) for referring image segmentation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, it takes a sequence of image patches and text query tokens as input,
and autoregressively outputs a sequence of polygon vertices. Since each vertex prediction is conditioned on all
preceding predicted vertices, the output predictions are no
longer independent of each other. The seq2seq framework
is flexible on its input and output format, as long as both
of them can be formulated as sequences of variable length.
Thus, it is natural to concatenate the visual and language
features together as a long sequence, avoiding complicated
multi-modal feature fusion as in prior work [7,30,73,86,87].
In the meantime, the output can also be a long sequence
of multiple polygons separated by separator tokens, covering the scenario where the segmentation masks are not connected, e.g., by occlusion, as shown in Fig. 1. Furthermore,
since a bounding box can be represented as a sequence of
two corner points (i.e., top left and bottom right), they can
also be output by PolyFormer along with the polygon vertices. Thus, referring image segmentation (polygon) and
referring expression comprehension (bounding box) can be
unified in our simple PolyFormer framework.
Localization is important for polygon and bounding box

18653

