This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperMatch: Noise-Tolerant Semi-Supervised Learning via Relaxed Contrastive
Constraint
Beitong Zhou∗ , Jing Lu∗ , Kerui Liu, Yunlu Xu, Zhanzhan Cheng† , Yi Niu
Hikvision Research Institute
zhoubt@hust.edu.cn, {lujing6, liukerui, xuyunlu, chengzhanzhan, niuyi}@hikvision.com

Recent developments of the application of Contrastive
Learning in Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) have demonstrated signiﬁcant advancements, as a result of its exceptional ability to learn class-aware cluster representations and the full exploitation of massive unlabeled data.
However, mismatched instance pairs caused by inaccurate
pseudo labels would assign an unlabeled instance to the
incorrect class in feature space, hence exacerbating SSL’s
renowned conﬁrmation bias. To address this issue, we introduced a novel SSL approach, HyperMatch, which is a plugin to several SSL designs enabling noise-tolerant utilization
of unlabeled data. In particular, conﬁdence predictions are
combined with semantic similarities to generate a more objective class distribution, followed by a Gaussian Mixture
Model to divide pseudo labels into a ’conﬁdent’ and a ’less
conﬁdent’ subset. Then, we introduce Relaxed Contrastive
Loss by assigning the ’less-conﬁdent’ samples to a hyperclass, i.e. the union of top-K nearest classes, which effectively regularizes the interference of incorrect pseudo labels and even increases the probability of pulling a ’less
conﬁdent’ sample close to its true class. Experiments and
in-depth studies demonstrate that HyperMatch delivers remarkable state-of-the-art performance, outperforming FixMatch on CIFAR100 with 400 and 2500 labeled samples by
11.86% and 4.88%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [2, 3, 5, 20, 21, 26, 29,
38, 39, 42] has become a promising solution for leveraging unlabeled data to save the expensive annotation cost
and simultaneously improve model performance, especially
in applications where large amounts of annotated data are
required to obtain a model with high performance [4, 18].
Modern SSL algorithms generally fall into two categories:
the Pseudo Label-based [22, 30, 38] focuses on generating
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

6[YN

6[RR

Abstract

?

G

6YK[JU2GHKRHGYKJ
)RGYY'YYOMTSKTZ

?

H._VKX)RGYY'YYOMTSKTZ

I

:UV1'II[XGI_UL
6YK[JU2GHKRY

Figure 1. Illustration of our ideas. (a) Pseudo-label-based assignment: the instance is pulled close to the wrong pseudo label class
and pushed away from ground-truth class (green pentagon). (b)
Hyper-class assignment: the instance is assigned to its hyper-class
(the union of top-K nearest classes), which includes the ground
truth class. (c) Top-K accuracy for clean and noisy pseudo labels
(divided by our Gaussian Mixture Model) in CIFAR100@400 experiment. As K grows, noisy labels beneﬁt more than clean labels.

reliable pseudo labels for unlabeled data, whereas the Consistency Regularization-based [2, 3, 20, 29] constrains the
model to make consistent predictions on perturbed samples.
Recently, a prominent advance is the combination of
Contrastive Learning [6, 8, 11, 13] with SSL techniques
[19, 21, 24, 25, 39, 42], which sets the remarkable state-ofthe-art performance. The naive Self-supervised Contrastive
Learning [6, 13] in pre-training tasks pushes instance-level
features away, thereby potentially driving samples within
the same class apart, its class-agnostic nature has been
proved to conﬂict with the class-clustering property of
SSL [24, 39], hence most recent studies [21, 24, 39] turn to
Class-Aware Contrastive Learning [16]. The general routine is to ﬁrst assign each unlabeled instance to the top-1
nearest class based on their pseudo labels, then two unlabeled instances from the same class are randomly selected
to form a positive pair, followed by a class-aware contrastive loss to compel instances from positive pairs to share
similar features while pushing away the representations of
different classes.
The precision of pseudo labels has a direct impact on the
class assignment of the aforementioned methods. By conﬁdence threshold, unlabeled data can be roughly grouped
into ’conﬁdent’ and ’less conﬁdent’ [39]. For ’conﬁdent’

24017

