This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DF-Platter: Multi-Face Heterogeneous Deepfake Dataset
Kartik Narayan,* Harsh Agarwal,* Kartik Thakral,* Surbhi Mittal,* Mayank Vatsa, and Richa Singh
IIT Jodhpur, India
{narayan.2, agarwal.10, thakral.1, mittal.5, mvatsa, richa}@iitj.ac.in

Abstract
Deepfake detection is gaining significant importance in
the research community. While most of the research efforts are focused towards high-quality images and videos
with controlled appearance of individuals, deepfake generation algorithms now have the capability to generate deepfakes with low-resolution, occlusion, and manipulation of
multiple subjects. In this research, we emulate the realworld scenario of deepfake generation and propose the DFPlatter dataset, which contains (i) both low-resolution and
high-resolution deepfakes generated using multiple generation techniques and (ii) single-subject and multiple-subject
deepfakes, with face images of Indian ethnicity. Faces in
the dataset are annotated for various attributes such as gender, age, skin tone, and occlusion. The dataset is prepared
in 116 days with continuous usage of 32 GPUs accounting to 1,800 GB cumulative memory. With over 500 GBs
in size, the dataset contains a total of 133,260 videos encompassing three sets. To the best of our knowledge, this
is one of the largest datasets containing vast variability
and multiple challenges. We also provide benchmark results under multiple evaluation settings using popular and
state-of-the-art deepfake detection models, for c0 images
and videos along with c23 and c40 compression variants.
The results demonstrate a significant performance reduction in the deepfake detection task on low-resolution deepfakes. Furthermore, existing techniques yield declined detection accuracy on multiple-subject deepfakes. It is our
assertion that this database will improve the state-of-theart by extending the capabilities of deepfake detection algorithms to real-world scenarios. The database is available
at: http://iab-rubric.org/df-platter-database.

1. Introduction
With the advent of diverse deep learning architectures,
significant breakthrough have been made in the field of image/video forgery. This has led to an incredible rise in the
* Equal contribution by student authors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Samples showcasing multi-face deepfakes circulated on
social media. (a) A zoom call with a deepfake of Elon Musk [8]
(b) Real-time deepfake generation at America’s Got Talent [9] (c)
Deepfake round-table with multiple deepfake subjects [33].

amount of fake multimedia content being generated due to
increased accessibility and less training requirements. Not
only has the amount of such media risen, but the sophistication of such content has also improved drastically, making it indistinguishable from real videos. While most deepfakes are used for entertainment purposes like parody films
and filters in apps, they can also be used to illicitly defame
someone, spread misinformation or propaganda, or conduct
fraud. In 2020 Delhi state elections in India, a deepfake
video of a popular political figure was created [34] and according to some estimates, the deepfake was disseminated
to about 15 million people in the state [13]. Given the abuse
of deepfakes and their possible impact, the necessity for better and robust deepfake detection methods is unavoidable.
Designing a dependable deepfake detection system requires availability of comprehensive deepfake datasets for
training. Table 1 summarizes the key characteristics of the
publicly available deepfake datasets. Most of the datasets

9739

