This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PCT-Net: Full Resolution Image Harmonization Using Pixel-Wise Color
Transformations
Julian Jorge Andrade Guerreiro1,∗
1

The University of Tokyo

2

Mitsuru Nakazawa2

Björn Stenger2

Rakuten Institute of Technology, Rakuten Group, Inc.

julianguerreio@outlook.de, {mitsuru.nakazawa, bjorn.stenger}@rakuten.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present PCT-Net, a simple and general
image harmonization method that can be easily applied to
images at full-resolution. The key idea is to learn a parameter network that uses downsampled input images to predict the parameters for pixel-wise color transforms (PCTs)
which are applied to each pixel in the full-resolution image.
We show that affine color transforms are both efficient and
effective, resulting in state-of-the-art harmonization results.
Moreover, we explore both CNNs and Transformers as the
parameter network, and show that Transformers lead to better results. We evaluate the proposed method on the public
full-resolution iHarmony4 dataset, which is comprised of
four datasets, and show a reduction of the foreground MSE
(fMSE) and MSE values by more than 20% and an increase
of the PSNR value by 1.4dB, while keeping the architecture
light-weight. In a user study with 20 people, we show that
the method achieves a higher B-T score than two other recent methods.

1. Introduction
Cutting and pasting parts of an image into another image is an important editing task, also referred to as image
compositing. However, creating a composite image by simply adding a foreground region to a different image will
typically produce unrealistic results due to different conditions at the time the images were taken. In order to reduce
this discrepancy between foreground and background, image harmonization aims to align the colors by modifying the
foreground region.
A variety of approaches have been proposed to solve
this task using traditional statistical techniques as well as
deep learning methods. Nonetheless, most of the research
[5,12–15,17,23,28,30] has solely focused on low-resolution
images (256 × 256 pixels), whereas high resolution images
* work conducted during an internship at Rakuten Group, Inc.

have become in fact the standard for most real use cases.
Since most approaches are built on convolutional neural
networks (CNN), they would theoretically be able to process images of any size. However, due to poor scaling, the
computational cost required for high resolution images render them effectively impractical.
More recently, some methods have started exploring
high-resolution image harmonization [6,18,22,34] by leveraging a network that takes a low-resolution image as its input, but instead of predicting the final image, further processes the image according to the output of the network.
While this allows us to apply high resolution image harmonization based on a low-resolution input, current models are
either simplifying the problem for the sake of efficiency or
employ a series of complex operations to improve performance. Following the general dual branch approach, we
propose a light-weight model capable of harmonizing images at high resolutions. As shown in Fig. 1, our method
achieves significant improvements in terms of foregroundnormalized MSE (fMSE), but only requires roughly the
same or less parameters, depending on the backbone.
We are able to outperform state-of-the-art methods on
full resolution image harmonization by interpolating the
network output in parameter space instead of introducing
interpolation errors in the image space. Following the reasoning by Xue et al. [34], we argue that the parameter
space contains less high frequency components which cause
higher interpolation errors during upsampling. In contrast
to [34], we greatly reduce the complexity by introducing
pixel-wise color transformations (PCT) and find that a simple affine transformation is sufficient to achieve significant
improvements. We show that this idea can easily be applied
to both, CNN-based and Transformer-based models, while
outperforming current state-of-the-art models in terms of reconstruction error.
In our approach, the backbone network predicts a set of
parameters for each input pixel. Since this is done in low
resolution, we interpolate the parameter map to match the
full resolution of the original composite image. We then

5917

