This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Twin Contrastive Learning with Noisy Labels
Zhizhong Huang1
Junping Zhang1
Hongming Shan2,3∗
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence and MOE Frontiers Center
for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
3
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-inspired Technology, Shanghai 200031, China
{zzhuang19, jpzhang, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning from noisy data is a challenging task that significantly degenerates the model performance. In this paper,
we present TCL, a novel twin contrastive learning model
to learn robust representations and handle noisy labels for
classification. Specifically, we construct a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) over the representations by injecting
the supervised model predictions into GMM to link labelfree latent variables in GMM with label-noisy annotations.
Then, TCL detects the examples with wrong labels as the outof-distribution examples by another two-component GMM,
taking into account the data distribution. We further propose
a cross-supervision with an entropy regularization loss that
bootstraps the true targets from model predictions to handle
the noisy labels. As a result, TCL can learn discriminative
representations aligned with estimated labels through mixup
and contrastive learning. Extensive experimental results
on several standard benchmarks and real-world datasets
demonstrate the superior performance of TCL. In particular,
TCL achieves 7.5% improvements on CIFAR-10 with 90%
noisy label—an extremely noisy scenario. The source code
is available at https://github.com/Hzzone/TCL.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown exciting performance
for classification tasks [13]. Their success largely results
from the large-scale curated datasets with clean human annotations, such as CIFAR-10 [19] and ImageNet [6], in which
the annotation process, however, is tedious and cumbersome.
In contrast, one can easily obtain datasets with some noisy
annotations—from online shopping websites [40], crowdsourcing [42, 45], or Wikipedia [32]—for training a clas∗ Corresponding author

sification neural network. Unfortunately, the mislabelled
data are prone to significantly degrade the performance of
deep neural networks. Therefore, there is considerable interest in training noise-robust classification networks in recent
years [20, 21, 25, 29, 31, 48].
To mitigate the influence of noisy labels, most of the methods in literature propose the robust loss functions [37, 47],
reduce the weights of noisy labels [35, 39], or correct the
noisy labels [20, 29, 31]. In particular, label correction methods have shown great potential for better performance on the
dataset with a high noise ratio. Typically, they correct the
labels by using the combination of noisy labels and model
predictions [31], which usually require an essential iterative sample selection process [1, 20, 21, 29]. For example,
Arazo et al. [1] uses the small-loss trick to carry out sample
selection and correct labels via the weighted combination.
In recent years, contrastive learning has shown promising
results in handling noisy labels [21, 21, 29]. They usually
leverage contrastive learning to learn discriminative representations, and then clean the labels [21, 29] or construct
the positive pairs by introducing the information of nearest
neighbors in the embedding space. However, using the nearest neighbors only considers the label noise within a small
neighborhood, which is sub-optimal and cannot handle extreme label noise scenarios, as the neighboring examples
may also be mislabeled at the same time.
To address this issue, this paper presents TCL, a novel
twin contrastive learning model that explores the label-free
unsupervised representations and label-noisy annotations
for learning from noisy labels. Specifically, we leverage
contrastive learning to learn discriminative image representations in an unsupervised manner and construct a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) over its representations. Unlike unsupervised GMM, TCL links the label-free GMM
and label-noisy annotations by replacing the latent variable
of GMM with the model predictions for updating the parameters of GMM. Then, benefitting from the learned data

11661

