This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point2Pix: Photo-Realistic Point Cloud Rendering via Neural Radiance Fields
Tao Hu1 Xiaogang Xu1 * Shu Liu2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Jiaya Jia1,2
2
SmartMore

{taohu, xgxu, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, liushuhust@gmail.com

Abstract
Synthesizing photo-realistic images from a point cloud is
challenging because of the sparsity of point cloud representation. Recent Neural Radiance Fields and extensions are
proposed to synthesize realistic images from 2D input. In
this paper, we present Point2Pix as a novel point renderer
to link the 3D sparse point clouds with 2D dense image pixels. Taking advantage of the point cloud 3D prior and NeRF
rendering pipeline, our method can synthesize high-quality
images from colored point clouds, generally for novel indoor scenes. To improve the efficiency of ray sampling,
we propose point-guided sampling, which focuses on valid
samples. Also, we present Point Encoding to build Multiscale Radiance Fields that provide discriminative 3D point
features. Finally, we propose Fusion Encoding to efficiently
synthesize high-quality images. Extensive experiments on
the ScanNet and ArkitScenes datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization.

1. Introduction
Point cloud rendering aims to synthesize images from
point clouds at given camera parameters, which has been
frequently utilized in 3D visualization, navigation, and augmented reality. There are many advantages to point cloud
representation, such as flexible shape and general 3D prior.
However, since point clouds are generally produced by 3D
scanners (RGBD or LiDAR) [3, 9, 14] or by Multi-View
Stereo (MVS) from images [4, 15, 52], the points are usually sparsely distributed in 3D scenes. Although traditional
graphics-based renderers [38, 42, 50, 58] can render point
clouds to images without training or finetuning, the quality
is not satisfying with hole artifacts and missing details [10].
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [29] were proposed for 3D representation and high-fidelity novel view
synthesis. It employs an implicit function to directly map
each point’s spatial information (location and direction) to
attributes (color and density). However, most NeRF-based
* Corresponding author.

methods [23,49,54,55] are scene-specific, thus taking much
time to train from scratch for novel scenes in abundant
multi-view images, which limits the practical applications.
In this work, we bridge the gap between point clouds and
NeRF, thus proposing a novel point cloud renderer, called
Point2Pix, to synthesize photo-realistic images from colored point clouds. Compared with most NeRF-based methods [23, 29, 53, 54], ours does not necessarily require multiview images or fine-tuning procedures for indoor scenes.
First, point clouds are treated as underlying anchors of
NeRF. The training process of NeRF is to learn 3D point attributes from given locations. Because there is no mapping
ground truth for multi-view images, NeRF-based methods
[23, 29] indirectly train their networks with a pixel reconstruction loss. Note that point clouds are exactly made up of
points with location and attributes, thus can provide training pairs for the mapping function to conduct supervised
learning and improve performance.
Then, point clouds can also improve the efficiency of ray
sampling. NeRF-based methods [23, 29, 54] learn the 3D
shape and structure from multi-view images, which do not
involve geometric prior in novel scenes. Thus, dense uniform sampling [5, 46] or coarse-to-fine sampling [29, 54]
were used to synthesize high-quality images. These strategies are inefficient because most of the locations in 3D
scenes are empty [23, 31]. Since point clouds represent a
relatively fine shape of 3D scenes, the area around existing
points deserves more attention. Based on this observation,
we propose a point-guided sampling strategy to mainly focus on the local area of points in the point cloud. It can
significantly reduce the number of required samples while
maintaining decent synthesis accuracy.
Further, point-based networks can provide 3D features
prior to subsequent applications, general for novel scenes.
Although many methods [7, 18, 36, 37] have been proposed
for various point cloud understanding tasks, they are usually designed for existing points. In this work, we propose
Multi-scale Radiance Fields, including Point Encoder and
MLP networks, to extract multi-scale features for any location in the scene. These 3D point features are discriminative
and general, ensuring finetuning-free rendering. Also, in-

8349

