This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class Balanced Adaptive Pseudo Labeling for Federated Semi-Supervised
Learning
Ming Li Qingli Li Yan Wang*
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing, East China Normal University
lm1640362161@gmail.com, qlli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ywang@cee.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper focuses on federated semi-supervised learning (FSSL), assuming that few clients have fully labeled
data (labeled clients) and the training datasets in other
clients are fully unlabeled (unlabeled clients). Existing
methods attempt to deal with the challenges caused by not
independent and identically distributed data (Non-IID) setting. Though methods such as sub-consensus models have
been proposed, they usually adopt standard pseudo labeling or consistency regularization on unlabeled clients which
can be easily influenced by imbalanced class distribution.
Thus, problems in FSSL are still yet to be solved. To seek
for a fundamental solution to this problem, we present Class
Balanced Adaptive Pseudo Labeling (CBAFed), to study
FSSL from the perspective of pseudo labeling. In CBAFed,
the first key element is a fixed pseudo labeling strategy to
handle the catastrophic forgetting problem, where we keep
a fixed set by letting pass information of unlabeled data
at the beginning of the unlabeled client training in each
communication round. The second key element is that we
design class balanced adaptive thresholds via considering the empirical distribution of all training data in local
clients, to encourage a balanced training process. To make
the model reach a better optimum, we further propose a
residual weight connection in local supervised training and
global model aggregation. Extensive experiments on five
datasets demonstrate the superiority of CBAFed. Code will
be available at https://github.com/minglllli/
CBAFed.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) aims to train machine learning
models on a decentralized manner while preserving data
privacy, i.e., separate local models are trained on separate
local training datasets independently. In recent years, FL
has received much attention for privacy protection reasons
* Corresponding Author.

[32]. However, most of FL works focused on supervised
learning with fully labeled data. But in practice, labeling
process of large-scale training data is laborious and expensive. Due to the lack of funds or experts, large labeled training dataset is difficult for many companies and institutions
to obtain. These may hinder applicability of FL.
To handle this problem, federated semi-supervised learning (FSSL) has been explored by many researchers recently
[8, 14, 15]. There are broadly three lines of FSSL methods
by considering different places and status of labeled data.
The first two lines consider that there are only limited labeled data in the central server [8] or each client has partially labeled data [15]. The third line assumes that few
clients have fully labeled data and the training datasets in
other clients are fully unlabeled [14, 18, 31]. Our paper
mainly focuses on the third line of FSSL, and we call local clients with fully labeled data as labeled clients and the
other clients as unlabeled clients.
The main difficulties to train a third line FSSL model lie
in three folds: 1) There are no labeled data in unlabeled
clients. Thus, the training can be easily biased without
label guidance. 2) Due to the divergent class distribution
of labeled and unlabeled clients, namely the not independent and identically distributed data (Non-IID) setting, inaccurate supervisory signals may be generated in unlabeled
clients via employing the model trained in labeled clients by
either pseudo labeling or consistency regularization framework. 3) Due to the catastrophic forgetting problems in
CNNs, with the training process of unlabeled clients going
on, models may forget the knowledge learned on labeled
clients and so decrease the prediction accuracy drastically.
RSCFed [14], the state-of-the-art method significantly
boosts the FSSL performance by first distilling subconsensus models, and then aggregating the sub-consensus
models to the global model. The sub-consensus models can
handle the Non-IID setting to some extent, but the meanteacher based consistency regularization framework in unlabeled clients inevitably causes the accuracy degradation
when the classes are imbalanced distributed. RSCFed at-

16292

