This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Structured Semantic Prior
for Multi Label Recognition with Incomplete Labels
Zixuan Ding1,4 * Ao Wang2,3,4 * Hui Chen2,3,† Qiang Zhang1
Pengzhang Liu5 Yongjun Bao5 Weipeng Yan5 Jungong Han6,7
1
Xidian University 2 Tsinghua University 3 BNRist
4
Hangzhou Zhuoxi Institute of Brain and Intelligence 5 JD.com
6
Department of Computer Science, the University of Sheffield, UK
7
Centre for Machine Intelligence, the University of Sheffield, UK
dingzixuan@stu.xidian.edu.cn

wa22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{jichenhui2012,jungonghan77}@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-label recognition (MLR) with incomplete labels is
very challenging. Recent works strive to explore the imageto-label correspondence in the vision-language model, i.e.,
CLIP [22], to compensate for insufficient annotations. In
spite of promising performance, they generally overlook the
valuable prior about the label-to-label correspondence. In
this paper, we advocate remedying the deficiency of label
supervision for the MLR with incomplete labels by deriving
a structured semantic prior about the label-to-label correspondence via a semantic prior prompter. We then present
a novel Semantic Correspondence Prompt Network (SCPNet), which can thoroughly explore the structured semantic
prior. A Prior-Enhanced Self-Supervised Learning method
is further introduced to enhance the use of the prior. Comprehensive experiments and analyses on several widely used
benchmark datasets show that our method significantly outperforms existing methods on all datasets, well demonstrating the effectiveness and the superiority of our method.
Our code will be available at https://github.com/
jameslahm/SCPNet.

1. Introduction
Multi-label recognition (MLR) aims to describe the image content with various semantic labels [5, 26, 29, 30]. It
encodes the visual information into structured labels, which
can benefit the index and fast retrieval of images in broad
practical applications, such as the search engine [24,27] and
the recommendation system [2, 33].
Benefited from the development of deep learning, MLR
* Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

qzhang@xidian.edu.cn

{Paul.yan, baoyongjun, liupengzhang}@jd.com

CNN
backbone

softmax

MC

Image
encoder
transfer

transfer
CNN
backbone

sigmoid

MLR

Image
encoder

(a) CNN-based
Image
encoder

Text
encoder

CL

transfer
Label
encoder

MLR
(b) DualCoOp

MLR

N
2

4
1
3

Label
encoder

(c) our SCPNet

Figure 1. Overview of CNN-based, DualCoOp [26] and our SCPNet. Like DualCoOp, our SCPNet adopts CLIP as the base model.
Differently, our SCPNet aims to enhance the MLR with the prior
about the label-to-label correspondence. MC means multi-class.
CL denotes contrastive learning.

has achieved remarkable progress in recent years. However, collecting high-quality full annotations becomes very
challenging when the label set scales up, which greatly hinders the wide usage of MLR in real scenarios. Recently,
researchers explore more feasible solutions for MLR. For
example, the full label setting is relaxed with a partial label
setting in [3, 21], which merely annotates a few labels for
each training image. One more extreme setting with solely
one single positive label is tackled in [8, 16]. These settings
can be unified into a common issue of incomplete labels,
which relieves the burden of the full annotation and considerably reduces the annotation cost. Therefore, it draws
increasing attention from both academia and industry.
Compared with the full label setting, the incomplete label setting encounters a dilemma of poor supervision, resulting in severe performance drops for MLR. Existing
methods strive to regain supervision from missing labels by
exhaustively exploring the image-to-label correspondence
via semantic-aware modules [4,21] or loss calibration meth-

3398

