This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Centroid Task Descriptor for Dynamic Class Incremental Inference
Tenghao Cai1 , Zhizhong Zhang1,† , Xin Tan1 , Yanyun Qu2 , Guannan Jiang3 , Chengjie Wang4 , Yuan Xie1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
3
CATL, China, 4 Tencent Youtu Lab
51215901050@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {zzzhang,xtan,yxie}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, jianggn@catl.com, jasoncjwang@tencent.com

Abstract

Baseline

Dynamic
Inference

Prediction

Prediction

c

Concat
Gate
Similar
Dissimilar

Incremental learning could be roughly divided into two
categories, i.e., class- and task-incremental learning. The
main difference is whether the task ID is given during evaluation. In this paper, we show this task information is indeed a strong prior knowledge, which will bring signiﬁcant
improvement over class-incremental learning baseline, e.g.,
DER [39]. Based on this observation, we propose a gate
network to predict the task ID for class incremental inference. This is challenging as there is no explicit semantic relationship between categories in the concept of task. Therefore, we propose a multi-centroid task descriptor by assuming the data within a task can form multiple clusters. The
cluster centers are optimized by pulling relevant samplecentroid pairs while pushing others away, which ensures
that there is at least one centroid close to a given sample.
To select relevant pairs, we use class prototypes as proxies and solve a bipartite matching problem, making the task
descriptor representative yet not degenerate to uni-modal.
As a result, our dynamic inference network is trained independently of baseline and provides a ﬂexible, efﬁcient solution to distinguish between tasks. Extensive experiments
show our approach achieves state-of-the-art results, e.g.,
we achieve 72.41% average accuracy on CIFAR100-B0S50,
outperforming DER by 3.40%.

c
ࢶࢀ

…

ࢶ૛

Task distribution

ࢶ૚

ࢶࢀ

…

ࢶ૛

ࢶ૚
Task ID: 2

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a): Illustration of DER (Left) and our dynamic inference method (Right). (b): Step accuracy on CIFAR100-B0S10
with DER under three different evaluation procedures: i) Given
Task ID: use t-th branch to infer the sample in t-th task ii) All
branches: concatenate all branches like original DER; iii) Random Path: randomly select one branch for inference.

Generally speaking, incremental learning could be
roughly divided into two categories, i.e., Task-IL vs. ClassIL [35]. It depends on whether the task ID is given during
inference. For example, Task-IL could use this task ID information to search prediction in a narrowed label space and
is considered to be easier than Class-IL. Consequently, the
accuracy of Task-IL is always outperforming Class-IL, and
we can consider task ID as strong prior knowledge for incremental learning.
That motivates us to think about a critical problem, can
we utilize task ID to improve the performance of Class-IL
approaches? To answer this question, we select Class-IL
SOTA method DER [39] as our baseline shown in the left
of Fig. 1(a). Once a new task arrived, DER expands the current network with a new task-speciﬁc branch Φ. This multibranch architecture allows us to conveniently adapt DER to
a Task-IL approach. That is, when a couple of categories
are trained in a speciﬁc task, a test sample belonging to this
task would be sent to the corresponding branch for inference. So we compare the results of DER by giving task ID
or directly using the original inference strategy over DER

1. Introduction
As a rapidly developing task in machine learning, incremental learning [7, 27] (IL) aims to continually learn new
concepts (classes), where the training data comes as a sequence of tasks with each including a couple of new classes
at a time. Such training strategy allows the network to incrementally learn novel knowledge [28] and has become more
prevalent in real-world applications.
† Corresponding authors.

7298

