This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Dehazing via a Multi-Range Temporal Alignment
Network with Physical Prior
⋆

Jiaqi Xu 1, 2, , Xiaowei Hu 2, , Lei Zhu 3, 4, , Qi Dou 1 , Jifeng Dai 5, 2 , Yu Qiao 2 , Pheng-Ann Heng 1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Video dehazing aims to recover haze-free frames with
high visibility and contrast. This paper presents a novel
framework to effectively explore the physical haze priors
and aggregate temporal information. Specifically, we design a memory-based physical prior guidance module to
encode the prior-related features into long-range memory.
Besides, we formulate a multi-range scene radiance recovery module to capture space-time dependencies in multiple
space-time ranges, which helps to effectively aggregate temporal information from adjacent frames. Moreover, we construct the first large-scale outdoor video dehazing benchmark dataset, which contains videos in various real-world
scenarios. Experimental results on both synthetic and real
conditions show the superiority of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Haze largely degrades the visibility and contrast of the
outdoor scenes, which adversely affects the performance of
downstream vision tasks, such as the detection and segmentation in autonomous driving and surveillance. According
to the atmospheric scattering model [18, 38], the formation
of a hazy image is described as:
  \label {eq:physical model} I(x)=J(x)t(x)+A(1-t(x)) \ , 

(1)

where I, J, A, t denote the observed hazy image, scene radiance, atmospheric light, and transmission, respectively, and
x is the pixel index. The transmission t = e−βd(x) describes
the scene radiance attenuation caused by the light scattering,
where β is the scattering coefficient of the atmosphere, and
d denotes the scene depth.
Video dehazing benefits from temporal clues, such as
highly correlated haze thickness and lighting conditions, as
⋆ : This work was done during Jiaqi Xu’s internship at Shanghai Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory.
: Corresponding authors (huxiaowei@pjlab.org.cn; leizhu@ust.hk).

(a) Hazy frame

(b) VDH [46]

(c) CG-IDN [59]

(d) Our method

Figure 1. Visual comparison on a real-world hazy video. Our
method trained on our outdoor dehazing dataset clearly removes
haze without color distortion.

well as the moving foreground objects and backgrounds.
Early deep learning-based video dehazing methods leverage temporal information by simply concatenating input
frames or feature maps [27, 46]. Recently, GC-IDN [59]
proposes to use cost volume and confidence to align and aggregate temporal information. However, existing video dehazing methods suffer from several limitations. First, these
approaches either obtain haze-free frames from the physical model-based component estimation [27, 46] or ignore
the explicit physical prior embedded in the haze imaging
model [59]. The former suffers from inaccurate intermediate prediction, thus leading to error accumulation in the
final results, while the latter overlooks the physical prior information, which plays an important role in haze estimation
and scene recovery. Second, these methods aggregate temporal information by using input/feature stacking or frameto-frame alignment in a local sliding window, which is hard
to obtain global and long-range temporal information.
In this work, we present a novel video dehazing framework via a Multi-range temporal Alignment network with
Physical prior (MAP-Net) to address the aforementioned issues. First, we design a memory-based physical prior guid-

18053

