This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseViT: Revisiting Activation Sparsity for
Efficient High-Resolution Vision Transformer
Xuanyao Chen1,2,∗
Zhijian Liu4,∗
1
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

2

Haotian Tang4
Fudan University

Li Yi1,3
Hang Zhao1,3
3
Tsinghua University

4

Song Han4
MIT

https://sparsevit.mit.edu

Abstract
High-resolution images enable neural networks to learn
richer visual representations. However, this improved performance comes at the cost of growing computational complexity, hindering their usage in latency-sensitive applications. As not all pixels are equal, skipping computations
for less-important regions offers a simple and effective measure to reduce the computation. This, however, is hard to
be translated into actual speedup for CNNs since it breaks
the regularity of the dense convolution workload. In this
paper, we introduce SparseViT that revisits activation sparsity for recent window-based vision transformers (ViTs). As
window attentions are naturally batched over blocks, actual
speedup with window activation pruning becomes possible:
i.e., ∼50% latency reduction with 60% sparsity. Different
layers should be assigned with different pruning ratios due to
their diverse sensitivities and computational costs. We introduce sparsity-aware adaptation and apply the evolutionary
search to efficiently find the optimal layerwise sparsity configuration within the vast search space. SparseViT achieves
speedups of 1.5×, 1.4×, and 1.3× compared to its dense
counterpart in monocular 3D object detection, 2D instance
segmentation, and 2D semantic segmentation, respectively,
with negligible to no loss of accuracy.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of image sensors, high-resolution
images become more and more accessible: e.g., recent mobile phones are able to capture 100-megapixel photos. The
increased image resolution offers great details and enables
neural network models to learn richer visual representations
and achieve better recognition quality. This, however, comes
at the cost of linearly-growing computational complexity,
making them less deployable for resource-constrained applications (e.g., mobile vision, autonomous driving).
∗ indicates equal contributions (listed in alphabetical order).

(a) Direct Downsample: Lower Resolution (0.5x), Dense (100%)

(b) Window Activation Pruning: Higher Resolution (1.0x), Sparse (25%)

Figure 1. Sparse, high-resolution features are far more informative
than dense, low-resolution ones. Compared with direct downsampling, activation pruning can retain important details at a higher
resolution, which is essential for most image recognition tasks.

The simplest solution to address this challenge is to downsample the image to a lower resolution. However, this will
drop the fine details captured from the high-resolution sensor. What a waste! The missing information will bottleneck
the model’s performance upper bound, especially for small
object detection and dense prediction tasks. For instance, the
detection accuracy of a monocular 3D object detector will
degrade by more than 5% in mAP by reducing the height and
width by 1.6×* . Such a large gap cannot be easily recovered
by scaling the model capacity up.
Dropping details uniformly at all positions is clearly suboptimal as not all pixels are equally informative (Figure 1a).
Within an image, the pixels that contain detailed object features are more important than the background pixels. Moti* BEVDet [19] (with Swin Transformer [33] as backbone) achieves 31.2
mAP with 256×704 resolution and 25.90 mAP with 160×440 resolution.

2061

