This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Domain Image Captioning with Discriminative Finetuning
Roberto Dessı̀
Meta AI / UPF

Michele Bevilacqua
Samaya AI

Eleonora Gualdoni
UPF

Francesca Franzon
UPF

Nathanaël Carraz Rakotonirina
UPF

Marco Baroni
UPF / ICREA

Abstract
Neural captioners are typically trained to mimic humangenerated references without optimizing for any specific
communication goal, leading to problems such as the generation of vague captions. In this paper, we show that
fine-tuning an out-of-the-box neural captioner with a selfsupervised discriminative communication objective helps to
recover a plain, visually descriptive language that is more
informative about image contents. Given a target image,
the system must learn to produce a description that enables
an out-of-the-box text-conditioned image retriever to identify such image among a set of candidates. We experiment
with the popular ClipCap captioner, also replicating the
main results with BLIP. In terms of similarity to groundtruth human descriptions, the captions emerging from discriminative finetuning lag slightly behind those generated
by the non-finetuned model, when the latter is trained and
tested on the same caption dataset. However, when the
model is used without further tuning to generate captions
for out-of-domain datasets, our discriminatively-finetuned
captioner generates descriptions that resemble human references more than those produced by the same captioner
wihtout finetuning. We further show that, on the Conceptual Captions dataset, discriminatively finetuned captions
are more helpful than either vanilla ClipCap captions or
ground-truth captions for human annotators tasked with an
image discrimination task.1

1. Introduction
The last decade has seen impressive progress on the task
of automatically generating image descriptions with deep
neural networks [5, 39, 44, 46]. Most of the proposed meth1 Our
code is available at https : / / github . com /
facebookresearch / EGG / tree / main / egg / zoo /
discriminative_captioner.

Figure 1. Setup of our discriminative finetuning method when applied to the ClipCap captioner [27]. All CLIP encoders are frozen,
while the language generation modules (mapper and GPT-2) are
updated based on reward values.

ods try to optimize the similarity of system-produced captions with ground-truth human references, either through a
standard cross-entropy cost function [3], or by maximizing
natural-language-generation (NLG) metrics such as CIDEr
[31, 36] through a reward-based objective. While imitating
human captions is a reasonable goal, it does not take into
account that, in concrete applications, an image description
is produced for a purpose [15, 21].
There are a multitude of context-dependent purposes a
description might be produced for, but a fundamental one
is to correctly characterize an object so that a hearer could
discriminate it from other contextual elements [18]. This
ability to discriminate between referents is a core purpose
of communication, playing a fundamental role in its evolution and acquisition (e.g., [6, 38]). We study here what
happens when we take an out-of-the-box image captioner
that was trained to imitate human captions, and finetune its
language components with a discriminative objective using

6935

