This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Samples with Low Loss Curvature Improve Data Efficiency
Isha Garg
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA

Kaushik Roy
Purdue University
West Lafayette, USA

gargi@purdue.edu

kaushik@purdue.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the second order properties of
the loss of trained deep neural networks with respect to the
training data points to understand the curvature of the loss
surface in the vicinity of these points. We find that there
is an unexpected concentration of samples with very low
curvature. We note that these low curvature samples are
largely consistent across completely different architectures,
and identifiable in the early epochs of training. We show
that the curvature relates to the ‘cleanliness’ of the data
points, with low curvatures samples corresponding to clean,
higher clarity samples, representative of their category.
Alternatively, high curvature samples are often occluded,
have conflicting features and visually atypical of their category. Armed with this insight, we introduce SLo-Curves,
a novel coreset identification and training algorithm. SLocurves identifies the samples with low curvatures as being
more data-efficient and trains on them with an additional
regularizer that penalizes high curvature of the loss surface in their vicinity. We demonstrate the efficacy of SLoCurves on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, where it outperforms state of the art coreset selection methods at small
coreset sizes by up to 9%. The identified coresets generalize across architectures, and hence can be pre-computed to
generate condensed versions of datasets for use in downstream tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/ishagarg/SLo-Curves.

1. Introduction
Deep learning applications have exploded due to access
to big data and computational resources. However, data is
expensive to gather, annotate and store, and directly influences the computational resources required. Storing more
data also runs higher risks of data leakage and privacy violation. It also influences parallelism and communication
bottlenecks between machines [17]. There is limited understanding of the mechanism through which deep learning
models process complex datasets, what constitutes ‘good’
or ‘easy’ examples for learning, and how large a number of

Figure 1. Histograms of training dataset’s curvature for various
networks trained on CIFAR-10.

samples are indeed beneficial. Research on data efficiency
often focuses on doing more with less data. Standard training methods assume all data points from the training set to
be independently and identically distributed from the true
training distribution. Data points are sampled uniformly
during training and treated as having equal significance. An
alternative is to identify representative data points from the
training distribution that are more beneficial to learning than
random uniform sampling [30, 31]. They can be used as
smaller condensed datasets, or upweighted during training
as per their significance. These subsets of important points
are also known as coresets.
Coresets prove useful in many downstream applications.
They are data-efficient and can serve as a good choice of
proxy data for Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [45, 52],
as episodic memory in Continual Learning [2, 6, 60], and
as the choice of augmentation samples during self supervised learning [37]. They can be utilized in many regimes
that may have memory or compute resources, such as for
compute-efficient learning [35,43,46], dataset condensation
[8, 58, 61], efficient Hyper-parameter Optimization (HPO)
[33], and speeding up the training of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [54]. The utility of identifying im-

20290

