This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Label-Free Liver Tumor Segmentation
Qixin Hu1 Yixiong Chen2 Junfei Xiao3 Shuwen Sun4
Jieneng Chen3 Alan Yuille3 Zongwei Zhou3, *
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
The Chinese University of Hong Kong – Shenzhen
3
Johns Hopkins University
4
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University
2

Code and Visual Turing Test: https://github.com/MrGiovanni/SyntheticTumors

Abstract
We demonstrate that AI models can accurately segment
liver tumors without the need for manual annotation by using synthetic tumors in CT scans. Our synthetic tumors
have two intriguing advantages: (I) realistic in shape and
texture, which even medical professionals can confuse with
real tumors; (II) effective for training AI models, which can
perform liver tumor segmentation similarly to the model
trained on real tumors—this result is exciting because no
existing work, using synthetic tumors only, has thus far
reached a similar or even close performance to real tumors.
This result also implies that manual efforts for annotating
tumors voxel by voxel (which took years to create) can be
significantly reduced in the future. Moreover, our synthetic
tumors can automatically generate many examples of small
(or even tiny) synthetic tumors and have the potential to improve the success rate of detecting small liver tumors, which
is critical for detecting the early stages of cancer. In addition to enriching the training data, our synthesizing strategy
also enables us to rigorously assess the AI robustness.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) has dominated medical image
segmentation [21,26,73–75], but training an AI model (e.g.,
U-Net [48]) often requires a large number of annotations.
Annotating medical images is not only expensive and timeconsuming, but also requires extensive medical expertise,
and sometimes needs the assistance of radiology reports and
biopsy results to achieve annotation accuracy [12, 52, 59,
69–71]. Due to its high annotation cost, only roughly 200
CT scans with annotated liver tumors are publicly available
(provided by LiTS [5]) for training and testing models.
* Corresponding author: Zongwei Zhou (zzhou82@jh.edu)

7422

To minimize annotation expenses, generating synthetic
tumors is an emerging research topic. Early attempts include, but only limited to, synthesizing COVID-19 infections [41,63], lung nodules [19] abdominal tumors [27], diabetic lesions [57], and brain tumors [60]. However, the synthetic tumors in those studies appear very different from the
real tumors; due to this, AI models trained using synthetic
tumors perform significantly worse than those trained using real tumors. What makes synthesizing tumors so hard?
There are several important factors: shape, intensity, size,
location, and texture. In this paper, we handcraft a strategy to synthesize liver tumors in abdominal CT scans. Our
key novelties include (i) location without collision with vessels, (ii) texture with scaled-up Gaussian noise, and (iii)
shape generated from distorted ellipsoids. These three aspects are proposed according to the clinical knowledge of
liver tumors (detailed in §3.2). The resulting synthetic tumors are realistic—even medical professionals usually confuse them with real tumors in the visual examination (Figure 1; Table 2). In addition, the model trained on our synthetic tumors achieves a Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC)
of 59.81% for segmenting real liver tumors, whereas AI
trained on real tumors obtains a DSC of 57.63% (Figure 2),
showing that synthetic tumors have the potential to be used
as an alternative to real tumors in training AI models.
These results are exciting because using synthetic tumors only, no previous work has thus far reached a similar (or even close) performance to the model trained on
real tumors [24]. Moreover, our synthesizing strategy can
exhaustively generate tumors with desired locations, sizes,
shapes, textures, and intensities, which are not limited to a
fixed finite-size training set (the well-known limitation of
the conventional training paradigm [65]). For example, it
is hard to collect sufficient training examples with small tumors. It is because early-stage tumors may not cause symptoms, which can delay detection, and these tumors are rela-

