This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Divide and Adapt: Active Domain Adaptation via Customized Learning
Duojun Huang1,2 Jichang Li3 Weikai Chen4 Junshi Huang5 Zhenhua Chai5 Guanbin Li1,2†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Tencent America 5 Meituan
huangdj9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, csjcli@connect.hku.hk, chenwk891@gmail.com
{huangjunshi,chaizhenhua}@meituan.com, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Source

Active domain adaptation (ADA) aims to improve the
model adaptation performance by incorporating active
learning (AL) techniques to label a maximally-informative
subset of target samples. Conventional AL methods do not
consider the existence of domain shift, and hence, fail to
identify the truly valuable samples in the context of domain
adaptation. To accommodate active learning and domain
adaption, the two naturally different tasks, in a collaborative framework, we advocate that a customized learning strategy for the target data is the key to the success
of ADA solutions. We present Divide-and-Adapt (DiaNA),
a new ADA framework that partitions the target instances
into four categories with stratiﬁed transferable properties.
With a novel data subdivision protocol based on uncertainty
and domainness, DiaNA can accurately recognize the most
gainful samples. While sending the informative instances
for annotation, DiaNA employs tailored learning strategies for the remaining categories. Furthermore, we propose an informativeness score that uniﬁes the data partitioning criteria. This enables the use of a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to automatically sample unlabeled data
into the proposed four categories. Thanks to the “divideand-adapt” spirit, DiaNA can handle data with large variations of domain gap. In addition, we show that DiaNA can
generalize to different domain adaptation settings, such as
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), semi-supervised
domain adaptation (SSDA), source-free domain adaptation
(SFDA), etc.

Target

Centroids

(1) Confident
Consistent

(2) Uncertain
Consistent

(3) Uncertain
Inconsistent

(4) Confident
Inconsistent

For source model:

Transferable
centroids

Transferable
margins

Need
Annotation

Challenging
Samples

Backpack

Pan
Fan

Bike
TV

Figure 1. The illustration of our proposed Divide-and-Adapt
mechanism to divide target samples into different data subsets for
customized learning.

the domain disparity. Nevertheless, DA methods are signiﬁcantly outperformed by their supervised counterparts due to
the scarceness of annotation as demonstrated in [4, 14, 27].
In practice, it is cost-effective to get a moderate amount
of target samples labeled to boost the performance of domain adaptation. Active learning (AL) approaches seek
to select samples with uncertainty [9, 12, 29, 30] and diversity [19, 25] to best beneﬁt the model, which properly
matches the demand. However, previous AL methods assume that both the labeled and unlabeled data follow the
same distribution, such a strategy may become ineffective
to the DA scenarios where the target data suffer from domain shift. The recently proposed active domain adaptation
(ADA) [4, 22, 31] aims to resolve this issue by actively selecting the maximally-informative instances such that the
performance of the transferred model can be best boosted
with a limited annotation budget.
The key to the success of ADA is to strike a good balance
between the highly coupled yet inherently different tasks:
active learning and domain adaptation. The real-world target data typically exhibit either of the two characteristics:

1. Introduction
Domain adaptation (DA) approaches strive to generalize model trained on a labeled source domain to a target
domain with rare annotation [5, 13, 16, 24] by coping with
† Corresponding author is Guanbin Li.

7651

