This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-Time Neural Light Field on Mobile Devices
Junli Cao1
Huan Wang2
Pavlo Chemerys1
Vladislav Shakhrai1
Ju Hu1
Yun Fu2
Denys Makoviichuk1
Sergey Tulyakov1
Jian Ren1
1
2
Snap Inc.
Northeastern University
Abstract
Recent efforts in Neural Rendering Fields (NeRF) have
shown impressive results on novel view synthesis by utilizing implicit neural representation to represent 3D scenes.
Due to the process of volumetric rendering, the inference
speed for NeRF is extremely slow, limiting the application
scenarios of utilizing NeRF on resource-constrained hardware, such as mobile devices. Many works have been conducted to reduce the latency of running NeRF models. However, most of them still require high-end GPU for acceleration or extra storage memory, which is all unavailable
on mobile devices. Another emerging direction utilizes the
neural light field (NeLF) for speedup, as only one forward
pass is performed on a ray to predict the pixel color. Nevertheless, to reach a similar rendering quality as NeRF, the
network in NeLF is designed with intensive computation,
which is not mobile-friendly. In this work, we propose an
efficient network that runs in real-time on mobile devices
for neural rendering. We follow the setting of NeLF to train
our network. Unlike existing works, we introduce a novel
network architecture that runs efficiently on mobile devices
with low latency and small size, i.e., saving 15⇥ ⇠ 24⇥
storage compared with MobileNeRF. Our model achieves
high-resolution generation while maintaining real-time inference for both synthetic and real-world scenes on mobile devices, e.g., 18.04ms (iPhone 13) for rendering one
1008 ⇥ 756 image of real 3D scenes. Additionally, we
achieve similar image quality as NeRF and better quality
than MobileNeRF (PSNR 26.15 vs. 25.91 on the real-world
forward-facing dataset)1 .

1. Introduction
Remarkable progress seen in the domain of neural rendering [33] promises to democratize asset creation and rendering, where no mesh, texture, or material is required –
only a neural network that learns a representation of an object or a scene from multi-view observations. The trained
1 More demo examples in our Webpage.

Figure 1. Examples of deploying our approach on mobile devices for real-time interaction with users. Due to the small model
size (8.3MB) and fast inference speed (18 ⇠ 26ms per image on
iPhone 13), we can build neural rendering applications where users
interact with 3D objects on their devices, enabling various applications such as virtual try-on. We use publicly available software
to make the on-device application for visualization [1, 3].

model can be queried at arbitrary viewpoints to generate
novel views. To be made widely available, this exciting application requires such methods to run on resourceconstrained devices, such as mobile phones, conforming to
their limitations in computing, wireless connectivity, and
hard drive capacity.
Unfortunately, the impressive image quality and capabilities of NeRF [33] come with a price of slow rendering speed. To return the color of the queried pixel, hundreds of points need to be sampled along the ray that ends
up in that pixel, which is then integrated to get the radiance. To enable real-time applications, many works have
been proposed [12, 34, 37, 45], yet, they still require highend GPUs for rendering and hence are not available for
resource-constrained applications on mobile or edge devices. An attempt is made to trade rendering speed with
storage in MobileNeRF [10]. While showing promising
acceleration results, their method requires storage for texturing saving. For example, for a single real-world scene
from the forward-facing dataset [33], MobileNeRF requires
201.5MB of storage. Clearly, downloading and storing tens,
hundreds, or even thousands of such scenes in MobileNeRF

8328

