This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bootstrapping Objectness from Videos by Relaxed Common Fate and Visual Grouping
Long Lian1
UC Berkeley

longlian@berkeley.edu

2

Zhirong Wu2
Microsoft Research Asia

wuzhiron@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study learning object segmentation from unlabeled
videos. Humans can easily segment moving objects without
knowing what they are. The Gestalt law of common fate, i.e.,
what move at the same speed belong together, has inspired
unsupervised object discovery based on motion segmentation. However, common fate is not a reliable indicator of
objectness: Parts of an articulated / deformable object may
not move at the same speed, whereas shadows / reflections
of an object always move with it but are not part of it.
Our insight is to bootstrap objectness by first learning
image features from relaxed common fate and then refining
them based on visual appearance grouping within the image itself and across images statistically. Specifically, we
learn an image segmenter first in the loop of approximating
optical flow with constant segment flow plus small withinsegment residual flow, and then by refining it for more coherent appearance and statistical figure-ground relevance.
On unsupervised video object segmentation, using only
ResNet and convolutional heads, our model surpasses the
state-of-the-art by absolute gains of 7/9/5% on DAVIS16
/ STv2 / FBMS59 respectively, demonstrating the effectiveness of our ideas. Our code is publicly available.

1. Introduction
Object segmentation from videos is useful to many vision and robotics tasks [1, 19, 30, 32]. However, most methods rely on pixel-wise human annotations [4,5,13,20,23,25,
26, 29, 33, 35, 46, 47], limiting their practical applications.
We focus on learning object segmentation from entirely
unlabeled videos (Fig. 1). The Gestalt law of common fate,
i.e., what move at the same speed belong together, has inspired a large body of unsupervised object discovery based
on motion segmentation [6, 18, 22, 28, 41, 43, 45].
There are three main types of unsupervised video object
segmentation (UVOS) methods. 1) Motion segmentation
methods [18,28,41,43] use motion signals from a pretrained

Image

3

Stella X. Yu1,3
University of Michigan
stellayu@umich.edu

Optical Flow

AMD+

OCLR

Ours

Reflection Articulation

1

Figure 1. We study how to discover objectness from unlabeled
videos based on common motion and appearance. AMD [22]
and OCLR [41] rely on common fate, i.e., what move at the same
speed belong together, which is not always a reliable indicator of
objectness. Top: Articulation of a human body means that object
parts may not move at the same speed; common fate thus leads
to partial objectness. Bottom: Reflection of a swan in water always moves with it but is not part of it; common fate thus leads
to excessive objectness. Our method discovers full objectness by
relaxed common fate and visual grouping. AMD+ refers to AMD
with RAFT flows as motion supervision for fair comparison.

optical flow estimator to segment an image into foreground
objects and background (Fig. 1). OCLR [41] achieves stateof-the-art performance by first synthesizing a dataset with
arbitrary objects moving and then training a motion segmentation model with known object masks. 2) Motionguided image segmentation methods such as GWM [6]
use motion segmentation loss to guide appearance-based
segmentation. Motion between video frames is only required during training, not during testing. 3) Joint appearance segmentation and motion estimation methods such
as AMD [22] learn motion and segmentation simultaneously in a self-supervised fashion by reconstructing the next
frame based on how segments of the current frame move.
However, while common fate is effective at binding parts
of heterogeneous appearances into one whole moving object, it is not a reliable indicator of objectness (Fig. 1).
1. Articulation: Parts of an articulated or deformable object may not move at the same speed; common fate thus
leads to partial objectness containing the major moving
part only. In Fig.1 top, AMD+ discovers only the mid-

14582

