This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-aware Vision-based Metric Cross-view Geolocalization
Florian Fervers1 Sebastian Bullinger1 Christoph Bodensteiner1 Michael Arens1 Rainer Stiefelhagen2
1
Fraunhofer IOSB 2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
1

{firstname.lastname}@iosb.fraunhofer.de

2

rainer.stiefelhagen@kit.edu

Figure 1. Probability distributions for the vehicle position predicted by our model which matches the vehicle’s surround camera images with
an aerial image. The first and second rows show the front and back cameras in the Ford AV dataset [6]. The last row shows the aerial image
with the search region in the center and driving direction pointing upwards. Blue and red color refer to low and high probability predicted by
our model. Map data: Bing Maps © 2022 TomTom, © Vexcel Imaging [1].

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel method for vision-based
metric cross-view geolocalization (CVGL) that matches
the camera images captured from a ground-based vehicle
with an aerial image to determine the vehicle’s geo-pose.
Since aerial images are globally available at low cost,
they represent a potential compromise between two established paradigms of autonomous driving, i.e. using expensive
high-definition prior maps or relying entirely on the sensor
data captured at runtime.
We present an end-to-end differentiable model that uses
the ground and aerial images to predict a probability distribution over possible vehicle poses. We combine multiple vehicle datasets with aerial images from orthophoto providers
on which we demonstrate the feasibility of our method. Since

the ground truth poses are often inaccurate w.r.t. the aerial
images, we implement a pseudo-label approach to produce
more accurate ground truth poses and make them publicly
available.
While previous works require training data from the target region to achieve reasonable localization accuracy (i.e.
same-area evaluation), our approach overcomes this limitation and outperforms previous results even in the strictly
more challenging cross-area case. We improve the previous
state-of-the-art by a large margin even without ground or
aerial data from the test region, which highlights the model’s
potential for global-scale application. We further integrate
the uncertainty-aware predictions in a tracking framework
to determine the vehicle’s trajectory over time resulting in a
mean position error on KITTI-360 of 0.78m.

21621

