This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Gradient Projection Continual Learning: Stability / Plasticity
Feature Space Decoupling
Zhen Zhao1 , Zhizhong Zhang1,† , Xin Tan1 , Jun Liu2 , Yanyun Qu3 , Yuan Xie1,† , Lizhuang Ma1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab 3 School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
{51255901056}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {zzzhang,xtan,yxie,lzma}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
{junsenselee}@tencent.com, {yyqu}@xmu.edu.cn

Continual learning aims to incrementally learn novel
classes over time, while not forgetting the learned knowledge. Recent studies have found that learning would not
forget if the updated gradient is orthogonal to the feature
space. However, previous approaches require the gradient
to be fully orthogonal to the whole feature space, leading to
poor plasticity, as the feasible gradient direction becomes
narrow when the tasks continually come, i.e., feature space
is unlimitedly expanded. In this paper, we propose a space
decoupling (SD) algorithm to decouple the feature space
into a pair of complementary subspaces, i.e., the stability
space I, and the plasticity space R. I is established by
conducting space intersection between the historic and current feature space, and thus I contains more task-shared
bases. R is constructed by seeking the orthogonal complementary subspace of I, and thus R mainly contains taskspecific bases. By putting distinguishing constraints on R
and I, our method achieves a better balance between stability and plasticity. Extensive experiments are conducted
by applying SD to gradient projection baselines, and show
SD is model-agnostic and achieves SOTA results on publicly
available datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved promising performance on various vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, and action recognition
[3, 9, 32, 34, 36]. However, DNNs are typically trained offline on a fixed dataset, and therefore the models are not
able to incrementally learn novel concepts (novel classes),
which has become an emerging need in many real-world
† Corresponding authors.

Ours

Former Methods

Abstract

Plasticity
Correlated

Stability
Correlated

Gradient

Space
Decoupling

Gradient

Bases

𝐼

Gradient

𝑅

Feature Space
High Stability

High Plasticity

Figure 1. Left: Recent gradient projection methods. All of them
constrain the gradient to be fully orthogonal to the feature space.
Right: We propose a space decoupling (SD) algorithm to decouple
the feature space into a pair of complementary subspaces, i.e., the
stability space I, and the plasticity space R. To balance stability
and plasticity, more bases are preserved in I, and less in R, while
stricter gradient constraints are put on I and looser on R.

applications [11, 16, 21, 26, 30].
In this context, continual learning (CL) [14] is proposed,
aiming to continually learn novel concepts, i.e., a series
of learning tasks, while not forgetting the learned knowledge [1, 4, 6, 10, 15, 39]. Recent studies have found that
learning would have less impact on old tasks if the direction of the gradient is orthogonal to the space spanned by
the features from old tasks [18, 23, 31, 38]. With this motivation, a couple of continual learning methods referring
to feature space methods have been proposed and can be
generally divided into two classes: (a) Orthogonal based
methods; (b) Null-space based methods.
Orthogonal based methods like GPM [31] and TRGP
[23] calibrate the gradient in the direction fully orthogonal to the feature space, while Null-space based methods
like Adam-NSCL [38], AdNS [18] train the model in the
null space of input features. It is easy to prove that these

3718

