This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Raw Image Reconstruction with Learned Compact Metadata
Yufei Wang1 , Yi Yu1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Lanqing Guo1 , Lap-Pui Chau3 , Alex C. Kot1 , Bihan Wen1 *
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{yufei001, yuyi0010, lanqing001, eackot, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg
yangwh@pcl.ac.cn

lap-pui.chau@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

Raw
sRGB

While raw images exhibit advantages over sRGB images
(e.g., linearity and fine-grained quantization level), they are
not widely used by common users due to the large storage requirements. Very recent works propose to compress
raw images by designing the sampling masks in the raw
image pixel space, leading to suboptimal image representations and redundant metadata. In this paper, we propose
a novel framework to learn a compact representation in the
latent space serving as the metadata in an end-to-end manner. Furthermore, we propose a novel sRGB-guided context model with the improved entropy estimation strategies,
which leads to better reconstruction quality, smaller size
of metadata, and faster speed. We illustrate how the proposed raw image compression scheme can adaptively allocate more bits to image regions that are important from
a global perspective. The experimental results show that
the proposed method can achieve superior raw image reconstruction results using a smaller size of the metadata
on both uncompressed sRGB images and JPEG images.
The code will be released at https://github.com/
wyf0912/R2LCM .

1. Introduction
As an unprocessed and uncompressed data format directly obtained from camera sensors, raw images has unique
advantages for computer vision tasks in practice. For example, it is easier to model the distribution of real image noise
in raw space, which enables generalized deep real denoising
networks [1, 40]; As pixel values in raw images have a linear relationship with scene radiance, they own benefits to recover shadows and highlights without bringing in the grainy
noise usually associated with high ISO [12, 16, 33, 35],
which greatly contributes to the low-light image enhancement. Besides, with richer colors, raw images offer more
room for correction and artistic manipulation.
* Corresponding author.

UNet
Sampling
mask

ISP

Raw

Sampled
Raw
Pixels

Decoder

Reconstructed
Raw

sRGB

(a) Previous SOTA methods sample in the raw space [26, 30].
Raw
sRGB

Encoder

Learned
Compact
Feature
Learned entropy coding

Decoder
01···10

Reconstructed
Raw

bitstream

(b) The proposed method samples in the latent space.

Figure 1. The comparison between the previous SOTA methods (in
blue) and our proposed method (in green). Different from the previous work where the sampling strategy is hand-crafted or learned
by a pre-defined sampling loss, we learn the sampling and reconstruction process in a unified end-to-end manner. In addition, the
sampling of previous works is in the raw pixel space, which in fact
still includes a large amount of spatial redundancy and precision
redundancy. Instead, we conduct sampling in the feature space,
and more compact metadata is obtained for pixels in the feature
space via the adaptive allocation. The saved metadata is annotated
in dashed box.

Despite of these merits, raw images are not widely
adopted by common users due to large file sizes. In addition, since raw images are unprocessed, additional post processing steps, e.g., demosaicing and denoising, are always
needed before displaying them. For fast image rendering in
practice, a copy of JPEG image is usually saved along with
its raw data [2]. To improve the storage efficiency, rawimage reconstruction problem attracts more and more attention, i.e., how to minimize the amount of metadata required
for de-rendering sRGB images back to raw space. Classic
metadata-based raw image reconstruction methods model
the workflow of image signal processing (ISP) pipeline and
save the required parameters in ISP as metadata [27]. To
further reduce the storage and computational complexity towards a lightweight and flexible reverse ISP reconstruction,

18206

