This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STDLens: Model Hijacking-resilient Federated Learning for Object Detection
Ka-Ho Chow, Ling Liu, Wenqi Wei, Fatih Ilhan, Yanzhao Wu
Georgia Instutite of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
khchow@gatech.edu, ling.liu@cc.gatech.edu, {wenqiwei,filhan,yanzhaowu}@gatech.edu

Abstract

Scenario

Federated Learning (FL) has been gaining popularity as
a collaborative learning framework to train deep learningbased object detection models over a distributed population of clients. Despite its advantages, FL is vulnerable
to model hijacking. The attacker can control how the object detection system should misbehave by implanting Trojaned gradients using only a small number of compromised
clients in the collaborative learning process. This paper
introduces STDLens, a principled approach to safeguarding FL against such attacks. We first investigate existing
mitigation mechanisms and analyze their failures caused by
the inherent errors in spatial clustering analysis on gradients. Based on the insights, we introduce a three-tier forensic framework to identify and expel Trojaned gradients and
reclaim the performance over the course of FL. We consider three types of adaptive attacks and demonstrate the robustness of STDLens against advanced adversaries. Extensive experiments show that STDLens can protect FL against
different model hijacking attacks and outperform existing
methods in identifying and removing Trojaned gradients
with significantly higher precision and much lower falsepositive rates. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/git-disl/STDLens.

Benign

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) for object detection has attracted numerous applications [12], especially in healthcare,
with strict privacy regulations protecting patient medical
records [25, 27]. Instead of using a centralized data curator, FL can train a global object detection model with a distributed population of clients. Each client only shares its
fixed-size gradient (updated model) parameters (e.g., 246.9
MB for YOLOv3 [15]) with the FL server for aggregation
while keeping its private raw data local (e.g., terabytes of
videos) [13]. Such a paradigm lowers the bar for knowledge sharing and eases the recruitment of contributors, but
it becomes vulnerable to model hijacking [9, 21].
Model hijacking aims at interfering with the training pro-

Class-Poison
Victim: Person

BBox-Poison
Victim: Person

Objn-Poison
Victim: Person

Object Detection Results

APperson APcar
52.43

74.12

38.22
71.79
(↓27%) (↓3%)
18.06
72.82
(↓66%) (↓2%)
37.61
71.59
(↓28%) (↓3%)

Table 1. FL-trained detectors can be hijacked by perception poisoning to misdetect objects of designated classes (e.g., person) in
three different ways (2nd to 4th rows) [3], while objects of nonvictim classes (e.g., car) have negligible performance degradation.

cess of a machine learning model and causes it to misbehave at the deployment stage [17]. The FL-trained global
model can be indirectly hijacked by a small number of compromised clients who share Trojaned gradients to gradually
confuse the learning trajectory of FL [10]. Such gradients
can be generated in black-box through data poisoning. The
attacker only has to poison the local training data owned by
a compromised client, such as changing the ground-truth
label of certain objects by dirty-label poisoning [21] or implanting a backdoor to trigger the malfunctioning of a hijacked model [1, 2, 8, 20]. The FL software will take the
poisoned local training data and unintentionally generate
malicious gradients for sharing. With the growing number of real-world applications, recent work has begun to
understand the hijacking of FL-based object detection systems [3]. As shown in Table 1, the adversary can designate
how the hijacked model should misdetect objects of certain classes (e.g., person) while ensuring other objects can
still be precisely detected (e.g., car). This fine-grained control opens the door for an adversary to design a stealthy attack configuration to hurt the FL system yet remains hardly
noticeable by the owner [5], leading to catastrophic consequences such as car crashes.

16343

