This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuMap: Neural Coordinate Mapping by
Auto-Transdecoder for Camera Localization
Shitao Tang

Sicong Tang

Andrea Tagliasacchi Ping Tan
Simon Fraser University

Yasutaka Furukawa

{shitao tang, sta105, andrea.tagliasacchi, pingtan, furukawa}@sfu.ca
Feature
Matching

Coordinate
Regression

NeuMap
(Ours)

Feature Matches

Dense Coords.

Sparse Coords.

Transformer

CNN

NeuMap
Squeezer

60

PixelLoc
Cascaded
Active Search

40

CNN

CNN

CNN

20

Database

Query
Scene agnostic

HLoc

80

Accuracy

Transformer

Aachen Night Performance

100

Query

Codes

Query

0

QP+SIFT
DSAC++
0

ESAC

.25 .05 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.6 3.2 6.4 12.8

Data size (GB)

Scene specific

Figure 1. The paper presents neural coordinate mapping (NeuMap) for camera localization. NeuMap encodes a scene into a set of codes
and uses a scene-agnostic transformer to decode the coordinates of key-points in a query image. The right compares the localization
accuracy and the data size for Aachen Night benchmark. The accuracy is averaged over three translation/rotation error thresholds (0.25m,
2◦ ), (0.5m, 5◦ ), or (5m, 10◦ ). NeuMap and Squeezer control representation sizes and are illustrated by curves with multiple data points.

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end neural mapping
method for camera localization, encoding a whole scene
into a grid of latent codes, with which a Transformerbased auto-decoder regresses 3D coordinates of query pixels. State-of-the-art camera localization methods require
each scene to be stored as a 3D point cloud with per-point
features, which takes several gigabytes of storage per scene.
While compression is possible, the performance drops significantly at high compression rates. NeuMap achieves extremely high compression rates with minimal performance
drop by using 1) learnable latent codes to store scene information and 2) a scene-agnostic Transformer-based autodecoder to infer coordinates for a query pixel. The sceneagnostic network design also learns robust matching priors
by training with large-scale data, and further allows us to
just optimize the codes quickly for a new scene while fixing
the network weights. Extensive evaluations with five benchmarks show that NeuMap outperforms all the other coor-

dinate regression methods significantly and reaches similar
performance as the feature matching methods while having a much smaller scene representation size. For example,
NeuMap achieves 39.1% accuracy in Aachen night benchmark with only 6MB of data, while other compelling methods require 100MB or a few gigabytes and fail completely
under high compression settings. The codes are available
at https://github.com/Tangshitao/NeuMap.

1. Introduction
Visual localization determines camera position and orientation based on image observations, an essential task for
applications such as VR/AR and self-driving cars. Despite
significant progress, accurate visual localization remains a
challenge, especially when dealing with large viewpoint and
illumination changes. Compact map representation is another growing concern, as applications like delivery robots
may require extensive maps. Standard visual localization
techniques rely on massive databases of keypoints with 3D

929

