This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PiMAE: Point Cloud and Image Interactive
Masked Autoencoders for 3D Object Detection
Anthony Chen1,∗ , Kevin Zhang1,∗ , Renrui Zhang2 , Zihan Wang1 ,
Yuheng Lu1,3 , Yandong Guo4 , Shanghang Zhang1,†
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Wukong Lab, iKingtec 4 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{antonchen, kevinzyz6, shanghang}@pku.edu.cn
zhangrenrui@pjlab.org.cn, rzhevcherkasy@outlook.com
luyuheng@ikingtec.com, yandong.guo@live.com

Abstract

Image

Point Cloud
Project

Masked Autoencoders learn strong visual representations and achieve state-of-the-art results in several independent modalities, yet very few works have addressed their
capabilities in multi-modality settings. In this work, we focus on point cloud and RGB image data, two modalities
that are often presented together in the real world, and
explore their meaningful interactions. To improve upon
the cross-modal synergy in existing works, we propose PiMAE, a self-supervised pre-training framework that promotes 3D and 2D interaction through three aspects. Specifically, we first notice the importance of masking strategies
between the two sources and utilize a projection module
to complementarily align the mask and visible tokens of
the two modalities. Then, we utilize a well-crafted twobranch MAE pipeline with a novel shared decoder to promote cross-modality interaction in the mask tokens. Finally, we design a unique cross-modal reconstruction module to enhance representation learning for both modalities. Through extensive experiments performed on largescale RGB-D scene understanding benchmarks (SUN RGBD and ScannetV2), we discover it is nontrivial to interactively learn point-image features, where we greatly improve
multiple 3D detectors, 2D detectors, and few-shot classifiers by 2.9%, 6.7%, and 2.4%, respectively. Code is available at https://github.com/BLVLab/PiMAE.

1. Introduction
The advancements in deep learning-based technology
have developed many significant real-world applications,
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Tokenize

Tokenize

Complement Masking
Reconstructed Point Cloud

Specific
Encoders

Reconstructed Image

Shared Encoder

Shared Decoder
Specific
Decoders

Reconstructed Image features

Cross-modal Reconstruction

Figure 1. With our proposed design, PiMAE learns cross-modal
representations by interactively dealing with multi-modal data and
performing reconstruction.

such as robotics and autonomous driving. In these scenarios, 3D and 2D data in the form of point cloud and RGB images from a specific view are readily available. Therefore,
many existing methods perform multi-modal visual learning, a popular approach leveraging both 3D and 2D information for better representational abilities.
Intuitively, the paired 2D pixels and 3D points present
different perspectives of the same scene. They encode different degrees of information that, when combined, may become a source of performance improvement. Designing a
model that interacts with both modalities, such as geometry
and RGB, is a difficult task because directly feeding them to
a model results in marginal, if not degraded, performance,
as demonstrated by [34].
In this paper, we aim to answer the question: how to
design a more interactive unsupervised multi-modal learn-

5291

