This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Hidden Positives for Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
Hyun Seok Seong, WonJun Moon, SuBeen Lee, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{gustjrdl95, wjun0830, leesb7426, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a major task for scene understanding and plays a crucial role in many applications including medical imaging and autonomous driving [5, 11,
28, 34, 38, 41]. However, existing supervised approaches
demand large-scale pixel-level annotations which require
huge labeling costs. It has triggered the advent of weaklysupervised [23, 33, 35, 36] and unsupervised semantic segmentation [8, 14, 19, 37] which are to learn without expensive pixel-level annotations.
* Corresponding author

19540

Image

Label

Ours

STEGO

(a) Visualization
Anchor
Local hidden positive
Patch nearby anchor
but not local hidden
positive

0.6

Global hidden positive
Threshold for
global hidden positive (Eq.2)

0.4
0.2
0

- 0.2

Patch index (sorted by similarity)

(b) Global hidden positive

Attention score

Anchor
0.8

Similarity

Dramatic demand for manpower to label pixel-level annotations triggered the advent of unsupervised semantic
segmentation. Although the recent work employing the vision transformer (ViT) backbone shows exceptional performance, there is still a lack of consideration for task-speciﬁc
training guidance and local semantic consistency. To tackle
these issues, we leverage contrastive learning by excavating
hidden positives to learn rich semantic relationships and
ensure semantic consistency in local regions. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst discover two types of global hidden positives, taskagnostic and task-speciﬁc ones for each anchor based on
the feature similarities deﬁned by a ﬁxed pre-trained backbone and a segmentation head-in-training, respectively. A
gradual increase in the contribution of the latter induces the
model to capture task-speciﬁc semantic features. In addition, we introduce a gradient propagation strategy to learn
semantic consistency between adjacent patches, under the
inherent premise that nearby patches are highly likely to
possess the same semantics. Speciﬁcally, we add the loss
propagating to local hidden positives, semantically similar
nearby patches, in proportion to the predeﬁned similarity
scores. With these training schemes, our proposed method
achieves new state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in COCO-stuff,
Cityscapes, and Potsdam-3 datasets. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/hynnsk/HP.

0.6

Attention score for
Threshold for local hidden positive (Eq.7)

0.4
0.2
0

Attention score for

Image index

(c) Local hidden positive

Figure 1. Assuming a mini-batch comprising two images shown in
(a), we describe two types of hidden positives, to leverage for contrastive learning. (a) With two types of hidden positives introduced
in (b) and (c), we provide an example of how our training scheme
provides more precise and consistent semantics. (b) (top) Semantically analogous patches throughout the mini-batch are selected as
global hidden positives. (bottom) Data-driven criterion per anchor
is designed for reliable positive collection. With the criterion, selected positives are illustrated in (b top). (c) (top) We deﬁne local
hidden positives for each anchor to be the adjacent patches with
high semantic consistency, i.e., blue boxes. (bottom) Average attention scores for adjacent patches from the pretrained transformer
architecture. The blue line represents the attention score for local
hidden positives while the red line for patches neighboring anchors
but having low semantic consistency.

Particularly, unsupervised semantic segmentation is one
of the most challenging tasks, since it needs to capture
pixel-level semantics from unlabeled data. In this context,
clustering-based approaches have been proposed to learn

