This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BAD-NeRF: Bundle Adjusted Deblur Neural Radiance Fields
Peng Wang1,2
Lingzhe Zhao2
1
Zhejiang University

Ruijie Ma2
Peidong Liu2†
2
Westlake University

{wangpeng, zhaolingzhe, maruijie, liupeidong}@westlake.edu.cn

Input blurry image

SRN-Deblur [48]

Deblur-NeRF [23]

BAD-NeRF

Ground truth

Figure 1. Given a set of severe motion blurred images, our bundle adjusted deblur NeRF (BAD-NeRF) jointly learns the neural radiance
fields and recovers the camera motion trajectories within exposure time. It synthesizes novel images of higher quality than prior works.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have received considerable attention recently, due to its impressive capability in
photo-realistic 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis,
given a set of posed camera images. Earlier work usually
assumes the input images are of good quality. However, image degradation (e.g. image motion blur in low-light conditions) can easily happen in real-world scenarios, which
would further affect the rendering quality of NeRF. In this
paper, we present a novel bundle adjusted deblur Neural
Radiance Fields (BAD-NeRF), which can be robust to severe motion blurred images and inaccurate camera poses.
Our approach models the physical image formation process
of a motion blurred image, and jointly learns the parameters
of NeRF and recovers the camera motion trajectories during exposure time. In experiments, we show that by directly
modeling the real physical image formation process, BADNeRF achieves superior performance over prior works on
both synthetic and real datasets. Code and data are available at https://github.com/WU-CVGL/BAD-NeRF.

1. Introduction
Acquiring accurate 3D scene geometry and appearance
from a set of 2D images has been a long standing problem
† Corresponding author.

in computer vision. As a fundamental block for many vision applications, such as novel view image synthesis and
robotic navigation, great progress has been made over the
last decades. Classic approaches usually represent the 3D
scene explicitly, in the form of 3D point cloud [8, 52], triangular mesh [4, 5, 10] or volumetric grid [31, 45]. Recent
advancements in implicit 3D representation by using a deep
neural network, such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
[27], have enabled photo-realistic 3D reconstruction and
novel view image synthesis, given well posed multi-view
images.
NeRF takes a 5D vector (i.e. for spatial location and
viewing direction of the sampled 3D point) as input and
predicts its radiance and volume density via a multilayer
perceptron. The corresponding pixel intensity or depth
can then be computed by differentiable volume rendering
[19, 25]. While many methods have been proposed to further improve NeRF’s performance, such as rendering efficiency [11,28], training with inaccurate poses [20] etc., limited work has been proposed to address the issue of training
with motion blurred images. Motion blur is one of the most
common artifacts that degrades images in practical application scenarios. It usually occurs in low-light conditions
where longer exposure times are necessary. Motion blurred
images would bring two main challenges to existing NeRF
training pipeline: a) NeRF usually assumes the rendered

4170

