This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Prototypical Network for Cross Domain Few-Shot Learning
Fei Zhou1 Peng Wang2 * Lei Zhang1† Wei Wei1 Yanning Zhang1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 University of Wollonggong

1

zhoufei@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

pengw@uow.edu.au

{nwpuzhanglei,weiweinwpu,ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction

Prototypical Network is a popular few-shot solver that
aims at establishing a feature metric generalizable to novel
few-shot classiﬁcation (FSC) tasks using deep neural networks. However, its performance drops dramatically when
generalizing to the FSC tasks in new domains. In this study,
we revisit this problem and argue that the devil lies in the
simplicity bias pitfall in neural networks. In speciﬁc, the
network tends to focus on some biased shortcut features
(e.g., color, shape, etc.) that are exclusively sufﬁcient to distinguish very few classes in the meta-training tasks within
a pre-deﬁned domain, but fail to generalize across domains
as some desirable semantic features. To mitigate this problem, we propose a Local-global Distillation Prototypical
Network (LDP-net). Different from the standard Prototypical Network, we establish a two-branch network to classify
the query image and its random local crops, respectively.
Then, knowledge distillation is conducted among these two
branches to enforce their class afﬁliation consistency. The
rationale behind is that since such global-local semantic relationship is expected to hold regardless of data domains,
the local-global distillation is beneﬁcial to exploit some
cross-domain transferable semantic features for feature
metric establishment. Moreover, such local-global semantic consistency is further enforced among different images of
the same class to reduce the intra-class semantic variation
of the resultant feature. In addition, we propose to update
the local branch as Exponential Moving Average (EMA)
over training episodes, which makes it possible to better
distill cross-episode knowledge and further enhance the
generalization performance. Experiments on eight crossdomain FSC benchmarks empirically clarify our argument
and show the state-of-the-art results of LDP-net. Code is
available in https://github.com/NWPUZhoufei/LDP-Net

* F. Zhou and P. Wang contributed equally in this work.
† Corresponding author.

20061

Prototypical Network (ProtoNet) [1] is a popular fewshot classiﬁcation (FSC) method, which works by establishing a feature metric generalizable to novel few-shot tasks
using deep neural networks. It adopts an episode-based
learning strategy, where each episode, e.g., N -way K-shot,
is formulated as a contrastive learning task to identify the
correct class for each query sample from a set of limited
classes represented by prototypes derived from few support samples. Thanks to the simplicity of the framework
and appealing few-shot learning performance, ProtoNet has
gained great research attention [2–5].
However, the performance of typical ProtoNet declines
greatly when generalizing to FSC tasks in new domains,
e.g., apply the ProtoNet trained on natural images in miniImageNet [6] to the ﬁne-grained bird images in CUB [7].
This severely restricts the practicality of ProtoNet in real
applications. In this work, we propose to re-inspect the intrinsic reason for the limited cross-domain generalization
capability of ProtoNet and revive it in the cross-domain setting with right medicine. Speciﬁcally, the key for crossdomain generalization, especially in few-shot setting with
ProtoNet, lies on exploiting some semantic information of
each class that is invariant across different domains. To
this end, typical ProtoNet resorts to taking advantages of
the great expressive capacity of deep neural networks for
feature learning. Obviously, it fails to exploit the desirable
cross-domain transferable semantic features. In that case,
what feature representation are obtained by the deep neural network? Some recent works [8–10] may have found
the possible answer, viz., simplicity bias. It has shown that
neural networks exclusively latch on to the simplest feature
(e.g., color, shape, etc.) and tends to ignore the complex
predictive features (e.g., semantics of the object). Inspired
by this, we argue that the limited cross-domain generalization capacity of ProtoNet is incurred by the simplicity bias,
viz., it tends to exploit some biased shortcut features that are
exclusively sufﬁcient to distinguish very few classes in the
meta-training tasks within a pre-deﬁned domain, but prone
to be variant across different domains.

