This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unicode Analogies: An Anti-Objectivist Visual Reasoning Challenge
Steven Spratley
Krista A. Ehinger
Tim Miller
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
https://github.com/SvenShade/UnicodeAnalogies

Abstract
Analogical reasoning enables agents to extract relevant
information from scenes, and efficiently navigate them in
familiar ways. While progressive-matrix problems (PMPs)
are becoming popular for the development and evaluation
of analogical reasoning in computer vision, we argue that
the dominant methodology in this area struggles to expose
the lack of meaningful generalisation in solvers, and reinforces an objectivist stance on perception – that objects can
only be seen one way – which we believe to be counterproductive. In this paper, we introduce the Unicode Analogies challenge, consisting of polysemic, character-based
PMPs to benchmark fluid conceptualisation ability in vision
systems. Writing systems have evolved characters at multiple levels of abstraction, from iconic through to symbolic
representations, producing both visually interrelated yet exceptionally diverse images when compared to those exhibited by existing PMP datasets. Our framework has been designed to challenge models by presenting tasks much harder
to complete without robust feature extraction, while remaining largely solvable by human participants. We therefore
argue that Unicode Analogies elegantly captures and tests
for a facet of human visual reasoning that is severely lacking in current-generation AI.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, statistical classification models have been
designed to neatly cleave data into categories. Even in
tasks such as visual scene decomposition, where data resists full description by any one label, there is an underlying objectivist assumption being made; the expectation of
there being an objective number of distinguishable “things”
present, themselves belonging to singular classes. Human
visual perception makes a departure from this. The symbolic world to which we attend, with firm compositional
rules for scenes and their objects, and with their parts and
positions, is subsisted by a churning sea of ongoing conceptualisation processes deeply fluid and contextual [15].
In recent years, there has been a proliferation of computer vision architectures built with object-centric inductive

Figure 1. An example problem in UA, instantiating the DistributeThree rule with the Closure concept. Five out of six context frames
are provided (left), with four answer frames to choose from (right).
The correct answer is emboldened.

biases [21], many of which represent states-of-the-art on
popular datasets [7, 35, 41]. This is an important direction,
as training models to decompose scenes into objects allows
for an explicit abstraction stage promoting feature reuse.
However, abstract visual reasoning tasks such as Bongard
problems [3] expose philosophically [20] — and in this paper, experimentally — that such an approach might work
against the creation of models that possess the ability to abstract and deploy useful concepts. This observation also engages a current debate in the literature regarding the scalability of built-in knowledge and inductive biases [24, 36].
Humans display flexibility in how they decompose
scenes, and perceive such scenes at a level of abstraction
informed by past experiences and appropriate to present
goals [8,9]. Scene understanding in humans is therefore undergirded by something other than the perception of static
objects [22], and the idea that scene modelling research can
separate perception and higher cognition into a pipeline of
self-contained modules is strongly critiqued [5].
Noticing other shortcomings of deep-learnt approaches
to computer vision, including brittleness to out-ofdistribution (OOD) data, a small number of abstraction
datasets inspired by Raven’s Progressive Matrices have
been recently released [23]. Further motivations to this
direction include a) the expectation that tasks with such
an extended history in general psychometric testing would
be useful to import into computer vision research, and b)
the opinion that the more broadly applicable a model’s abstracted concepts become, the more robust that model will

19082

