This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diversity-Aware Meta Visual Prompting
Qidong Huang1 Xiaoyi Dong1 Dongdong Chen2 Weiming Zhang1, *
Feifei Wang1 Gang Hua3 Nenghai Yu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Cloud AI 3 Wormpex AI Research
{hqd0037@mail., dlight@mail., zhangwm@, wangfeifei@mail., ynh@}ustc.edu.cn
{cddlyf@, ganghua@}gmail.com

1. Introduction
With the increasing scale of training data and model size,
the pretraining-finetuning paradigm has shown remarkable
achievement in many areas, including natural language processing (NLP) [4,13] and computer vision (CV) [2,7,8,19].
* Corresponding author.

60

50

50

40

40

Top-1 Acc Gain

We present Diversity-Aware Meta Visual Prompting (DAM-VP), an efficient and effective prompting method
for transferring pre-trained models to downstream tasks
with frozen backbone. A challenging issue in visual prompting is that image datasets sometimes have a large data diversity whereas a per-dataset generic prompt can hardly
handle the complex distribution shift toward the original
pretraining data distribution properly. To address this issue,
we propose a dataset Diversity-Aware prompting strategy
whose initialization is realized by a Meta-prompt. Specifically, we cluster the downstream dataset into small homogeneity subsets in a diversity-adaptive way, with each
subset has its own prompt optimized separately. Such a
divide-and-conquer design reduces the optimization difficulty greatly and significantly boosts the prompting performance. Furthermore, all the prompts are initialized with a
meta-prompt, which is learned across several datasets. It
is a bootstrapped paradigm, with the key observation that
the prompting knowledge learned from previous datasets
could help the prompt to converge faster and perform better on a new dataset. During inference, we dynamically
select a proper prompt for each input, based on the feature distance between the input and each subset. Through
extensive experiments, our DAM-VP demonstrates superior efficiency and effectiveness, clearly surpassing previous prompting methods in a series of downstream datasets
for different pretraining models. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/shikiw/DAM-VP.

Top-1 Acc Gain

Abstract

30
20
10

30
20
10
0

0

VP

-10
60

VPT

-10
65

70

75

Dataset Diversity

80

60

65

70

75

80

Dataset Diversity

Figure 1. Relation between dataset diversity and the performance
gain got by using prompting. The gain is the performance improvement when compared with the linear-probing accuracy, under the head-tuning setting. Both previous methods get a large
performance gain on low-diversity datasets, while failing to boost
the transfer performance on high-diversity datasets.

However, fully finetuning a large pre-trained model for each
small downstream task still has some problems in realworld usage. The most practical one is the storage and distribution problem that we have to maintain an independent
copy of the model for each task, which is quite expensive
and inflexible, especially for increasing numbers of downstream tasks [9].
To break the dilemma, many efforts [6,17,18,25,51] have
been paid to efficiently transfer the given pre-trained models
into a particular dataset. Prompting is an extensively studied
method in the NLP area, which appends a few tokens before
the input sequence to provide some task-specific knowledge
to the pre-trained model, so that the model could adapt well
on the downstream tasks without the fully-finetuning. Inspired by the success of prompting in NLP, some recent
works [1, 26] propose visual prompting for vision models.
By adding some learnable noise onto the input image or appending some learnable tokens to the model input sequence,
the pre-trained models show promising results on different
kinds of downstream tasks.
However, we argue that these methods ignore the diverse
distribution property of the image dataset and using a sin-

10878

