This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Curricular Contrastive Regularization for Physics-aware Single Image Dehazing
Yu Zheng1 , Jiahui Zhan1 , Shengfeng He2 , Junyu Dong1 , Yong Du1 *
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University

Abstract

39
(f) 38.25

PSNR (dB)

Considering the ill-posed nature, contrastive regularization has been developed for single image dehazing,
introducing the information from negative images as a
lower bound. However, the contrastive samples are nonconsensual, as the negatives are usually represented distantly from the clear (i.e., positive) image, leaving the solution space still under-constricted. Moreover, the interpretability of deep dehazing models is underexplored towards the physics of the hazing process. In this paper, we
propose a novel curricular contrastive regularization targeted at a consensual contrastive space as opposed to a
non-consensual one. Our negatives, which provide better
lower-bound constraints, can be assembled from 1) the hazy
image, and 2) corresponding restorations by other existing
methods. Further, due to the different similarities between
the embeddings of the clear image and negatives, the learning difﬁculty of the multiple components is intrinsically imbalanced. To tackle this issue, we customize a curriculum
learning strategy to reweight the importance of different
negatives. In addition, to improve the interpretability in
the feature space, we build a physics-aware dual-branch
unit according to the atmospheric scattering model. With
the unit, as well as curricular contrastive regularization,
we establish our dehazing network, named C2 PNet. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our C2 PNet signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods, with extreme
PSNR boosts of 3.94dB and 1.50dB, respectively, on SOTSindoor and SOTS-outdoor datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/YuZheng9/C2PNet.

(e) 38.57

38

(g) 38.68

(d) 38.19
(b) 37.89

37



36

(a) 36.39

Method

Rate E:H:U

(a) Baseline

0:0:0

(b)

1:0:0

(c)

0:0:1

(d)

0:1:0

(e)

1:2:0

(f)

1:0:2

(c) 33.96

(g)

1:1:1

1

3

35
34
33
0

#Negatives in the consensual contrastive space


Non-consensual Contrastive Space
Consensual Contrastive Space

×

Anchor

Positive(GT)
Negatives

Ultra-hard Negatives
Hard Negatives
Easy Negatives
Pull

Push

×

Push (under-constricted)

(g) Rate E:H:U = 1:1:1

Figure 1. Upper panel: Examination for contrastive regularization
based on three difﬁculty levels of the negatives in the consensual
contrastive space. Lower panel: Illustration of contrastive samples
in the consensual and non-consensual spaces.

ing [35]. Similar to the emergence of other image restoration task solvers [12, 13, 39, 43], valid image dehazing techniques are required for handling vision-based applications.
Deep learning based methods have achieved tremendous
success in single image dehazing and can be roughly categorized into two classes: physics-free methods [5,10,17,24]
and physics-aware methods [4,8,11,34]. Regarding the former, most of them usually use ground-truth images with
predicted restorations to enforce L1/L2 distance-based consistency and also involve various regularizations [29, 42] as
additional constraints to cope with the ill-posed property.
Notice that all of those regularizations ignore the information from negative images as a lower bound, contrastive regularization (CR) [40] is proposed to introduce different hazy

1. Introduction
As a common atmospheric phenomenon, haze noticeably
degrades the quality of photographed images, severely limiting the performance of subsequent high-level visual tasks
such as vehicle re-identiﬁcation [7] and scene understand* Corresponding author (csyongdu@ouc.edu.cn).

5785

