This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Balanced Energy Regularization Loss
for Out-of-distribution Detection
*

Hyunjun Choi1 ,2
1

Hawook Jeong2

ASRI, ECE., Seoul National University

numb7315@snu.ac.kr

hawook@rideflux.com

Abstract
In the field of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, a previous method that use auxiliary data as OOD data has
shown promising performance. However, the method provides an equal loss to all auxiliary data to differentiate them
from inliers. However, based on our observation, in various
tasks, there is a general imbalance in the distribution of the
auxiliary OOD data across classes. We propose a balanced
energy regularization loss that is simple but generally effective for a variety of tasks. Our balanced energy regularization loss utilizes class-wise different prior probabilities
for auxiliary data to address the class imbalance in OOD
data. The main concept is to regularize auxiliary samples
from majority classes, more heavily than those from minority classes. Our approach performs better for OOD detection in semantic segmentation, long-tailed image classification, and image classification than the prior energy regularization loss. Furthermore, our approach achieves state-ofthe-art performance in two tasks: OOD detection in semantic segmentation and long-tailed image classification.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are used in a variety of fields
such as image classification [22] and semantic segmentation [11]. However, there is a challenge in the practical use
of deep neural networks in areas where safety is crucial,
such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis [20, 25].
In particular, deep neural networks have the issue of providing high confidence to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
that are not used for training [15]. As a result, Maximum
softmax probability (MSP) score has been proposed to identify these OOD samples [17]. Based on the score, OOD detection performance is evaluated by metrics (e.g. AUROC,
FPR). Both in image classification [18, 24, 26, 29, 30, 38, 40,
43, 46](including long-tailed image classification [43]) and
semantic segmentation [1–3, 5, 10, 12, 16, 19, 28, 33, 36, 41],
* Work done as an intern at RideFlux.

Jin Young Choi1
2

RideFlux Inc.
jychoi@snu.ac.kr

different approaches have been suggested to enhance the
OOD detection performance. Among them, we concentrate
on the methods using auxiliary data as OOD data which indicate superior OOD detection performance to the previous
methods that only use in-distribution samples.
Outlier Exposure (OE) utilizes an auxiliary dataset of
outliers to improve OOD detection performance [18]. The
auxiliary data is consist of classes that do not overlap with
the in-distribution data and the test OOD data. OE leverages
the cross-entropy loss for the existing training data and the
regularization loss for the auxiliary data. The cross-entropy
loss that results from giving the auxiliary data a uniform
label is the regularization loss of OE. Meanwhile, a new
energy score has been introduced in Energy-based OOD
detection (EnergyOE) which replaces the MSP score [29].
Furthermore, EnergyOE suggests an energy regularization
loss that differs from that of OE to enhance performance.
The squared hinge loss for energy with every existing (indistribution) piece of data and every auxiliary (OOD) piece
of data is added to create the energy regularization loss.
Similarly, in semantic segmentation, the OOD detection
performance is enhanced by using the auxiliary dataset of
the outlier. Meta-OOD [5] organized the auxiliary dataset of
the outlier by scenes of the COCO dataset [27]. Although
the process of creating the auxiliary data is different from
image classification, the training loss is comparable. MetaOOD adopts the regularization loss proposed by OE. Recently, PEBAL [41] also adopts energy regularization loss
proposed by EnergyOE.
However, when regularizing auxiliary data, the existing
methods for OOD detection do not take into account variations between auxiliary data samples. The variations are severe especially on real data such as semantic segmentation
for autonomous driving. As seen in Figure 1a, for the pretrained model, the class distribution of the auxiliary OOD
data is not uniform across classes, i.e., imbalanced. To address the imbalanced problem, we regularize the auxiliary
data differently for each sample. To achieve this, we propose a balanced energy regularization loss to apply higher
regularization to majority classes than minority classes in

15691

