This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Demystifying Causal Features on Adversarial Examples and Causal Inoculation
for Robust Network by Adversarial Instrumental Variable Regression
Junho Kim*, Byung-Kwan Lee*, Yong Man Ro†
Image and Video Systems Lab, School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{arkimjh, leebk, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The origin of adversarial examples is still inexplicable in
research fields, and it arouses arguments from various viewpoints, albeit comprehensive investigations. In this paper,
we propose a way of delving into the unexpected vulnerability in adversarially trained networks from a causal perspective, namely adversarial instrumental variable (IV) regression. By deploying it, we estimate the causal relation of
adversarial prediction under an unbiased environment dissociated from unknown confounders. Our approach aims
to demystify inherent causal features on adversarial examples by leveraging a zero-sum optimization game between a
casual feature estimator (i.e., hypothesis model) and worstcase counterfactuals (i.e., test function) disturbing to find
causal features. Through extensive analyses, we demonstrate that the estimated causal features are highly related
to the correct prediction for adversarial robustness, and the
counterfactuals exhibit extreme features significantly deviating from the correct prediction. In addition, we present
how to effectively inoculate CAusal FEatures (CAFE) into
defense networks for improving adversarial robustness.

1. Introduction
Adversarial examples, which are indistinguishable to human observers but maliciously fooling Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), have drawn great attention in research fields
due to their security threats used to compromise machine
learning systems. In real-world environments, such potential risks evoke weak reliability of the decision-making process for DNNs and pose a question of adopting DNNs in
safety-critical areas [4, 58, 66].
To understand the origin of adversarial examples, seminal works have widely investigated the adversarial vulnerability through numerous viewpoints such as excessive linearity in a hyperplane [26], aberration of statistical fluctuations [59, 63], and phenomenon induced from frequency
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Instrument

Confounder

𝑍𝑍

𝑈𝑈

𝑇𝑇

Treatment

ℎ

Feature Variation

𝑌𝑌

Outcome

𝑋𝑋adv

𝑍𝑍
𝒇𝒇

Unobserved
Confounders

𝒇𝒇 𝑋𝑋adv

ℎ

Causal
Features

Causal Estimator

Figure 1. Data generating process (DGP) with IV. By deploying Z,
it can estimate causal relation between treatment T and outcome
Y under exogenous condition for unknown confounders U .

information [73]. Recently, several works [34, 35, 40]
have revealed the existence and pervasiveness of robust and
non-robust features in adversarially trained networks and
pointed out that the non-robust features on adversarial examples can provoke unexpected misclassifications.
Nonetheless, there still exists a lack of common consensus [22] on underlying causes of adversarial examples, albeit comprehensive endeavors [32,64]. It is because that the
earlier works have focused on analyzing associations between adversarial examples and target labels in the learning
scheme of adversarial training [42, 54, 67, 72, 77], which is
canonical supervised learning. Such analyses easily induce
spurious correlation (i.e., statistical bias) in the learned associations, thereby cannot interpret the genuine origin of
adversarial vulnerability under the existence of possibly biased viewpoints (e.g., excessive linearity, statistical fluctuations, frequency information, and non-robust features).
In order to explicate where the adversarial vulnerability
comes from in a causal perspective and deduce true adversarial causality, we need to employ an intervention-oriented
approach (i.e., causal inference) that brings in estimating
causal relations beyond analyzing merely associations for
the given data population of adversarial examples.
One of the efficient tools for causal inference is instrumental variable (IV) regression when randomized controlled trials (A/B experiments) or full controls of unknown
confounders are not feasible options. It is a popular approach used to identify causality in econometrics [13, 16,
47], and it provides an unbiased environment from unknown confounders that raise the endogeneity of causal inference [55]. In IV regression, the instrument is utilized

12302

