This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Center Focusing Network for Real-Time LiDAR Panoptic Segmentation
Xiaoyan Li1,2 Gang Zhang3 Boyue Wang1,2 Yongli Hu1,2 Baocai Yin1,2
1
Beijing Municipal Key Lab of Multimedia and Intelligent Software Technology
2
Beijing Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Faculty of Information Technology,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
3
Mogo Auto Intelligence and Telemetics Information Technology Co. Ltd.
{xiaoyan.li,wby,huyongli,ybc}@bjut.edu.cn

zhanggang11021136@gmail.com

Abstract
LiDAR panoptic segmentation facilitates an autonomous
vehicle to comprehensively understand the surrounding objects and scenes and is required to run in real time. The
recent proposal-free methods accelerate the algorithm, but
their effectiveness and efficiency are still limited owing to
the difficulty of modeling non-existent instance centers and
the costly center-based clustering modules. To achieve accurate and real-time LiDAR panoptic segmentation, a novel
center focusing network (CFNet) is introduced. Specifically,
the center focusing feature encoding (CFFE) is proposed to
explicitly understand the relationships between the original LiDAR points and virtual instance centers by shifting
the LiDAR points and filling in the center points. Moreover, to leverage the redundantly detected centers, a fast
center deduplication module (CDM) is proposed to select
only one center for each instance. Experiments on the SemanticKITTI and nuScenes panoptic segmentation benchmarks demonstrate that our CFNet outperforms all existing
methods by a large margin and is 1.6 times faster than the
most efficient method.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [18] combines both semantic segmentation and instance segmentation in a single framework.
It predicts semantic labels for the uncountable stuff classes
(e.g. road, sidewalk), while it simultaneously provides semantic labels and instance IDs for the countable things
classes (e.g. car, pedestrian). The LiDAR panoptic segmentation is one of the bases for the safety of autonomous driving, which employs the point clouds collected by the Light
Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensors to effectively depict the surroundings. Existing LiDAR panoptic segmentation methods first conduct semantic segmentation, and then
achieve instance segmentation for the things categories in

Figure 1. PQ vs. runtime on the SemanticKITTI test set. Runtime
measurements are taken on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. The
panoptic quality (PQ) is introduced in section 4.1.

two ways, the proposal-based and proposal-free methods.
The proposal-based methods [17, 31, 37] adopt a twostage process similar to the well-known Mask R-CNN [14]
in the image domain. It first generates object proposals for
the things points by using 3D detection networks [19, 30]
and then refines the instance segmentation results within
each proposal. As shown in Fig. 1, these methods are usually complicated and hardly achieve real-time processing,
owing to their sequential multi-stage pipelines.
The proposal-free frameworks [13, 15, 21, 22, 29, 35, 39]
are more compact. To associate the things points with instance IDs, these methods usually leverage the instance centers. Specifically, they regress the offsets from the points
to their corresponding centers, and then adopt the classagnostic center-based clustering modules [13, 15, 29] or the
bird’s-eye view (BEV) center heatmap [22, 35, 39]. However, two problems exist in these methods. First, for center
feature extracting and center modeling, the non-existent in-

13425

