This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Effective Adversarial Textured 3D Meshes on Physical Face Recognition
Xiao Yang1 , Chang Liu2 , Longlong Xu1 , Yikai Wang1 , Yinpeng Dong1,3† ,
Ning Chen1 , Hang Su1,4 , Jun Zhu1,3,4†
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, Tsinghua-China Mobile Communications Group Co., Ltd. Joint Institute, Tsinghua University
2
Peking University 3 RealAI 4 Zhongguancun Laboratory
{yangxiao19, xu-ll18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

chang.liu@stu.pku.edu.cn

yikaiw@outlook.com

{dongyinpeng, ningchen, suhangss, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Face recognition is a prevailing authentication solution
in numerous biometric applications. Physical adversarial
attacks, as an important surrogate, can identify the weaknesses of face recognition systems and evaluate their robustness before deployed. However, most existing physical
attacks are either detectable readily or ineffective against
commercial recognition systems. The goal of this work is to
develop a more reliable technique that can carry out an endto-end evaluation of adversarial robustness for commercial
systems. It requires that this technique can simultaneously
deceive black-box recognition models and evade defensive
mechanisms. To fulfill this, we design adversarial textured
3D meshes (AT3D) with an elaborate topology on a human
face, which can be 3D-printed and pasted on the attacker’s
face to evade the defenses. However, the mesh-based optimization regime calculates gradients in high-dimensional
mesh space, and can be trapped into local optima with unsatisfactory transferability. To deviate from the mesh-based
space, we propose to perturb the low-dimensional coefficient space based on 3D Morphable Model, which significantly improves black-box transferability meanwhile enjoying faster search efficiency and better visual quality. Extensive experiments in digital and physical scenarios show that
our method effectively explores the security vulnerabilities
of multiple popular commercial services, including three
recognition APIs, four anti-spoofing APIs, two prevailing
mobile phones and two automated access control systems.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has become a prevailing authentication
solution in biometric applications, ranging from financial
payment to automated surveillance systems. Despite its
† Corresponding authors.

ü
Owner (Victim)

Face Recognition

Attacker

Face Anti-spoofing

ü
Figure 1. Demonstration of physical black-box attacks for unlocking one prevailing mobile phone. The attacker wearing the 3Dprinted adversarial mesh can successfully mislead the face recognition model to be recognized as the victim, meanwhile evading
face anti-spoofing. More results are shown in Sec. 4.

blooming development [4, 26, 33], recent research in adversarial machine learning has revealed that face recognition
models based on deep neural networks are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples [10, 41], leading to serious consequences or security problems in real-world applications.
Due to the imperative need of evaluating model robustness [30, 45], extensive attempts have been devoted to adversarial attacks on face recognition models. Adversarial attacks in the digital world [8, 28, 39, 45] are characterized by
adding minimal perturbations to face images in the digital
space, aiming to evade being recognized or to impersonate
another identity. Since an adversary usually cannot access
the digital input of practical systems, physical adversarial
examples wearable for real human faces are more feasible
for evaluating their adversarial robustness. Some studies
have shown the success of physical attacks against popular
recognition models by adopting different attack types, such
as eyeglass frames [27, 28], hats [17] and stickers [29].
In spite of the remarkable progress, it is challenging
to launch practical and effective physical attack methods
on automatic face recognition systems. First, the defen-

4119

