This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Grouping with Transformer for Referring Image Segmentation
Jiajin Tang1
1

Ge Zheng1

Cheng Shi1

Sibei Yang1,2†

School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

2

{tangjj,zhengge,shicheng2022,yangsb}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) aims to segment
the target referent in an image given a natural language expression [12, 17, 64]. It attracts increasing attention in the
research community and is expected to show its potential
in real applications, such as human-robot interaction via
natural language [50] and image editing [3]. Compared to
classical image segmentation that classifies pixels or masks
into a closed set of fixed categories, RIS requires locating referent at pixel level according to the free-form natural languages with open-world vocabularies. It faces chal† Sibei Yang is the corresponding author.

Visual
Encoder

“couch with
squares”

Language
Encoder

Visual Features
Linguistic Features
Pull Closer

Key

Initial Tokens
Query Vectors
Push Away

Binary
Mask

Encoder/Decoder

(b) VLT
Visual
Encoder
……

“couch with
squares”

Language
Encoder

Key

Decoder

Reshape

Binary
Mask

(c) Our CGFormer
Visual
Encoder

“couch with
squares”

Language
Encoder

……

CGFormer
……

……

Mask Head

Referring image segmentation aims to segment the target referent in an image conditioning on a natural language
expression. Existing one-stage methods employ per-pixel
classification frameworks, which attempt straightforwardly
to align vision and language at the pixel level, thus failing
to capture critical object-level information. In this paper,
we propose a mask classification framework, Contrastive
Grouping with Transformer network (CGFormer), which
explicitly captures object-level information via token-based
querying and grouping strategy. Specifically, CGFormer
first introduces learnable query tokens to represent objects
and then alternately queries linguistic features and groups
visual features into the query tokens for object-aware crossmodal reasoning. In addition, CGFormer achieves crosslevel interaction by jointly updating the query tokens and
decoding masks in every two consecutive layers. Finally,
CGFormer cooperates contrastive learning to the grouping
strategy to identify the token and its mask corresponding
to the referent. Experimental results demonstrate that CGFormer outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both segmentation and generalization settings consistently and significantly. Code is available at https://github.com/
Toneyaya/CGFormer.

(a) CRIS/ReSTR

Figure 1. Comparison of Transformer-based RIS methods and our
CGFormer. (a) CRIS [51] and ReSTR [25] fuse relevant linguistic
features into visual features, while (b) VLT [12] generates query
vectors to query visual features for segmentation. In contrast, (c)
our CGFormer introduces learnable query tokens and explicitly
groups visual features into tokens conditioning on language. Cooperating the grouping strategy with contrastive learning, it identifies the token and its mask corresponding to the referent.

lenges of comprehensively understanding vision and language modalities and aligning them at pixel level.
Existing works mainly follow the segmentation framework of per-pixel classification [17, 34] integrated with
multi-modal fusion to address the challenges. They introduce various fusion methods [19,20,26,32,46,63] to obtain
vision-language feature maps and predict the segmentation
results based on the feature maps. Recently, the improvement of vision-language fusion for RIS mainly lies in utilizing the Transformer [12, 25, 51, 62]. LAVT [62] integrates
fusion module into the Transformer-based visual encoder.
CRIS [51] and ReSTR [25] fuse linguistic features into each
feature of the visual feature maps, as shown in Figure 1a.
In contrast, VLT [12] integrates the relevant visual features
into language-conditional query vectors via transformer decoder, as shown in Figure 1b.
Although these methods have improved the segmenta-

23570

