This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent Direct Time-of-Flight Video Depth Super-Resolution
Zhanghao Sun1
1
Stanford University, zhsun@stanford.edu
Wei Ye2 , Jinhui Xiong2 , Gyeongmin Choe2 , Jialiang Wang3 , Shuochen Su2 , Rakesh Ranjan2
2
Meta Reality Labs, 3 Meta Research
NLSPN [41]
LR depth + RGB

Ground Truth

HVSR
LR histogram video + RGB video

param: 15M
AE: 14mm

param: 15M
AE: 10mm

Zoom-in Views

param: 26M
AE: 22mm

DVSR
LR depth video + RGB video

Figure 1. We propose the first multi-frame approaches, dToF depth video super-resolution (DVSR) and histogram video super-resolution
(HVSR), to super-resolve low-resolution dToF sensor videos with the high-resolution RGB frame guidance. The point cloud visualizations
of depth predictions reveal that, by utilizing multi-frame correlation, DVSR predicts significantly better geometry compared to state-of-theart per-frame depth enhancement networks [42] while being more lightweight; HVSR further improves the fidelity of geometry and reduces
flying pixels by utilizing the dToF histogram information. Besides the improvements in per-frame estimation, we highly recommend readers
to check out the supplementary video, which visualizes the significant improvements in temporal stability across the entire sequences.

Abstract
Direct time-of-flight (dToF) sensors are promising for
next-generation on-device 3D sensing. However, limited by
manufacturing capabilities in a compact module, the dToF
data has a low spatial resolution (e.g. ∼ 20 × 30 for iPhone
dToF), and it requires a super-resolution step before being
passed to downstream tasks. In this paper, we solve this
super-resolution problem by fusing the low-resolution dToF
data with the corresponding high-resolution RGB guidance.
Unlike the conventional RGB-guided depth enhancement
approaches, which perform the fusion in a per-frame manner, we propose the first multi-frame fusion scheme to mitigate the spatial ambiguity resulting from the low-resolution
dToF imaging. In addition, dToF sensors provide unique
depth histogram information for each local patch, and we
incorporate this dToF-specific feature in our network design
to further alleviate spatial ambiguity. To evaluate our models on complex dynamic indoor environments and to provide a large-scale dToF sensor dataset, we introduce DyDToF, the first synthetic RGB-dToF video dataset that features dynamic objects and a realistic dToF simulator fol-

lowing the physical imaging process. We believe the methods and dataset are beneficial to a broad community as
dToF depth sensing is becoming mainstream on mobile devices. Our code and data are publicly available. https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/DVSR/

1. Introduction
On-device depth estimation is critical in navigation [41],
gaming [6], and augmented/virtual reality [3,8]. Previously,
various solutions based on stereo/structured-light sensors
and indirect time-of-flight sensors (iToF) [4,35,44,57] have
been proposed. Recently, direct time-of-flight (dToF) sensor brought more interest in both academia [31, 36] and
industry [5], due to its high accuracy, compact form factor, and low power consumption [13, 37]. However, limited by the manufacturing capability, current dToF sensors
have very low spatial resolutions [13, 40]. Each dToF pixel
captures and pre-processes depth information from a local
patch in the scene (Sec. 3), leading to high spatial ambiguity
when estimating the high-resolution depth maps for down-

5075

