This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-supervised learning made simple with self-supervised clustering
Enrico Fini* 1
1

Pietro Astolfi* 1,2
Julien Mairal2

University of Trento

2

Inria†

Karteek Alahari2 Xavier Alameda-Pineda2
Moin Nabi3 Elisa Ricci1,4
3

SAP AI Research

4

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Abstract
Labeled
samples

Self-supervised learning models have been shown to
learn rich visual representations without requiring human
annotations. However, in many real-world scenarios, labels
are partially available, motivating a recent line of work on
semi-supervised methods inspired by self-supervised principles. In this paper, we propose a conceptually simple yet empirically powerful approach to turn clusteringbased self-supervised methods such as SwAV or DINO into
semi-supervised learners. More precisely, we introduce a
multi-task framework merging a supervised objective using
ground-truth labels and a self-supervised objective relying
on clustering assignments with a single cross-entropy loss.
This approach may be interpreted as imposing the cluster centroids to be class prototypes. Despite its simplicity,
we provide empirical evidence that our approach is highly
effective and achieves state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR100 and ImageNet.

Unlabeled
samples

Cluster
prototypes

Class
prototypes

Mistakes

(a) SwAV / DINO

(b) SwAV / DINO + linear

(c) SwAV / DINO + fine-tuning

(d) Suave / Daino (ours)

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-supervised learning became the
dominant paradigm for unsupervised visual representation
learning. In particular, much experimental evidence shows
that augmentation-based self-supervision [3, 8–10, 14–16,
18, 21, 29, 32, 35, 71] can produce powerful representations of unlabeled data. Such models, although trained
without supervision, can be naturally used for supervised
downstream tasks via simple fine-tuning. However, the
most suitable way to leverage self-supervision is perhaps
by multi-tasking the self-supervised objective with a custom (possibly supervised) objective. Based on this idea,
the community has worked on re-purposing self-supervised
methods in other sub-fields of computer vision, as for
instance in domain adaptation [25], novel class discovery [31, 77], continual learning [30] and semi-supervised
learning [4, 13, 19, 72].
* Enrico Fini and Pietro Astolfi contributed equally.
† Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France.

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the motivation behind the proposed semi-supervised framework. (a) Self-supervised clustering
methods like SwAV [15] and DINO [16] compute cluster prototypes that are not necessarily well aligned with semantic categories, but they do not require labeled data. (b) Adding a linear classifier provides class prototypes, but the labeled (and unlabeled) samples are not always correctly separated. (c) Fine-tuning
can help separating labeled data. (d) Our framework learns cluster prototypes that are aligned with class prototypes thus correctly
separating both labeled and unlabeled data.

One of the areas that potentially benefits from the
advancements in unsupervised representation learning is
semi-supervised learning. This is mainly due to the fact
that in semi-supervised learning it is crucial to efficiently
extract the information in the unlabeled set to improve the

3187

