This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global Vision Transformer Pruning with Hessian-Aware Saliency
Huanrui Yang1,2 ,* Hongxu Yin1 , Maying Shen1 , Pavlo Molchanov1 , Hai Li3 , and Jan Kautz1
1
NVIDIA, 2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 Duke University
huanrui@berkeley.edu, {dannyy, mshen, pmolchanov, jkautz}@nvidia.com, hai.li@duke.edu

Abstract
Transformers yield state-of-the-art results across many
tasks. However, their heuristically designed architecture
impose huge computational costs during inference. This
work aims on challenging the common design philosophy of
the Vision Transformer (ViT) model with uniform dimension
across all the stacked blocks in a model stage, where we
redistribute the parameters both across transformer blocks
and between different structures within the block via the
first systematic attempt on global structural pruning. Dealing with diverse ViT structural components, we derive a
novel Hessian-based structural pruning criteria comparable
across all layers and structures, with latency-aware regularization for direct latency reduction. Performing iterative
pruning on the DeiT-Base model leads to a new architecture family called NViT (Novel ViT), with a novel parameter
redistribution that utilizes parameters more efficiently. On
ImageNet-1K, NViT-Base achieves a 2.6× FLOPs reduction,
5.1× parameter reduction, and 1.9× run-time speedup over
the DeiT-Base model in a near lossless manner. Smaller
NViT variants achieve more than 1% accuracy gain at the
same throughput of the DeiT Small/Tiny variants, as well as
a lossless 3.3× parameter reduction over the SWIN-Small
model. These results outperform prior art by a large margin.
Further analysis is provided on the parameter redistribution
insight of NViT, where we show the high prunability of ViT
models, distinct sensitivity within ViT block, and unique
parameter distribution trend across stacked ViT blocks. Our
insights provide viability for a simple yet effective parameter
redistribution rule towards more efficient ViTs for off-theshelf performance boost.

1. Introduction
Transformer models demonstrate high model capacity,
easy scalability, and superior ability in capturing long-range
dependency [1, 9, 19, 30, 38]. Vision Transformer, i.e., the
ViT [12], shows that embedding image patches into tokens
and passing them through a sequence of transformer blocks
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

can lead to higher accuracy compared to state-of-the-art
CNNs. DeiT [35] further presents a data-efficient training
method such that acceptable accuracy can be achieved without extensive pretraining. Offering competitive performance
to CNNs under similar training regimes, transformers now
point to the appealing perspective of solving both NLP and
vision tasks with the same architecture [18, 20, 49].
Unlike CNNs built with convolutional layers that contain few dimensions like the kernel size and the number
of filters, the ViT has multiple distinct components, i.e.,
QKV projection, multi-head attention, multi-layer perceptron, etc. [38], each defined by independent dimensions. As
a result, the dimension of each component in each ViT block
needs to be carefully designed to achieve a decent trade-off
between efficiency and accuracy. However, this is typically
not the case for state-of-the-art models. Models such as
ViT [12] and DeiT [35] mainly inherit the design heuristics
from NLP tasks, e.g., use MLP expansion ratio 4, fix QKV
per head, all the blocks having the same dimensions, etc.,
which may not be optimal for computer vision [4], causing significant redundancy in the base model and a worse
efficiency-accuracy trade-off upon scaling, as extensively
shown empirically. New developments in ViT architectures
incorporate additional design tricks like multi-stage architecture [41], more complicated attention schemes [23], and
additional convolutional layers [13] etc., yet no attempt has
been made on understanding the potential of redistributing
parameters within the stacked vision transformer blocks.
This work targets efficient ViTs by exploring parameter
redistribution within ViT blocks and across multiple layers of
cascading ViT blocks. To this end, we start with the straightforward DeiT design space, with only ViT blocks. We analyze the importance and redundancy of different components
in the DeiT model via latency-aware global structural pruning, leveraging the insights to redistribute parameters for
enhanced accuracy-efficiency trade-off. Our approach, as
visualized in Fig. 1, starts from analyzing the blocks in the
computation graph of ViT to identify all the dimensions that
can be independently controlled. We apply global structural
pruning over all the components in all blocks. This offers
complete flexibility to explore their combinations towards

18547

