This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Neural Duplex Radiance Fields for Real-Time View Synthesis
Ziyu Wan1 Christian Richardt2 Aljaž Božič2 Chao Li2 Vijay Rengarajan2
Seonghyeon Nam2 Xiaoyu Xiang2 Tuotuo Li2 Bo Zhu2 Rakesh Ranjan2 Jing Liao1 *
1 City University of Hong Kong
2 Meta Reality Labs
raywzy.com/NDRF/
10,000× Faster
rendering

Fast conversion
NeRF

Neural Duplex Radiance Field

Real-Time Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. Our framework efficiently learns the neural duplex radiance field from a NeRF model for high-quality real-time view synthesis.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) enable novel-view synthesis with unprecedented visual quality. However, to render
photorealistic images, NeRFs require hundreds of deep multilayer perceptron (MLP) evaluations – for each pixel. This
is prohibitively expensive and makes real-time rendering
infeasible, even on powerful modern GPUs. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach to distill and bake NeRFs into
highly efficient mesh-based neural representations that are
fully compatible with the massively parallel graphics rendering pipeline. We represent scenes as neural radiance features
encoded on a two-layer duplex mesh, which effectively overcomes the inherent inaccuracies in 3D surface reconstruction by learning the aggregated radiance information from a
reliable interval of ray-surface intersections. To exploit local
geometric relationships of nearby pixels, we leverage screenspace convolutions instead of the MLPs used in NeRFs to
achieve high-quality appearance. Finally, the performance
of the whole framework is further boosted by a novel multiview distillation optimization strategy. We demonstrate the
effectiveness and superiority of our approach via extensive
experiments on a range of standard datasets.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D scenes by a representation that can be rendered from unobserved viewpoints using only a few posed
* Corresponding author.

images has been a long-standing goal in the computer graphics and computer vision communities. Significant progress
has recently been achieved by neural radiance fields (NeRFs)
[26], which are capable of generating photorealistic novel
views and modeling view-dependent effects such as specular reflections. In particular, a radiance field is a volumetric
function parameterized by MLPs that estimates density and
emitted radiance at sampled 3D locations in a given direction.
Differentiable volume rendering then allows the optimization
of this function by minimizing the photometric discrepancy
between the real observed color and the rendered color.
Despite the unprecedented success and enormous practical potential of NeRF and its various extensions [3, 6, 57],
an inescapable problem is the high computational cost of
rendering novel views. For instance, even using a powerful
modern GPU, NeRF requires about 30 seconds to render a
single image with 800×800 pixels, which prevents its use
for interactive applications in virtual and augmented reality. On the other hand, the rapid development of NeRF has
spawned abundant follow-up works that focus on optimization acceleration [18, 28, 54], generalization [5, 47, 53], and
enabled different downstream tasks, including 3D stylization [11, 16, 30], editing [24, 50, 55, 56], or even perception
[10, 17]. Thus, a generalized method that can learn and extract a real-time renderable representation given an arbitrary
pretrained NeRF-based model, while maintaining high rendering quality, is highly desirable.
The huge computational cost of rendering a NeRF representation mainly comes from two aspects: (1) For each
individual pixel, NeRF requires sampling hundreds of loca-

8307

