This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniMAE: Single Model Masked Pretraining on Images and Videos
Rohit Girdhar∗ Alaaeldin El-Nouby∗ Mannat Singh∗
Kalyan Vasudev Alwala∗ Armand Joulin Ishan Misra∗
FAIR, Meta AI
https://github.com/facebookresearch/omnivore

Patchify

Standard
ViT
Encoder

Drop
Patches

Transformer
Decoder

Figure 1. OmniMAE is a single model for images and videos that is trained using masked autoencoding [40]. We use a plain Vision
Transformer [24] architecture but with spatio-temporal patches as input. At training, we ‘patchify’ the visual input (images or videos),
and feed the encoder only a subset of the patches. The decoder reconstructs the pixels for the missing patches using the encoder’s output.
The encoder-decoder model is trained using a pixel reconstruction loss. After training, our single plain Transformer encoder performs
competitively compared to specialized architectures on downstream image and video recognition tasks.

Abstract
Transformer-based architectures have become competitive across a variety of visual domains, most notably images
and videos. While prior work studies these modalities in isolation, having a common architecture suggests that one can
train a single unified model for multiple visual modalities.
Prior attempts at unified modeling typically use architectures
tailored for vision tasks, or obtain worse performance compared to single modality models. In this work, we show that
masked autoencoding can be used to train a simple Vision
Transformer on images and videos, without requiring any
labeled data. This single model learns visual representations
that are comparable to or better than single-modality representations on both image and video benchmarks, while using
a much simpler architecture. Furthermore, this model can be
learned by dropping 90% of the image and 95% of the video
patches, enabling extremely fast training of huge model architectures. In particular, we show that our single ViT-Huge
model can be finetuned to achieve 86.6% on ImageNet and
75.5% on the challenging Something Something-v2 video
∗ Equal technical contribution.

benchmark, setting a new state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The Transformer architecture [78] is rapidly becoming
competitive across the different visual modalities in Computer Vision, from images [24, 27, 55, 77], to 3D [57, 60, 89]
and videos [2, 9, 27, 31, 32, 56]. This convergence toward
a unified architecture naturally suggests that we should be
able to train a single model that works across different visual modalities. However, recent attempts to train unified
models either lead to worse performance compared to single
modality models [53], or require the use of an alternative
architecture [33], namely the Swin Transformer [55], with
inductive biases tailored towards vision tasks. While specialized Transformer architectures for vision [27, 55, 56, 81] can
offer better performance for visual modalities, they lose the
generality and flexibility of the vanilla Transformer, making
it harder to later model different domains like text, speech,
3D etc. in multi-modal architectures.
In this work, we train a single vanilla Transformer that
works for both images and videos, as illustrated in Figure 1.

10406

