This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Deep Asymmetric Stereo Matching with
Spatially-Adaptive Self-Similarity
Taeyong Song1
Sunok Kim2
Kwanghoon Sohn3,4
2
Hyundai Motor Company R&D Division, Korea Aerospace University,
3
Yonsei University, 4 Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

1

taeyongsong@hyundai.com, sunok.kim@kau.ac.kr, khsohn@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised stereo matching has received a lot of attention since it enables the learning of disparity estimation
without ground-truth data. However, most of the unsupervised stereo matching algorithms assume that the
left and right images have consistent visual properties,
i.e., symmetric, and easily fail when the stereo images
are asymmetric.
In this paper, we present a novel
spatially-adaptive self-similarity (SASS) for unsupervised
asymmetric stereo matching. It extends the concept of
self-similarity and generates deep features that are robust
to the asymmetries. The sampling patterns to calculate
self-similarities are adaptively generated throughout the
image regions to effectively encode diverse patterns. In
order to learn the effective sampling patterns, we design
a contrastive similarity loss with positive and negative
weights. Consequently, SASS is further encouraged to
encode asymmetry-agnostic features, while maintaining
the distinctiveness for stereo correspondence. We present
extensive experimental results including ablation studies
and comparisons with different methods, demonstrating
effectiveness of the proposed method under resolution and
noise asymmetries.

1. Introduction
Scene depth is an indispensable information in computer
vision, as it can benefit numerous subsequent applications
including scene recognition [5, 18], 3D scene reconstruction [22], and autonomous driving [17]. Stereo matching,
which aims to find disparities of corresponding points in
rectified left and right (stereo) images, has been widely explored since the disparity can directly converted to depth
with camera calibration parameters. Recent advent of largeThis research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP)
(NRF2021R1A2C2006703). The work of S. Kim was supported by the
National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea
government (MSIP) (NRF-2021R1C1C2005202). (Corresponding author:
Kwanghoon Sohn.)

scale datasets and advanced hardware led the researchers
to solve stereo matching with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). It resulted in a number of CNN-based
stereo matching algorithms that are learned in both supervised [1, 16, 19] and unsupervised manner [3, 25]. Even
though the recent methods have achieved significant gain
in both accuracy and speed, the existing algorithms assume
that the stereo images are symmetric, where the stereo images have consistent visual properties in terms of brightness, resolution, noise level, modality, etc.
Recently, multi-camera systems have become more common, such as RGB-NIR cameras in Kinect, and tele-wide
cameras in smartphones. Such systems usually consist of
different sensors, resulting in asymmetric stereo images,
i.e., the stereo images with different visual properties. The
asymmetric images are embedded into inconsistent features
and make it difficult to accurately calculate the cost volume.
Furthermore, the most widely adopted assumption for unsupervised stereo matching, photometric consistency, is invalid for the corresponding points in the asymmetric stereo
images [2]. Consequently, the widely-used stereo matching
methods assuming symmetric images [1, 3, 19] easily fail in
the asymmetric scenario [15].
There have been relatively less efforts to handle stereo
matching under asymmetries such as visual quality [2, 15]
and spectrum [23, 31]. Several methods adopt supervised
[15], or proxy-supervised [23] paradigm to solve the deep
asymmetric stereo matching. However, such methods require additional active depth [15] or image [23] sensor to acquire the training label, which makes it difficult to construct
the training data. In order to tackle the problem and learn
the asymmetric stereo matching in an unsupervised manner,
a few methods adopt feature consistency loss [2, 24]. On
the other hand, several spectral-asymmetric stereo matching methods use unpaired image-to-image translation [33]
algorithm to project the images into a same spectrum, followed by photometric consistency loss [14, 31]. A common
approach in the unsupervised asymmetric stereo matching
methods is to transfer the images into a shared space to ex-

13672

