This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Megahertz Light Steering without Moving Parts
Adithya Pediredla1,2 , Srinivasa G. Narasimhan2 , Maysamreza Chamanzar2 , Ioannis Gkioulekas2
1
Dartmouth College, 2 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

laser

We introduce a light steering technology that operates
at megahertz frequencies, has no moving parts, and costs
less than a hundred dollars. Our technology can benefit
many projector and imaging systems that critically rely on
high-speed, reliable, low-cost, and wavelength-independent
light steering, including laser scanning projectors, LiDAR
sensors, and fluorescence microscopes. Our technology uses
ultrasound waves to generate a spatiotemporally-varying
refractive index field inside a compressible medium, such as
water, turning the medium into a dynamic traveling lens. By
controlling the electrical input of the ultrasound transducers
that generate the waves, we can change the lens, and thus
steer light, at the speed of sound (1.5 km/s in water). We
build a physical prototype of this technology, use it to realize different scanning techniques at megahertz rates (three
orders of magnitude faster than commercial alternatives
such as galvo mirror scanners), and demonstrate proof-ofconcept projector and LiDAR applications. To encourage
further innovation towards this new technology, we derive
theory for its fundamental limits and develop a physicallyaccurate simulator for virtual design. Our technology offers
a promising solution for achieving high-speed and low-cost
light steering in a variety of applications.

mirror

galvo
(moving mirrors)

camera
(a) galvo steering (1 kHz)

laser

lens

ultrasound transducers
(without moving parts)
camera
(b) proposed steering (1 MHz)

Figure 1. Megahertz light steering. (a) Light steering systems in
LiDAR systems and laser projectors have moving mechanical components, limiting them to kHz scanning rates. (b) Our technology
uses the acousto-optic effect to enable MHz light steering without
moving parts. The insets show that, before galvo mirrors could
scan even a few points, our prototype scanned a thousand points to
project the letter “A” on the wall.

1. Introduction

advances over previous light steering technologies (Table 1).
Our technology uses the acousto-optic effect1 to turn a
transparent medium, such as water, into a programmable
optic that steers an incident light beam. Sound is a pressure
wave that travels inside a medium by compressing and rarefying it, spatiotemporally changing the medium density. In
turn, this changes the refractive index of the medium, which
is proportional to the density [63,79]. We design the pressure
profile of the sound wave so that, at any time instant, the
spatially-varying refractive index makes the medium behave
as a periodic set of virtual gradient-index (GRIN) lenses,
each with an aperture equal to the sound wavelength. The
GRIN lenses bend light beams incident on the medium, with
the GRIN profile determining the beam trajectory. These
lenses travel at the speed of sound (1.5 km/s in water) and are
reconfigurable at MHz frequencies, allowing us to steer light
faster than mechanical devices. To enable flexible steering

Many imaging systems rely on the ability to steer light,
either as it leaves a source or as it reaches a sensor. Examples include laser scanning projectors [28, 56], LiDAR depth
sensors [38, 74, 75], and microscopy techniques (confocal
microscopy [23, 50], light-sheet microscopy [55, 68], multiphoton microscopy [17, 82]). Compared to full-field lighting and imaging, light steering systems help improve light
efficiency [47], counter indirect illumination [27, 42], and
enhance illumination and imaging contrast [9, 55]. However,
these advantages come at the cost of reduced acquisition
speed, bulky moving hardware, and motion artifacts. To
alleviate these costs, we introduce a new light steering technology that, through the use of ultrasonic sculpting, makes it
possible to scan light both transversally and axially at megahertz (MHz) rates. Additionally, our technology achieves
these high scanning rates without any moving parts. Lastly,
prototypes of our technology cost no more than a hundred
dollars. Altogether, these characteristics represent significant

1 This is different from Bragg’s diffraction in acousto-optic deflectors.

1

