This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Realistic Long-Tailed Semi-Supervised Learning:
Consistency Is All You Need
Tong Wei, Kai Gan
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{weit, gank}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
While long-tailed semi-supervised learning (LTSSL) has
received tremendous attention in many real-world classification problems, existing LTSSL algorithms typically assume that the class distributions of labeled and unlabeled
data are almost identical. Those LTSSL algorithms built
upon the assumption can severely suffer when the class distributions of labeled and unlabeled data are mismatched
since they utilize biased pseudo-labels from the model. To
alleviate this issue, we propose a new simple method that
can effectively utilize unlabeled data of unknown class distributions by introducing the adaptive consistency regularizer (ACR). ACR realizes the dynamic refinery of pseudolabels for various distributions in a unified formula by estimating the true class distribution of unlabeled data. Despite
its simplicity, we show that ACR achieves state-of-the-art
performance on a variety of standard LTSSL benchmarks,
e.g., an averaged 10% absolute increase of test accuracy
against existing algorithms when the class distributions of
labeled and unlabeled data are mismatched. Even when the
class distributions are identical, ACR consistently outperforms many sophisticated LTSSL algorithms. We carry out
extensive ablation studies to tease apart the factors that are
most important to ACR’s success. Source code is available
at https://github.com/Gank0078/ACR.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is an effective way of
using unlabeled data to improve the generalization of deep
neural networks (DNNs) [1, 10, 16] when only a limited
amount of labeled data is accessible [3, 23, 29, 31]. The
core idea of most SSL algorithms is to generate pseudolabels for unlabeled data and select confident ones to train
models. Recent progress on SSL has revealed promising
Tong Wei is the corresponding author. This research was supported by
the National Science Foundation of China (62206049).

performance in various tasks, such as image recognition
[29] and text categorization [35, 39]. However, most existing SSL algorithms assume the datasets are class-balanced,
i.e., each class is associated with an equivalent number of
samples in both labeled and unlabeled datasets. In contrast, class distributions in many real-world tasks are longtailed [6, 19, 33, 38, 43]. It is well known that classifiers
trained on long-tailed datasets tend to be biased towards
majority classes, leading to low test accuracy on minority
classes [20, 37, 44].
To improve the performance, many long-tailed semisupervised learning (LTSSL) algorithms have been proposed to generate unbiased pseudo-labels. They pursue
class-balanced classifiers using techniques including resampling [18], re-weighting [17], label smoothing [36], and
pseudo-label alignment [14, 34]. These algorithms have
shown strong generalization for the minority class by assuming the class distributions of labeled and unlabeled data
are almost identical. However, this assumption is frequently
violated in real-world applications, for instance, if the labeled and unlabeled data are collected from different tasks.
The unlabeled data may have a large class distribution gap
from labeled data, and using the erroneous assumption can
severely deteriorate the performance [17, 25].
Contribution. This paper studies the under-explored yet
practical LTSSL problem, i.e., learning from unlabeled data
of unknown class distributions. Notably, we start with three
representative types of class distributions of unlabeled data,
i.e., consistent, uniform, and reversed, as illustrated in Figures 1a to 1c. We then propose a new simple algorithm
to effectively use unlabeled data through the adaptive consistency regularizer (ACR), which is built upon one of the
most popular SSL algorithms FixMatch [29]. Concretely,
ACR is developed based on two findings: i) to learn a classbalanced classifier, it is helpful to generate pseudo-labels
biased appropriately toward the minority class, whereas ii)
to learn a better feature extractor, the accuracy of pseudolabels is critical. Those two findings seem to contradict.
We thus present a two-branch network, including a balanced branch and a standard branch, to resolve this con-

3469

