This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Gait Recognition via Effective Spatial-Temporal Feature Fusion
Yufeng Cui Yimei Kang†
College of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{cuiyufeng,kangyimei}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Gait recognition is a biometric technology that identifies people by their walking patterns. The silhouettesbased method and the skeletons-based method are the two
most popular approaches. However, the silhouette data
are easily affected by clothing occlusion, and the skeleton
data lack body shape information. To obtain a more robust and comprehensive gait representation for recognition,
we propose a transformer-based gait recognition framework called MMGaitFormer, which effectively fuses and aggregates the spatial-temporal information from the skeletons and silhouettes. Specifically, a Spatial Fusion Module (SFM) and a Temporal Fusion Module (TFM) are proposed for effective spatial-level and temporal-level feature
fusion, respectively. The SFM performs fine-grained body
parts spatial fusion and guides the alignment of each part of
the silhouette and each joint of the skeleton through the attention mechanism. The TFM performs temporal modeling
through Cycle Position Embedding (CPE) and fuses temporal information of two modalities. Experiments demonstrate
that our MMGaitFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on popular gait datasets. For the most challenging
“CL” (i.e., walking in different clothes) condition in CASIAB, our method achieves a rank-1 accuracy of 94.8%, which
outperforms the state-of-the-art single-modal methods by a
large margin.

1. Introduction
Gait recognition is a biometric technology that identifies people by their walking patterns, which is one of the
most promising video-based biometric technologies in the
long-distance recognition system. However, it is still challenging to perform reliable gait recognition, as its performance is severely affected by many complex factors, including clothing, carrying conditions, cross-view, etc.. To
alleviate these issues, various methods have been proposed.
The appearance-based and model-based methods are the
† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Comparison of different gait representations of a subject
from the CASIA-B gait dataset at different timesteps of normal
walks (a) and walking in different clothes (b). Each row depicts
the same frames as silhouette image, and 2D skeleton pose, the
combination of skeletons and silhouettes, respectively, from topto-bottom. Combines the complementary strengths of silhouette
and skeleton, it is expected to be a more comprehensive representation for gait.

two most popular approaches for video-based gait recognition. The appearance-based (i.e., silhouettes-based) methods [5, 9, 14, 19, 27] rely on binary human silhouette images segmented from the original video frame to eliminate
the influence of external factors. They utilized convolutional neural networks (CNN) to extract spatio-temporal
features and achieved state-of-the-art performance. The
model-based methods [2,16,17,23] consider the underlying
physical structure of the body and express the gait in a more
comprehensible model. The most recent model-based approaches are skeletons-based, in which they represent gait
with the skeletons obtained from videos through pose estimation models. With clear and robust skeleton representation, recent skeletons-based methods could even show competitive results compared to appearance-based methods.
Although both silhouette-based and skeletons-based
methods have their advantages, we argue that the incompleteness of both input representations of the gait information limits further improvement of these methods. As
shown in Fig.1(a), although the silhouettes retain most body
shape information, the self-obscuring problem occurs when
body areas overlap. Moreover, when clothing condition
changes, as shown in Fig.1(b), the external body shape is
significantly changed by clothing obscuration. However,

17949

