This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PromptCAL: Contrastive Affinity Learning via Auxiliary Prompts for
Generalized Novel Category Discovery
Sheng Zhang†

Salman Khan†⋄ Zhiqiang Shen†⋆ Muzammal Naseer†
Guangyi Chen†‡ Fahad Shahbaz Khan†∗
†
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI ⋆ Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
⋄
Australian National University ∗ Linköping University ‡ Carnegie Mellon University
{firstname.lastname}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Although existing semi-supervised learning models
achieve remarkable success in learning with unannotated
in-distribution data, they mostly fail to learn on unlabeled
data sampled from novel semantic classes due to their
closed-set assumption. In this work, we target a pragmatic but under-explored Generalized Novel Category Discovery (GNCD) setting. The GNCD setting aims to categorize unlabeled training data coming from known and
novel classes by leveraging the information of partially labeled known classes. We propose a two-stage Contrastive
Affinity Learning method with auxiliary visual Prompts,
dubbed PromptCAL, to address this challenging problem.
Our approach discovers reliable pairwise sample affinities to learn better semantic clustering of both known and
novel classes for the class token and visual prompts. First,
we propose a discriminative prompt regularization loss to
reinforce semantic discriminativeness of prompt-adapted
pre-trained vision transformer for refined affinity relationships. Besides, we propose contrastive affinity learning
to calibrate semantic representations based on our iterative semi-supervised affinity graph generation method for
semantically-enhanced supervision. Extensive experimental evaluation demonstrates that our PromptCAL method is
more effective in discovering novel classes even with limited annotations and surpasses the current state-of-the-art
on generic and fine-grained benchmarks (e.g., with nearly
11% gain on CUB-200, and 9% on ImageNet-100) on overall accuracy. Our code is available at https:// github.
com/ sheng-eatamath/ PromptCAL.

1. Introduction
The deep neural networks have demonstrated favorable
performance in the Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) setting [15,29,40,46,49]. Some recent works can even achieve
comparable performance to their fully-supervised counter-

Figure 1. PromptCAL Overview. In contrast to previous method
based on semi-supervised contrastive learning, PromptCAL constructs affinity graph on-the-fly to guide representation learning
of the class token and prompts. Meanwhile, our prompt-adapted
backbone can be tuned to enhance semantic discriminativeness.
PromptCAL can discover reliable affinities from a memory bank,
especially for novel classes. Therefore, our PromptCAL is better
task-aligned and discriminative to novel semantic information.

parts using few annotations for image recognition [3,38,46].
However, these approaches heavily rely on the closed-world
assumption that unlabeled data share the same underlying
class label space as the labeled data [10, 47]. In many realistic scenarios, this assumption does not hold true because
of the inherent dynamism of real-world tasks where novel
classes can emerge in addition to known classes.
In contrast to SSL, the Novel Category Discovery (NCD)
problem was introduced by [12] to relax the closed-world
assumption of SSL, which assumes the unlabeled data contain novel classes. Recently, the nascent Generalized Novel
Category Discovery (GNCD) problem, first proposed in
[4, 41], extends NCD and assumes the unlabeled data can
contain both known and novel classes, which is more pragmatic and challenging. To be more specific, GNCD intends
to categorize images sampled from predefined categories
in the training set comprising labeled-knowns, unlabeledknowns, and unlabeled-novels.
13479

