This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PixHt-Lab: Pixel Height Based Light Effect Generation for Image Compositing
Yichen Sheng
Purdue University
Xin Sun
Adobe Inc.

(a) cutout

Jianming Zhang
Adobe Inc.
He Zhang
Adobe Inc.

Julien Philip
Adobe Inc.
Lu Ling
Purdue University

(b) SSN [48]

(c) SSG [47]

Yannick Hold-Geoffroy
Adobe Inc.
Bedrich Benes
Purdue University

(d) PixHt-Lab (ours)

Figure 1. PixHt-Lab renders realistic reflection and soft shadows on general shadow receivers for 2D cutouts. (a) shows the object cutout
and composition background. (b) SSN [48] cannot render soft shadows on walls due to its ground plane assumption. (c) SSG [47] renders
specular reflection, but the shadow on the wall is uniformly softened. (d) Our PixHt-Lab renders realistic soft shadows on the wall guided
by 3D-aware buffer channels. The shadow is softened according to the background geometry with more realistic details. PixHt-Lab also
renders realistic reflections with physically-based surface materials.

Abstract
Lighting effects such as shadows or reflections are key
in making synthetic images realistic and visually appealing. To generate such effects, traditional computer graphics uses a physically-based renderer along with 3D geometry. To compensate for the lack of geometry in 2D Image
compositing, recent deep learning-based approaches introduced a pixel height representation to generate soft shadows and reflections. However, the lack of geometry limits
the quality of the generated soft shadows and constrains reflections to pure specular ones. We introduce PixHt-Lab,
a system leveraging an explicit mapping from pixel height
representation to 3D space. Using this mapping, PixHtLab reconstructs both the cutout and background geometry and renders realistic, diverse lighting effects for image
compositing. Given a surface with physically-based materials, we can render reflections with varying glossiness. To
generate more realistic soft shadows, we further propose
using 3D-aware buffer channels to guide a neural renderer.

Both quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate
that PixHt-Lab significantly improves soft shadow generation. Project: https://shengcn.github.io/PixHtLab/

1. Introduction
Image compositing is a powerful tool widely used for
image content creation, combining interesting elements
from different sources to create a new image. One challenging task is adding lighting effects to make the compositing
realistic and visually appealing. Lighting effects often involve complex interactions between the objects in the compositing, so their manual creation is tedious. It requires a
significant amount of effort, especially for soft shadows cast
by area lights and realistic reflections on the glossy surface
with the Fresnel effect [62].
Many methods that generate lighting effects for 3D
scenes have been well-studied [21], but 3D shapes are often unavailable during image compositing. Recent advancements in deep learning made significant progress in lighting

16643

