This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Video Object Segmentation via Space-time Correspondence Learning
Yurong Zhang1∗, Liulei Li2∗, Wenguan Wang2†, Rong Xie1 , Li Song1 , Wenjun Zhang1
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Current top-leading solutions for video object segmentation (VOS) typically follow a matching-based regime: for
each query frame, the segmentation mask is inferred according to its correspondence to previously processed and the
first annotated frames. They simply exploit the supervisory
signals from the groundtruth masks for learning mask prediction only, without posing any constraint on the space-time
correspondence matching, which, however, is the fundamental building block of such regime. To alleviate this crucial yet
commonly ignored issue, we devise a correspondence-aware
training framework, which boosts matching-based VOS solutions by explicitly encouraging robust correspondence matching during network learning. Through comprehensively
exploring the intrinsic coherence in videos on pixel and object levels, our algorithm reinforces the standard, fully supervised training of mask segmentation with label-free, contrastive correspondence learning. Without neither requiring
extra annotation cost during training, nor causing speed delay during deployment, nor incurring architectural modification, our algorithm provides solid performance gains on
four widely used benchmarks, i.e., DAVIS2016&2017, and
YouTube-VOS2018&2019, on the top of famous matchingbased VOS solutions.

1. Introduction
In this work, we address the task of (one-shot) video object segmentation (VOS) [5,73,96]. Given an input video with
groundtruth object masks in the first frame, VOS aims at accurately segmenting the annotated objects in the subsequent
frames. As one of the most challenging tasks in computer
vision, VOS benefits a wide range of applications including
augmented reality and interactive video editing [72].
Modern VOS solutions are built upon fully supervised
deep learning techniques and the top-performing ones [10,
12] largely follow a matching-based paradigm, where the
object masks for a new coming frame (i.e., query frame) are
∗ The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

[10]

https://github.com/wenguanwang/VOS_Correspondence

Figure 1. (a-b) shows some correspondences between a reference
frame and a query frame. (c) gives mask prediction. XMem [10],
even a top-leading matching-based VOS solution, still suffers from
unreliable correspondence. In contrast, with our correspondenceaware training strategy, robust space-time correspondence can be
established, hence leading to better mask-tracking results.

generated according to the correlations between the query
frame and the previously segmented as well as first annotated frames (i.e., reference frames), which are stored in an
outside memory. It is thus apparent that the module for crossframe matching (i.e., space-time correspondence modeling)
plays the central role in these advanced VOS systems. Nevertheless, these matching-based solutions are simply trained
under the direct supervision of the groundtruth segmentation masks. In other words, during training, the whole VOS
system is purely optimized towards accurate segmentation
mask prediction, yet without taking into account any explicit constraint/regularization on the central component —
space-time correspondence matching. This comes with a legitimate concern for sub-optimal performance, since there
is no any solid guarantee of truly establishing reliable crossframe correspondence during network learning. Fig. 1(a) offers a visual evidence for this viewpoint. XMem [10], the
latest state-of-the-art matching-based VOS solution, tends
to struggle at discovering valid space-time correspondence;
indeed, some background pixels/patches are incorrectly recognized as highly correlated to the query foreground.
The aforementioned discussions motivate us to propose a
new, space-time correspondence-aware training framework
which addresses the weakness of existing matching-based

2246

