This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Incomplete Multi-view Clustering with Cross-view Partial Sample and
Prototype Alignment
Jiaqi Jin1 , Siwei Wang1 , Zhibin Dong1 , Xinwang Liu1, * , En Zhu1,∗
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
{jinjiaqi, wangsiwei13, dzb20, xinwangliu, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The success of existing multi-view clustering relies on
the assumption of sample integrity across multiple views.
However, in real-world scenarios, samples of multi-view
are partially available due to data corruption or sensor
failure, which leads to incomplete multi-view clustering
study (IMVC). Although several attempts have been proposed to address IMVC, they suffer from the following drawbacks: i) Existing methods mainly adopt cross-view contrastive learning forcing the representations of each sample across views to be exactly the same, which might ignore view discrepancy and flexibility in representations; ii)
Due to the absence of non-observed samples across multiple views, the obtained prototypes of clusters might be
unaligned and biased, leading to incorrect fusion. To address the above issues, we propose a Cross-view Partial
Sample and Prototype Alignment Network (CPSPAN) for
Deep Incomplete Multi-view Clustering. Firstly, unlike existing contrastive-based methods, we adopt pair-observed
data alignment as ’proxy supervised signals’ to guide
instance-to-instance correspondence construction among
views. Then, regarding of the shifted prototypes in IMVC,
we further propose a prototype alignment module to achieve
incomplete distribution calibration across views. Extensive experimental results showcase the effectiveness of our
proposed modules, attaining noteworthy performance improvements when compared to existing IMVC competitors
on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
In modern society, data collected for real-world applications usually stems from different domains, sensors or
feature extractors, which gives rise to multi-view learning
in literature [2, 44]. For instance, an autonomous car may
have diverse sensors, and a movie is typically made up of
images and audio. As an important paradigm of multi-view
* Corresponding author

learning, multi-view clustering (MVC) [10,20,21,24,40,47]
divides data by exploiting the consistent and complementary information across multiple views. The success of existing multi-view clustering methods heavily relies on the
fully-available data assumption. However, in practical applications, some views of instances are only partially available due to unstable sensors and damaged storage media.
When some views are missing [9], the natural alignment
property of same instances across multiple views is destroyed, which may result in insufficient mining of complementary and consistent information. To handle the incompleteness issue, many incomplete multi-view clustering algorithms (IMVC) [15,31,38] with satisfactory performance
have been proposed. Typical strategies are mainly based on
matrix decomposition, incomplete multiple kernel learning
and graph-based methods. Learning more discriminative
consensus representations with incomplete view information is crucial to achieve better incomplete multi-view clustering performance. However, conventional IMVC methods
are based on raw features and therefore, the performance
heavily relies on the feature quality.
As deep neural networks [5,8,16,17,25,43] have demonstrated superior performance in learning high-level representations, deep learning has become prevalent in various
fields of computer vision and pattern classification. To
this end, researchers have explored combining deep neural networks [26, 35] and conventional IMVC methods to
improve clustering performance, and the resulting clustering method is called Deep Incomplete Multi-View Clustering (DIMVC) [11, 30, 37, 39, 42]. Most existing DIMVC
methods adopt the principle of contrastive learning, treating different views of the same sample as positive pairs and
their representations should be consistent. Such algorithms
ignore the cross-view alignment correlation of samples and
force instances of different views with unified representation, which may destroy the flexibility and variety of representations. We argue that the essence of IMVC task lies
in discovering structural correspondence between different
views, rather than rigidly and simply enforcing uniform representations across each view. In fact, IMVC can be re-

11600

