This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoralStyleCLIP: Co-optimized Region and Layer Selection for Image Editing
Ambareesh Revanur∗

Debraj Basu
∗

makeup

blue eyes

Shradha Agrawal
Adobe

Dhwanit Agarwal

Deepak Pai

arevanur@adobe.com

surprised

short curly hair

happy

Figure 1 The original and edited images using CoralStyleCLIP are shown in the first and second rows of images, respectively. The bottom
row shows the regions and StyleGAN2 layer numbers automatically selected for editing. The driving text prompts are above every column.

Abstract
Edit fidelity is a significant issue in open-world controllable generative image editing. Recently, CLIP-based approaches have traded off simplicity to alleviate these problems by introducing spatial attention in a handpicked layer
of a StyleGAN. In this paper, we propose CoralStyleCLIP,
which incorporates a multi-layer attention-guided blending strategy in the feature space of StyleGAN2 for obtaining high-fidelity edits. We propose multiple forms of our
co-optimized region and layer selection strategy to demonstrate the variation of time complexity with the quality of
edits over different architectural intricacies while preserving simplicity. We conduct extensive experimental analysis
and benchmark our method against state-of-the-art CLIPbased methods. Our findings suggest that CoralStyleCLIP
results in high-quality edits while preserving the ease of use.

1. Introduction
Controlling smooth semantic edits to photorealistic images [1, 5, 34, 41] synthesized by well-known Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13, 18, 19] has become
simplified with guidance from independently trained contrastive models such as CLIP [36]. Using natural language
as a rich medium of instruction for open-world image synthesis [39, 46–48] and editing [11, 12, 24, 26, 28, 45] has addressed many drawbacks of previously proposed methods.
As first demonstrated by StyleCLIP [34], the requirements for large amounts of annotated data [25] and manual
efforts [14, 44] were considerably alleviated. Furthermore,
the range of possible edits that were achievable significantly
improved [34]. The underlying theme of related approaches
involves CLIP-driven exploration [15,22,34] of the intermediate disentangled latent spaces of the GANs.

12695

