This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FREDOM: Fairness Domain Adaptation Approach to
Semantic Scene Understanding
Thanh-Dat Truong1 , Ngan Le1 , Bhiksha Raj2 , Jackson Cothren3 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
3
Dep. of Geosciences, University of Arkansas, USA
{tt032, thile, jcothre, khoaluu}@uark.edu, bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Although Domain Adaptation in Semantic Scene Segmentation has shown impressive improvement in recent
years, the fairness concerns in the domain adaptation have
yet to be well defined and addressed. In addition, fairness is
one of the most critical aspects when deploying the segmentation models into human-related real-world applications,
e.g., autonomous driving, as any unfair predictions could
influence human safety. In this paper, we propose a novel
Fairness Domain Adaptation (FREDOM) approach to semantic scene segmentation. In particular, from the proposed
formulated fairness objective, a new adaptation framework
will be introduced based on the fair treatment of class distributions. Moreover, to generally model the context of structural dependency, a new conditional structural constraint is
introduced to impose the consistency of predicted segmentation. Thanks to the proposed Conditional Structure Network, the self-attention mechanism has sufficiently modeled
the structural information of segmentation. Through the ablation studies, the proposed method has shown the performance improvement of the segmentation models and promoted fairness in the model predictions. The experimental
results on the two standard benchmarks, i.e., SYNTHIA →
Cityscapes and GTA5 → Cityscapes, have shown that our
method achieved State-of-the-Art (SOTA) performance1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable results
in a wide range of practical problems, including scene understanding, autonomous driving, and medical imaging, by
using deep learning models, e.g., Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [3, 4, 24], Transformers [45]. Despite the
phenomenal achievement, these data-driven approaches still
need to improve in treating the prediction of each class. In
particular, the segmentation models typically treat unfairly
between classes in the dataset according to the class distributions. It is known as the fairness problem of semantic
1 The implementation of FREDOM is available at https : / /
github.com/uark-cviu/FREDOM

Figure 1. The class distributions on Cityscapes are defined for
Fairness problem and Long-tail problem. In long-tail problem,
several head classes frequently exist in the dataset, e.g., Pole, Traffic Light, or Sign. Still, these classes belong to a minority group
in the fairness problem as their appearance on images does not occupy too many pixels. Our FREDOM has promoted the fairness of
models illustrated by an increase of mIoU on the minority group.

segmentation. The unfair predictions of segmentation models can lead to severe problems, e.g., in autonomous driving,
unfair predictions may result in wrong decisions in motion
planning control and therefore affect human safety. Moreover, the fairness issue of segmentation models is even well
observed or exaggerated when the trained models are deployed into new domains. Many prior works alleviate the
performance drop on new domains by using unsupervised
domain adaptation, but these approaches do not guarantee

19988

