This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Concept Customization of Text-to-Image Diffusion
Nupur Kumari1
Bingliang Zhang2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

A photo of a moongate

A moongate in
the snowy ice

Richard Zhang3
Eli Shechtman3
Jun-Yan Zhu1
2
3
Tsinghua University
Adobe Research

A squirrel in front Watercolor painting of
of moongate
moongate in a forest

µ

A digital illustration
of a V* dog in front
of a moongate

V* dog wearing
sunglasses in front
of a moongate

Multi-concept composition
A photo of a V* dog

A V* dog in a
swimming pool

User input images

A V* dog wearing
sunglasses

A V* dog oil painting,
Ghibli inspired

Single-concept generation

Figure 1. Given a few images of a new concept, our method augments a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model, enabling new generations
of the concept in unseen contexts. Example concepts include personal objects, animals, e.g., a pet dog, and classes not well generated by the
model, e.g., moongate (a circular gate [76]). Furthermore, we propose a method for composing multiple new concepts together, for example,
V∗ dog wearing sunglasses in front of a moongate. We denote personal categories with a new modifier token V∗ .

Abstract
While generative models produce high-quality images of
concepts learned from a large-scale database, a user often
wishes to synthesize instantiations of their own concepts (for
example, their family, pets, or items). Can we teach a model
to quickly acquire a new concept, given a few examples? Furthermore, can we compose multiple new concepts together?
We propose Custom Diffusion, an efficient method for augmenting existing text-to-image models. We find that only optimizing a few parameters in the text-to-image conditioning
mechanism is sufficiently powerful to represent new concepts
while enabling fast tuning (∼ 6 minutes). Additionally, we
can jointly train for multiple concepts or combine multiple fine-tuned models into one via closed-form constrained
optimization. Our fine-tuned model generates variations of
multiple new concepts and seamlessly composes them with
existing concepts in novel settings. Our method outperforms
or performs on par with several baselines and concurrent
works in both qualitative and quantitative evaluations, while
being memory and computationally efficient.

1. Introduction
Recently released text-to-image models [53, 57, 60, 79]
have represented a watershed year in image generation. By
simply querying a text prompt, users are able to generate
images of unprecedented quality. Such systems can generate
a wide variety of objects, styles, and scenes – seemingly
“anything and everything”.
However, despite the diverse, general capability of such
models, users often wish to synthesize specific concepts from
their own personal lives. For example, loved ones such as
family, friends, pets, or personal objects and places, such as
a new sofa or a recently visited garden, make for intriguing
concepts. As these concepts are by nature personal, they are
unseen during large-scale model training. Describing these
concepts after the fact, through text, is unwieldy and unable
to produce the personal concept with sufficient fidelity.
This motivates a need for model customization. Given the
few user-provided images, can we augment existing text-toimage diffusion models with the new concept (for example,
their pet dog or a “moongate” as shown in Figure 1)? The
fine-tuned model should be able to generalize and compose
them with existing concepts to generate new variations. This

1931

