This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MixNeRF: Modeling a Ray with Mixture Density
for Novel View Synthesis from Sparse Inputs
Seunghyeon Seo

Donghoon Han∗ Yeonjin Chang∗
Seoul National Univeristy

Nojun Kwak

{zzzlssh, dhk1349, yjean8315, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has broken new ground
in the novel view synthesis due to its simple concept and
state-of-the-art quality. However, it suffers from severe performance degradation unless trained with a dense set of images with different camera poses, which hinders its practical applications. Although previous methods addressing
this problem achieved promising results, they relied heavily on the additional training resources, which goes against
the philosophy of sparse-input novel-view synthesis pursuing the training efficiency. In this work, we propose MixNeRF, an effective training strategy for novel view synthesis from sparse inputs by modeling a ray with a mixture
density model. Our MixNeRF estimates the joint distribution of RGB colors along the ray samples by modeling it
with mixture of distributions. We also propose a new task of
ray depth estimation as a useful training objective, which is
highly correlated with 3D scene geometry. Moreover, we remodel the colors with regenerated blending weights based
on the estimated ray depth and further improves the robustness for colors and viewpoints. Our MixNeRF outperforms
other state-of-the-art methods in various standard benchmarks with superior efficiency of training and inference.

1. Introduction
A photo-realistic view synthesis is one of the major research topics in computer vision. Recently, the coordinatebased neural representation [6, 25, 26, 30] has gained much
popularity for the novel view synthesis task. Among them,
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [28], which models a 3D
scene by learning from a dense set of 2D images, enabled
high-quality view synthesis with a simple concept and has
become the prevailing mainstream. However, NeRF suffers
∗ D. Han and Y. Chang equally contributed to this work.

This work was supported by NRF grant (2021R1A2C3006659) and
IITP grants (2021-0-01343, 2022-0-00953) funded by Korean Government.

PSNR

Abstract

Training Time per Scene (Hours)
Figure 1. Comparison with the vanilla mip-NeRF [1] and other
regularization methods. Given the same number of training batch
and iterations, our MixNeRF outperforms mip-NeRF and DietNeRF [12] by a large margin with comparable or shorter training
time. Compared to RegNeRF [29], ours achieves superior performance with about 42% shortened training time. The size of the
circles are proportional to the number of input views, indicating
3/6/9-view, respectively. More details are provided in Sec. 4.2.

from severe performance degradation in real-world applications, e.g. AR/VR, autonomous driving, and so on, where
only a sparse set of views are available due to the burdensome task of collecting dense training images.
One of the key factors for a model’s high-quality rendering with limited input views is its robustness in 3D geometry learning, i.e. accurate depth estimation for a scene.
There are several works to address this problem and it
can be classified into two major paradigms: pre-training
and regularization approaches. For the pre-training approach [5,7,13,16,20,22,31,34,37,42], a general 3D geometry is trained by the multi-view images from a large-scale
dataset and per-scene finetuning is optionally conducted in
the test time. Although it has achieved promising results, it
still requires the expensive cost for collecting a large-scale
dataset across different scenes for pre-training and is not
well-generalized for a novel domain in the test time.
Another line of research, the regularization approach [9,
12, 18, 29, 32, 39], performs per-scene optimization from
scratch by applying regularization to prevent being overfitted from the limited inputs. Most existing methods of this
kind depend heavily on the extra training resources for com-

20659

