This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

METransformer: Radiology Report Generation by Transformer with Multiple
Learnable Expert Tokens
Zhanyu Wang
University of Sydney

Lingqiao Liu
University of Adelaide

Lei Wang
University of Wollongong

zhanyu.wang@sydney.edu.au

lingqiao.liu@adelaide.edu.au

leiw@uow.edu.au

Luping Zhou
University of Sydney
luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
In clinical scenarios, multi-specialist consultation could
significantly benefit the diagnosis, especially for intricate
cases. This inspires us to explore a “multi-expert joint
diagnosis” mechanism to upgrade the existing “single expert” framework commonly seen in the current literature.
To this end, we propose METransformer, a method to realize this idea with a transformer-based backbone. The key
design of our method is the introduction of multiple learnable “expert” tokens into both the transformer encoder and
decoder. In the encoder, each expert token interacts with
both vision tokens and other expert tokens to learn to attend
different image regions for image representation. These expert tokens are encouraged to capture complementary information by an orthogonal loss that minimizes their overlap. In the decoder, each attended expert token guides the
cross-attention between input words and visual tokens, thus
influencing the generated report. A metrics-based expert
voting strategy is further developed to generate the final report. By the multi-experts concept, our model enjoys the
merits of an ensemble-based approach but through a manner that is computationally more efficient and supports more
sophisticated interactions among experts. Experimental results demonstrate the promising performance of our proposed model on two widely used benchmarks. Last but not
least, the framework-level innovation makes our work ready
to incorporate advances on existing “single-expert” models
to further improve its performance.

1. Introduction
Interpreting radiology images (e.g., chest X-ray) and
writing diagnostic reports are essential operations in clinical
practice and normally require a considerable manual work-

load. Therefore, radiology report generation, which aims
to automatically generate a free-text description based on a
radiograph, is highly desired to ease the burden of radiologists while maintaining the quality of health care. Recently,
substantial progress has been made towards research on automated radiology report generation models [4,5,15–17,21,
22,33–35,41,43,44,47]. Most existing studies adopt a conventional encoder-decoder architecture following the image
captioning paradigm [6, 25, 32, 37, 48] and resort to optimizing network structure or introducing external or prior
information to aid report generation. These methods, in this
paper, are collectively referred to as “single-expert” based
diagnostic captioning methods.
However, diagnostic report generation is a very challenging task as disease anomalies usually only occupy a small
portion of the whole image and could appear at arbitrary locations. Due to the fine-grained nature of radiology images,
it is hard to focus on the correct image regions throughout
the report generation procedure despite different attentions
developed in recent works [16, 21]. Meanwhile, it is noticed that in clinic scenarios, multi-specialist consultation is
especially beneficial for those intricate diagnostic cases that
challenge a single specialist for a comprehensive and accurate diagnosis. The above observations led us to think, could
we design a model to simulate the multi-specialist consultation scenario? Based on this motivation, we propose a
new diagnostic captioning framework, METransformer, to
mimic the “multi-expert joint diagnosis” process. Built
upon a transformer backbone, METransformer introduces
multiple “expert tokens”, representing multiple experts, into
both the transformer encoder and decoder. Each expert token learns to attend distinct image regions and interacts with
other expert tokens to capture reliable and complementary
visual information and produce a diagnosis report in parallel. The optimal report is selected through an expert voting
strategy to produce the final report. Our design is based on

11558

