This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Empirical Study of End-to-End
Video-Language Transformers with Masked Visual Modeling
Tsu-Jui Fu† *, Linjie Li‡ *, Zhe Gan‡ , Kevin Lin‡ , William Yang Wang† , Lijuan Wang‡ , Zicheng Liu‡
†
UC Santa Barbara ‡ Microsoft
{tsu-juifu, william}@cs.ucsb.edu
{lindsey.li, zhe.gan, keli, lijuanw, zliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Masked visual modeling (MVM) has been recently
proven effective for visual pre-training. While similar reconstructive objectives on video inputs (e.g., masked frame
modeling) have been explored in video-language (VidL)
pre-training, previous studies fail to find a truly effective
MVM strategy that can largely benefit the downstream performance. In this work, we systematically examine the potential of MVM in the context of VidL learning. Specifically,
we base our study on a fully end-to-end VIdeO-LanguagE
Transformer (VIOLET) [15], where the supervision from
MVM training can be backpropogated to the video pixel
space. In total, eight different reconstructive targets of
MVM are explored, from low-level pixel values and oriented
gradients to high-level depth maps, optical flow, discrete
visual tokens and latent visual features. We conduct comprehensive experiments and provide insights into the factors leading to effective MVM training, resulting in an enhanced model VIOLETv2. Empirically, we show VIOLETv2
pre-trained with MVM objective achieves notable improvements on 13 VidL benchmarks, ranging from video question
answering, video captioning, to text-to-video retrieval.1

1. Introduction
Video, containing multiple modalities in nature, has been
used as an epitome to test how AI systems perceive. Videolanguage (VidL) research aims at extending this ability to
convey perception via language. Popular VidL tasks were
introduced, such as text-to-video retrieval [29,54,75], video
question answering [25, 74], and video captioning [6, 75].
Recent progresses in VidL learning mostly focus on VidL
pre-training [49, 58, 83] with video-text matching [39, 79]
and masked language modeling [10]. There have also
been attempts on similar masked modeling on vision inputs.
1 Code has been released at https://github.com/tsujuifu/
pytorch_empirical-mvm.

For example, masked frame modeling [39] aims to recover
masked frame representations. However, the pre-extracted
video features cannot be refined during pre-training, which
may limit its effectiveness. More recently, VIOLET [15]
designs an end-to-end video-language transformer and proposes to reconstruct discrete visual tokens for masked frame
patches. Though showing some promises in recovering visual semantics, the performance improvements on downstream VidL tasks are still marginal.
Meanwhile, self-supervised visual pre-training has been
proven highly effective by reconstructing the masked image
patches through raw pixel values [21, 73], discrete visual
tokens [3, 81], or visual-semantic features [70, 71]. However, they all only focus on the visual modality. It is unclear
which variant of masked visual modeling (MVM) objectives can help VidL learning, especially given that the paired
language inputs can already provide high-level semantics.
Motivated by this, we conduct a comprehensive study
of MVM for VidL learning. As illustrated in Figure 1, we
base our study on the fully end-to-end VIdeO-LangaugeE
Transformer (VIOLET) [15], and study a broad spectrum
of MVM targets, including RGB pixel values (Pixel), histogram of oriented gradients (HOG), depth maps (Depth),
optical flow (Flow), discrete visual tokens (VQ), spatialfocused image features (SIF), temporal-aware video features (TVF), and mulitmodal features (MMF). During pretraining, we mask out some proportions of the video input along both spatial and temporal dimensions, and the
model learns to recover the MVM targets for these masked
patches. Equipped with another two standard pre-training
tasks (i.e., video-text matching and masked language modeling), we empirically verify the effectiveness of different
MVM variants on downstream VidL tasks.
Our study reveals that: (i) spatial-focused image features (SIF) is the most effective MVM target on video-text
inputs; and (ii) the effects of different MVM targets on
downstream VidL tasks are not shared between video-text
and image-text inputs. For example, SIF extracted from
the same model brings a large drop on downstream VidL

22898

