This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Non-Contrastive Unsupervised Learning of Physiological Signals from Video
Jeremy Speth, Nathan Vance, Patrick Flynn, Adam Czajka
University of Notre Dame
{jspeth,nvance1,flynn,aczajka}@nd.edu

Abstract
Subtle periodic signals such as blood volume pulse and
respiration can be extracted from RGB video, enabling noncontact health monitoring at low cost. Advancements in
remote pulse estimation – or remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) – are currently driven by deep learning solutions. However, modern approaches are trained and evaluated on benchmark datasets with ground truth from contactPPG sensors. We present the first non-contrastive unsupervised learning framework for signal regression to mitigate
the need for labelled video data. With minimal assumptions
of periodicity and finite bandwidth, our approach discovers the blood volume pulse directly from unlabelled videos.
We find that encouraging sparse power spectra within normal physiological bandlimits and variance over batches of
power spectra is sufficient for learning visual features of
periodic signals. We perform the first experiments utilizing
unlabelled video data not specifically created for rPPG to
train robust pulse rate estimators. Given the limited inductive biases and impressive empirical results, the approach is
theoretically capable of discovering other periodic signals
from video, enabling multiple physiological measurements
without the need for ground truth signals.

1. Introduction
Camera-based vitals estimation is a rapidly growing field
enabling non-contact health monitoring in a variety of settings [23]. Although many of the signals avoid detection
from the human eye, video data in the visible and infrared
ranges contain subtle intensity changes caused by physiological oscillations such as blood volume and respiration.
Significant remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) research
for estimating the cardiac pulse has leveraged supervised
deep learning for robust signal extraction [7, 18, 30, 38, 51,
52]. While the number of successful approaches has rapidly
increased, the size of benchmark video datasets with simultaneous vitals recordings has remained relatively stagnant.
Robust deep learning-based systems for deployment require training on larger volumes of video data with di-

verse skin tones, lighting, camera sensors, and movement.
However, collecting simultaneous video and physiological ground truth with contact-PPG or electrocardiograms
(ECG) is challenging for several reasons. First, many hours
of high quality videos is an unwieldy volume of data. Second, recording a diverse subject population in conditions
representative of real-world activities is difficult to conduct
in the lab setting. Finally, synchronizing contact measurements with video is technically challenging, and even contact measurements used for ground truth contain noise.
Fortunately, recent works find that contrastive unsupervised learning for rPPG is a promising solution to the data
scarcity problem [13, 42, 45, 50]. We extend this research
line into non-contrastive unsupervised learning to discover
periodic signals in video data. With end-to-end unsupervised learning, collecting more representative training data
to learn powerful visual features is much simpler, since only
video is required without associated medical information.
In this work, we show that non-contrastive unsupervised
learning is especially simple when regressing rPPG signals.
We find weak assumptions of periodicity are sufficient for
learning the minuscule visual features corresponding to the
blood volume pulse from unlabelled face videos. The loss
functions can be computed in the frequency domain over
batches without the need for pairwise or triplet comparisons. Figure 1 compares the proposed approach with supervised and contrastive unsupervised learning approaches.
This work creates opportunities for scaling deep learning
models for camera-based vitals and estimating periodic or
quasi-periodic signals from unlabelled data beyond rPPG.
Our novel contributions are:
1. A general framework for physiological signal estimation via non-contrastive unsupervised learning (SiNC)
by leveraging periodic signal priors.
2. The first non-contrastive unsupervised learning
method for camera-based vitals measurement.
3. The first experiments and results of training with nonrPPG-specific video data without ground truth vitals.
Source code to replicate this work is available at https:
//github.com/CVRL/SiNC-rPPG.

14464

