This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Transferable Targeted Adversarial Examples
Zhibo Wang†,§,∗ , Hongshan Yang† , Yunhe Feng‡ , Peng Sun♯ , Hengchang Guoß , Zhifei Zhang≀ , Kui Ren†
†
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P. R. China
§
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas, USA
♯
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, P. R. China
ß
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, P. R. China ≀ Adobe Research
{zhibowang, yanghs, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn, yunhe.feng@unt.edu
psun@hnu.edu.cn, hc guo@whu.edu.cn, zzhang@adobe.com

Abstract
Transferability of adversarial examples is critical for
black-box deep learning model attacks. While most existing
studies focus on enhancing the transferability of untargeted
adversarial attacks, few of them studied how to generate
transferable targeted adversarial examples that can mislead
models into predicting a specific class. Moreover, existing
transferable targeted adversarial attacks usually fail to sufficiently characterize the target class distribution, thus suffering from limited transferability. In this paper, we propose the Transferable Targeted Adversarial Attack (TTAA),
which can capture the distribution information of the target class from both label-wise and feature-wise perspectives, to generate highly transferable targeted adversarial
examples. To this end, we design a generative adversarial training framework consisting of a generator to produce
targeted adversarial examples, and feature-label dual discriminators to distinguish the generated adversarial examples from the target class images. Specifically, we design
the label discriminator to guide the adversarial examples
to learn label-related distribution information about the
target class. Meanwhile, we design a feature discriminator, which extracts the feature-wise information with strong
cross-model consistency, to enable the adversarial examples to learn the transferable distribution information. Furthermore, we introduce the random perturbation dropping
to further enhance the transferability by augmenting the diversity of adversarial examples used in the training process.
Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves excellent performance on the transferability of targeted adversarial examples. The targeted fooling rate reaches 95.13%
when transferred from VGG-19 to DenseNet-121, which
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.
∗ Zhibo Wang is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
As an important branch of artificial intelligence (AI),
deep neural networks (DNNs) contribute to many reallife applications, e.g., image classification [1, 2], speech
recognition [3, 4], face detection [5, 6], automatic driving technology [7], etc. Such broad impacts have motivated a wide range of investigations into the adversarial attacks on DNNs, exploring the vulnerability and uncertainty of DNNs. For instance, Szegedy et al. showed
that DNNs could be fooled by adversarial examples crafted
by adding human-indistinguishable perturbations to original inputs [8]. As successful adversarial examples must be
imperceptible to humans but cause DNNs to make a false
prediction, how to design adversarial attacks to generate
high-quality adversarial examples in a general manner remains challenging.
Adversarial attack methods can be divided into untargeted attacks and targeted attacks. Untargeted attacks try
to misguide the model to predict arbitrary incorrect labels, while targeted adversarial attacks expect the generated adversarial examples can trigger the misprediction for
a specific label. The transferability of adversarial examples
is crucial for both untargeted and targeted attacks, especially in black-box attack scenarios where the target model
is inaccessible. However, most existing studies focus on
enhancing the transferability of untargeted adversarial attacks, through data augmentation [9, 10], model aggregation [11,12], feature information utilization [13–15], or generative methods [16–18]. Although some of them could be
extended to the targeted adversarial attacks by simply modifying the loss function, they could not extract sufficient
transferable information about the target class due to the
overfitting of the source model and the lack of distribution
information of the target class, thus demonstrating limited
transferability.

20534

