This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-Based Signed Distance Fields for 3D Shape Generation
Jaehyeok Shim, Changwoo Kang and Kyungdon Joo*
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
{jh.shim,kangchangwoo,kyungdon}@unist.ac.kr
https://kitsunetic.github.io/sdf-diffusion

Noise

...

LR

Noise

HR

...

LR

HR

Figure 1. Visualization of 3D shape generation for various categories using SDF-Diffusion. SDF-diffusion gradually removes
the Gaussian noise and generates high-resolution 3D shapes in the form of an SDF voxel by a two-stage framework. Unlike previous
methods, which use point clouds, we can generate 3D meshes without concern of complex post-processing. For visualization purposes, we
show less-noise data instead of the initial Gaussian noise.

Abstract
We propose a 3D shape generation framework
(SDF-Diffusion in short) that uses denoising diffusion models with continuous 3D representation via
signed distance fields (SDF). Unlike most existing methods that depend on discontinuous forms, such as point
clouds, SDF-Diffusion generates high-resolution 3D
shapes while alleviating memory issues by separating the
generative process into two-stage: generation and superresolution. In the first stage, a diffusion-based generative
model generates a low-resolution SDF of 3D shapes.
Using the estimated low-resolution SDF as a condition,
the second stage diffusion model performs super-resolution
to generate high-resolution SDF. Our framework can
generate a high-fidelity 3D shape despite the extreme
spatial complexity. On the ShapeNet dataset, our model
shows competitive performance to the state-of-the-art
methods and shows applicability on the shape completion
task without modification.
*Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
The need for generative modeling of 3D shapes has
rapidly increased due to high demand in various fields, such
as computer vision, graphics, robotics, and content generation. To synthesize a high-quality 3D shape, numerous
generative approaches have been actively studied, including generative adversarial networks (GAN) [1, 7, 8, 18, 20,
40, 51, 62, 71, 85], variational auto-encoders (VAE) [13, 27,
35,45,67], normalizing flows [26,30,60,77], auto-regressive
models [19, 31, 45, 46, 76], and others [61, 74, 75, 80, 84].
Recently, denoising diffusion models (DDM) have
emerged as a promising generative framework in image
generation [10, 16, 22, 39, 47, 63] and speech synthesis [5,
32, 54]. DDM achieves a generative process by gradually
corrupting data through a diffusion process and denoising
through a learned neural network. This network can generate new realistic data by repeating the denoising process
from the given pure noise. Based on the success of DDMbased generative models in various domains, several attempts are being made to apply them to the task of 3D shape
generation [41,83,87]. They have applied DDM to generate
new point cloud and have outperformed previous methods.

20887

