This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VIVE3D: Viewpoint-Independent Video Editing using 3D-Aware GANs
Anna Frühstück2* , Nikolaos Sarafianos1 , Yuanlu Xu1 , Peter Wonka2 , Tony Tung1
1

Meta Reality Labs Research, Sausalito

2

KAUST

afruehstueck.github.io/vive3D

YAW = 0.3

+AGE
+GLASSES
YAW = 0.0

-SMILE
YAW = -0.3

Figure 1. We propose VIVE3D, a novel method that creates a powerful personalized 3D-aware generator using a low number of selected
images of a target person. Given a new video of that person, we can faithfully modify several facial attributes as well as the camera
viewpoint of the head crop. Finally, we seamlessly composite the edited face with the source frame in a temporally and spatially consistent
manner, while retaining a plausible composition with the static components of the frame outside of the generator’s region. The dotted
squares in the center frame denote the reference regions for the three different camera poses in the column below.

Abstract
We introduce VIVE3D, a novel approach that extends the
capabilities of image-based 3D GANs to video editing and
is able to represent the input video in an identity-preserving
and temporally consistent way. We propose two new building blocks. First, we introduce a novel GAN inversion technique specifically tailored to 3D GANs by jointly embedding
multiple frames and optimizing for the camera parameters.
Second, besides traditional semantic face edits (e.g. for age
and expression), we are the first to demonstrate edits that
show novel views of the head enabled by the inherent properties of 3D GANs and our optical flow-guided compositing
technique to combine the head with the background video.
Our experiments demonstrate that VIVE3D generates highfidelity face edits at consistent quality from a range of camera viewpoints which are composited with the original video
in a temporally and spatially consistent manner.

*This work was conducted during an internship at Meta RL Research.

1. Introduction
Semantic image editing has been an active research topic
for the past few years. Previous work [21] uses Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) to produce high-fidelity results in the image space. The most popular backbone is
StyleGAN [26–29] as it generates high-resolution domainspecific images while providing a disentangled latent space
that can be utilized for editing operations. To edit real photographs, there are typically two steps: The first step maps
the input image to the latent space of a pre-trained generator. This is usually accomplished either through encoderbased embedding or through optimization, such that generator can accurately reconstruct the image from the latent
code [53]. The second step is semantic image manipulation, where one latent input representation is mapped to another to obtain a certain attribute edit, (e.g. changing age,
facial expression, glasses, or hairstyle). While existing approaches produce impressive results on single images, extending them to videos is far from straightforward. Among

4446

