This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Rate Estimator and Unsupervised Learning for Efficient Distributed
Image Analytics in Split-DNN models
Nilesh Ahuja1 , Parual Datta1 , Bhavya Kanzariya1,2 , V. Srinivasa Somayazulu1 , Omesh Tickoo1
1
Intel Labs, 2 IIT Hyderabad
{nilesh.ahuja, parual.datta, bhavya.kanzariya, v.srinivasa.somayazulu, omesh.tickoo}@intel.com

Abstract
Thanks to advances in computer vision and AI, there
has been a large growth in the demand for cloud-based visual analytics in which images captured by a low-powered
edge device are transmitted to the cloud for analytics. Use
of conventional codecs (JPEG, MPEG, HEVC, etc.) for
compressing such data introduces artifacts that can seriously degrade the performance of the downstream analytic
tasks. Split-DNN computing has emerged as a paradigm
to address such usages, in which a DNN is partitioned
into a client-side portion and a server side portion. Lowcomplexity neural networks called ‘bottleneck units’ are introduced at the split point to transform the intermediate
layer features into a lower-dimensional representation better suited for compression and transmission. Optimizing
the pipeline for both compression and task-performance requires high-quality estimates of the information-theoretic
rate of the intermediate features. Most works on compression for image analytics use heuristic approaches to estimate the rate, leading to suboptimal performance. We propose a high-quality ‘neural rate-estimator’ to address this
gap. We interpret the lower-dimensional bottleneck output as a latent representation of the intermediate feature
and cast the rate-distortion optimization problem as one
of training an equivalent variational auto-encoder with an
appropriate loss function. We show that this leads to improved rate-distortion outcomes. We further show that replacing supervised loss terms (such as cross-entropy loss)
by distillation-based losses in a teacher-student framework
allows for unsupervised training of bottleneck units without
the need for explicit training labels. This makes our method
very attractive for real world deployments where access to
labeled training data is difficult or expensive. We demonstrate that our method outperforms several state-of-the-art
methods by obtaining improved task accuracy at lower bitrates on image classification and semantic segmentation
tasks.

1. Introduction
Visual analytics powered by computer-vision and AI are
being ubiquitously deployed in various domains including
retail, industry 4.0, security, and smart-cities [16]. These
analytics are increasingly being powered by deep-neural
networks (DNN) that are often too complex to be implemented on low-powered mobile or client devices. Instead,
visual data captured by a mobile device is transmitted over
the network to a server or the cloud. Data-compression
techniques are applied in order to keep the data-rate manageable. Standard data compression techniques for images
and videos, such as JPEG, BPG, H.264, H.265, etc. are
known to be suboptimal for visual analytics since these
optimize rate-distortion performance for human perception
rather than for semantics-based analytics. Consequently,
task performance can degrade severely in the presence of
even relatively mild compression artifacts.
To address this, split DNN-computing (also called collaborative intelligence [8, 17]) has emerged as a recent
paradigm in which a DNN is partitioned into two: a frontend comprising the input layer and a number of subsequent
layers deployed on the mobile or client side, and a backend comprising the remaining layers residing on the server
or cloud. Specially designed neural networks, called bottleneck layers [12, 21, 24] are introduced at the partition point.
These layers transform the high-dimensional intermediate
features at the split point into a lower-dimensional space,
enabling greater compression. This has important benefits over the traditional approach. First, the model can be
trained to learn features that are jointly optimized both for
task performance and for compression, resulting in greater
compression efficiency; second, there is no need to reconstruct the original signal resulting in greater computational
efficiency.
Early approaches [5] to split-computing explored the
use of simple lossless and lossy compression techniques
to compress the intermediate features. While lossless
techniques resulted in only mild reduction in bandwidth,
naively quantizing the intermediate features during infer-

2022

