This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UTM: A Unified Multiple Object Tracking Model with Identity-Aware Feature
Enhancement
Sisi You1

Hantao Yao2
1

2

Bing-kun Bao1

Changsheng Xu2,3*

Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

ssyou@njupt.edu.cn, hantao.yao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn, csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, Multiple Object Tracking has achieved great
success, which consists of object detection, feature embedding, and identity association. Existing methods apply the
three-step or two-step paradigm to generate robust trajectories, where identity association is independent of other
components. However, the independent identity association results in the identity-aware knowledge contained in
the tracklet not be used to boost the detection and embedding modules. To overcome the limitations of existing methods, we introduce a novel Unified Tracking Model (UTM)
to bridge those three components for generating a positive
feedback loop with mutual benefits. The key insight of UTM
is the Identity-Aware Feature Enhancement (IAFE), which
is applied to bridge and benefit these three components
by utilizing the identity-aware knowledge to boost detection and embedding. Formally, IAFE contains the IdentityAware Boosting Attention (IABA) and the Identity-Aware
Erasing Attention (IAEA), where IABA enhances the consistent regions between the current frame feature and identityaware knowledge, and IAEA suppresses the distracted regions in the current frame feature. With better detections
and embeddings, higher-quality tracklets can also be generated. Extensive experiments of public and private detections
on three benchmarks demonstrate the robustness of UTM.

1. Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) aims at locating and
identifying all of the moving objects in the video, which has
broad application prospects in visual surveillance, humancomputer interaction, virtual reality, and unmanned vehicles. With the rapid development of object detection [12,
34, 35, 66], Tracking-By-Detection has became a favorite
* indicates corresponding author: Changsheng Xu.

Detector

Detection

Embedding
model Embedding

Identity
Association Tracklet

(a) Separate Detection and Embedding (SDE)

Detection

Backbone
Embedding

Identity
Association

Tracklet

(b) Joint Detection and Embedding (JDE)
Detection
IAFE
Backbone

Tracklet
Embedding

(c) Unified Tracking Model (UTM)

Figure 1. Comparison of different MOT frameworks in existing
methods. (a) Separate Detection and Embedding (SDE) [2]. (b)
Joint Detection and Embedding (JDE) [50]. (c) The proposed Unified Tracking Model (UTM) that constructed with Identity-Aware
Feature Enhancement (IAFE) module.

paradigm in MOT. Recently, a number of Tracking-ByDetection approaches have been proposed, which can be
divided into two paradigms: Separate Detection and Embedding (SDE) [1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 16, 25, 38, 43, 52, 54], and
Joint Detection and Embedding (JDE) [15, 29, 45, 50, 64].
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), SDE can be divided into
three independent components: object detection, feature
embedding, and identity association1 . Candidate bounding boxes (bboxes) are obtained by standard detectors in
each frame first, then identity embedding of each bbox is
extracted by the re-identification algorithms, finally linked
across frames through identity association to generate tra1 In this paper, identity association includes affinity computation and
data association.

21876

