This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CRAFT: Concept Recursive Activation FacTorization for Explainability
Thomas Fel1,3,5 * Agustin Picard3,6 * Louis Bethune3 * Thibaut Boissin3,4 *
David Vigouroux3,4 Julien Colin1,3 Rémi Cadène1,2
Thomas Serre1,3
1

Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, USA 2 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, France
3
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Université de Toulouse, France
4
Institut de Recherche Technologique Saint-Exupery, France
5
Innovation & Research Division, SNCF , 6 Scalian

Figure 1. The “Man on the Moon” incorrectly classified as a “shovel” by an ImageNet-trained ResNet50. Heatmap generated by a
classic attribution method [55] (left) vs. concept attribution maps generated with the proposed CRAFT approach (right) which highlights
the two most influential concepts that drove the ResNet50’s decision along with their corresponding locations. CRAFT suggests that the
neural net arrived at its decision because it identified the concept of “dirt” • commonly found in members of the image class “shovel”
and the concept of “ski pants” • typically worn by people clearing snow from their driveway with a shovel instead the correct concept of
astronaut’s pants (which was probably never seen during training).

Abstract
Attribution methods, which employ heatmaps to identify the most influential regions of an image that impact
model decisions, have gained widespread popularity as a
type of explainability method. However, recent research
has exposed the limited practical value of these methods, attributed in part to their narrow focus on the most prominent
regions of an image – revealing "where" the model looks,
but failing to elucidate "what" the model sees in those areas.
In this work, we try to fill in this gap with CRAFT – a novel
approach to identify both “what” and “where” by generating concept-based explanations. We introduce 3 new ingredients to the automatic concept extraction literature: (i) a
recursive strategy to detect and decompose concepts across
layers, (ii) a novel method for a more faithful estimation of
concept importance using Sobol indices, and (iii) the use of
implicit differentiation to unlock Concept Attribution Maps.
We conduct both human and computer vision experiments to demonstrate the benefits of the proposed approach.

We show that the proposed concept importance estimation
technique is more faithful to the model than previous methods. When evaluating the usefulness of the method for human experimenters on a human-centered utility benchmark,
we find that our approach significantly improves on two of
the three test scenarios.

1. Introduction
Interpreting the decisions of modern machine learning
models such as neural networks remains a major challenge.
Given the ever-increasing range of machine learning applications, the need for robust and reliable explainability methods continues to grow [11, 35]. Recently enacted European laws (including the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [37] and the European AI act [43]) require the
assessment of explainable decisions, especially those made
by algorithms.
In order to try to meet this growing need, an array of
explainability methods have already been proposed [14, 50,
12711

