This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit 3D Human Mesh Recovery using Consistency with
Pose and Shape from Unseen-view
Hanbyel Cho
Yooshin Cho
Jaesung Ahn
Junmo Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
{tlrl4658,choys95,jaesung02,junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
From an image of a person, we can easily infer the natural 3D pose and shape of the person even if ambiguity exists. This is because we have a mental model that allows us
to imagine a person’s appearance at different viewing directions from a given image and utilize the consistency between
them for inference. However, existing human mesh recovery
methods only consider the direction in which the image was
taken due to their structural limitations. Hence, we propose
“Implicit 3D Human Mesh Recovery (ImpHMR)” that can
implicitly imagine a person in 3D space at the feature-level
via Neural Feature Fields. In ImpHMR, feature fields are
generated by CNN-based image encoder for a given image.
Then, the 2D feature map is volume-rendered from the feature field for a given viewing direction, and the pose and
shape parameters are regressed from the feature. To utilize consistency with pose and shape from unseen-view, if
there are 3D labels, the model predicts results including the
silhouette from an arbitrary direction and makes it equal
to the rotated ground-truth. In the case of only 2D labels,
we perform self-supervised learning through the constraint
that the pose and shape parameters inferred from different
directions should be the same. Extensive evaluations show
the efficacy of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) is a task that regresses
the parameters of a three-dimensional (3D) human body
model (e.g., SMPL [34], SMPL-X [42], and GHUM [57])
from RGB images. Along with 3D joint-based methods [7,
32, 46], HMR has many downstream tasks such as AR/VR,
and computer graphics as a fundamental topic in computer
vision. In recent years, there has been rapid progress in
HMR, particularly in regression-based approaches [6,19,22,
25–27,30,49,55,62]. However, despite these achievements,
the existing algorithms still have a gap with the way humans
do, so most of them do not show robust performance against
the inherent ambiguity of the task.

Figure 1. Mental model of human that infers pose and shape
from a single image. From an image of a person, we infer pose
and shape robustly by imagining the person’s appearance not only
from the direction in which the image was taken, but also from
other viewing directions (e.g., left and right sides).

Consider the image of a baseball player running, as
shown in Fig. 1. For the given single image, we can easily
infer that the person’s right elbow and left leg are extended
backward in a 3D space, despite the presence of inherent
ambiguity (e.g., depth and occlusion). This is because we
have a mental model that allows us to imagine a person’s appearance at different viewing directions from a given image
and utilize the consistency between them for inference. Recently, many state-of-the-art studies have successfully utilized knowledge similar to that used by humans such as human dynamics [20] and temporal information [8,23,35,55].
However, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no
studies proposed methods that consider 3D space for HMR
similar to the way we infer pose and shape through appearance check between different views in 3D space.
To overcome this issue, we propose “Implicit 3D Human
Mesh Recovery (ImpHMR)” that can implicitly imagine a
human placed in a 3D space via Neural Feature Fields [40].
Our assumption is that if the model is trained to infer a hu-

21148

