This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shadow
What You Can Reconstruct from a Shadow
Ruoshi Liu1

Sachit Menon1 Chengzhi Mao1 Dennis Park2 Simon Stent3 Carl Vondrick1
1
3
Columbia University 2 Toyota Research Institute
Woven Planet
shadow.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
3D reconstruction is a fundamental problem in computer
vision, and the task is especially challenging when the object
to reconstruct is partially or fully occluded. We introduce a
method that uses the shadows cast by an unobserved object
in order to infer the possible 3D volumes under occlusion.
We create a differentiable image formation model that allows
us to jointly infer the 3D shape of an object, its pose, and
the position of a light source. Since the approach is end-toend differentiable, we are able to integrate learned priors of
object geometry in order to generate realistic 3D shapes of
different object categories. Experiments and visualizations
show that the method is able to generate multiple possible
solutions that are consistent with the observation of the
shadow. Our approach works even when the position of
the light source and object pose are both unknown. Our
approach is also robust to real-world images where groundtruth shadow mask is unknown.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D shape of objects is a fundamental
challenge in computer vision, with a number of applications
in robotics, graphics, and data science. The task aims to

Input View
(Shadow shows occlusion)

estimate a 3D model from one or more camera views, and researchers over the last twenty years have developed excellent
methods to reconstruct visible objects [1, 13–15, 24, 25, 43].
However, objects are often occluded, with the line of sight
obstructed either by another object in the scene, or by themselves (self-occlusion). Reconstruction from a single image
is an under-constrained problem, and occlusions further reduce the number of constraints. To reconstruct occluded
objects, we need to rely on additional context.
One piece of evidence that people use to uncover occlusions is the shadow cast on the floor by the hidden object.
For example, figure 1 shows a scene with an object that has
become fully occluded. Even though no appearance features
are visible, the shadow reveals that another object exists behind the chair, and the silhouette constrains the possible 3D
shapes of the occluded object. What hidden object caused
that shadow?
In this paper, we introduce a framework for reconstructing
3D objects from their shadows. We formulate a generative
model of objects and their shadows cast by a light source,
which we use to jointly infer the 3D shape, its pose, and
the location of the light source. Our model is fully differentiable, which allows us to use gradient descent to efficiently
search for the best shapes that explain the observed shadow.
Our approach integrates both learned empirical priors about

Our Result
(New camera view)

Original Scene

Figure 1. We introduce a method to perform 3D reconstruction from the shadow cast on the floor by occluded objects. In the middle, we
visualize our reconstruction of the occluded chair from a new camera view.

17059

