This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MP-Former: Mask-Piloted Transformer for Image Segmentation
Hao Zhang1,4 *†, Feng Li1,4∗† , Huaizhe Xu1,4 , Shijia Huang2,4 ,
Shilong Liu3,4 , Lionel M. Ni5,1 , Lei Zhang4‡
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
3
Dept. of CST., BNRist Center, Institute for AI, Tsinghua University.
4
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA).
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).

Abstract
We present a mask-piloted Transformer which improves
masked-attention in Mask2Former for image segmentation. The improvement is based on our observation that
Mask2Former suffers from inconsistent mask predictions
between consecutive decoder layers, which leads to inconsistent optimization goals and low utilization of decoder
queries. To address this problem, we propose a mask-piloted
training approach, which additionally feeds noised groundtruth masks in masked-attention and trains the model to
reconstruct the original ones. Compared with the predicted
masks used in mask-attention, the ground-truth masks serve
as a pilot and effectively alleviate the negative impact of
inaccurate mask predictions in Mask2Former. Based on this
technique, our MP-Former achieves a remarkable performance improvement on all three image segmentation tasks
(instance, panoptic, and semantic), yielding +2.3AP and
+1.6mIoU on the Cityscapes instance and semantic segmentation tasks with a ResNet-50 backbone. Our method
also significantly speeds up the training, outperforming
Mask2Former with half of the number of training epochs
on ADE20K with both a ResNet-50 and a Swin-L backbones.
Moreover, our method only introduces little computation during training and no extra computation during inference. Our
code will be released at https://github.com/IDEAResearch/MP-Former.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision which includes semantic, instance, and panoptic
* Equal contribution.
† This work was done when Hao Zhang and Feng Li were interns at

IDEA.
‡ Corresponding author.

segmentation. Early works design specialized architectures
for different tasks, such as mask prediction models [2, 15]
for instance segmentation and per-pixel prediction models [25, 28] for semantic segmentation. Panoptic segmentation [18] is a unified task of instance and semantic segmentation. But universal models for panoptic segmentation
such as Panoptic FPN [18] and K-net [34] are usually suboptimal on instance and semantic segmentation compared
with specialized models.
Recently, Vision Transformers [29] has achieved tremendous success in many computer vision tasks, such as image
classification [11, 24] and object detection [1]. Inspired by
DETR’s set prediction mechanism, Mask2Former [7] proposes a unified framework and achieves a remarkable performance on all three segmentation tasks. Similar to DETR,
it uses learnable queries in Transformer decoders to probe
features and adopts bipartite matching to assign predictions
to ground truth (GT) masks. Mask2Former also uses predicted masks in a decoder layer as attention masks for the
next decoder layer. The attention masks serve as a guidance
to help next layer’s prediction and greatly ease training.
Despite its great success, Mask2Former is still an initial
attempt which is mainly based on a vanilla DETR model
that has a sub-optimal performance compared to its later
variants. For example, in each decoder layer, the predicted
masks are built from scratch by dot-producting queries and
feature map without performing layer-wise refinement as
proposed in deformable DETR [37]. Because each layer
build masks from scratch, the masks predicted by a query
in different layers may change dramatically. To show this
inconsistent predictions among layers, we build two metrics
mIoU-Li and Utili to quantify this problem and analyze its
consequences in Section 3. As a result, this problem leads to
a low utilization rate of decoder queries, which is especially
severe in the first few decoder layers. As the attention masks
predicted from an early layer are usually inaccurate, when
serving as a guidance for its next layer, they will lead to

18074

