This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AssemblyHands:
Towards Egocentric Activity Understanding via 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Takehiko Ohkawa1,2 * Kun He1 Fadime Sener1 Tomas Hodan1 Luan Tran1 Cem Keskin1
1

Meta Reality Labs

2

The University of Tokyo

https://assemblyhands.github.io

Abstract
We present AssemblyHands, a large-scale benchmark
dataset with accurate 3D hand pose annotations, to facilitate the study of egocentric activities with challenging handobject interactions. The dataset includes synchronized egocentric and exocentric images sampled from the recent Assembly101 dataset, in which participants assemble and disassemble take-apart toys. To obtain high-quality 3D hand
pose annotations for the egocentric images, we develop an
efficient pipeline, where we use an initial set of manual annotations to train a model to automatically annotate a much
larger dataset. Our annotation model uses multi-view feature fusion and an iterative refinement scheme, and achieves
an average keypoint error of 4.20 mm, which is 85% lower
than the error of the original annotations in Assembly101.
AssemblyHands provides 3.0M annotated images, including 490K egocentric images, making it the largest existing
benchmark dataset for egocentric 3D hand pose estimation.
Using this data, we develop a strong single-view baseline of
3D hand pose estimation from egocentric images. Furthermore, we design a novel action classification task to evaluate predicted 3D hand poses. Our study shows that having
higher-quality hand poses directly improves the ability to
recognize actions.

1. Introduction
Recognizing human activities is a decades-old problem
in computer vision [17]. With recent advancements in userassistive augmented reality and virtual reality (AR/VR) systems, there is an increasing demand for recognizing actions from the egocentric (first-person) viewpoint. Popular AR/VR headsets such as Microsoft HoloLens, Magic
Leap, and Meta Quest are typically equipped with egocentric cameras to capture a user’s interactions with the real or
virtual world. In these scenarios, the user’s hands manip* Work done during internship.

Original Assembly101

“position”
Pose
Egocentric image estimation

û

Action

û classification

3D hand pose

AssemblyHands (Ours)
Multi-view annotation

Training

3D pose annotations
+ egocentric images

Exocentric images

“screw”ü
Pose
Egocentric image estimation

Action

ü classification

3D hand pose

Figure 1. High-quality 3D hand poses as an effective representation for egocentric activity understanding. AssemblyHands
provides high-quality 3D hand pose annotations computed from
multi-view exocentric images sampled from Assembly101 [28],
which originally comes with inaccurate annotations computed
from egocentric images (see the incorrect left-hand pose prediction). As we experimentally demonstrate on an action classification task, models trained on high-quality annotations achieve significantly higher accuracy.

ulating objects is a very important modality of interaction.
In particular, hand poses (e.g., 3D joint locations) play a
central role in understanding and enabling hand-object interaction [3, 18], pose-based action recognition [7, 20, 28],
and interactive interfaces [10, 11].
Recently, several large-scale datasets for understanding
egocentric activities have been proposed, such as EPICKITCHENS [5], Ego4D [8], and Assembly101 [28]. In particular, Assembly101 highlights the importance of 3D hand
poses in recognizing procedural activities such as assembling toys. 3D hand poses are compact representations, and
are highly indicative of actions and even the objects that are
interacted with– for example, the “screwing” hand motion is

12999

