This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Verifiable and Reproducible Human Evaluation
for Text-to-Image Generation
Mayu Otani1
1

Riku Togashi1
Esa Rahtu3

CyberAgent, Inc.

2

Yu Sawai1
Ryosuke Ishigami1
Yuta Nakashima2
4
1
Janne Heikkilä
Shin’ichi Satoh

Osaka University

3

Abstract
Human evaluation is critical for validating the performance of text-to-image generative models, as this highly
cognitive process requires deep comprehension of text and
images. However, our survey of 37 recent papers reveals
that many works rely solely on automatic measures (e.g.,
FID) or perform poorly described human evaluations that
are not reliable or repeatable. This paper proposes a standardized and well-defined human evaluation protocol to facilitate verifiable and reproducible human evaluation in future works. In our pilot data collection, we experimentally
show that the current automatic measures are incompatible
with human perception in evaluating the performance of the
text-to-image generation results. Furthermore, we provide
insights for designing human evaluation experiments reliably and conclusively. Finally, we make several resources
publicly available to the community to facilitate easy and
fast implementations.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image synthesis has seen substantial development in recent years. Several new models have been introduced with remarkable results. The majority of the
works validate their models using automatic measures, such
as FID [13] and recently proposed CLIPScore [12], even
though many papers point out problems with these measures. The most popular measure, FID, is criticized for
misalignment with human perception [9]. For example, image resizing and compression hardly degrade the perceptual quality but induce high variations in the FID score [28],
while CLIPScore can inflate for a model trained to optimize
text-to-image alignment in the CLIP space [27].
This empirical evidence of the misalignment of the automatic measures motivates human evaluation of perceived
quality. However, according to our study of 37 recent papers, the current practices in human evaluation face signifi-

4

Tampere University

University of Oulu

Conventional human evaluation for text-to-image generation
Ad-hoc task design

Lack of quality check
A

Rank the images

B

Missing details

A

Score the image
Which is better?1

2

3

vs

Which task is efficient?

Is the rating reliable?

What details
should we report?

Standardized human evaluation
Open-source
Empirically validated protocol
Annotation quality assessment
Recommended report template

Figure 1. Conventionally, researchers have used different protocols for human evaluation, and setup details are often unclear. We
aim to build a standardized human evaluation.

cant challenges in reliability and reproducibility. We mainly
identified the following two problematic practices. Firstly,
evaluation protocols vary significantly from one paper to
another. For example, some employ relative evaluation by
simultaneously showing annotators two or more samples for
comparison, and others collect scores of individual samples
based on certain criteria. Secondly, important details of experimental configurations and collected data are often omitted. For example, the number of annotators who rate each
sample is mostly missing, and sometimes even the number
of assessed samples is not reported. These inconsistencies
in the evaluation protocol make future analysis almost impossible. We also find that recent papers do not analyze the
quality of the collected human annotations. Therefore, we
cannot assess how reliable the evaluation result is. It is also
difficult to know which is a good way to evaluate text-toimage synthesis among various evaluation protocols.
The natural language generation (NLG) community has
extensively explored human evaluation. Human evaluation
is typically done in a crowdsourcing platform, and there are
many well-known practices. Yet, quality control is an open
challenge [16]. Recently, a platform for benchmarking multiple NLG tasks was launched [18]. The platform offers a

14277

