This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Being Comes from Not-being:
Open-vocabulary Text-to-Motion Generation with Wordless Training
Junfan Lin1,2 Jianlong Chang3 Lingbo Liu2 Guanbin Li1 Liang Lin1 Qi Tian3 * Chang Wen Chen2
1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

3

Huawei Cloud

Abstract
Text-to-motion generation is an emerging and challenging problem, which aims to synthesize motion with the same
semantics as the input text. However, due to the lack of diverse labeled training data, most approaches either limit to
specific types of text annotations or require online optimizations to cater to the texts during inference at the cost of efficiency and stability. In this paper, we investigate offline
open-vocabulary text-to-motion generation in a zero-shot
learning manner that neither requires paired training data
nor extra online optimization to adapt for unseen texts. Inspired by the prompt learning in NLP, we pretrain a motion
generator that learns to reconstruct the full motion from
the masked motion. During inference, instead of changing the motion generator, our method reformulates the input text into a masked motion as the prompt for the motion
generator to “reconstruct” the motion. In constructing the
prompt, the unmasked poses of the prompt are synthesized
by a text-to-pose generator. To supervise the optimization
of the text-to-pose generator, we propose the first text-pose
alignment model for measuring the alignment between texts
and 3D poses. And to prevent the pose generator from overfitting to limited training texts, we further propose a novel
wordless training mechanism that optimizes the text-to-pose
generator without any training texts. The comprehensive
experimental results show that our method obtains a significant improvement against the baseline methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/junfanlin/
oohmg.

1. Introduction
Motion generation has attracted increasing attention due
to its practical value in the fields of virtual reality, video
games, and movies. Especially for text-conditional motion
generation, it can largely improve the user experience if
the virtual avatars can react to the communication texts in
real time. However, most current text-to-motion approaches
* Corresponding author: tian.qi1@huawei.com

Figure 1. Demonstrations of our OOHMG. Given an unseen openvocabulary text (e.g., an object name “a basketball”, or a simile
description “fly like a bird”, or a usual text “he walks”), OOHMG
translates the text into the text-consistent pose, which is used to
prompt the motion generator for synthesizing the motion.

are trained on paired text-motion data with limited types of
annotations, and thus could not well-generalize to unseen
open-vocabulary texts.
To handle the open-vocabulary texts, recent works leverage the powerful zero-shot text-image alignment ability of
the pretrained model, i.e., CLIP [35], to facilitate the textto-motion generation. Some works like MotionCLIP [42]
use the CLIP text encoder to extract text features and learn
a motion decoder to decode the features into motions. However, they require paired text-motion training data and still
could not handle texts that are dissimilar to the training
texts. Instead of learning an offline motion generator with
paired data, some works like AvatarCLIP [13] generate motions for the given textual descriptions via online matching
and optimization. Nevertheless, matching cannot generate
new poses to fit diverse texts and online optimization is usually time-consuming and unstable.
In this paper, we investigate filling the blank of offline
open-vocabulary text-to-motion generation in a zero-shot
learning manner. For convenience, we term our method
as OOHMG which stands for Offline Open-vocabulary
Human Motion Generation. The main philosophy of

23222

