This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Agent Automated Machine Learning
Zhaozhi Wang123†, Kefan Su1 , Jian Zhang4 , Huizhu Jia1 , Qixiang Ye23 , Xiaodong Xie1 , Zongqing Lu1‡
1

Peking University

2

Peng Cheng Lab

3

Abstract
In this paper, we propose multi-agent automated machine learning (MA2ML) with the aim to effectively handle joint optimization of modules in automated machine
learning (AutoML). MA2ML takes each machine learning
module, such as data augmentation (AUG), neural architecture search (NAS), or hyper-parameters (HPO), as an
agent and the final performance as the reward, to formulate a multi-agent reinforcement learning problem. MA2ML
explicitly assigns credit to each agent according to its
marginal contribution to enhance cooperation among modules, and incorporates off-policy learning to improve search
efficiency. Theoretically, MA2ML guarantees monotonic
improvement of joint optimization. Extensive experiments
show that MA2ML yields the state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy
on ImageNet under constraints of computational cost, e.g.,
79.7%/80.5% with FLOPs fewer than 600M/800M. Extensive ablation studies verify the benefits of credit assignment
and off-policy learning of MA2ML.

1. Introduction
Automated machine learning (AutoML) aims to find
high-performance machine learning (ML) pipelines without
human effort involvement. The main challenge of AutoML
lies in finding optimal solutions in huge search spaces.
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has been
validated to be effective to optimize individual AutoML
modules, such as data augmentation (AUG) [4], neural architecture search (NAS) [25, 53, 54], and hyper-parameter
optimization (HPO) [38]. However, when facing the huge
search space (Figure 1 left) and the joint optimization of
these modules, the efficiency and performance challenges
remain.
Through experiments, we observed that among AutoML
modules there exists a cooperative relationship that facilities
the joint optimization of modules. For example, a small network (ResNet-34) with specified data augmentation and op† The work was done during his Master program at Peking University.
‡ Correspondence to B zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

4

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Huge search space
of ML pipelines

HPO

HPO

Huawei

𝒌 𝟏

𝒌

𝒑𝒌 𝟏
Searched pipeline

𝒑𝒌

NAS
AUG

NAS

AUG

Figure 1. Search spaces of machine learning pipelines. Left: single agent controls all modules, and the huge search space makes
it ineffective to learn. Mid: each agent controls one module, and
the learning difficulty is reduced by introducing MA2ML. Right:
MA2ML guarantees monotonic improvement of the searched
pipeline, where pk and R(pk ) denote the k-th searched pipeline
and its expected performance, respectively.

timized hyper-parameters significantly outperforms a large
one (ResNet-50) with default training settings (76.8% vs.
76.1%). In other words, good AUG and HPO alleviate
the need for NAS to some extent. Accordingly, we propose multi-agent automated machine learning (MA2ML),
which explores the cooperative relationship towards joint
optimization of ML pipelines. In MA2ML, ML modules
are defined as RL agents (Figure 1 mid), which take actions to jointly maximize the reward, so that the training efficiency and test accuracy are significantly improved. Specially, we introduce credit assignment to differentiate the
contribution of each module, such that all modules can be
simultaneously updated. To handle both continuous (e.g.,
learning rate) and discrete (e.g., architecture) action spaces,
MA2ML employs a multi-agent actor-critic method, where
a centralized Q-function is learned to evaluate the joint action. Besides, to further improve search efficiency, MA2ML
adopts off-policy learning to exploit historical samples for
policy updates.
MA2ML is justified theoretically and experimentally.
Theoretically, we prove that MA2ML guarantees monotonic policy improvement (Figure 1 right), i.e., the performance of the searched pipeline monotonically improves
in expectation. This enables MA2ML to fit the joint optimization problem and be adaptive to all modules in the
ML pipeline, potentially achieving full automation. Experimentally, we take the combination of individual RL-based
modules to form MA2ML-Lite, and compare their perfor-

11960

