This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StepFormer: Self-supervised Step Discovery and Localization
in Instructional Videos
Nikita Dvornik1

Isma Hadji1 Ran Zhang1 Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,2
Richard P. Wildes1,2 Allan D. Jepson1
1
Samsung AI Centre Toronto, 2 York University
{kosta, wildes}@eecs.yorku.ca, {isma.hadji, ran.zhang, allan.jepson}@samsung.com

Abstract
Instructional videos are an important resource to learn
procedural tasks from human demonstrations. However,
the instruction steps in such videos are typically short and
sparse, with most of the video being irrelevant to the procedure. This motivates the need to temporally localize the
instruction steps in such videos, i.e. the task called keystep localization. Traditional methods for key-step localization require video-level human annotations and thus do
not scale to large datasets. In this work, we tackle the problem with no human supervision and introduce StepFormer, a
self-supervised model that discovers and localizes instruction steps in a video. StepFormer is a transformer decoder
that attends to the video with learnable queries, and produces a sequence of slots capturing the key-steps in the
video. We train our system on a large dataset of instructional videos, using their automatically-generated subtitles
as the only source of supervision. In particular, we supervise our system with a sequence of text narrations using an
order-aware loss function that filters out irrelevant phrases.
We show that our model outperforms all previous unsupervised and weakly-supervised approaches on step detection
and localization by a large margin on three challenging
benchmarks. Moreover, our model demonstrates an emergent property to solve zero-shot multi-step localization and
outperforms all relevant baselines at this task.

1. Introduction
Observing someone perform a task (e.g. cooking, assembling furniture or changing a tire) is a common approach for
humans to acquire new skills. Instructional videos provide
an excellent large-scale resource to learn such procedural
activities for both humans and AI agents. Consequently, instructional video datasets [24,34,41] have recently received
significant attention and been used for various video understanding tasks, e.g. [1, 5, 13, 23, 28, 38, 39]. A potential im-

Long instructional video

StepFormer
self-supervised

Discovered instruction steps

1

s1
start

3

2

s3

s2
end

start

4

end

start

s4
end

start end

Figure 1. StepFormer for instruction step discovery and localization. StepFormer is a transformer decoder trained to discover
instruction steps in a video, supervised purely from video subtitles. At inference, it only needs the video to discover an ordered
sequence of step slots and temporally localize them in the video.

pediment with using instructional videos from the web is
that they tend to be long and noisy, i.e. a limited number
of frames in the video correspond to the instruction steps,
while the remaining video segments are unrelated to the task
(e.g. title frames, close-ups of people talking and product
advertisements). Thus, a major challenge with instructional
videos is filtering out the uninformative frames and focusing only on the task-relevant segments, i.e. the key-steps.
For instance, in a procedure of making a cake the key-steps
could be “crack eggs”, “add sugar”, “add flour”, then “mix”,
etc. As a result, many recent efforts tackle the problem of
instruction key-step localization, e.g. [9, 10, 23, 24, 34, 41].
Most previous work aiming at temporally localizing keysteps from instructional videos rely on some form of supervision. Fully supervised approaches require start and
end times of each step [34, 40]. Weakly supervised ap-

18952

