This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CP3 : Channel Pruning Plug-in for Point-based Networks
Yaomin Huang1,2,*

Ning Liu2,*

Zhengping Che2

Zhiyuan Xu2

Chaomin Shen1

Yaxin Peng3

Guixu Zhang1,B

Xinmei Liu1

Feifei Feng2

Jian Tang2,B

1 School of Computer Science, East China Normal University
2 Midea Group
3 Department of Mathematics, School of Science, Shanghai University
1 {51205901049,51205901078}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn

1 {cmshen,gxzhang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

2 {liuning22,chezp,xuzy70,feifei.feng,tangjian22}@midea.com

3 yaxin.peng@shu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Abstract
Channel pruning can effectively reduce both computational cost and memory footprint of the original network while keeping a comparable accuracy performance.
Though great success has been achieved in channel pruning
for 2D image-based convolutional networks (CNNs), existing works seldom extend the channel pruning methods to
3D point-based neural networks (PNNs). Directly implementing the 2D CNN channel pruning methods to PNNs
undermine the performance of PNNs because of the different representations of 2D images and 3D point clouds
as well as the network architecture disparity. In this paper, we proposed CP3 , which is a Channel Pruning Plugin for Point-based network. CP3 is elaborately designed
to leverage the characteristics of point clouds and PNNs
in order to enable 2D channel pruning methods for PNNs.
Specifically, it presents a coordinate-enhanced channel importance metric to reflect the correlation between dimensional information and individual channel features, and it
recycles the discarded points in PNN’s sampling process
and reconsiders their potentially-exclusive information to
enhance the robustness of channel pruning. Experiments
on various PNN architectures show that CP3 constantly
improves state-of-the-art 2D CNN pruning approaches on
different point cloud tasks. For instance, our compressed
PointNeXt-S on ScanObjectNN achieves an accuracy of
88.52% with a pruning rate of 57.8%, outperforming the
baseline pruning methods with an accuracy gain of 1.94%.

* Equal contributions.
B Corresponding authors.
This work is done during Yaomin Huang and Xinmei Liu’s internship
at Midea Group.

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) often encounter
the problems of overloaded computation and overweighted
storage. The cumbersome instantiation of a CNN model
leads to inefficient, uneconomic, or even impossible deployment in practice. Therefore, light-weight models that
provide comparable results with much fewer computational
costs are in great demand for nearly all applications. Channel pruning is a promising solution to delivering efficient
networks. In recent years, 2D CNN channel pruning,
e.g., pruning classical VGGNets [37], ResNets [14], MobileNets [16], and many other neural networks for processing 2D images [6, 7, 12, 24, 26, 29, 40], has been successfully conducted. Most channel pruning approaches focus on
identifying redundant convolution filters (i.e., channels) by
evaluating their importance. The cornerstone of 2D channel pruning methods is the diversified yet effective channel
evaluation metrics. For instance, HRank [24] uses the rank
of the feature map as the pruning metric and removes the
low-rank filters that are considered to contain less information. CHIP [40] leverages channel independence to represent the importance of each feature mapping and eliminates
less important channels.
With the widespread application of depth-sensing technology, 3D vision tasks [9, 10, 36, 44] are a rapidly growing
field starving for powerful methods. Apart from straightforwardly applying 2D CNNs, models built with Pointbased Neural Networks (PNNs), which directly process
point clouds from the beginning without unnecessary rendering, show their merits and are widely deployed on edge
devices for various applications such as robots [22, 49] and
self-driving [2, 53]. Compressing PNNs is crucial due to
the limited resources of edge devices and multiple models
for different tasks are likely to run simultaneously [8, 30].
Given the huge success of 2D channel pruning and the great

5302

