This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Few-Shot Medical Segmentation:
A Vector Quantization View
Shiqi Huang, Tingfa Xu*, Ning Shen, Feng Mu, Jianan Li*
Beijing Institute of Technology
{bitsqhuang,lijianan15}@gmail.com, {ciom xtf1, bitmufeng}@bit.edu.cn, shennbit@163.com

Abstract
The existing few-shot medical segmentation networks
share the same practice that the more prototypes, the better performance. This phenomenon can be theoretically interpreted in Vector Quantization (VQ) view: the more prototypes, the more clusters are separated from pixel-wise
feature points distributed over the full space. However,
as we further think about few-shot segmentation with this
perspective, it is found that the clusterization of feature
points and the adaptation to unseen tasks have not received
enough attention. Motivated by the observation, we propose
a learning VQ mechanism consisting of grid-format VQ
(GFVQ), self-organized VQ (SOVQ) and residual oriented
VQ (ROVQ). To be specific, GFVQ generates the prototype
matrix by averaging square grids over the spatial extent,
which uniformly quantizes the local details; SOVQ adaptively assigns the feature points to different local classes
and creates a new representation space where the learnable local prototypes are updated with a global view; ROVQ
introduces residual information to fine-tune the aforementioned learned local prototypes without re-training, which
benefits the generalization performance for the irrelevance
to the training task. We empirically show that our VQ
framework yields the state-of-the-art performance over abdomen, cardiac and prostate MRI datasets and expect this
work will provoke a rethink of the current few-shot medical
segmentation model design. Our code will soon be publicly
available.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks in
medical imaging applications, e.g., disease diagnosis [1, 2],
monitoring [3, 4], and screening [5]. With sufficient labeled
data being fed into the deep network, segmentation models
can achieve promising results. However, in most practical
scenarios, the segmentation models often suffer from the
* Correspondence to: Tingfa Xu and Jianan Li.

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of different clustering representation schemes of few-shot medical segmentation: (a) the basic VQ
with each class represented by a prototype vector; (b) the GFVQ,
i.e., the existing local prototype generation, extracts prototype array via mobile pooling window; (c) the proposed SOVQ assigns
the pixel-wise features to multiple local classes adaptively; (d) the
proposed ROVQ fine-tunes the learned prototype vectors parameterlessly to enhance the adaption performance to unseen tasks.
The arrows denote the more accurate edge in (d).

lack of required data due to the expensive cost of expertise
dense annotations and limited number of abnormal organ
and rare lesion samples.
Recently, few-shot medical image segmentation has
been widely studied to reduce the requirement for largescale datasets with dense annotations [6–8]. Currently, the
common inference paradigm of few-shot medical image
segmentation is to encode a prototype to represent the novel
class appearing in the support image (Fig. 1(a)) and compute the similarity with query features to perform segmentation [9–12]. The essential work of such a framework lies
in prototype learning, which is carried out only by the feature encoder. This encoder is learned with training tasks in
the training stage and generalized to unseen tasks in the testing stage. From a vector quantization (VQ) view, the prototype vectors representing different classes can be considered as the known sample points in a coding space, and the
pixel-wise query feature points are supposed to be classified
by decision boundaries determined by the known support
points [13–15]. In this view, the prototype learning problem
is rethought to be a VQ optimization problem and the prototype vectors learned from support features are thought to
serve as the support vectors delineating the encoding space
for query features. Therefore, the aim of prototypical few-

3072

