This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Exploration of Multimodal Complementarity for Few-Shot Action
Recognition
Yuyang Wanyan1,2 , Xiaoshan Yang1,2,3 , Chaofan Chen4 , Changsheng Xu1,2,3 *
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS) 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
4

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)

wanyanyuyang2021@ia.ac.cn, xiaoshan.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, chencfbupt@gmail.com, csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, few-shot action recognition receives increasing
attention and achieves remarkable progress. However, previous methods mainly rely on limited unimodal data (e.g.,
RGB frames) while the multimodal information remains relatively underexplored. In this paper, we propose a novel
Active Multimodal Few-shot Action Recognition (AMFAR)
framework, which can actively find the reliable modality for
each sample based on task-dependent context information
to improve few-shot reasoning procedure. In meta-training,
we design an Active Sample Selection (ASS) module to organize query samples with large differences in the reliability of modalities into different groups based on modalityspecific posterior distributions. In addition, we design an
Active Mutual Distillation (AMD) to capture discriminative task-specific knowledge from the reliable modality to
improve the representation learning of unreliable modality by bidirectional knowledge distillation. In meta-test,
we adopt Adaptive Multimodal Inference (AMI) to adaptively fuse the modality-specific posterior distributions with
a larger weight on the reliable modality. Extensive experimental results on four public benchmarks demonstrate that
our model achieves significant improvements over existing
unimodal and multimodal methods.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, action recognition [20, 34, 52, 73]
has achieved significant progress with the emerge of deep
learning. However, these existing deep methods require a
large amount of labeled videos to guarantee their performance. In practice, it is sometimes expensive or even impossible to collect abundant annotated data, which limits the
effectiveness of supervised methods. In order to deal with
this problem, more and more researchers begin to focus on
the few-shot action recognition (FSAR) task, which aims at
* corresponding author: Changsheng Xu.

Ballet Dancing (

)

Snowboarding (

)

Task 1

RGB Feature Space

Skateboarding (

)

Flow Feature Space

Task 2

support sample

query sample

Figure 1. Illustration of multimodal few-shot action recognition
task. The main challenge is that the contribution of a specific
modality highly depends on task-specific contextual information.

classifying unlabeled videos (query set) from novel action
classes with the help of only a few annotated samples (support set).
Recently, researchers have proposed many promising
few-shot action recognition methods, which can be roughly
divided into two groups: data augmentation-based methods
and alignment-based methods. Data augmentation-based
methods try to generate additional training data [18], selfsupervision signals [72] or auxiliary information [22, 69] to
promote robust representation learning. Alignment-based
methods [5,8,44,58,66,69,72] focus on matching the video
frames or segments in the temporal or spatial dimension to
measure the distance between query and support samples in
a fine-grained manner.
Although existing few-shot action recognition methods
have achieved remarkable performance, they mainly rely on
limited unimodal data (e.g. RGB frames) that are always
insufficient to reflect complex characteristics of human actions. When learning novel concepts from a few samples,
humans have the ability to integrate the multimodal perceptions (e.g. appearance, audio and motion) to enhance the
recognition procedure. In addition, in conventional action
recognition, many top-performing methods [23, 46, 56, 60]

6492

