This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shifted Diffusion for Text-to-image Generation
Yufan Zhou 1 ,* Bingchen Liu 2 , Yizhe Zhu 2 , Xiao Yang 2 , Changyou Chen 1 , Jinhui Xu 1
1
State University of New York at Buffalo 2 ByteDance
{yufanzho, changyou, jinhui}@buffalo.edu, {bingchenliu, yizhe.zhu, yangxiao.0}@bytedance.com

Abstract
We present Corgi, a novel method for text-to-image generation. Corgi is based on our proposed shifted diffusion
model, which achieves better image embedding generation
from input text. Unlike the baseline diffusion model used in
DALL-E 2, our method seamlessly encodes prior knowledge
of the pre-trained CLIP model in its diffusion process by
designing a new initialization distribution and a new transition step of the diffusion. Compared to the strong DALL-E
2 baseline, our method performs better in generating image embedding from the text in terms of both efficiency
and effectiveness, resulting in better text-to-image generation. Extensive large-scale experiments are conducted and
evaluated in terms of both quantitative measures and human evaluation, indicating a stronger generation ability of
our method compared to existing ones. Furthermore, our
model enables semi-supervised and language-free training
for text-to-image generation, where only part or none of the
images in the training dataset have an associated caption.
Trained with only 1.7% of the images being captioned, our
semi-supervised model obtains FID results comparable to
DALL-E 2 on zero-shot text-to-image generation evaluated
on MS-COCO. Corgi also achieves new state-of-the-art results across different datasets on downstream language-free
text-to-image generation tasks, outperforming the previous
method, Lafite, by a large margin.

1. Introduction
“AI-generated content” has attracted increasingly more
public awareness thanks to the significant progress in recent research of high-fidelity text-aligned image synthetic
tasks. [7, 20–23, 26, 32]. Particularly, models trained on
web-scale datasets have demonstrated their impressive ability to generate out-of-distribution images from arbitrary text
inputs that describe unseen combinations of visual con* Performed this work during internship at ByteDance, code is available
at https://github.com/drboog/Shifted_Diffusion. The
research of the first and last author was supported in part by NSF through
grants IIS-1910492 and CCF-2200173 and by KAUST CRG10-4663.2.

cepts.
Starting from DALL-E [21], researchers have proposed a
variety of approaches to further advance the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) of text-to-image generation in terms of both generation quality and efficiency. Latent Diffusion Model [22]
trains a diffusion model in the latent space of auto-encoder
instead of pixel space, leading to better generation efficiency. GLIDE [15] adopts a hierarchical architecture,
which consists of diffusion models at different resolutions.
Such a model design strategy has shown to be effective
and has been adopted by many follow-up works. DALL-E
2 [20] further introduces an extra image embedding input.
Such an image embedding not only improves the model performance in text-to-image generation but also enables applications, including image-to-image generation and generation under multi-modal conditions. Imagen [23] makes use
of a rich pre-trained text encoder [19], demonstrating that a
frozen text encoder pre-trained on the large-scale text-only
dataset can help text-to-image generation models in understanding the semantics of text descriptions. Parti [32] shows
a further successful scale-up of the generative model, leading to impressive improvement in text-to-image consistency
with transformer structure.
The aforementioned approaches focus on improving text-to-image generation by either scaling up trainable/frozen modules or designing better model architectures. In this work, we explore an orthogonal direction,
where we propose novel techniques to improve the diffusion process itself and make it more suitable and effective
for text-to-image generation.
Specifically, we propose Corgi (Clip-based shifted diffusiOn model bRidGIng the gap), a novel diffusion model
designed for a flexible text-to-image generation. Our model
can perform text-to-image generation under all the supervised, semi-supervised, and language-free settings. By
“bridging the gap,” we emphasize two key novelties in our
method: (1) our model tries to bridge the image-text modality gap [12] so as to train a better generative model. Modality gap is a critical concept discovered in pre-trained models such as CLIP [17], which captures the phenomenon that
multi-modality representations do not align in the joint em-

10157

