This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-Supervised Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation with Prototypical
Contrastive Learning
Anurag Das1 , Yongqin Xian2 *, Dengxin Dai1 , Bernt Schiele1
1

MPI for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, 2 ETH Zurich

{andas,ddai,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, yongqin.xian@gmail.com

Abstract
There has been a lot of effort in improving the performance of unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation task, however, there is still a huge gap in performance when compared with supervised learning. In this
work, we propose a common framework to use different
weak labels, e.g., image, point and coarse labels from the
target domain to reduce this performance gap. Specifically,
we propose to learn better prototypes that are representative class features by exploiting these weak labels. We use
these improved prototypes for the contrastive alignment of
class features. In particular, we perform two different feature alignments: first, we align pixel features with prototypes within each domain and second, we align pixel features from the source to prototype of target domain in an
asymmetric way. This asymmetric alignment is beneficial
as it preserves the target features during training, which
is essential when weak labels are available from the target domain. Our experiments on various benchmarks show
that our framework achieves significant improvement compared to existing works and can reduce the performance
gap with supervised learning. Code will be available at
https://github.com/anurag-198/WDASS.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation requires pixel level annotation,
which is expensive and time consuming. For real world urban scenes [5, 9, 32, 42], this becomes more challenging as
there are far too many objects to annotate in the scene. For
example, it takes around 90 min to annotate an image for
Cityscapes [5]. To reduce this annotation effort, the task of
Unsupervised Domain Adaptative Semantic Segmentation
(UDASS) [31, 44, 47, 48] proposes to learn from photorealistic synthetic images [26, 28, 38] with relatively cheap
labels. However, due to the domain gap between the real
(target domain) and synthetic (source domain) images, this
* Currently with Google. This work was done at ETH Zürich.

Road, Sidewalk,
building, traffic
sign, car, rider,
sky, vegetation

Image label

Point label

Coarse label

Target

Source
Synthetic label

Figure 1. We propose a common framework for different weak label (image, point and coarse labels) for the task of Weakly Supervised Domain Adaptative Semantic Segmentation(WDASS). Our
proposed framework, utilising cheaper weak labels bridges the gap
between UDA (CorDA [35], ProDA [43], DASS [16]) and supervised learning. Notably, for coarse annotation, our method outperforms supervised learning, exhibiting the potential of weak labels
for domain adaptation task.

problem becomes more challenging. There have been many
efforts [16, 29, 31, 41, 43, 44, 44, 48] to improve the performance on the UDASS task, yet there is a big performance
gap compared to supervised learning. In this work, we propose to exploit additional weak labels (image [13,22], point
and [1] coarse labels [5]) for the real images to improve
over the UDASS performance and reduce the performance
gap with supervised learning.
Weakly supervised Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation (WDASS) relaxes the problem of UDASS by allowing weak labels from the target domain. However, it is non
trivial to optimally use the weak labels. [25] works with image and point labels and focuses on pixel level adversarial alignment between source and target domains. [6] works
with coarse labels and uses self-training for feature alignment. Both these methods use the weak labels only as additional supervision signal from the target domain and do not
use them for aligning features between the source and target domain. Moreover, these works do not have a common
framework that works with different weak labels. We pro-

15434

