This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEVFormer v2: Adapting Modern Image Backbones to
Bird’s-Eye-View Recognition via Perspective Supervision
Chenyu Yang1* Yuntao Chen2* Hao Tian3* Chenxin Tao1 Xizhou Zhu3 Zhaoxiang Zhang2,4
Gao Huang1 Hongyang Li5 Yu Qiao5 Lewei Lu3 Jie Zhou1 Jifeng Dai1,5B
1

3

Tsinghua University 2 Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
SenseTime Research 4 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science (CASIA)
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
We present a novel bird’s-eye-view (BEV) detector with
perspective supervision, which converges faster and better suits modern image backbones. Existing state-of-theart BEV detectors are often tied to certain depth pretrained backbones like VoVNet, hindering the synergy between booming image backbones and BEV detectors. To
address this limitation, we prioritize easing the optimization
of BEV detectors by introducing perspective view supervision. To this end, we propose a two-stage BEV detector,
where proposals from the perspective head are fed into the
bird’s-eye-view head for final predictions. To evaluate the
effectiveness of our model, we conduct extensive ablation
studies focusing on the form of supervision and the generality of the proposed detector. The proposed method is verified with a wide spectrum of traditional and modern image
backbones and achieves new SoTA results on the large-scale
nuScenes dataset. The code shall be released soon.

1. Introduction
Bird’s-eye-view(BEV) recognition models [17,21,25,27,
29, 35, 42] are a class of camera-based models for 3D object detection. They have attracted interest in autonomous
driving as they can naturally integrate partial raw observations from multiple sensors into a unified holistic 3D output space. A typical BEV model is built upon an image
backbone, followed by a view transformation module that
lifts perspective image features into BEV features, which
are further processed by a BEV feature encoder and some
task-specific heads. Although much effort is put into designing the view transformation module [17, 27, 42] and incorporating an ever-growing list of downstream tasks [9,27]
into the new recognition framework, the study of image
*: Equal contribution.
B: Corresponding author, email: daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn.

backbones in BEV models receives far less attention. As a
cutting-edge and highly demanding field, it is natural to introduce modern image backbones into autonomous driving.
Surprisingly, the research community chooses to stick with
VoVNet [13] to enjoy its large-scale depth pre-training [26].
In this work, we focus on unleashing the full power of modern image feature extractors for BEV recognition to unlock
the door for future researchers to explore better image backbone design in this field.
However, simply employing modern image backbones
without proper pre-training fails to yield satisfactory results.
For instance, an ImageNet [6] pre-trained ConvNeXt-XL
[23] backbone performs just on par with a DDAD-15M pretrained VoVNet-99 [26] for 3D object detection, albeit the
latter has 3.5× parameters of the former. We owe the struggle of adapting modern image backbones to the following
issues: 1) The domain gap between natural images and autonomous driving scenes. Backbones pre-trained on general
2D recognition tasks fall short of perceiving 3D scenes, especially estimating depth. 2) The complex structure of current BEV detectors. Take BEVFormer [17] as an example.
The supervision signals of 3D bounding boxes and object
class labels are separated from the image backbone by the
view encoder and the object decoder, each of which is comprised of transformers of multiple layers. The gradient flow
for adapting general 2D image backbones for autonomous
driving tasks is distorted by the stacked transformer layers.
In order to combat the difficulties mentioned above in
adapting modern image backbones for BEV recognition, we
introduce perspective supervision into BEVFormer, i.e. extra supervision signals from perspective-view tasks and directly applied to the backbone. It guides the backbone to
learn 3D knowledge missing in 2D recognition tasks and
overcomes the complexity of BEV detectors, greatly facilitating the optimization of the model. Specifically, we build
a perspective 3D detection head [26] upon the backbone,
which takes image features as input and directly predicts

17830

