This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Knowledge Distillation of Face Ensembles
Jianqing Xu* Shen Li*
Ailin Deng
Miao Xiong
Jiaying Wu2 Jiaxiang Wu1 Shouhong Ding1 Bryan Hooi2
1
Youtu Lab, Tencent. 2 IDS and SoC, National University of Singapore.
2

2

{joejqxu, willjxwu, ericshding}@tencent.com
{shen.li, ailin, miao.xiong, jiayingwu}@u.nus.edu

bhooi@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Mean ensemble (i.e. averaging predictions from multiple
models) is a commonly-used technique in machine learning
that improves the performance of each individual model. We
formalize it as feature alignment for ensemble in open-set
face recognition and generalize it into Bayesian Ensemble
Averaging (BEA) through the lens of probabilistic modeling.
This generalization brings up two practical benefits that existing methods could not provide: (1) the uncertainty of a
face image can be evaluated and further decomposed into
aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty, the latter
of which can be used as a measure for out-of-distribution
detection of faceness; (2) a BEA statistic provably reflects
the aleatoric uncertainty of a face image, acting as a measure for face image quality to improve recognition performance. To inherit the uncertainty estimation capability from
BEA without the loss of inference efficiency, we propose
BEA-KD, a student model to distill knowledge from BEA.
BEA-KD mimics the overall behavior of ensemble members
and consistently outperforms SOTA knowledge distillation
methods on various challenging benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is an active research area
that has profound benefits for model compression, wherein
competitive recognition performance can be achieved by
smaller models (student models) via a distillation process
from teacher models. As such, smaller models can be deployed into space-constrained environments such as mobile
and embedded devices.
There has been abundant literature in KD for face recognition [22, 33, 34]. However, all the existing approaches fall
into the “one-teacher-versus-one-student” paradigm. This
learning paradigm has several limitations. Firstly, a single
teacher can be biased, which further results in biased esti* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. A conceptual illustration of BEA and BEA-KD. Given
a face image x, we have n = 5 probabilistic ensemble members
{r-vMF(µi , κi )}n
i=1 (marked by light blue). Bayesian ensemble
(n)
averaging (marked by dark blue) returns a single r-vMF(µ̃x , κ̄x )
that accounts for the expected positions and confidence by all the
ensemble members. To emulate the ensemble’s probabilistic behavior, we employ a parametrized distribution qϕ,φ (z|x) to approximate BEA.

mates of face feature embeddings given by a student after
knowledge distillation from the biased teacher. Secondly, it
only yields point estimates of face feature embeddings, unable to provide uncertainty measure for face recognition in
a safety-sensitive scenario.
Compared with single-teacher KD, KD from multiple
teachers (a.k.a. ensemble KD) is beneficial and has been
extensively explored in literature [9, 11, 29, 32, 36, 37].
However, these approaches are designed solely for closedset classification tasks, distilling logits in a fixed simplex
space via KL divergence (as the label set remains the same
throughout training and test). In contrast, face recognition
is inherently an open-set problem where classes cannot be
known a priori. More specifically, face identities appearing during the inference stage scarcely overlap with those
in the training phase. Consequently, without a fixed simplex space for logit distillation, existing approaches cannot
be readily applied to face recognition. As will be shown
in our empirical studies, existing closed-set KD approaches

3489

