This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

gSDF: Geometry-Driven Signed Distance Functions
for 3D Hand-Object Reconstruction
Zerui Chen
Shizhe Chen
Cordelia Schmid
Ivan Laptev
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research Univ., 75005 Paris, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Signed distance functions (SDFs) is an attractive framework that has recently shown promising results for 3D shape
reconstruction from images. SDFs seamlessly generalize to
different shape resolutions and topologies but lack explicit
modelling of the underlying 3D geometry. In this work, we exploit the hand structure and use it as guidance for SDF-based
shape reconstruction. In particular, we address reconstruction of hands and manipulated objects from monocular RGB
images. To this end, we estimate poses of hands and objects
and use them to guide 3D reconstruction. More specifically,
we predict kinematic chains of pose transformations and
align SDFs with highly-articulated hand poses. We improve
the visual features of 3D points with geometry alignment
and further leverage temporal information to enhance the
robustness to occlusion and motion blurs. We conduct extensive experiments on the challenging ObMan and DexYCB
benchmarks and demonstrate significant improvements of
the proposed method over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Understanding how hands interact with objects is becoming increasingly important for widespread applications,
including virtual reality, robotic manipulation and humancomputer interaction. Compared to 3D estimation of sparse
hand joints [24, 38, 51, 53, 67], joint reconstruction of hands
and object meshes [11, 18, 21, 26, 62] provides rich information about hand-object interactions and has received increased attention in recent years.
To reconstruct high-quality meshes, some recent works [9,
17, 61] explore multi-view image inputs. Multi-view images,
however, are less common both for training and testing scenarios. In this work, we focus on a more practical and userfriendly setting where we aim to reconstruct hand and object
meshes from monocular RGB images. Given the ill-posed
nature of the task, many existing methods [7, 19, 21, 54, 62]
employ parametric mesh models (e.g., MANO [46]) to im-

gSDF

gSDF

gSDF

Figure 1. We aim to reconstruct 3D hand and object meshes from
monocular images (top). Our method gSDF (middle) first predicts
3D hand joints (blue) and object locations (red) from input images.
We use estimated hand poses and object locations to incorporate
strong geometric priors into SDF by generating hand- and objectaware kinematic features for each SDF query point. Our resulting
gSDF model generates accurate results for real images with various
objects and grasping hand poses (bottom).

pose prior knowledge and reduce ambiguities in 3D hand reconstruction. MANO hand meshes, however, have relatively
limited resolution and can be suboptimal for the precise
capture of hand-object interactions.
To reconstruct detailed hand and object meshes, another
line of efforts [11, 26] employ signed distance functions
(SDFs). Grasping Field [26] makes the first attempt to model
hand and object surfaces using SDFs. However, it does not
explicitly associate 3D geometry with image cues and has no
prior knowledge incorporated in SDFs, leading to unrealistic
meshes. AlignSDF [11] proposes to align SDFs with respect
to global poses (i.e., the hand wrist transformation and the

12890

