This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeSDF: Self-evolved Signed Distance Field for Implicit 3D Clothed Human
Reconstruction
Yukang Cao
Kai Han
Kwan-Yee K. Wong
The University of Hong Kong
{ykcao, kykwong}@cs.hku.hk

kaihanx@hku.hk

Figure 1. Self-evolved Signed Distance Field (SeSDF): We propose Self-evolved Signed Distance Field (SeSDF), which can flexibly
reconstruct 3D clothed human models from a single-view image (top) or uncalibrated multi-view images (bottom). SeSDF can robustly
recover fine geometry details from any type of poses, which allows us to generate clothed human avatars.

Abstract
We address the problem of clothed human reconstruction
from a single image or uncalibrated multi-view images. Existing methods struggle with reconstructing detailed geometry of a clothed human and often require a calibrated setting
for multi-view reconstruction. We propose a flexible framework which, by leveraging the parametric SMPL-X model,
can take an arbitrary number of input images to reconstruct
a clothed human model under an uncalibrated setting. At
the core of our framework is our novel self-evolved signed
distance field (SeSDF) module which allows the framework
to learn to deform the signed distance field (SDF) derived
from the fitted SMPL-X model, such that detailed geometry
reflecting the actual clothed human can be encoded for better reconstruction. Besides, we propose a simple method for
self-calibration of multi-view images via the fitted SMPLX parameters. This lifts the requirement of tedious manual calibration and largely increases the flexibility of our
method. Further, we introduce an effective occlusion-aware
feature fusion strategy to account for the most useful fea-

tures to reconstruct the human model. We thoroughly evaluate our framework on public benchmarks, demonstrating
significant superiority over the state-of-the-arts both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Clothed human reconstruction is a hot topic with increasing demand in real-world applications such as 3D telepresence, game modeling, metaverse [40], etc. Early works
show promise under equipment-assisted settings, requiring
expensive dense camera rigs [12] and tedious calibration
procedures [15]. Parametric models, such as SMPL [36]
and SMPL-X [47], have been introduced to model a naked
human body with constrained parameters. With the witnessed success of deep learning in many vision tasks, many
deep learning methods have been proposed to regress the
parameters of such parametric human models from a single [16, 66, 67] or multiple images [6, 13, 68]. However,
these methods can only reconstruct a minimally-clothed human model without many details (e.g., hairs and clothes).

4647

