This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEMaRT: Label-Efficient Masked Region Transform for Image Harmonization
Sheng Liu

Cong Phuoc Huynh Cong Chen Maxim Arap
Amazon Prime Video

Raffay Hamid

{shenlu, conghuyn, checongt, maxarap, raffay}@amazon.com

Abstract

transformed
image

image

output
image

41
40
39

PSNR (dB)

We present a simple yet effective self-supervised pretraining method for image harmonization which can leverage large-scale unannotated image datasets. To achieve
this goal, we first generate pre-training data online with
our Label-Efficient Masked Region Transform (LEMaRT)
pipeline. Given an image, LEMaRT generates a foreground
mask and then applies a set of transformations to perturb
various visual attributes, e.g., defocus blur, contrast, saturation, of the region specified by the generated mask. We
then pre-train image harmonization models by recovering
the original image from the perturbed image. Secondly, we
introduce an image harmonization model, namely SwinIH,
by retrofitting the Swin Transformer [27] with a combination of local and global self-attention mechanisms. Pretraining SwinIH with LEMaRT results in a new state of
the art for image harmonization, while being label-efficient,
i.e., consuming less annotated data for fine-tuning than existing methods. Notably, on iHarmony4 dataset [8], SwinIH
outperforms the state of the art, i.e., SCS-Co [16] by a margin of 0.4 dB when it is fine-tuned on only 50% of the training data, and by 1.0 dB when it is trained on the full training
dataset.

composite
image (input)

39.8
SCS-Co: 38.8
2
iS AM: 38.2
DHT+:37.9

39.2
38.5

38

37.8
37.2

37

36.3
35.8

36
35
0%

40%

60%

Percentage of training data
LEMaRT (ours) SCS-Co DHT+

1. Introduction
The goal of image harmonization is to synthesize photorealistic images by extracting and transferring foreground
regions from an image to another (background) image. The
main challenge is the appearance mismatch between the
foreground and the surrounding background, due to differences in camera and lens settings, capturing conditions,
such as illumination, and post-capture image processing.
Image harmonization aims to resolve this mismatch by adjusting the appearance of the foreground in a composite image to make it compatible with the background. Research
in image harmonization has relevant applications in photorealistic image editing and enhancement [42,44], video synthesis [23, 37] and data augmentation for various computer
vision tasks [11, 12, 35].

20%

80%

100%

iS2AM

Figure 1. Top: given an image, LEMaRT applies a set of transformations, e.g., brightness, hue adjustment, to obtain a transformed
image. The transformed image is then combined with the original
image to form a composite image, which is used to pre-train our
SwinIH image harmonization model. As shown in the right-hand
column, SwinIH is capable of reconstructing photo-realistic output images after pre-training and fine-tuning. Bottom: using our
LEMaRT pre-training scheme, our image harmonization model
(SwinIH) surpasses state of the art (SOTA) counterparts with less
than 40% of the training data from iHarmony4 for fine-tuning.

Traditional image harmonization approaches perform
color transforms to match the low-level color statistics of
the foreground to the background with the aim to achieve
photorealism [22, 31, 33, 39]. However, the generalization

18290

