This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trajectory-Aware Body Interaction Transformer for Multi-Person Pose
Forecasting
Xiaogang Peng, Siyuan Mao, Zizhao Wu†
Department of Digital Media Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
{pengxiaogang,siyuanmao,wuzizhao}@hdu.edu.cn

Figure 1. (a) In complex crowd scenarios, different people may interact with one another at varying levels (low and high interactions) and at
different positions (i.e., between near and far distances). (b) The illustration of our main idea on body part interactions. We divide the body
joints into 5 parts, and the Intra-Individual branch is used to explore part relationships for each individual and the Inter-Individual branch
aims to capture interaction dependencies of body parts between individuals. Our TBIFomer facilitates to model body part interactions for
intra- and inter-individuals simultaneously.

Abstract
Multi-person pose forecasting remains a challenging
problem, especially in modeling fine-grained human body
interaction in complex crowd scenarios. Existing methods
typically represent the whole pose sequence as a temporal series, yet overlook interactive influences among people based on skeletal body parts. In this paper, we propose
a novel Trajectory-Aware Body Interaction Transformer
(TBIFormer) for multi-person pose forecasting via effectively modeling body part interactions. Specifically, we construct a Temporal Body Partition Module that transforms
all the pose sequences into a Multi-Person Body-Part sequence to retain spatial and temporal information based on
body semantics. Then, we devise a Social Body Interaction
Self-Attention (SBI-MSA) module, utilizing the transformed
sequence to learn body part dynamics for inter- and intraindividual interactions. Furthermore, different from prior
Euclidean distance-based spatial encodings, we present a
novel and efficient Trajectory-Aware Relative Position Encoding for SBI-MSA to offer discriminative spatial information and additional interactive clues. On both shortand long-term horizons, we empirically evaluate our framework on CMU-Mocap, MuPoTS-3D as well as synthesized
datasets (6 ∼ 10 persons), and demonstrate that our method
greatly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a proliferation of work on the
topic of human motion prediction [4, 6, 7, 13, 24, 25, 28, 34],
which aims to forecast future poses based on past observations. Similarly, understanding and forecasting human
motion plays a critical role in the field of artificial intelligence and computer vision, especially for robot planning,
autonomous driving, and video surveillance [8, 14, 21, 44].
Although encouraging progress has been achieved, the current methods are mostly based on local pose dynamics forecasting without considering global position changes of body
joints (global body trajectory) and often tackle the problem of single humans in isolation while overlooking humanhuman interaction. Actually, in real-world scenarios, each
person may interact with one or more people, ranging from
low to high levels of interactivity with instantaneous and
deferred mutual influences [2, 31]. As illustrated in Fig. 1
(a), two individuals are pushing and shoving with high interaction, whilst a third individual is strolling with no or low
interaction. Thus, accurately forecasting pose dynamics and
trajectory and comprehensively considering complex social
interactive factors are imperative for understanding human
behavior in multi-person motion prediction. However, existing solutions do not efficiently address these challenging
factors. For example, Guo et al. [15] propose a collaborative prediction task and perform future motion prediction
for only two interacted dancers, which inevitably ignores
low interaction influence on one’s future behavior. Wang
et al. [39] use local and global Transformers to learn indi-

17121

