This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MD-VQA: Multi-Dimensional Quality Assessment for UGC Live Videos
Zicheng Zhang1,* Wei Wu2,* Wei Sun1,* Danyang Tu1, Wei Lu1,
Xiongkuo Min1 , Ying Chen2 , Guangtao Zhai1,3†
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Alibaba Group
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

{zzc1998,sunguwei,danyangtu,SJTU-Luwei,minxiongkuo,zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn,
2

{guokui.ww,yingchen}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
User-generated content (UGC) live videos are often
bothered by various distortions during capture procedures
and thus exhibit diverse visual qualities. Such source videos
are further compressed and transcoded by media server
providers before being distributed to end-users. Because
of the flourishing of UGC live videos, effective video quality assessment (VQA) tools are needed to monitor and perceptually optimize live streaming videos in the distributing
process. In this paper, we address UGC Live VQA problems by constructing a first-of-a-kind subjective UGC Live
VQA database and developing an effective evaluation tool.
Concretely, 418 source UGC videos are collected in real
live streaming scenarios and 3,762 compressed ones at different bit rates are generated for the subsequent subjective
VQA experiments. Based on the built database, we develop a Multi-Dimensional VQA (MD-VQA) evaluator to
measure the visual quality of UGC live videos from semantic, distortion, and motion aspects respectively. Extensive
experimental results show that MD-VQA achieves state-ofthe-art performance on both our UGC Live VQA database
and existing compressed UGC VQA databases.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of social media applications
and the advancement of video shooting and processing technologies, more and more ordinary people are willing to tell
their stories, share their experiences, and have their voice
heard on social media or streaming media platforms such
as Twitch, Tiktok, Taobao, etc. However, due to the lack
of photography skills and professional equipment, the vi* These authors contributed equally to this work. The database is available at https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/148818?t=1679581936815.
† Corresponding author.

Quality Monitoring
UGC Distortion
Upload

Users

Distribute
Transcoding

Optimization

Live Platforms

Viewers

Figure 1. The distributing process of UGC live videos, where the
users upload the videos degraded by the UGC distortions to the
live platforms and the distorted videos are further compressed before being distributed to the viewers. The VQA models can monitor the quality changes of the compressed UGC live videos and
adaptively optimize the transcoding setting.

sual quality of user-generated content (UGC) videos may
be degraded by in-the-wild distortions [51]. What’s more,
in common live platforms, live videos are encoded and distributed to end-users with very low delay, where compression algorithms have a significant influence on the visual
quality of live videos because they can greatly reduce transmission bandwidth. As illustrated in Fig. 1, video quality
assessment (VQA) tools play an important role in monitoring, optimizing, and further improving the Quality of Experience (QoE) of end-users in UGC live streaming systems.
In the literature, many UGC VQA databases have been
carried out [14, 21, 36, 45, 51] to address the impact of general in-the-wild distortions on video quality, while some
compression VQA databases [22, 34, 40] are proposed to
study the influence of compression artifacts. Then some
compressed UGC VQA databases [1, 21, 46] are further
constructed to solve the problem of assessing the quality
of UGC videos with compression distortions. However,
they are either small in scale or employ high-quality UGC
videos as the sources, and all of the mentioned databases
lack videos in live streaming scenes. Therefore, there is
a lack of a proper UGC Live VQA database to develop
and validate the video quality measurement tools for live
streaming systems.

1746

