This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You Do Not Need Additional Priors or Regularizers in Retinex-based Low-light
Image Enhancement
Huiyuan Fu1 , Wenkai Zheng1 , Xiangyu Meng1 , Xin Wang2 , Chuanming Wang1 , Huadong Ma1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 Stony Brook University
{fhy, ciki, clearlove7, wcm, mhd}@bupt.edu.cn, x.wang@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Images captured in low-light conditions often suffer from
significant quality degradation. Recent works have built a
large variety of deep Retinex-based networks to enhance
low-light images. The Retinex-based methods require decomposing the image into reflectance and illumination components, which is a highly ill-posed problem and there is
no available ground truth. Previous works addressed this
problem by imposing some additional priors or regularizers. However, finding an effective prior or regularizer that
can be applied in various scenes is challenging, and the
performance of the model suffers from too many additional
constraints. We propose a contrastive learning method and
a self-knowledge distillation method for Retinex decomposition that allow training our Retinex-based model without elaborate hand-crafted regularization functions. Rather
than estimating reflectance and illuminance images and representing the final images as their element-wise products as
in previous works, our regularizer-free Retinex decomposition and synthesis network (RFR) extracts reflectance and
illuminance features and synthesizes them end-to-end. In
addition, we propose a loss function for contrastive learning
and a progressive learning strategy for self-knowledge distillation. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
our proposed methods can achieve superior performance
compared with state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
High quality images are highly desirable for many computer vision and machine learning applications. In a lowlight environment, images often suffer from visual degradations such as poor visibility and low contrast. The darker the
area in an image, the more the information is lost, and the
harder it is to recover the image with a good quality. Many
computer vision systems may malfunction or fail completely
in low-light conditions. If dark regions can be removed or alleviated after the low-light image enhancement, images can

(a) Input

(b) SCI (CVPR 22) [22]

(c) URetinexNet (CVPR 22) [32]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Visual comparison on a real-captured low-light image
using state-of-the-art approaches.

become more clear. Thus low-light image enhancement can
potentially benefit many computer vision applications.
Traditional methods for low-light image enhancement
can be divided into two categories, one based on histogram
equalization [1, 2, 7, 12, 25] and the other based on Retinex
theory [4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 28]. However, relying on the handcrafted features, they are not robust against the degraded visibility and unexpected noise.
Recently, deep learning based approaches for low-light
image enhancement have received extensive attention. Instead of using prior handcrafted features, these methods,
such as directly learning enhanced results in an end-to-end
network and deep Retinex-based methods, can automatically
learn the features with deep neural networks [5,8,16,17,19,
20,22,26,27,29,31–35,37–39] for low-light image enhancement. A specific survey can be found in [14].
Since Retinex theory [11] models the color perception of
human vision on natural scenes, deep Retinex-based methods have better enhancement performance and generalization in most cases than directly learning enhanced results
in an end-to-end network. However, Retinex decomposition

18125

