This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EFEM: Equivariant Neural Field Expectation Maximization
for 3D Object Segmentation Without Scene Supervision
Jiahui Lei1

Congyue Deng2 Karl Schmeckpeper1 Leonidas Guibas2 Kostas Daniilidis1
1
2
University of Pennsylvania
Stanford University

{leijh, karls, kostas}@cis.upenn.edu, {congyue, guibas}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce Equivariant Neural Field Expectation
Maximization (EFEM), a simple, effective, and robust geometric algorithm that can segment objects in 3D scenes
without annotations or training on scenes. We achieve
such unsupervised segmentation by exploiting single object shape priors. We make two novel steps in that direction. First, we introduce equivariant shape representations
to this problem to eliminate the complexity induced by the
variation in object configuration. Second, we propose a
novel EM algorithm that can iteratively refine segmentation masks using the equivariant shape prior. We collect
a novel real dataset Chairs and Mugs that contains various object configurations and novel scenes in order to verify
the effectiveness and robustness of our method. Experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves consistent and robust performance across different scenes where
the (weakly) supervised methods may fail. Code and data
available at https://www.cis.upenn.edu/ ˜leijh/
projects/efem

1. Introduction
Learning how to decompose 3D scenes into object instances is a fundamental problem in visual perception systems. Past developments in 3D computer vision have
made huge strides on this problem by training neural networks on 3D scene datasets with segmentation masks [55,
63, 67]. However, these works heavily rely on large labeled datasets [3, 15] that require laborious 3D annotation
based on special expertise. Few recent papers alleviate this
problem by reducing the need to either sparse point labeling [24, 60] or bounding boxes [12].
In this work, we follow an object-centric approach inspired by the Gestalt school of perception that captures an
object as a whole shape [32, 47] invariant to its pose and
scale [31]. A holistic approach builds up a prior for each
object category, that then enables object recognition in different complex scenes with varying configurations. Directly
learning object-centric priors instead of analyzing each 3D

Figure 1. We present EFEM, an unsupervised 3D object segmentation method applicable to real-world scenes (results on the right)
by only training on ShapeNet single object reconstruction.

scene inspires a more efficient way of learning instance segmentation: both a mug on the table and a mug in the dishwasher are mugs, and one does not have to learn to segment out a mug in all possible environmental contexts if
we have a unified shape concept for mugs. Such objectcentric recognition facilitates a robust scene analysis for autonomous systems in many interactive real-world environments with a diversity of object configurations: Imagine a
scenario where a robot is doing the dishes in the kitchen.
Dirty bowls are piled in the sink and the robot is cleaning them and placing them into a cabinet. Objects of the
same category appear in the scene repeatedly under different configurations (piles, neat lines in the cabinet). What
is even more challenging is that even within this one single
task (doing dishes) the scene configuration can drastically
change when objects are moved. We show that such scenarios cannot be addressed by the state-of-the-art strongly or
weakly supervised methods that struggle under such scene
configuration variations.
In this paper, we introduce a method that can segment
3D object instances from 3D static scenes by learning priors of single object shapes (ShapeNet [4]) without using any
scene-level labels. Two main challenges arise when we remove the scene-level annotation. First, objects in the scene
can have a different position, rotation, and scale than the
canonical poses where the single object shapes were trained.
Second, the shape encoder which is trained on object-level
input cannot be directly applied to the scene observations
unless the object masks are known. We address the first
challenge by introducing equivariance to this problem. By

4902

