This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Standing Between Past and Future: Spatio-Temporal Modeling for
Multi-Camera 3D Multi-Object Tracking
Ziqi Pang1 *, Jie Li2 , Pavel Tokmakov2 , Dian Chen2 , Sergey Zagoruyko3 , Yu-Xiong Wang1†
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign1 , Toyota Research Institute2 , Woven Planet Level-53

Abstract
This work proposes an end-to-end multi-camera 3D
multi-object tracking (MOT) framework. It emphasizes
spatio-temporal continuity and integrates both past and future reasoning for tracked objects. Thus, we name it “Pastand-Future reasoning for Tracking” (PF-Track). Specifically, our method adopts the “tracking by attention” framework and represents tracked instances coherently over time
with object queries. To explicitly use historical cues, our
“Past Reasoning” module learns to refine the tracks and
enhance the object features by cross-attending to queries
from previous frames and other objects. The “Future Reasoning” module digests historical information and predicts
robust future trajectories. In the case of long-term occlusions, our method maintains the object positions and enables re-association by integrating motion predictions. On
the nuScenes dataset, our method improves AMOTA by a
large margin and remarkably reduces ID-Switches by 90%
compared to prior approaches, which is an order of magnitude less. The code and models are made available at
https://github.com/TRI-ML/PF-Track.

1. Introduction
Reasoning about object trajectories in 3D is the cornerstone of autonomous navigation. While many LiDARbased approaches exist [36, 58, 63], their applicability is
limited by the cost and reliability of the sensor. Detecting,
tracking, and forecasting object trajectories only with cameras is hence a critical problem. Significant progress has
been achieved on these tasks separately, but they have been
historically primarily studied in isolation and combined into
a full-stack pipeline in an ad-hoc fashion.
In particular, 3D detection has attracted a lot of attention [20,24,25,28,53], but associating these detections over
time has been mostly done independently from localiza* Work done while interning at Toyota Research Institute.
† Corresponding to Ziqi Pang at ziqip2@illinois.edu and Yu-

Xiong Wang at yxw@illinois.edu.

t =0
Front-right Camera

……

t = t!
Back-right Camera

Past Reasoning à Better Track Quality

……

t = t"
Back-right Camera

……

t =T
Back Camera

Future Reasoning à Address Occlusions

Figure 1. We visualize the output of our model by projecting predicted 3D bounding boxes onto images. In the beginning, imagebased detection can be inaccurate (t = 0) due to depth ambiguity.
With “Past Reasoning,” the bounding box quality (t = t1 ) gradually improves by leveraging historical information. With “Future
Reasoning,” our PF-Track predicts the long-term motions of objects and maintains their states even under occlusions (t = t2 ) and
camera switches. This enables re-association without explicit reidentification (t = T ), as the object ID does not switch. Our PFTrack further combines past and future reasoning in a joint framework to improve spatio-temporal coherence.

tion [19, 31, 43]. Recently, a few approaches to end-toend detection and tracking have been proposed, but they
operate on neighboring frames and fail to integrate longerterm spatio-temporal cues [7, 12, 33, 65]. In the prediction literature, on the other hand, it is common to assume
the availability of ground truth object trajectories and HDMaps [4, 8, 11, 59]. A few attempts for a more realistic evaluation have been made [16, 21], focusing only on the prediction performance.
In this paper, we argue that multi-object tracking can be
dramatically improved by jointly optimizing the detectiontracking-prediction pipeline, especially in a camera-based
system. We provide an intuitive example from our realworld experiment in Fig. 1. At first, the pedestrian is fully
visible, but a model with only single-frame information
makes a prediction with large deviation (frame t = 0 in
Fig. 1). After this, integrating the temporal information
from the past gradually corrects the error over time (frame
t = t1 in Fig. 1), by capitalizing on the notion of spatiotemporal continuity. Moreover, as the pedestrian becomes
fully occluded (frame t = t2 in Fig. 1), we can still predict their location by using the aggregated past informa-

17928

