This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Wavelet Representation for Compact Neural Radiance Fields
Seungtae Nam2
Joo Chan Lee2
Jong Hwan Ko2,3†
Eunbyung Park2,3†
1
AI2XL, KT
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University

Daniel Rho1 *

Byeonghyeon Lee2 *

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) have demonstrated the
potential of coordinate-based neural representation (neural
fields or implicit neural representation) in neural rendering.
However, using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to represent
a 3D scene or object requires enormous computational resources and time. There have been recent studies on how
to reduce these computational inefficiencies by using additional data structures, such as grids or trees. Despite the
promising performance, the explicit data structure necessitates a substantial amount of memory. In this work, we
present a method to reduce the size without compromising
the advantages of having additional data structures. In detail, we propose using the wavelet transform on grid-based
neural fields. Grid-based neural fields are for fast convergence, and the wavelet transform, whose efficiency has
been demonstrated in high-performance standard codecs,
is to improve the parameter efficiency of grids. Furthermore, in order to achieve a higher sparsity of grid coefficients while maintaining reconstruction quality, we present
a novel trainable masking approach. Experimental results demonstrate that non-spatial grid coefficients, such as
wavelet coefficients, are capable of attaining a higher level
of sparsity than spatial grid coefficients, resulting in a more
compact representation. With our proposed mask and compression pipeline, we achieved state-of-the-art performance
within a memory budget of 2 MB. Our code is available at
https://github.com/daniel03c1/masked wavelet nerf.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in coordinate-based neural representation (neural fields or implicit neural representation) have
demonstrated remarkable performance in many applications. In particular, neural radiance fields (NeRF) have
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Rate-distortion curves on the NeRF synthetic dataset.
The numbers inside parenthesis denote the axis resolution of grids.

sparked interest by synthesizing high-quality images from
novel viewpoints. It uses a multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
with positional encoding to map coordinates to corresponding colors and opacities. Combined with the differentiable
volumetric rendering and the neural network’s architectural
priors, it has shown great potential to be a new representation paradigm. However, the high computational costs (in
both training and inference) have been a significant bottleneck, often taking several days to converge.
Several follow-up studies have been proposed to accelerate training and inference times [5, 9, 11, 14, 16, 31,
32, 40, 44]. To speed up inference, KiloNeRF [32] proposed splitting a 3D scene into thousands of partial scenes,
each of which is assigned a tiny, distinct neural network.
While achieving impressive speed-up, it requires a massive amount of memory storage. On the other hand, FastNeRF [14] suggested caching and factorizing the NeRF
network to reduce computational costs. Meanwhile, metalearning algorithms [12, 26, 29] have also been applied to
accelerate the training time, and they have shown faster
convergence with the learned initialization [34, 40]. However, it requires well-organized large-scale datasets and a
pre-training process. Furthermore, the rendering costs re-

20680

