This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Table Structure Recognition with Visual-Alignment Sequential
Coordinate Modeling

2

Yibo Li

Yongshuai Huang*,1
Ning Lu∗,1
Dapeng Chen1
1
1
Zecheng Xie
Shenggao Zhu
Liangcai Gao2
1
Huawei Technologies Ltd. 2 Peking University

Wei Peng1

{huangyongshuai1,luning12,chendapeng8,xiezecheng1,zhushenggao,peng.wei1}@huawei.com
{yiboli,gaoliangcai}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Table structure recognition aims to extract the logical
and physical structure of unstructured table images into
a machine-readable format. The latest end-to-end imageto-text approaches simultaneously predict the two structures by two decoders, where the prediction of the physical structure (the bounding boxes of the cells) is based on
the representation of the logical structure. However, the
previous methods struggle with imprecise bounding boxes
as the logical representation lacks local visual information. To address this issue, we propose an end-to-end sequential modeling framework for table structure recognition called VAST. It contains a novel coordinate sequence
decoder triggered by the representation of the non-empty
cell from the logical structure decoder. In the coordinate sequence decoder, we model the bounding box coordinates as
a language sequence, where the left, top, right and bottom
coordinates are decoded sequentially to leverage the intercoordinate dependency. Furthermore, we propose an auxiliary visual-alignment loss to enforce the logical representation of the non-empty cells to contain more local visual details, which helps produce better cell bounding boxes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method
can achieve state-of-the-art results in both logical and physical structure recognition. The ablation study also validates that the proposed coordinate sequence decoder and
the visual-alignment loss are the keys to the success of our
method.

1. Introduction
Tables are an essential medium for expressing structural
or semi-structural information. Table structure recognition,
including recognizing a table’s logical and physical structure, is crucial for understanding and further editing a vi* Equal contribution.

(a) TableFormer (Baseline)

(b) VAST (Ours)

Figure 1. Visualization comparison of the bounding box predicted
by TableFormer and VAST. Our results are more accurate, which
is vital for downstream content extraction or table understanding
tasks. The image is cropped from the table with id 7285, which
comes from FinTabNet.

sual table. The logical structure represents the row-column
relation of cells and the spanning information of a cell. The
physical structure contains not only the logical structure but
also the bounding box or content of the cells, focusing on
the exact locations in the image.
Table recognition can be implemented by an end-to-end
encoder-decoder paradigm. Such methods excel at predicting the logical structure but usually produce less accurate
physical structures, i.e., bounding boxes of cells or cell contents. However, the bounding box accuracy is essential to
downstream tasks, such as text information extraction or table QA. This work designs the sequential coordinate decoding and enforces more visual information to produce more
accurate bounding boxes.
In the coordinate sequence decoder, the start embedding
of the non-empty cell is the representation from the HTML
sequence decoder. The representation usually contains a
more global context of the table and has fewer local visual
details. Because the local visual appearance is vital for pre-

11134

