This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVAL: Explainable Video Anomaly Localization
Michael J. Jones2 *
Ashish Singh1,2 *
1
CICS, University of Massachusetts Amherst
ashishsingh@cs.umass.edu

mjones@merl.com

Abstract
We develop a novel framework for single-scene
video anomaly localization that allows for humanunderstandable reasons for the decisions the system makes.
We first learn general representations of objects and their
motions (using deep networks) and then use these representations to build a high-level, location-dependent model
of any particular scene. This model can be used to detect
anomalies in new videos of the same scene. Importantly, our
approach is explainable – our high-level appearance and
motion features can provide human-understandable reasons for why any part of a video is classified as normal
or anomalous. We conduct experiments on standard video
anomaly detection datasets (Street Scene, CUHK Avenue,
ShanghaiTech and UCSD Ped1, Ped2) and show significant
improvements over the previous state-of-the-art. All of our
code and extra datasets will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
We are interested in the problem of spatio-temporal localization of anomalous activities in videos of a given scene.
Informally, anomalous activities are events that differ from
those typically observed in a scene, such as a cyclist riding
through an indoor shopping mall [35]. Like many other papers on anomaly detection, this work addresses the setting
in which we have access to an initial set of videos that are
used to define the typical, or ‘nominal’ activities in a particular scene. Such a situation naturally arises in surveillance
and monitoring tasks [41], where it is easy to collect nominal data, but it is not practical to collect a representative set
of possible anomalies for a scene. Thus, the problem setup is as follows: provided with a set of videos of a scene
which do not contain any anomalies, (called the nominal
set), the goal is to detect any events in a test video from
the same scene that differ substantially from all events in
the nominal set [29, 35]. In defining anomaly detection, it
is important to consider the role of location. In real-world
* equal contribution

Erik G. Learned-Miller1,2
2
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs
elm@cs.umass.edu

surveillance scenarios, an event may be normal in one location but anomalous in another. For example, a car driving
on a road is typically not anomalous, while one driving on a
sidewalk typically is. In view of this, we adopt the following definition [35].
Definition 1 An anomaly is any spatio-temporal region of
test video that is significantly different from all of the nominal video in the same spatial region.
Unlike most recent work in anomaly detection, a key
goal of our work is to produce not only a set of anomalies, but a simple and clear explanation for what makes
them anomalous. We are motivated by how people tasked
with watching video from a stationary surveillance camera would detect an unusual incident. While monitoring a
scene, we expect a person to note the types of objects seen
(people, buildings, cars) and the motions of those objects
(walking east or west on a sidewalk, driving northwest on
the street) to characterize the given scene. The person could
then notice an anomaly when the objects or motions do not
match what has been seen before. The person could also
explain why something was anomalous.
We design our video anomaly detection system using this
sketch of how a human would solve the problem as motivation. We want to use deep networks to give a high-level understanding of the objects and motions occurring in a scene.
By ’high-level’, we mean at the level of whole objects and
not at the level of pixels or edges. To do this, we train deep
networks that take a spatio-temporal region of video (which
we call a video volume) as input and output attribute vectors
representing the object classes, the directions and speeds of
motion and the fraction of stationary pixels (which gives
information on the sizes of moving objects) occurring in a
spatio-temporal region. The feature vectors from the penultimate layers of these deep networks yield high-level representations, or embeddings, of the appearance and motion
content of each video volume. Ten frames are used for video
volumes in our experiments.
Unlike many other recent works, we do not learn new
embedding functions (i.e. networks) for new scenes. We
use the same embedding networks for every environment.
Instead, to characterize the nominal video for a new scene,
we store a representative set of all the embeddings found in

18717

