This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure Aggregation for Cross-Spectral Stereo Image Guided Denoising
Zehua Sheng1 , Zhu Yu1 , Xiongwei Liu1 , Si-Yuan Cao1 , Yuqi Liu1 , Hui-Liang Shen1 ,* Huaqi Zhang2
1

Zhejiang University, 2 vivo Mobile Communication Company Ltd.

{shengzehua, yu zhu, liuxw11}@zju.edu.cn
{liuyuqi, shenhl}@zju.edu.cn

karlcao@hotmail.com

zhanghuaqi@vivo.com

Abstract
To obtain clean images with salient structures from noisy
observations, a growing trend in current denoising studies
is to seek the help of additional guidance images with high
signal-to-noise ratios, which are often acquired in different spectral bands such as near infrared. Although previous guided denoising methods basically require the input
images to be well-aligned, a more common way to capture
the paired noisy target and guidance images is to exploit a
stereo camera system. However, current studies on crossspectral stereo matching cannot fully guarantee the pixellevel registration accuracy, and rarely consider the case of
noise contamination. In this work, for the first time, we
propose a guided denoising framework for cross-spectral
stereo images. Instead of aligning the input images via conventional stereo matching, we aggregate structures from the
guidance image to estimate a clean structure map for the
noisy target image, which is then used to regress the final denoising result with a spatially variant linear representation
model. Based on this, we design a neural network, called
as SANet, to complete the entire guided denoising process.
Experimental results show that, our SANet can effectively
transfer structures from an unaligned guidance image to the
restoration result, and outperforms state-of-the-art denoisers on various stereo image datasets. Besides, our structure aggregation strategy also shows its potential to handle other unaligned guided restoration tasks such as superresolution and deblurring. The source code is available at
https://github.com/lustrouselixir/SANet.

1. Introduction
Due to the ill-posed nature of image denoising, even the
state-of-the-art single-image denoisers still suffer from the
problem of over-smoothing edges and details, especially at
high noise levels [5, 26, 35, 41]. Recently, multi-modal im* Corresponding author.

Guided Denoising
Linear
Representation

Noise Map
Estimation

Noisy target image

Denoised image
Structure Aggregation
Target

WP
...

Aggregator

Structure Map

Guidance
Guidance image

Noisy target (RGB) Guidance (NIR)

MPRNet

Structure Map

SANet (Ours)

Figure 1. The overall framework of our SANet. It consists of
a structure aggregation module and a guided denoising module.
The structure aggregation module estimates a structure map for
the target image, based on which the guided denoising module
regresses the final denoising result. Compared with the state-ofthe-art single image denoiser MPRNet [41], our SANet can restore
salient structures according to the unaligned guidance image.

age processing has attracted increasing attention in image
restoration since it’s promising to recover salient structures
based on a guidance image [8, 13, 27, 30, 37, 39]. To ensure that the target image keeps the original ambience and
the guidance image is nearly noise-free, the auxiliary guidance image is often captured in a different spectral band.
In actual applications, near-infrared (NIR) is a popular option [15, 17, 23, 44]. Many smartphones and surveillance
systems have already been equipped with NIR cameras. Extra NIR light sources are usually required to capture clean
NIR images with salient structures in a short exposure time
without affecting the imaging process of the visible light.
Current guided image restoration methods [8, 13, 27, 30,
37] basically assume the target and guidance images to be
well-aligned at the pixel level. In [44], the authors apply a
beam splitter to obtain registered images from two cameras,
while the work [23] uses a motorized rotator with different

13997

