This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-Aware Domain Generalization for Face Anti-Spoofing
Qianyu Zhou1,3 ,* Ke-Yue Zhang2 ,* Taiping Yao2 , Xuequan Lu4 , Ran Yi1 ,
Shouhong Ding2†, Lizhuang Ma1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University; 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent;
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Computer Software Evaluating and Testing; 4 Deakin University.
1
{zhouqianyu,ranyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, 1 ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
2
{zkyezhang,taipingyao,ericshding}@tencent.com, 4 xuequan.lu@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) based on domain generalization (DG) has been recently studied to improve the generalization on unseen scenarios. Previous methods typically
rely on domain labels to align the distribution of each domain for learning domain-invariant representations. However, artificial domain labels are coarse-grained and subjective, which cannot reflect real domain distributions accurately. Besides, such domain-aware methods focus on
domain-level alignment, which is not fine-grained enough
to ensure that learned representations are insensitive to domain styles. To address these issues, we propose a novel
perspective for DG FAS that aligns features on the instance
level without the need for domain labels. Specifically,
Instance-Aware Domain Generalization framework is proposed to learn the generalizable feature by weakening the
features’ sensitivity to instance-specific styles. Concretely,
we propose Asymmetric Instance Adaptive Whitening to
adaptively eliminate the style-sensitive feature correlation,
boosting the generalization. Moreover, Dynamic Kernel
Generator and Categorical Style Assembly are proposed to
first extract the instance-specific features and then generate
the style-diversified features with large style shifts, respectively, further facilitating the learning of style-insensitive
features. Extensive experiments and analysis demonstrate
the superiority of our method over state-of-the-art competitors. Code will be publicly available at this link.

1. Introduction
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) plays a critical role in protecting face recognition systems from various presentation attacks, e.g., printed photos, video replay, etc. To cope with
these presentation attacks, a series of FAS works based on
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Conventional DG-based FAS approaches typically rely
on artificially-defined domain labels to perform domain-aware domain generalization, which cannot guarantee that the learned representations are still insensitive to domain-specific styles. In contrast, our method does not rely on such domain labels and focuses
on the instance-aware domain generalization via exploring asymmetric instance adaptive whiting on the fine-grained instance level.

hand-crafted features [3, 15, 23, 33, 47], and deeply-learned
features [12, 19, 28, 49, 51] have been proposed. Although
these methods have achieved promising performance in
intra-dataset scenarios, they suffer from poor generalization
when adapting to various unseen domains.
To improve the generalization ability on unseen domains, recent studies introduce domain generalization (DG)
techniques into the FAS tasks, which utilize the adversarial learning [21, 39, 44] or meta-learning [7, 11, 29, 30, 61]
to learn domain-invariant representations. Despite its gratifying progress, most of these DG-based FAS methods utilize domain labels to align the distribution of each domain
for domain-invariant representations, as shown in Figure
1. However, such domain-aware methods suffer from two
major limitations. Firstly, the artificial domain labels utilized in their methods are very coarse, and cannot accurately and comprehensively reflect the real domain distributions. For example, numerous illumination conditions,
attack types, and background scenes are ignored in the

20453

