This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Implicit Glyph Attention for Text Recognition
Tongkun Guan1 , Chaochen Gu2*, Jingzheng Tu2 , Xue Yang1 , Qi Feng2 , Yudi Zhao2 , Wei Shen1*
1
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{gtk0615,jacygu,tujingzheng,yangxue-2019-sjtu,fengqi,yudizhao,wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

"COPTER"

"COPTER"

"COPTER"
Alignment

STR

The attention mechanism has become the de facto module in scene text recognition (STR) methods, due to its capability of extracting character-level representations. These
methods can be summarized into implicit attention based
and supervised attention based, depended on how the attention is computed, i.e., implicit attention and supervised
attention are learned from sequence-level text annotations
and or character-level bounding box annotations, respectively. Implicit attention, as it may extract coarse or even
incorrect spatial regions as character attention, is prone to
suffering from an alignment-drifted issue. Supervised attention can alleviate the above issue, but it is character
category-speciﬁc, which requires extra laborious characterlevel bounding box annotations and would be memoryintensive when handling languages with larger character
categories. To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a novel attention mechanism for STR, self-supervised
implicit glyph attention (SIGA). SIGA delineates the glyph
structures of text images by jointly self-supervised text segmentation and implicit attention alignment, which serve
as the supervision to improve attention correctness without extra character-level annotations. Experimental results
demonstrate that SIGA performs consistently and signiﬁcantly better than previous attention-based STR methods,
in terms of both attention correctness and ﬁnal recognition
performance on publicly available context benchmarks and
our contributed contextless benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Scene text recognition (STR) aims to recognize texts
from natural images, which has wide applications in handwriting recognition [36, 47, 53], industrial print recognition [12, 16, 32], and visual understanding [8, 23, 31].
Recently, attention-based models with encoder-decoder architectures are typically developed to address this task by
attending to important regions of text images to extract
* Corresponding author.

15285

images

1
2
3
4
5
6
Category-independent
channels

(a) Implicit attention

STR

images

3
5
16
15
18
20
Category-dependent
channels

(b) Supervised attention

STR
Unsupervised
method

images

1
2
4
3
5
6
Category-independent
channels

(c) Self-supervised implicit glyph attention (SIGA)

Figure 1. Three difference supervised manners for STR.

character-level representations. These methods can be summarized into implicit attention methods (a) and supervised
attention methods (b) as shown in Figure 1, according to the
annotation type used for supervising the attention.
Speciﬁcally, implicit attention is learned from sequencelevel text annotations by computing attention scores across
all locations over a 1D or 2D space. For example, the 1D sequential attention weights [3, 39] are generated at different
decoding steps to extract important items of the encoded
sequence. The 2D attention weights [15, 50] are generated by executing a cross-attention operation with the embedded time-dependent sequences and visual features on
all spatial locations. However, implicit attention methods,
which only extract coarse or even unaligned spatial regions
as character attention, may encounter alignment-drifted attention. In contrast, supervised attention is learned from extra character-level bounding box annotations by generating
character segmentation maps. Although these supervised
attention methods [20, 28, 30, 42] can alleviate the above issue, they rely on labour-intensive character-level bounding
box annotations, and their attention maps with respect to
character categories might be memory-intensive when the
number of character categories is large.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a
novel attention-based method for STR (Figure 1 (c)), selfsupervised implicit glyph attention (SIGA). As brieﬂy
shown in Figure 2, SIGA delineates the glyph structures
of text images by jointly self-supervised text segmentation and implicit attention alignment, which serve as the
supervision for learning attention maps during training
to improve attention correctness. Speciﬁcally, the glyph
structures are generated by modulating the learned text
foreground representations with sequence-aligned attention

