This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Appearance: a Semantic Controllable Self-Supervised Learning
Framework for Human-Centric Visual Tasks
Weihua Chen, Xianzhe Xu, Jian Jia, Hao luo, Yaohua Wang, Fan Wang, Rong Jin, Xiuyu Sun†
Alibaba Group
{kugang.cwh, xianzhe.xxz, jj359864, michuan.lh, xiachen.wyh, fan.w, jinrong.jr,
xiuyu.sxy}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Human-centric visual tasks have attracted increasing
research attention due to their widespread applications. In
this paper, we aim to learn a general human representation
from massive unlabeled human images which can benefit
downstream human-centric tasks to the maximum extent.
We call this method SOLIDER, a Semantic cOntrollable
seLf-supervIseD lEaRning framework. Unlike the existing
self-supervised learning methods, prior knowledge from
human images is utilized in SOLIDER to build pseudo
semantic labels and import more semantic information
into the learned representation. Meanwhile, we note that
different downstream tasks always require different ratios
of semantic information and appearance information. For
example, human parsing requires more semantic information, while person re-identification needs more appearance
information for identification purpose. So a single learned
representation cannot fit for all requirements. To solve
this problem, SOLIDER introduces a conditional network
with a semantic controller. After the model is trained,
users can send values to the controller to produce representations with different ratios of semantic information,
which can fit different needs of downstream tasks. Finally,
SOLIDER is verified on six downstream human-centric
visual tasks. It outperforms state of the arts and builds
new baselines for these tasks. The code is released in
https://github.com/tinyvision/SOLIDER.

1. Introduction
Human-centric visual analysis plays an important role
in widespread applications, such as surveillance, sports,
augmented reality, and video production. Person reidentification [13, 14, 41, 82], attribute recognition [72, 78],
person search [76, 92], pedestrian detection [3, 24, 32],
human parsing [27, 53], and pose estimation [58, 90]
† Corresponding Author

Legend
Upper body
Lower body
Shoes

Figure 1. A representation space learned by DINO [6]. Seven
human images are represented in seven different colors. Each
image is split into four parts according to their semantic regions,
i.e., upper body (as ▲), lower body (as +), shoes (as ⋆) and
background (as ×, not visualized to avoid distraction). It can be
seen that different parts of a same person are closer to each other
even they share different semantic meanings.

have achieved considerable progress in recent years.
In another aspect, there are massive human images
available in the current computer vision community. For
example, even an unlabeled person re-identification dataset,
LUPerson [25, 26] (#Img≈4.18M) is 4 time larger than the
ImageNet dataset (#Img≈1M). How to use unlabeled data
to build a human representation is challenging, especially
when it needs to benefit various downstream tasks.
Self-supervised learning has achieved great developments by using unlabeled data to learn representations.
Many pretext tasks have been designed, such as contrastive
learning [6, 10, 35] and masking image modeling [2, 34, 77,
95]. Although these methods have achieved great success
in learning general image representations, there is a lack of
specific design targeting human-centric tasks.
Some researchers [55, 81, 97] focus to extend selfsupervised learning methods on human-centric visual tasks.
They use DINO [6] with LUPerson [25, 26] dataset to build
pre-trained models for person re-identification task. When
applying the pre-trained models to other human-centric

15050

