This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-specific Fine-tuning via Variational Information Bottleneck for
Weakly-supervised Pathology Whole Slide Image Classification
Honglin Li1,3 , Chenglu Zhu2,3 , Yunlong Zhang1,3 , Yuxuan Sun1,3 ,
Zhongyi Shui1,3 , Wenwei Kuang3,4 , Sunyi Zheng2,3 , Lin Yang2,3 *
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Research Center for Industries of the Future and 3 School of Engineering, Westlake University
4
The University of Hong Kong
{lihonglin,yanglin}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
While Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) has shown
promising results in digital Pathology Whole Slide Image
(WSI) analysis, such a paradigm still faces performance
and generalization problems due to high computational
costs and limited supervision of Gigapixel WSIs. To deal
with the computation problem, previous methods utilize a
frozen model pretrained from ImageNet to obtain representations, however, it may lose key information owing to
the large domain gap and hinder the generalization ability
without image-level training-time augmentation. Though
Self-supervised Learning (SSL) proposes viable representation learning schemes, the downstream task-specific features via partial label tuning are not explored. To alleviate
this problem, we propose an efficient WSI fine-tuning framework motivated by the Information Bottleneck theory. The
theory enables the framework to find the minimal sufficient
statistics of WSI, thus supporting us to fine-tune the backbone into a task-specific representation only depending on
WSI-level weak labels. The WSI-MIL problem is further
analyzed to theoretically deduce our fine-tuning method.
We evaluate the method on five pathological WSI datasets
on various WSI heads. The experimental results show significant improvements in both accuracy and generalization
compared with previous works. Source code will be available at https://github.com/invoker-LL/WSI-finetuning.

1. Introduction
Digital Pathology or microscopic images have been
widely used for the diagnosis of cancers such as Breast
Cancer [13] and Prostate Cancer [6]. However, the reading
of Whole Slide Images (WSIs) with gigapixel resolution is
* Corresponding author.

a. ImageNet-1k
v-score: 0.285

b. Full Supervision
v-score: 0.745

c. Self-supervised
v-score: 0.394

d. IB Fine-tuning (ours)
v-score: 0.538

Figure 1. T-SNE visualization of different representations on
patches. Our method converts chaotic ImageNet-1K and SSL features into a more task-specific and separable distribution. The
cluster evaluation measurement, v-scores, show weakly supervised fine-tuned features are more close to full supervision compared to others. a. ImageNet-1k pretraining. b. Full patch supervision. c. Self-supervised Learning. d. Fine-tuning with WSI labels.

time-consuming which poses an urgent need for automatic
computer-assisted diagnosis. Though computers can boost
the speed of the diagnosis process, the enormous size of resolution, over 100M [45], makes it infeasible to acquire precise and exhaustive annotations for model training, let alone
the current hardware can hardly support the parallel training on all patches of a WSI. Hence, an annotation-efficient
learning scheme with light computation is increasingly desirable to cope with those problems. In pathology WSI analysis, the heavy annotation cost is usually alleviated by Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) with only WSI-level weak
supervision, which makes a comprehensive decision on a
series of instances as a bag sample [19, 31]. Intuitively, all

7454

