This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Posture Mining for Fine-grained Classification
Zhenchao Tang1,† , Hualin Yang1,† , and Calvin Yu-Chian Chen1,2,3,∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 China Medical University Hospital, 3 Asia University
tangzhch7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yanghlin8@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, chenyuchian@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Because the subtle differences between the different
sub-categories of common visual categories such as bird
species, fine-grained classification has been seen as a challenging task for many years. Most previous works focus
towards the features in the single discriminative region isolatedly, while neglect the connection between the different
discriminative regions in the whole image. However, the
relationship between different discriminative regions contains rich posture information and by adding the posture
information, model can learn the behavior of the object
which attribute to improve the classification performance.
In this paper, we propose a novel fine-grained framework
named PMRC (posture mining and reverse cross-entropy),
which is able to combine with different backbones to good
effect. In PMRC, we use the Deep Navigator to generate the
discriminative regions from the images, and then use them
to construct the graph. We aggregate the graph by message passing and get the classification results. Specifically,
in order to force PMRC to learn how to mine the posture
information, we design a novel training paradigm, which
makes the Deep Navigator and message passing communicate and train together. In addition, we propose the reverse
cross-entropy (RCE) and demomenstate that compared to
the cross-entropy (CE), RCE can not only promote the accurracy of our model but also generalize to promote the accuracy of other kinds of fine-grained classification models.
Experimental results on benchmark datasets confirm that
PMRC can achieve state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained clssification tasks have been seen as quite
challenging tasks because the visual differences between
the fine-grained classification datasets are hard to recognize. For ordinary people, we can do the normal classification easily, but as for the fine-grained classification, only
experts with professional knowledge can do it. Therefore,
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The overview of PMRC. Firstly, we use the Deep Navigator to generate the discriminative regions. Then we construct the
graph. Finally, we aggregate the graph through message passing
and classify the graph.

compared to category-level classification, fine-grained classification is more chanllenging.
There have been many predecessors on fine-grained classification. Works in [2,4,7,12,16,25,31,45,48] can achieve
good performance on fine-grained classification. However,
their training and testing phase both need bounding box annotations which cost a lot of manual labour and are always
error-prone. Then works in [3, 20] develp the methods and
use the annotations only in training phase. More recent
works develop methods that don’t need bounding box annotations in training phase or testing phase [18, 22, 26, 47]. It
is a general idea to create graph using local regions. However, related existing method [44, 49] is not easy to transplant, and it is difficult to perceive discriminative regions
with correct context information and the relationship between regions. We propose a method that can be conveniently combined with different backbones, and propose a
novel learning strategy to ensure that the model can perceive the correct discriminative regions and their relationships (posture information). In addition, our RCE is simple
to implement and has better performance than CE.
The framework we propose, which we term PMRC (posture mining and RCE), use the Deep Navigator and graph
neural network to mine the posture information from the
fine-grained images and use RCE to promote the performance. PMRC is able to combine with different backbones
to good effect. We design the loss to make PMRC learn
the way to mine the posture information from the images,
which include guide the Deep Navigator to search the discriminative regions and guide the message passing module
to percept the posture information based on the discrimina-

23735

