This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt-Guided Zero-Shot Anomaly Action Recognition
using Pretrained Deep Skeleton Features
Fumiaki Sato*, Ryo Hachiuma*, Taiki Sekii
Konica Minolta, Inc.
{fumiaki.sato.jp,rhachiuma,taiki.sekii}@gmail.com

Abstract
This study investigates unsupervised anomaly action
recognition, which identifies video-level abnormal-humanbehavior events in an unsupervised manner without abnormal samples, and simultaneously addresses three limitations in the conventional skeleton-based approaches: target
domain-dependent DNN training, robustness against skeleton errors, and a lack of normal samples. We present a
unified, user prompt-guided zero-shot learning framework
using a target domain-independent skeleton feature extractor, which is pretrained on a large-scale action recognition dataset. Particularly, during the training phase using normal samples, the method models the distribution of
skeleton features of the normal actions while freezing the
weights of the DNNs and estimates the anomaly score using this distribution in the inference phase. Additionally,
to increase robustness against skeleton errors, we introduce
a DNN architecture inspired by a point cloud deep learning paradigm, which sparsely propagates the features between joints. Furthermore, to prevent the unobserved normal actions from being misidentified as abnormal actions,
we incorporate a similarity score between the user prompt
embeddings and skeleton features aligned in the common
space into the anomaly score, which indirectly supplements
normal actions. On two publicly available datasets, we conduct experiments to test the effectiveness of the proposed
method with respect to abovementioned limitations.

1. Introduction
Anomaly action recognition, the task that detects
whether the person(s) in the video is/are behaving abnormally [7,14,16,20,22,32,39,43], becomes an essential piece
of technology for averting accidents and crimes [7,33]. The
previous work can be classified into two methods that leverage appearance information from the videos [7, 14, 39, 43]
or only their human skeletons [16, 20, 22, 32]. With the
* Equal contribution.

Out-of-distribution
Abnormal
actions
Prompt violence

handshake

punching a person
pushing

Normal
actions

walking

Observed
normal
samples Decision boundary

w/o prompt violence
w/ prompt violence

Figure 1. Modeling the distribution of skeleton features per video
for identifying violent action samples as abnormal while only
walking samples are observed as normal samples in the training
phase. The decision boundary (black dotted line), which is learned
from only normal samples, is shifted by the proposed promptguided anomaly score in the direction of embedding the prompt
violence input by the user (red line). Handshake samples unobserved during the training are out-of-distribution but normal and
are incorrectly recognized as abnormal without such prompt due to
a lack of normal samples. However, by adding this prompt, handshake samples can be correctly identified as normal while walking
samples are recognized as normal.

help of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), the earlier methods
identify abnormal actions by analyzing appearance features
from videos. On the other hand, the latter methods use only
low-information skeleton sequences extracted by applying
multi-person pose estimation approaches [3, 10, 30] (simply
referred to as pose detectors) to the videos and thus are relatively robust to changes in the appearances of the person
and background [40].
Furthermore, the previous methods identify the abnormal actions for each frame [16, 22, 39, 43] or each video
clip [7, 14, 20, 32]. They also follow supervised [7, 14, 32]
or unsupervised [16, 20, 22, 39, 43] manners depending on
whether annotations are given. Because the annotation cost
is lower, the proposed method makes use of the skeletonbased approach, which recognizes abnormal actions at the
video level in an unsupervised manner.
This study uses two assumptions; the users can define the

6471

