This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Exploit Temporal Structure for
Biomedical Vision–Language Processing
Shruthi Bannur∗, Stephanie Hyland∗ , Qianchu Liu, Fernando Pérez-Garcı́a, Maximilian Ilse,
Daniel C. Castro, Benedikt Boecking, Harshita Sharma, Kenza Bouzid, Anja Thieme,
Anton Schwaighofer, Maria Wetscherek, Matthew P. Lungren, Aditya Nori
Javier Alvarez-Valle, and Ozan Oktay†
Microsoft Health Futures

Abstract

Existing methods
(a)

Self-supervised learning in vision–language processing
(VLP) exploits semantic alignment between imaging and
text modalities. Prior work in biomedical VLP has mostly
relied on the alignment of single image and report pairs
even though clinical notes commonly refer to prior images. This does not only introduce poor alignment between the modalities but also a missed opportunity to exploit rich self-supervision through existing temporal content in the data. In this work, we explicitly account for
prior images and reports when available during both training and fine-tuning. Our approach, named BioViL-T, uses
a CNN–Transformer hybrid multi-image encoder trained
jointly with a text model. It is designed to be versatile
to arising challenges such as pose variations and missing input images across time. The resulting model excels
on downstream tasks both in single- and multi-image setups, achieving state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on (I)
progression classification, (II) phrase grounding, and (III)
report generation, whilst offering consistent improvements
on disease classification and sentence-similarity tasks. We
release a novel multi-modal temporal benchmark dataset,
MS-CXR-T, to quantify the quality of vision–language representations in terms of temporal semantics. Our experimental results show the advantages of incorporating prior
images and reports to make most use of the data.

1. Introduction
Self-supervision from image–text pairs has enabled the
development of flexible general-purpose vision–language
models both in the general domain [40, 53, 77] and for
specialised domains such as biomedicine and radiology
∗ These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: ozan.oktay@microsoft.com

Proposed method
(c)

Image
encoder

Image
encoder

Prior image

Current image

Current image

(if available)
Text
encoder

InfoNCE
affinity matrix

Clinical report

(b)

Text
encoder

Spatial modelling

Clinical report

(d)

InfoNCE
affinity matrix

Spatiotemporal modelling

Prior image
Current image

✓

× ×

?

?

?

"lung nodule remains unchanged"

?

?

?

"pleural effusion is worsening"

"pleural fluid in the right base"

× ×
× ✓ ×
× × ✓
✓

Figure 1. (a) Existing visual–language pre-training approaches
[9, 32, 81] often use only a single image for contrastive learning
(e.g., InfoNCE [49]). (b) In such settings, discarding the temporal
connectivity of images limits the alignment of image–text pairs as
shown with the affinity matrix, leading to suboptimal pre-training
and missed opportunity to create additional model supervision for
free. (c, d) Our approach exploits this domain knowledge by learning to incorporate a series of images and correlate them to reports,
leading to pre-trained models that can generalise to a wider range
of downstream tasks whilst achieving SOTA performance.

[9, 32, 81]. Vision–language processing (VLP) has shown
that cross-modal supervision can provide a richer signal for
training both image [19] and text [9] models. However, the
success of VLP relies on paired samples sharing semantics,
i.e., given an image and text pair, the text should describe
the image with minimal extraneous detail [15, 16, 35].
In this regard, VLP in biomedicine and radiology poses
a distinctive challenge, as reports routinely include comparisons to prior imaging studies [3, 47, 57]. Without knowl-

15016

