This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All-in-focus Imaging from Event Focal Stack
Hanyue Lou†1,2
1

Minggui Teng†1,2

Yixin Yang1,2

Boxin Shi*1,2

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
{hylz, minggui teng, yangyixin93, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

Refocusing Timestamp Selection

+
Event Focal Stack

Defocused Image

Reconstruction
𝑡𝑡0
𝑡𝑡1

Merging

𝑡𝑡4

All-in-focus Image

𝑡𝑡4

Predicted Weights

Image Focal Stack

(a) Defocused Image

(b) Ground Truth

(c) DRBNet

(d) Ours

Reconstructed Sharpness
Golden Search
Iteration

Patches

𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑖 for patch 𝑖𝑖

𝑡𝑡0
𝑡𝑡1

Neighbouring Events

Figure 1. Left: We propose the event focal stack composed of event streams, which can be used to reconstruct an image focal stack and
predict the merging weights for all-in-focus image recovery. Our pipeline consists of three steps: selecting the refocusing timestamps,
reconstructing the corresponding image focal stack, and merging the stack into an all-in-focus image with weights predicted from the
images and neighbouring events. Right: Given a defocused image (a) and the corresponding event focal stack, our method recovers an
all-in-focus image (d) with closer clarity to the ground truth (b) than DRBNet [31] (c).

Abstract
Traditional focal stack methods require multiple shots to
capture images focused at different distances of the same
scene, which cannot be applied to dynamic scenes well.
Generating a high-quality all-in-focus image from a single
shot is challenging, due to the highly ill-posed nature of the
single-image defocus and deblurring problem. In this paper, to restore an all-in-focus image, we propose the event
focal stack which is defined as event streams captured during a continuous focal sweep. Given an RGB image focused
at an arbitrary distance, we explore the high temporal resolution of event streams, from which we automatically select
refocusing timestamps and reconstruct corresponding refocused images with events to form a focal stack. Guided by
the neighbouring events around the selected timestamps, we
can merge the focal stack with proper weights and restore
a sharp all-in-focus image. Experimental results on both
synthetic and real datasets show superior performance over
state-of-the-art methods.
† Contributed equally to this work as first authors
∗ Corresponding author

Project page: https://hylz-2019.github.io/EFS

1. Introduction
The lens aperture of a camera controls the amount of
incoming luminous flux. A larger aperture maintains the
signal-to-noise ratio with shorter exposure time, which is
useful for shooting high-speed scenes or capturing images
in low-light conditions with less noise. However, large aperture settings also make the depth of field (DoF) shallow,
which results in defocus blur. This is preferable in certain
scenarios, such as in portrait photography a shallow DoF
can be used to emphasize the subject. Yet, all-in-focus images preserve information from all distances and are desired
in more situations, e.g., microscopy imaging [25]. Besides,
all-in-focus imaging also benefits various high-level vision
tasks, e.g., object detection [29] and semantic segmentation [10].
An all-in-focus image could be obtained by deblurring a
defocused image, but the defocus kernel, determined by the
aperture shape and depth of the scene, is usually spatiallyvarying and difficult to be estimated accurately [48]. Conventional two-stage methods [9, 13, 36] first estimate the
pixel-wise or patch-wise defocus kernels with image priors and then apply non-blind image deconvolution to each

17366

