This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Large-scale Robustness Analysis of Video Action Recognition Models
Madeline Chantry Schiappa 1 * †, Naman Biyani 2 *, Prudvi Kamtam1
Shruti Vyas 1 , Hamid Palangi 3 , Vibhav Vineet 3‡, Yogesh Rawat 1‡
CRCV, University of Central Florida 1 , IIT Kanpur 2 , and Microsoft Research 3

Abstract
We have seen a great progress in video action recognition
in recent years. There are several models based on convolutional neural network (CNN) and some recent transformer
based approaches which provide top performance on existing benchmarks. In this work, we perform a large-scale
robustness analysis of these existing models for video action recognition. We focus on robustness against real-world
distribution shift perturbations instead of adversarial perturbations. We propose four different benchmark datasets,
HMDB51-P, UCF101-P, Kinetics400-P, and SSv2-P to perform this analysis. We study robustness of six state-of-the-art
action recognition models against 90 different perturbations.
The study reveals some interesting findings, 1) transformer
based models are consistently more robust compared to CNN
based models, 2) Pretraining improves robustness for Transformer based models more than CNN based models, and 3)
All of the studied models are robust to temporal perturbations for all datasets but SSv2; suggesting the importance of
temporal information for action recognition varies based on
the dataset and activities. Next, we study the role of augmentations in model robustness and present a real-world dataset,
UCF101-DS, which contains realistic distribution shifts, to
further validate some of these findings. We believe this study
will serve as a benchmark for future research in robust video
action recognition 1 .

1. Introduction
Robustness of deep learning models against real-world
distribution shifts is crucial for various applications in vision,
such as medicine [4], autonomous driving [41], environment
monitoring [60], conversational systems [36], robotics [68]
and assistive technologies [5]. Distribution shifts with respect to training data can occur due to the variations in environment such as changes in geographical locations, background, lighting, camera models, object scale, orientations,
* The authors contributed equally as first authors to this paper.
† Corresponding author:madelineschiappa@knights.ucf.edu
‡ The authors contributed equally as supervisors to this paper.
1 More details available at bit.ly/3TJLMUF.

Figure 1. Performance against robustness of action recognition
models on UCF101-P. y-axis: relative robustness γ r , x-axis: accuracy on clean videos, model names appended with P indicate
pre-training, and the size of circle indicates FLOPs.

motion patterns, etc. Such distribution shifts can cause the
models to fail when deployed in a real world settings [26].
For example, an AI ball tracker that replaced human camera
operators was recently deployed in a soccer game and repeatedly confused a soccer ball with the bald head of a lineman,
leading to a bad experience for viewers [13].
Robustness has been an active research topic due to its
importance for real-world applications [4, 41, 60]. However,
most of the effort is directed towards images [7, 25, 26].
Video is a natural form of input to the vision systems that
function in the real world. Therefore studying robustness
in videos is an important step towards developing reliable
systems for real world deployment. In this work we perform
a large-scale analysis on robustness of existing deep models
for video action recognition against common real world
spatial and temporal distribution shifts.
Video action recognition provides an important test scenario to study robustness in videos given there are sufficient,
large benchmark datasets and well developed deep learning
models. Although the existing approaches have made impressive progress in action recognition, there are several fundamental questions that still remain unanswered in the field.
Do these approaches enable effective temporal modeling, the
crux of the matter for action recognition approaches? Are
these approaches robust to real-world corruptions like noise

14698

