This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEDIC: Remove Model Backdoors via Importance Driven Cloning
Qiuling Xu, Guanhong Tao, Jean Honorio, Yingqi Liu, Shengwei An,
Guangyu Shen, Siyuan Cheng, Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University
{xu1230, taog, jhonorio, liu1751, an93, shen447, cheng535, xyzhang}@purdue.edu

Abstract

Backdoor attack is a prominent threat to applications
of Deep Learning models. Misbehaviors, e.g., model misclassification, can be induced by an input stamped with a
backdoor trigger, such as a patch with a solid color or a
pattern [14, 29]. A large number of various backdoor attacks
have been proposed, targeting different modalities and featuring different attack methods [2, 22, 37, 44, 49, 55]. An
important defense method is hence to remove backdoors
from pre-trained models. For instance, Fine-prune proposed
to remove backdoor by fine-tuning a pre-trained model on
clean inputs [27]. Distillation [23] removes neurons that
are not critical for benign functionalities. Model connectivity repair (MCR) [56] interpolates weight parameters of a
poisoned model and its finetuned version. ANP [50] adver-

sarially perturbs neuron weights of a poisoned model and
prunes those neurons that are sensitive to perturbations (and
hence considered compromised). While these techniques are
very effective in their targeted scenarios, they may fall short
in some other attacks. For example, if a trojaned model is
substantially robust, fine-tuning may not be able to remove
the backdoor without lengthy retraining. Distillation may become less effective if a neuron is important for both normal
functionalities and backdoor behaviors. And pruning neurons may degrade model benign accuracy. More discussions
of related work can be found in Section 2.
In this paper, we propose a novel backdoor removal technique M EDIC 2 as illustrated in Figure 1 (A). It works by
cloning the benign functionalities of a pre-trained model to a
new sanitized model of the same structure. Given a trojaned
model and a small set of clean samples , M EDIC trains the
clone model from scratch. The training is not only driven
by the cross-entropy loss as in normal model training, but
also by forcing the clone model to generate the same internal
activation values as the original model at the correspond⃝, 2
⃝, and 4
⃝ in Figure 1
ing internal neurons, i.e., steps 1
(A). Intuitively, one can consider it essentially derives the
weight parameters in the clone model by resolving the activation equivalence constraints. There are a large number of
such constraints even with just a small set of clean samples.
However, such faithful cloning likely copies the backdoor
behaviors as well as it tends to generate the same set of
weight values. Therefore, our cloning is further guided by
importance (step 3
⃝). Specifically, for each sample x, we
only force the important neurons to have the same activation
values. A neuron is considered important if (1) it tends to be
substantially activated by the sample, when compared to its
activation statistics over the entire population (the activation
criterion in red in Figure 1 (A)), and (2) the large activation
value has substantial impact on the classification result (the
impact criterion) . The latter can be determined by analyzing the output gradient regarding the neuron activation. By
constraining only the important neurons and relaxing the

1 Code is available at https : / / github . com / qiulingxu /
MEDIC

2 M EDIC stands for “Remove ModEl Backdoors via Importance DrIven
Cloning”.

We develop a novel method to remove injected backdoors
in deep learning models. It works by cloning the benign
behaviors of a trojaned model to a new model of the same
structure. It trains the clone model from scratch on a very
small subset of samples and aims to minimize a cloning loss
that denotes the differences between the activations of important neurons across the two models. The set of important
neurons varies for each input, depending on their magnitude of activations and their impact on the classification
result. We theoretically show our method can better recover
benign functions of the backdoor model. Meanwhile, we
prove our method can be more effective in removing backdoors compared with fine-tuning. Our experiments show that
our technique can effectively remove nine different types of
backdoors with minor benign accuracy degradation, outperforming the state-of-the-art backdoor removal techniques
that are based on fine-tuning, knowledge distillation, and
neuron pruning.1

1. Introduction

20485

