This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoFusion: A Framework for Denoising-Diffusion-based Motion Synthesis
Rishabh Dabral1
1

Muhammad Hamza Mughal1,2

Vladislav Golyanik1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC

A person jumps multiple times

2

Christian Theobalt1

Saarland University

Walking counter-clockwise

A ﬁgure crawls
on the ﬂoor

A person kicks
with right leg

Figure 1. Our MoFusion approach synthesises long sequences of human motions in 3D from textual and audio inputs (e.g., by
providing music samples). Our model has significantly improved generalisability and realism, and can be conditioned on modalities like
text and audio. The resulting dance movements match the rhythm of the conditioning music, even if it is outside the training distribution.

Abstract

Conventional methods for human motion synthesis have
either been deterministic or have had to struggle with the
trade-off between motion diversity vs motion quality. In response to these limitations, we introduce MoFusion, i.e., a
new denoising-diffusion-based framework for high-quality
conditional human motion synthesis that can synthesise
long, temporally plausible, and semantically accurate motions based on a range of conditioning contexts (such as music and text). We also present ways to introduce well-known
kinematic losses for motion plausibility within the motiondiffusion framework through our scheduled weighting strategy. The learned latent space can be used for several interactive motion-editing applications like in-betweening, seedconditioning, and text-based editing, thus, providing crucial abilities for virtual-character animation and robotics.
Through comprehensive quantitative evaluations and a perceptual user study, we demonstrate the effectiveness of MoFusion compared to the state of the art on established
benchmarks in the literature. We urge the reader to watch
our supplementary video at https://vcai.mpi-inf.

mpg.de/projects/MoFusion/.

1. Introduction
3D human motion synthesis is an important generative
computer vision problem that often arises in robotics, virtual character animation and video games and movie production (e.g., for crowd dynamics simulation). It saw impressive progress over the last years; several works recently
tackled it with reinforcement learning [41, 60, 64], deep
generative models [2, 42, 43, 50] or using deterministic approaches [12, 29, 35]. Despite the progress, multiple open
challenges remain, such as improving motion variability,
enabling higher motion realism and enhancing synthesis fidelity under user-specified conditioning. Under conditioning, we understand influencing the model outputs according
to a control signal (e.g., “walking counter-clockwise”).
The key goal of conditional human motion synthesis is
to generate motions that semantically agree with the conditioning while exhibiting diversity for the same conditioning signal. To facilitate the same, the recent state-of-theart approaches have widely adopted generative techniques
like conditional variational auto-encoders (CVAE) [17, 32,

9760

