This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised 3D Shape Reconstruction by Part Retrieval and Assembly
Xianghao Xu1 , Paul Guerrero2 , Matthew Fisher2 , Siddhartha Chaudhuri2 , Daniel Ritchie1
1
Brown University (USA), 2 Adobe Research (UK, USA, India)
{xianghao xu, daniel ritchie}@brown.edu, {guerrero, matfishe, sidch}@adobe.com

Figure 1. Our system takes target 3D shapes together with a 3D part library as input and outputs a set of retrieved and transformed parts
from the part library that recreates the input target shapes.

Abstract
Representing a 3D shape with a set of primitives can aid
perception of structure, improve robotic object manipulation, and enable editing, stylization, and compression of
3D shapes. Existing methods either use simple parametric primitives or learn a generative shape space of parts.
Both have limitations: parametric primitives lead to coarse
approximations, while learned parts offer too little control
over the decomposition. We instead propose to decompose
shapes using a library of 3D parts provided by the user,
giving full control over the choice of parts. The library
can contain parts with high-quality geometry that are suitable for a given category, resulting in meaningful decompositions with clean geometry. The type of decomposition
can also be controlled through the choice of parts in the library. Our method works via a unsupervised approach that
iteratively retrieves parts from the library and refines their
placements. We show that this approach gives higher reconstruction accuracy and more desirable decompositions than
existing approaches. Additionally, we show how the decomposition can be controlled through the part library by using
different part libraries to reconstruct the same shapes.

1. Introduction
The ability to compactly represent a 3D shape as a combination of primitive elements has applications in multiple
domains. In computer vision, the ability to automatically
decompose a shape into parts can aid machine perception
of the 3D structure of objects, which can in turn help au-

tonomous agents plan how to manipulate such objects.
In computer graphics, a combination of primitives can
be used as a compressed geometry representation, as a way
to abstract, stylize, or edit a 3D shape by allowing users to
alter the underlying primitive library. Ideally, a system that
performs this kind of shape decomposition should be able
to do so without supervision in the form of ground-truth
decompositions, as such data is rarely available at scale.
Past research in vision and graphics has studied this
unsupervised shape decomposition problem. Initially, researchers sought methods for decomposing 3D shapes into
sets of simple parametric primitives, such as cuboids or superquadric surfaces [18,21,23,26]. These methods produce
clean, parametric geometry as output, and the choice of
primitive type allows a small degree of user control over the
decomposition. However, parametric primitives produce
only a coarse approximation of the input shape, which may
not be desirable in all applications. Thus, more recent work
has investigated unsupervised decomposition of shapes into
arbitrarily-shaped primitives whose geometries are determined by a neural network [4, 10, 17]. These methods produce a set of “neural primitives” whose union closely approximates the input shape. However, the geometries of
these primitives may contain artifacts (e.g. bumps, blobs).
Further, these methods offer little to no control over the type
of decomposition they produce – the network outputs whatever primitives it thinks are best to reconstruct the input
shape since it lacks access to a supervised part prior.
Is it possible to obtain a decomposition of a 3D shape
whose primitives exhibit clean geometry and closely reconstruct the input shape, while also providing more control

8559

