This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TruFor: Leveraging all-round clues for trustworthy image forgery
detection and localization
Fabrizio Guillaro1

Davide Cozzolino1
1

Avneesh Sud2

University Federico II of Naples

Nicholas Dufour2
2

Luisa Verdoliva1

Google Research

Abstract
In this paper we present TruFor, a forensic framework
that can be applied to a large variety of image manipulation methods, from classic cheapfakes to more recent manipulations based on deep learning. We rely on the extraction of both high-level and low-level traces through
a transformer-based fusion architecture that combines the
RGB image and a learned noise-sensitive fingerprint. The
latter learns to embed the artifacts related to the camera internal and external processing by training only on
real data in a self-supervised manner. Forgeries are detected as deviations from the expected regular pattern that
characterizes each pristine image. Looking for anomalies
makes the approach able to robustly detect a variety of local manipulations, ensuring generalization. In addition to
a pixel-level localization map and a whole-image integrity
score, our approach outputs a reliability map that highlights areas where localization predictions may be errorprone. This is particularly important in forensic applications in order to reduce false alarms and allow for a large
scale analysis. Extensive experiments on several datasets
show that our method is able to reliably detect and localize both cheapfakes and deepfakes manipulations outperforming state-of-the-art works. Code is publicly available
at https://grip-unina.github.io/TruFor/.

1. Introduction
Manipulating images has never been easier, with new
powerful editing tools appearing by the day. These new
opportunities stimulate the creativity of benign and malicious users alike. Previously, crafting a multimedia disinformation campaign required sophisticated skills, and attackers could do little more than copy, replicate or remove
objects in an image, classic forms of image manipulations
also known as “cheapfakes”. With the explosive growth of
deep learning, image manipulation tools have become both
easier to use and more powerful, allowing users to generate
on-the-fly images of persons that do not exist or to realize

Noiseprint++
Extraction

Confidence
Analysis

Anomaly
Analysis

Forgery
Detection
Integrity Score

Figure 1. TruFor detects and localizes image forgeries (in yellow).
It is based on the extraction of a learned noise-sensitive fingerprint,
Noiseprint++, which is combined with the RGB image to output an
anomaly localization map. Noiseprint++ is also used jointly with
the image to compute the confidence map, which estimates the less
reliable regions of the anomaly heatmap (black areas), e.g. the
false positive region in lower right. The confidence and anomaly
maps are then used together to produce a global integrity score.

credible deepfakes. Diffusion models enable the creation of
realistic image edits using natural language prompts, photorealistically adapting the inserted manipulation to the style
and lighting of the context [1, 33].
The risks posed by such tools in the wrong hands are
obvious. Indeed, in recent years there has been a growing interest on the part of governments and funding agencies in developing forensic tools capable of countering such
attacks. A major focus is on local image edits, particularly partial modifications that change the image semantics (for example the partially manipulated image in Fig. 1,
where the two real faces have been replaced with GANgenerated ones [26]). Multimedia forensics and related scientific fields have seen a rapid increase in activity in response to such challenges, with a large number of methods
and tools proposed for image forgery detection and localiza-

20606

