This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hint-Aug: Drawing Hints from Foundation Vision Transformers towards
Boosted Few-shot Parameter-Efficient Tuning
Zhongzhi Yu1 , Shang Wu2 , Yonggan Fu1 , Shunyao Zhang2 , Yingyan (Celine) Lin1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Rice University
{zyu401, yfu314, celine.lin}@gatech.edu {sw99,sz74}@rice.edu

Abstract
Despite the growing demand for tuning foundation vision
transformers (FViTs) on downstream tasks, fully unleashing FViTs’ potential under data-limited scenarios (e.g., fewshot tuning) remains a challenge due to FViTs’ data-hungry
nature. Common data augmentation techniques fall short
in this context due to the limited features contained in the
few-shot tuning data. To tackle this challenge, we first identify an opportunity for FViTs in few-shot tuning: pretrained
FViTs themselves have already learned highly representative features from large-scale pretraining data, which are
fully preserved during widely used parameter-efficient tuning. We thus hypothesize that leveraging those learned features to augment the tuning data can boost the effectiveness of few-shot FViT tuning. To this end, we propose a
framework called Hint-based Data Augmentation (HintAug), which aims to boost FViT in few-shot tuning by augmenting the over-fitted parts of tuning samples with the
learned features of pretrained FViTs. Specifically, Hint-Aug
integrates two key enablers: (1) an Attentive Over-fitting
Detector (AOD) to detect over-confident patches of foundation ViTs for potentially alleviating their over-fitting on the
few-shot tuning data and (2) a Confusion-based Feature
Infusion (CFI) module to infuse easy-to-confuse features
from the pretrained FViTs with the over-confident patches
detected by the above AOD in order to enhance the feature
diversity during tuning. Extensive experiments and ablation
studies on five datasets and three parameter-efficient tuning
techniques consistently validate Hint-Aug’s effectiveness:
0.04% ∼ 32.91% higher accuracy over the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) data augmentation method under various low-shot
settings. For example, on the Pet dataset, Hint-Aug achieves
a 2.22% higher accuracy with 50% less training data over
SOTA data augmentation methods.

1. Introduction
Foundation vision transformers (FViTs) [16, 41, 54, 55,
64] with billions of floating point operations (FLOPs) and
parameters have recently demonstrated significant poten-

tial in various downstream tasks [40, 41]. The success of
FViTs has ushered in a new paradigm in deep learning:
pretraining-then-tuning [16, 40, 67], which first pretrains an
FViT on a large-scale dataset, then uses recently developed
parameter-efficient tuning methods (e.g., visual prompt tuning (VPT) [34], visual prompting [2], LoRA [33], and
Adapter [72]) to tune pretrained FViTs on downstream tasks
with limited tuning data. However, although it is highly desirable, effectively tuning pretrained FViTs for real-world
applications, especially under few-shot tuning scenarios, remains a particularly challenging task. The reason is that although parameter-efficient tuning methods are dedicatedly
designed for FViTs and can alleviate the overfitting issue by
reducing the number of trainable parameters [2, 34, 72], the
data-hungry nature of FViTs [16, 54] is not mitigated and
thus the achievable accuracy under data-limited scenarios
(e.g., few-shot tuning scenarios) are still limited. Therefore,
how to effectively tune pretrained FViTs on various downstream tasks with few-shot tuning is still an open question.
To enhance the effectiveness of parameter-efficient FViT
tuning under few-shot settings, one promising direction is to
leverage data augmentation techniques to increase the data
diversity and thus the feature diversity of the models when
being tuned on few-shot data, boosting the achievable accuracy [12, 31, 68, 71]. Nevertheless, it has been shown that
existing data augmentation techniques fall short in boosting the model accuracy under few-shot tuning scenarios.
This is because most of the existing data augmentation techniques are random-based (e.g., RandAugment [13], AutoAugment [12], color jitter, mixup [71], and cutmix [68]),
which only randomly permute existing features in the training data and thus cannot generate new and meaningful
features [63]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we observe that
neither the widely-used random-based data augmentation
techniques (i.e., a dedicated combination of techniques including RandAugment [13], color jitter, and random erasing [74] as in [72]) nor training without data augmentation
can consistently achieve a satisfactory accuracy across dif† Our code is available at https://github.com/GATECHEIC/Hint-Aug

11102

