This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Instance-Level Representation for Large-Scale Multi-Modal
Pretraining in E-commerce
Yang Jin1,2 , Yongzhi Li2 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Yadong Mu1*
1
Peking University 2 ByteDance Inc.
jiny@stu.pku.edu.cn, liyongzhi.ailab@bytedance.com,
yuanzehuan@bytedance.com, myd@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper aims to establish a generic multi-modal
foundation model that has the scalable capability to massive downstream applications in E-commerce. Recently,
large-scale vision-language pretraining approaches have
achieved remarkable advances in the general domain.
However, due to the significant differences between natural and product images, directly applying these frameworks
for modeling image-level representations to E-commerce
will be inevitably sub-optimal. To this end, we propose an
instance-centric multi-modal pretraining paradigm called
ECLIP in this work. In detail, we craft a decoder architecture that introduces a set of learnable instance queries
to explicitly aggregate instance-level semantics. Moreover,
to enable the model to focus on the desired product instance without reliance on expensive manual annotations,
two specially configured pretext tasks are further proposed.
Pretrained on the 100 million E-commerce-related data,
ECLIP successfully extracts more generic, semantic-rich,
and robust representations. Extensive experimental results
show that, without further fine-tuning, ECLIP surpasses
existing methods by a large margin on a broad range of
downstream tasks, demonstrating the strong transferability
to real-world E-commerce applications.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the flourishing growth of E-commerce has
brought great convenience to people’s daily life. And a wide
range of product-based application tasks has subsequently
emerged, such as item classification [18, 29], product retrieval [7, 35], commodity recommendation [21, 28], and so
on. Compared to developing individual task-specific models, building a general-purpose foundation model that works
for massive E-commercial applications simultaneously can
enhance applicability and reduce training costs.
* Corresponding Author.

General Domain

E-commerce Domain

Foreground: horse, people, church

Foreground: frying pan, coffee machine

A group of people on
horseback next to a church

Stainless steel frying pan

Italian semi-automatic
home coffee maker

Multiple Images For a Product

(a)

(b)
PROYA ruby face cream for ladies

(c)

Figure 1. Domain difference between natural and product images. For natural images, it is the frequent case that most pixels
are semantically correlated to the textual sentence. However, in
E-commerce, such correlation is much more sparse (e.g., “frying
pan” or ”coffee machine” only occupy small portions of the entire
images). Moreover, images for a product are often provided in a
group from multiple sources such as (a) advertisement videos, (b)
product pages, (c) customer comments (see the bottom examples).

Recent developments in vision-language pretraining
(VLP) [9, 12, 17, 20, 31, 34] have demonstrated remarkable
advances in diverse VL downstream tasks. Profiting from
large-scale image-text pairs, these methods are able to learn
generic multimodal representations that are reused across
various tasks. In E-commerce scenario, the related data naturally contains cross-modal information to describe a corresponding product. Motivated by the tremendous success
achieved by VL modeling, several approaches [4,33,35,37]
have made attempts at designing a commerce-specific multimodal representation learning paradigm. They imitate the
existing VLP methods (e.g., CLIP [20], VilBERT [17]) to
learn the image-level representations of the product via pretraining on abundant commerce image-text pairs.
Though promising results have been achieved, directly
applying these VLP methods in the general domain to E-

11060

