This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Symmetric Shape-Preserving Autoencoder for Unsupervised Real Scene
Point Cloud Completion
Changfeng Ma1 , Yinuo Chen1 , Pengxiao Guo1 , Jie Guo1 , Chongjun Wang1 , Yanwen Guo1 *
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{changfengma,yinuochen,pxguo}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{guojie,chjwang,ywguo}@nju.edu.cn

Input

Abstract
Unsupervised completion of real scene objects is of vital importance but still remains extremely challenging in
preserving input shapes, predicting accurate results, and
adapting to multi-category data. To solve these problems, we propose in this paper an Unsupervised Symmetric
Shape-Preserving Autoencoding Network, termed USSPA,
to predict complete point clouds of objects from real scenes.
One of our main observations is that many natural and
man-made objects exhibit significant symmetries. To accommodate this, we devise a symmetry learning module to
learn from those objects and to preserve structural symmetries. Starting from an initial coarse predictor, our autoencoder refines the complete shape with a carefully designed upsampling refinement module. Besides the discriminative process on the latent space, the discriminators of
our USSPA also take predicted point clouds as direct guidance, enabling more detailed shape prediction. Clearly
different from previous methods which train each category
separately, our USSPA can be adapted to the training of
multi-category data in one pass through a classifier-guided
discriminator, with consistent performance on single category. For more accurate evaluation, we contribute to the
community a real scene dataset with paired CAD models
as ground truth. Extensive experiments and comparisons
demonstrate our superiority and generalization and show
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
unsupervised completion of real scene objects.

1. Introduction
As the standard outputs of 3D scanners [12, 32], point
clouds are becoming more and more popular [9] which
are also the basic data structure in 3D geometry processing [4, 5, 13]. Complete point clouds are hard to obtain
due to the nature of the scanning process and object occlusion [35]. Due to the defects of incomplete point clouds
on downstream applications such as reconstruction [10], recent works [17, 19, 22, 23, 26, 30, 33, 35] pay more attention
* Corresponding author.

Disp3D

ShapeInv

Unpaired

Ours

(a)

(b)

Real Scene
Objects

(c)

Completion
Results

Figure 1. Visual comparison of predicted results on real scene
data by our USSPA and other works (top) and our complete result
on a whole real scene (bottom). (a) shows an example of a real
scene partial point cloud of a chair and the complete predictions
by Disp3D [23], ShapeInv [36], Unpaired [32] and our method. As
shown, our prediction result is more accurate and uniform according to the input, which contains complete arms and legs. (b) and
(c) show the original point cloud of a real scene and the complete
results of all the objects in this scene.

to point cloud completion which relies on paired artificial
complete point clouds for supervised training to complete
partial point clouds. However, these supervised works are
difficult to apply in practice because of the great gap between artificial data and real scene data and the inaccessibility to the ground truth of real scene data. Therefore, it is
important to complete partial point clouds from real scene
in an unsupervised way.
Recent unsupervised works [24, 32, 36] only require real

13560

