This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CIGAR: Cross-Modality Graph Reasoning for Domain Adaptive Object
Detection
Yabo Liu1,2 Jinghua Wang1∗ Chao Huang3 Yaowei Wang2 Yong Xu1,2∗
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
yaboliu.ug@gmail.com

wangjh2012@foxmail.com

wangyw@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptive object detection (UDAOD) aims to learn a detector by generalizing knowledge
from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. Though the existing graph-based methods for UDAOD perform well in some cases, they cannot learn a proper
node set for the graph. In addition, these methods build the
graph solely based on the visual features and do not consider the linguistic knowledge carried by the semantic prototypes, e.g., dataset labels. To overcome these problems,
we propose a cross-modality graph reasoning adaptation
(CIGAR) method to take advantage of both visual and linguistic knowledge. Specifically, our method performs crossmodality graph reasoning between the linguistic modality
graph and visual modality graphs to enhance their representations. We also propose a discriminative feature selector to find the most discriminative features and take them as
the nodes of the visual graph for both efficiency and effectiveness. In addition, we employ the linguistic graph matching loss to regulate the update of linguistic graphs and
maintain their semantic representation during the training
process. Comprehensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our proposed CIGAR.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental technique in computer
vision tasks, and it has been widely explored in many applications, e.g., self-driving and public safety. A variety of
works [31,38,39,56,57] have achieved improvements in detection performance due to the development of deep neural
networks. However, a detector significantly degrades if we
deploy it in a novel domain due to the problem of domain
shift. The domain shift can be induced by many factors,
* Corresponding authors.

huangchao 08@126.com

yongxu@ymail.com

Source
Visual Graph
Source Data

Visual
Graph
Projection

Linguistic
Graph

Discriminative
Feature Selector

Semantic
Prototypes
Person

Cross-Modality
Graph Reasoning

Bicycle
Linguistic
Graph
Projection

Car
⋮

Bus

Target Data

Visual
Graph
Projection

Target
Visual Graph

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Cross-modality Graph Reasoning Adaptation (CIGAR) framework.

such as the variation of the capture condition from sunny
to foggy weather, from virtual to real-world, and from one
camera to another.
To deal with the problem of domain shift [9], researchers
have proposed many unsupervised domain adaptive object
detection (UDA-OD) methods to bridge the domain gap between the source and target domains. Among them, the
self-training based methods [5, 10, 26, 35] have shown excellent performances. However, they cannot be easily extended to real applications because they are computationally
expensive and inefficient. Feature alignment-based methods [3,4,6,22,25] have also been extensively studied. These
methods are structurally elegant and can be categorized into
three groups, including global-level alignment, instancelevel alignment, and category-level alignment. The globallevel alignment methods [6,41] align the whole shallow feature maps produced by a backbone network. The instancelevel alignment methods [4, 17] extract the feature maps for
all the instances and learn to achieve cross-domain align-

23776

