This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DualVector: Unsupervised Vector Font Synthesis with Dual-Part Representation
Ying-Tian Liu1

Zhifei Zhang2 Yuan-Chen Guo1 Matthew Fisher2
Zhaowen Wang2 Song-Hai Zhang1∗
1
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 2 Adobe Research
{liuyingt20@mails., guoyc19@mails., shz@}tsinghua.edu.cn
{zzhang, matfishe, zhawang}@adobe.com

The five boxing wizards jump quickly.
The five boxing wizards jump quickly.
The five boxing wizards jump quickly.
The five boxing wizards jump quickly.
The five boxing wizards jump quickly.

THE QUICK BROWN FOX JUMPS OVER THE LAZY DOG.
THE QUICK BROWN FOX JUMPS OVER THE LAZY DOG.
THE QUICK BROWN FOX JUMPS OVER THE LAZY DOG.
THE QUICK BROWN FOX JUMPS OVER THE LAZY DOG.
THE QUICK BROWN FOX JUMPS OVER THE LAZY DOG.

Figure 1. High-quality vector fonts (copyable on electronic devices) synthesized by DualVector (left), with smoothly-interpolated styles
(right). Both sentences are pangrams. Please zoom in for details.

Abstract
Automatic generation of fonts can be an important aid to
typeface design. Many current approaches regard glyphs as
pixelated images, which present artifacts when scaling and
inevitable quality losses after vectorization. On the other
hand, existing vector font synthesis methods either fail to
represent the shape concisely or require vector supervision
during training. To push the quality of vector font synthesis
to the next level, we propose a novel dual-part representation for vector glyphs, where each glyph is modeled as a
collection of closed “positive” and “negative” path pairs.
The glyph contour is then obtained by boolean operations
on these paths. We first learn such a representation only
from glyph images and devise a subsequent contour refinement step to align the contour with an image representation
to further enhance details. Our method, named DualVector,
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in vector font synthesis both quantitatively and qualitatively. Our synthesized
vector fonts can be easily converted to common digital font
formats like TrueType Font for practical use. The code is
released at https://github.com/thuliu-yt16/dualvector.

1. Introduction
Fonts with various styles play an important role in content display and distribution. Excellent font design is timeconsuming and labor-intensive. Recent machine learning
∗ Corresponding author

innovations have made font generation possible, but how
to automatically generate high-quality vector fonts remains
a task of practical importance in the artistic and computer
graphics and vision communities.
Benefiting from the development of image generation
techniques, mainstream font synthesis methods [2, 12, 24,
41, 42] could generate pixelated glyph images. Despite the
promising quality, images of glyphs incur aliasing artifacts
on edges when discretely sampled, and thus are not competent for high-quality rendering or printing at arbitrary resolutions. To alleviate this problem, some methods [7, 34]
adopt coordinate-based neural networks to model a glyph as
a contiguous neural field, which have also shown great potential in modeling 3D geometry and scenes [7, 30, 32]. Although glyphs represented by the implicit field can be rendered at arbitrary resolutions, it is hard to preserve details
in high-frequency regions such as edges and corners, not to
mention the high computational costs as the network needs
to be evaluated for every pixel. Researchers have made
much effort to directly synthesize vector fonts [4,27,33,39]
in recent years, with the main difficulty lying in finding a
representation of vector graphics that can be encoded or decoded effectively in a deep learning framework. One typical
approach represents a vector shape as a sequence of drawing
commands and adopts sequence modeling techniques such
as recurrent networks and transformers. The drawbacks are
twofold: (1) Modeling command sequences can be much
harder than images. There are infinitely many command sequences that correspond to the same-looking shape, which
brings ambiguities in learning and makes it hard to construct

14193

