This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GD-MAE: Generative Decoder for MAE Pre-training on LiDAR Point Clouds
Honghui Yang1,3∗ Tong He3∗ Jiaheng Liu3,4 Hua Chen5 Boxi Wu2
Binbin Lin2† Xiaofei He1 Wanli Ouyang3
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Beihang University
5
COMAC Beijing Aircraft Technology Research Institute

…

Head

…

Head

…
Transformer Decoder
Transformer Encoder

(b) ConvMAE, Point-M2AE, etc.

Generative Decoder

Head

∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when Honghui was an intern
at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
† Corresponding author

Transformer Decoder

(a) MAE, Point-MAE, etc.

…

We have witnessed great success in 3D object detection [44, 47, 64, 68, 71, 78], due to the numerous applications in autonomous driving, robotics, and navigation. Despite the impressive performance, most methods count on
large amounts of carefully labeled 3D data, which is often

Transformer Encoder

…

1. Introduction

…

Despite the tremendous progress of Masked Autoencoders (MAE) in developing vision tasks such as image and
video, exploring MAE in large-scale 3D point clouds remains challenging due to the inherent irregularity. In contrast to previous 3D MAE frameworks, which either design
a complex decoder to infer masked information from maintained regions or adopt sophisticated masking strategies,
we instead propose a much simpler paradigm. The core
idea is to apply a Generative Decoder for MAE (GD-MAE)
to automatically merges the surrounding context to restore
the masked geometric knowledge in a hierarchical fusion
manner. In doing so, our approach is free from introducing
the heuristic design of decoders and enjoys the flexibility
of exploring various masking strategies. The corresponding part costs less than 12% latency compared with conventional methods, while achieving better performance. We
demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method on several
large-scale benchmarks: Waymo, KITTI, and ONCE. Consistent improvement on downstream detection tasks illustrates strong robustness and generalization capability. Not
only our method reveals state-of-the-art results, but remarkably, we achieve comparable accuracy even with 20% of the
labeled data on the Waymo dataset. Code will be released.

…

Abstract

Transformer Encoder

(c) GD-MAE (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparisons. Previous MAE-style pre-training architectures of (a) single-scale [18, 19, 38] and (b) multi-scale [12, 73]
take as inputs the visible tokens and learnable tokens for decoders.
In contrast, (c) the proposed framework avoids such a process.

of high cost and time-consuming. Such a fully supervised
manner hinders the possibility of using massive unlabeled
data and can be vulnerable when applied in different scenes.
Mask Autoencoder (MAE) [18], serving as one of the effective ways for pre-training, has demonstrated great potential in learning holistic representations. This is achieved
by encouraging the method to learn a semantically consistent understanding of the input beyond low-level statistics.
Although MAE-based methods have shown effectiveness in
2D image [18] and video [52], how to apply it in large-scale
point clouds remains an open problem.
Due to the large variation of the visible extent of objects, learning hierarchical representation is of great signif-

9403

