This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cascade Evidential Learning for Open-world Weakly-supervised Temporal
Action Localization
Mengyuan Chen1,2 , Junyu Gao1,2 , and Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
chenmengyuan2021@ia.ac.cn; {junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Testing Phase

Abstract

Training Phase

Targeting at recognizing and localizing action instances
with only video-level labels during training, Weaklysupervised Temporal Action Localization (WTAL) has
achieved signiﬁcant progress in recent years. However, living in the dynamically changing open world where unknown
actions constantly spring up, the closed-set assumption of
existing WTAL methods is invalid. Compared with traditional open-set recognition tasks, Open-world WTAL (OWTAL) is challenging since not only are the annotations of
unknown samples unavailable, but also the ﬁne-grained annotations of known action instances can only be inferred
ambiguously from the video category labels. To address this
problem, we propose a Cascade Evidential Learning framework at an evidence level, which targets at OWTAL for the
ﬁrst time. Our method jointly leverages multi-scale temporal contexts and knowledge-guided prototype information to progressively collect cascade and enhanced evidence
for known action, unknown action, and background separation. Extensive experiments conducted on THUMOS-14
and ActivityNet-v1.3 verify the effectiveness of our method.
Besides the classiﬁcation metrics adopted by previous openset recognition methods, we also evaluate our method on localization metrics which are more reasonable for OWTAL.

Basketball Dunk

Basketball Dunk

Cricket Shot

Unknown (Cricket Bowling)

1. Introduction
Targeting at recognizing and localizing action instances
with only video-level labels during training, Weaklysupervised Temporal Action Localization (WTAL) has attracted increasing attention from both academia and industry [9, 11, 18, 19, 37, 43]. Unlike fully-supervised TAL,
WTAL only requires video-level action labels during training. However, the closed-set assumption of existing WTAL
14741

Long Jump

Cricket Shot

Unknown (Hammer Throw)

Figure 1. Illustration of the training and testing phases of OWTAL.
With only video-level labels for training, OWTAL aims to localize
both known and unknown action instances in testing videos.

methods is invalid in the dynamically changing real world,
since with the development of society never-before-seen human action categories are constantly emerging. Therefore,
to address this problem, we consider a different WTAL setting in this work, termed as Open-world WTAL (OWTAL).
Different from the traditional WTAL task, as shown
in Figure 1, OWTAL allows testing videos to contain action instances of unknown categories, which have never appeared during training. Therefore, temporal boundries of
both known and unknown action instances are expected to
be predicted. Compared with its fully-supervised counterpart Open Set TAL [3], OWTAL is challenging in two aspects: (1) Ambiguity of annotations of closed-set (known)
action instances. Previous works indicate that the closed-set
and open-set performance are highly correlated [42]. However, under the OWTAL setting, not only are the annotations
of unknown action instances unavailable, but also the ﬁnegrained annotations of known ones can only be inferred ambiguously from the video category labels. During training,
the known action instances that the model needs to focus on
are prone to be disturbed by the background snippets, which
hinders the learning of the closed-set actions, thus making it
extremely difﬁcult to differentiate the unknown actions, the
known actions, and the background. (2) Lack of reasonable
metrics. The traditional Open Set Recognition (OSR) aims

