This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Three Guidelines You Should Know for Universally Slimmable Self-Supervised
Learning
Yun-Hao Cao1 ,
1

Peiqin Sun2 *,

Shuchang Zhou2

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
MEGVII Technology
caoyh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {sunpeiqin, zsc}@megvii.com
Abstract

We propose universally slimmable self-supervised learning (dubbed as US3L) to achieve better accuracy-efficiency
trade-offs for deploying self-supervised models across different devices. We observe that direct adaptation of selfsupervised learning (SSL) to universally slimmable networks
misbehaves as the training process frequently collapses. We
then discover that temporal consistent guidance is the key to
the success of SSL for universally slimmable networks, and
we propose three guidelines for the loss design to ensure
this temporal consistency from a unified gradient perspective. Moreover, we propose dynamic sampling and group
regularization strategies to simultaneously improve training
efficiency and accuracy. Our US3L method has been empirically validated on both convolutional neural networks and
vision transformers. With only once training and one copy
of weights, our method outperforms various state-of-the-art
methods (individually trained or not) on benchmarks including recognition, object detection and instance segmentation.

1. Introduction
Deep supervised learning has achieved great success in
the last decade, but the drawback is that it relies heavily
on a large set of annotated training data. Self-supervised
learning (SSL) has gained popularity because of its ability
to avoid the cost of annotating large-scale datasets. Since
the emergence of contrastive learning [7], SSL has clearly
gained momentum and several recent works [8, 14] have
achieved comparable or even better performance than the supervised pretraining when transferring to downstream tasks.
However, it remains challenging to deploy trained models
for edge computing purposes, due to the limited memory,
computation and storage capabilities of such devices.
* Corresponding author.

Table 1. Comparisons between supervised classification and SimSiam under S-Net on CIFAR-100. The accuracy for SimSiam is
under linear evaluation. ‘-’ denotes the model collapses.

Accuracy (%)
Method
1.0x 0.75x 0.5x 0.25x
Individual
73.8 72.8 71.4 67.3
S-Net [32]
71.9 71.7 70.8 66.2
Supervised
S-Net+Distill [31] 73.1 71.9 70.5 67.2
Individual
65.2 64.0 60.6 51.2
S-Net
[32]
SimSiam [9] S-Net+Distill [31] 46.9
46.9 46.7 45.3
Ours
65.5 65.3 63.2 59.7
Type

To facilitate deployment, several model compression techniques have been proposed, including lightweight architecture design [29], knowledge distillation [20], network pruning [15], and quantization [33]. Among them, structured network pruning [25] is directly supported and accelerated by
most current hardware and therefore the most studied. However, most structured pruning methods require fine-tuning to
obtain a sub-network with a specific sparsity, and a single
trained model cannot achieve instant and adaptive accuracyefficiency trade-offs across different devices. To address this
problem in the context of supervised learning, the family
of slimmable networks (S-Net) and universally slimmable
networks (US-Net) [2, 22, 31, 32] were proposed, which can
switch freely among different widths by training only once.
Driven by the success of slimmable networks, a question arises: Can we train a self-supervised model that can
run at arbitrary width? A naı̈ve solution is to replace the
supervised loss with self-supervised loss based on the USNet framework. However, we find that this solution doesn’t
work directly after empirical studies. Table 1 shows that the
phenomenon in self-supervised scenarios is very different.
The model directly collapses after applying the popular SSL
method SimSiam [9] to slimmable networks [32]. Although
using inplace distillation [31] for sub-networks prevents the
model from collapsing, there is still a big gap between the

15742

