This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Inter-Class and Intra-Class Constraints in Novel Class Discovery
Wenbin Li1 , Zhichen Fan1 , Jing Huo1 ,* Yang Gao1
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

Abstract

been proposed and attracted increasing attention in recent
years [8, 10, 11, 33, 35, 37].

Novel class discovery (NCD) aims at learning a model
that transfers the common knowledge from a class-disjoint
labelled dataset to another unlabelled dataset and discovers new classes (clusters) within it. Many methods, as well
as elaborate training pipelines and appropriate objectives,
have been proposed and considerably boosted performance
on NCD tasks. Despite all this, we find that the existing
methods do not sufficiently take advantage of the essence
of the NCD setting. To this end, in this paper, we propose to model both inter-class and intra-class constraints
in NCD based on the symmetric Kullback-Leibler divergence (sKLD). Specifically, we propose an inter-class sKLD
constraint to effectively exploit the disjoint relationship between labelled and unlabelled classes, enforcing the separability for different classes in the embedding space. In
addition, we present an intra-class sKLD constraint to explicitly constrain the intra-relationship between a sample
and its augmentations and ensure the stability of the training process at the same time. We conduct extensive experiments on the popular CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and ImageNet
benchmarks and successfully demonstrate that our method
can establish a new state of the art and can achieve significant performance improvements, e.g., 3.5%/3.7% clustering accuracy improvements on CIFAR100-50 dataset split
under the task-aware/-agnostic evaluation protocol, over
previous state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/FanZhichen/NCD-IIC.

The goal of NCD is to train a classification model on a
labelled dataset and simultaneously transfer the latent common knowledge to discover new classes (or clusters) in another unlabelled dataset. Different from semi-supervised
learning [1, 2, 26, 36] that assumes the labelled and unlabelled datasets share the same label space, in the setting
of NCD, the classes of the unlabelled dataset are disjoint
with those of the labelled dataset, which is more challenging. In addition, NCD is also different from the generic
clustering [3, 4, 18, 31] in that an additional labelled dataset
is available in NCD. In general, for the standard clustering methods, the clustering results are not unique. That is
to say, there may be multiple different and approximately
correct results for a certain unlabelled dataset. In contrast,
thanks to the available labelled dataset, NCD can eliminate
the semantic ambiguity with the label guidance and finally
makes the clustering be consistent with the real visual semantics [11]. Clearly, NCD is more realistic and more practical than unsupervised clustering.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made great progress and achieved remarkable results in many computer vision fields, especially
in image classification [13, 16, 22, 25, 27]. Unfortunately,
these successes of deep learning heavily rely on a large
amount of fully labelled data for training. On the other
hand, in many realistic scenarios, it is difficult to collect or
to annotate such a large-scale dataset. To address this problem, a new paradigm of novel class discovery (NCD) has
* Corresponding author

In general, the existing NCD methods can be roughly
divided into two categories, i.e., two-stage based methods
and single-stage based methods [20]. Most of the early
methods are two-stage by using labelled and unlabelled
data in different stages, such as KCL [14], MCL [15] and
DTC [11]. Typically, the two-stage based methods first
learn an embedding network on the labelled set through supervised learning and then use it on the unlabelled set to
discover new clusters with little modifications. In contrast,
the latest methods are almost single-stage, such as, RS [10],
NCL [37], UNO [8], DualRank [35] and ComEx [33],
which use both labelled and unlabelled data in a single
stage at the same time. The single-stage based methods can
learn the feature representation and discover novel classes
simultaneously, iteratively updating the learned feature embedding network and clustering results during the training process. Compared with the two-stage based methods, the single-stage methods can make more effective use
of the similarity between labelled and unlabelled classes
to achieve a better knowledge transfer between these two
datasets. Therefore, in this paper, we will mainly focus on

3449

