This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Neighbor Consistency Mining for Correspondence Pruning
Xin Liu and Jufeng Yang*
TMCC, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, China
xinliu 0209@163.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
The goal of correspondence pruning is to recognize correct correspondences (inliers) from initial ones, with applications to various feature matching based tasks. Seeking
neighbors in the coordinate and feature spaces is a common strategy in many previous methods. However, it is
difficult to ensure that these neighbors are always consistent, since the distribution of false correspondences is extremely irregular. For addressing this problem, we propose
a novel global-graph space to search for consistent neighbors based on a weighted global graph that can explicitly
explore long-range dependencies among correspondences.
On top of that, we progressively construct three neighbor
embeddings according to different neighbor search spaces,
and design a Neighbor Consistency block to extract neighbor context and explore their interactions sequentially. In
the end, we develop a Neighbor Consistency Mining Network (NCMNet) for accurately recovering camera poses
and identifying inliers. Experimental results indicate that
our NCMNet achieves a significant performance advantage
over state-of-the-art competitors on challenging outdoor
and indoor matching scenes. The source code can be found
at https://github.com/xinliu29/NCMNet.

1. Introduction
Estimating high-quality feature correspondences between two images is of crucial significance to numerous
computer vision tasks, such as visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [33], structure from motion (SfM) [41, 49], image fusion [31], and image registration [48, 51]. Off-the-shelf feature extraction methods [4, 29, 52] can be employed to establish initial correspondences. Due to complex matching situations (e.g., severe viewpoint variations, illumination changes, occlusions,
blurs, and repetitive structures), a great number of false correspondences, called outliers, are inevitable [19, 30]. To
mitigate the negative impact of outliers for downstream
tasks, correspondence pruning [5, 24, 53] can be imple∗ Corresponding Author

Sampled inlier
Inlier

𝑘𝑛𝑛 search

Outlier
(a) neighbors in
coordinate space

Input

Neural
Network

Search region

𝑘𝑛𝑛 search
(b) neighbors in
feature space

SGC
Global Graph

𝑘𝑛𝑛 search
(c) neighbors in
global-graph space

Figure 1. The acquisition process and visual comparison of (a)
spatial neighbors, (b) feature-space neighbors, and (c) globalgraph neighbors. SGC: the spectral graph convolution operation.

mented to further identify correct correspondences, also
known as inliers, from initial ones. However, unlike images
that contain sufficient information, e.g., texture and RGB
information, correspondence pruning is extremely challenging since the spatial positions of initial correspondences are
discrete and irregular [55].
Intuitively, inliers commonly conform to consistent constraints (e.g., lengths, angles, and motion) under the
2D rigid transformation, while outliers are randomly distributed, see the top left of Fig. 1. Therefore, the consistency of correspondences as a vital priori knowledge
has been studied extensively to distinguish inliers and outliers [9, 13, 14], in which the neighbor consistency has received widespread attention [25, 26, 57]. For well-defined
neighbors, previous approaches [5, 8, 27] employ k-nearest
neighbor (knn) search in the coordinate space of raw correspondences to seek spatially consistent neighbors, denoted

9527

