This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHS-Net: Learning Signed Hyper Surfaces for Oriented Normal Estimation of
Point Clouds
Qing Li1

Huifang Feng2 Kanle Shi3 Yue Gao1
Yu-Shen Liu1 * Zhizhong Han5

Yi Fang4

1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2 School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China

3 Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China

4 Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE
5 Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA

{leoqli, gaoyue, liuyushen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
shikanle@kuaishou.com

yfang@nyu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel method called SHS-Net for oriented
normal estimation of point clouds by learning signed hyper
surfaces, which can accurately predict normals with global
consistent orientation from various point clouds. Almost
all existing methods estimate oriented normals through a
two-stage pipeline, i.e., unoriented normal estimation and
normal orientation, and each step is implemented by a separate algorithm. However, previous methods are sensitive
to parameter settings, resulting in poor results from point
clouds with noise, density variations and complex geometries. In this work, we introduce signed hyper surfaces
(SHS), which are parameterized by multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) layers, to learn to estimate oriented normals from
point clouds in an end-to-end manner. The signed hyper
surfaces are implicitly learned in a high-dimensional feature space where the local and global information is aggregated. Specifically, we introduce a patch encoding module and a shape encoding module to encode a 3D point
cloud into a local latent code and a global latent code,
respectively. Then, an attention-weighted normal prediction module is proposed as a decoder, which takes the local
and global latent codes as input to predict oriented normals. Experimental results show that our SHS-Net outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in both unoriented
and oriented normal estimation on the widely used benchmarks. The code, data and pretrained models are available
at https://github.com/LeoQLi/SHS-Net.

* The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported
by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and
in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

fenghuifang@stu.xmu.edu.cn
h312h@wayne.edu

Unoriented Normal
Normal
Estimation:
PCA
AdaFit
HSurf-Net

...

Oriented Normal
Normal
Orientation:
MST
QPBO
ODP

...
2

1
Point Cloud

SHS-Net

Previous
Ours

Figure 1. We propose SHS-Net to estimate oriented normals directly from point clouds. In contrast, previous studies usually
achieve this process through a two-stage paradigm using different
algorithms, i.e., (1) unoriented normal estimation (e.g., PCA [19],
AdaFit [59] and HSurf-Net [32]) and (2) normal orientation (e.g.,
MST [19], QPBO [45] and ODP [38]).

1. Introduction
In computer vision and graphics, estimating normals for
point clouds is a prerequisite for many techniques. As an
important geometric property of point clouds, normals with
consistent orientation, i.e., oriented normals, clearly reveal
the geometric structures and make significant contributions
in downstream applications, such as rendering and surface
reconstruction [24–26]. Generally, the estimation of oriented normals requires a two-stage paradigm (see Fig. 1):
(1) the unoriented normal estimation from the local neighbors of the query point, (2) the normal orientation to make
the normal directions to be globally consistent, e.g., facing
outward of the surface. While unoriented normals can be
estimated by plane or surface fitting of the local neighborhood, determining whether the normals are facing outward
or inward is ambiguous. In recent years, many excellent
algorithms [5, 29, 31, 32, 59] have been proposed for unoriented normal estimation, while there are few methods that

13591

