This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TTA-COPE: Test-Time Adaptation for Category-Level Object Pose Estimation
Taeyeop Lee1 Jonathan Tremblay2 Valts Blukis2 Bowen Wen2 Byeong-Uk Lee1
Inkyu Shin1 Stan Birchfield2 In So Kweon1 Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1
KAIST 2 NVIDIA

Abstract
Test-time adaptation methods have been gaining attention recently as a practical solution for addressing sourceto-target domain gaps by gradually updating the model
without requiring labels on the target data. In this paper, we
propose a method of test-time adaptation for category-level
object pose estimation called TTA-COPE. We design a pose
ensemble approach with a self-training loss using poseaware confidence. Unlike previous unsupervised domain
adaptation methods for category-level object pose estimation, our approach processes the test data in a sequential,
online manner, and it does not require access to the source
domain at runtime. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the proposed pose ensemble and the self-training
loss improve category-level object pose performance during test time under both semi-supervised and unsupervised
settings.

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation is a crucial problem in computer vision and robotics. Advanced methods that focus on diverse variations of object 6D pose estimation
have been introduced, such as known 3D objects (instancelevel) [28, 38], category-level [18, 36, 43], few-shot [52],
and zero-shot pose estimation [13, 47]. These techniques
are useful for downstream applications requiring an online operation, such as robotic manipulation [6, 25, 48] and
augmented reality [23, 24, 32]. Our paper focuses on the
category-level object pose estimation problem since it is
more broadly applicable than the instance-level problem.
Many works on category-level object pose estimation [2,
3, 17, 18, 36, 43, 44] have been proposed recently. These
approaches estimate multiple classes of object pose more
efficiently in a single network compared to the instancelevel object pose estimation methods [27, 38, 41, 49–51],
which depend on known 3D shape knowledge and the size
of the objects. Notably, Wang et al. [43] introduced a
novel representation called Normalized Object Coordinate
Space (NOCS) to align various object instances within each

Figure 1. We propose a Test-Time Adaptation for Category-level
Object Pose Estimation framework (TTA-COPE) that automatically improves the network in an online manner without labeled
target data. As new image frames are processed, our method finetunes the network using the unlabeled data and simultaneously applies the network to perform pose estimation via inference. This
approach successfully handles domain shifts compared with no
adaptation, as seen here.

category in a canonical 3D space. The strengths of the
NOCS representation have led to its adoption by follow-up
work [3, 17, 36].
In order to obtain accurate category-level object pose
methods in unseen real-world scenarios, it is desirable to
fine-tune the models in the new environment with labeled
target data. The model that is not fine-tuned on the target domain distribution will almost certainly exhibit lower
performance than the fine-tuned model [37]. However, annotating 6D poses of objects in the target environment is
an expensive process [1, 39, 43, 45] that we seek to avoid.

21285

