This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model-Agnostic Gender Debiased Image Captioning
Yusuke Hirota

Yuta Nakashima

Noa Garcia

{y-hirota@is., n-yuta@, noagarcia@}ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

Osaka University

baseline
a young boy riding a skateboard

baseline
a man riding a wave on a surfboard

baseline
a man wearing a suit holding a banana

baseline
a young boy holding a baseball bat

+LIBRA
a young girl riding a skateboard

+LIBRA
a woman catching a wave on a surfboard

+LIBRA
a man in a jacket holding a banana

+LIBRA
a young boy holding a plastic frisbee

(a) context → gender bias mitigation

(b) gender → context bias mitigation

Figure 1. Generated captions by a baseline captioning model (UpDn [2]) and LIBRA. We show the baseline suffers from context →
gender/gender → context biases, predicting incorrect gender or incorrect word (e.g., in the left example, skateboard highly co-occurs with
men in the training set, and the baseline incorrectly predicts boy). Our proposed framework successfully modifies those incorrect words.

Abstract
Image captioning models are known to perpetuate and
amplify harmful societal bias in the training set. In this
work, we aim to mitigate such gender bias in image captioning models. While prior work has addressed this problem
by forcing models to focus on people to reduce gender misclassification, it conversely generates gender-stereotypical
words at the expense of predicting the correct gender. From
this observation, we hypothesize that there are two types of
gender bias affecting image captioning models: 1) bias that
exploits context to predict gender, and 2) bias in the probability of generating certain (often stereotypical) words because of gender. To mitigate both types of gender biases, we
propose a framework, called LIBRA, that learns from synthetically biased samples to decrease both types of biases,
correcting gender misclassification and changing genderstereotypical words to more neutral ones.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, societal bias, for which a model
makes adverse judgments about specific population subgroups usually underrepresented in datasets, is increasingly

concerning [4, 6, 7, 11, 17, 22, 41, 43, 52, 57]. A renowned
example is the work by Buolamwini and Gebru [7], which
demonstrated that commercial facial recognition models
predict Black women with higher error rates than White
men. The existence of societal bias in datasets and models is
extremely problematic as it inevitably leads to discrimination with potentially harmful consequences against people
in already historically discriminated groups.
One of the computer vision tasks in which societal bias is
prominent is image captioning [49, 58], which is the task of
generating a sentence describing an image. Notably, image
captioning models not only reproduce the societal bias in
the training datasets, but also amplify it. This phenomenon
is known as bias amplification [10,15,24,42,64] and makes
models produce sentences more biased than the ones in the
original training dataset. As a result, the generated sentences can contain stereotypical words about attributes such
as gender that are sometimes irrelevant to the images.
Our study focuses on gender bias in image captioning
models. First, based on the observations in previous work
[5,8,18,44,51], we hypothesize that there exist two different
types of biases affecting captioning models:
Type 1. context → gender bias, which makes captioning
models exploit the context of an image and precedently

15191

