This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Res Facial Appearance Capture from Polarized Smartphone Images
Dejan Azinović1
1

Olivier Maury2 Christophe Hery2 Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich

2

Meta Reality Labs

3

Justus Thies3

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Figure 1. Our method obtains high-resolution skin textures from two RGB input sequences captured with polarization foils attached to
a smartphone. The core idea is to separate the skin’s diffuse and specular response by capturing one cross-polarized and one parallelpolarized sequence. We recover an accurate geometry with multi-view stereo, fit a parametric head model, and employ a differentiable
rendering strategy to recover 4K diffuse albedo, specular gain and normal maps. These can be used with off-the-shelf rendering software,
such as Blender, to produce photo-realistic images from novel views, under novel illumination and with subsurface scattering (SSS).

Abstract
We propose a novel method for high-quality facial texture reconstruction from RGB images using a novel capturing routine based on a single smartphone which we equip
with an inexpensive polarization foil. Specifically, we turn
the flashlight into a polarized light source and add a polarization filter on top of the camera. Leveraging this setup,
we capture the face of a subject with cross-polarized and
parallel-polarized light. For each subject, we record two
short sequences in a dark environment under flash illumination with different light polarization using the modified smartphone. Based on these observations, we reconstruct an explicit surface mesh of the face using structure
from motion. We then exploit the camera and light colocation within a differentiable renderer to optimize the facial textures using an analysis-by-synthesis approach. Our
All data has been captured at the Technical University of Munich.

method optimizes for high-resolution normal textures, diffuse albedo, and specular albedo using a coarse-to-fine optimization scheme. We show that the optimized textures can
be used in a standard rendering pipeline to synthesize highquality photo-realistic 3D digital humans in novel environments.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have seen tremendous advances in
the development of virtual and mixed reality devices. At
the same time, the commercial availability of such hardware
has led to a massive interest in the creation of ’digital human’ assets and photo-realistic renderings of human faces.
In particular, the democratization to commodity hardware
would open up significant potential for asset creation in
video games, other home entertainment applications, or immersive teleconferencing systems. However, rendering a

16836

