This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conditional Generation of Audio from Video via Foley Analogies
Yuexi Du1,2

Ziyang Chen1
1

Input silent video

Justin Salamon3

University of Michigan

Conditional video

2

Bryan Russell3

Yale University

Conditional audio

3

Andrew Owens1

Adobe Research

Generated audio

Input example’s audio

Figure 1. Conditional Foley generation via analogy. We generate a soundtrack for a silent input video, given a user-provided conditional
example specifying what its audio should “sound like.” In the first example, we make the xylophone strikes sound like the clicks of a
mechanical keyboard. In the second, we generate a soundtrack for a video in which the drumstick striking a wooden door sounds as though
it were made of metal. Notice that the shape of the sound events in the generated audio (e.g., thin stripes in the top example) matches the
conditional audio and the onsets match the input example’s audio. For reference, we provide the input video’s (held out) sound on the right.
We encourage the reader to watch and listen to the results on our project webpage.

Abstract
The sound effects that designers add to videos are designed to convey a particular artistic effect and, thus, may
be quite different from a scene’s true sound. Inspired by
the challenges of creating a soundtrack for a video that differs from its true sound, but that nonetheless matches the
actions occurring on screen, we propose the problem of conditional Foley. We present the following contributions to
address this problem. First, we propose a pretext task for
training our model to predict sound for an input video clip
using a conditional audio-visual clip sampled from another
time within the same source video. Second, we propose a
model for generating a soundtrack for a silent input video,
given a user-supplied example that specifies what the video
should “sound like”. We show through human studies and
automated evaluation metrics that our model successfully
generates sound from videos, while varying its output according to the content of a supplied example. Project site:
https://xypb.github.io/CondFoleyGen.

1. Introduction
When artists create sound effects for videos, they often
“borrow” sounds from other sources, then manipulate them
to match the on-screen actions. These artists’ aim is not
necessarily to convey the scene’s true sound, but rather to

achieve a desired artistic effect. Thus, the clunk of a coconut
shell becomes a trotting horse, or the sizzle of cooking bacon
becomes rain1 .
The problem of creating sound effects for video, known
as Foley [1], has often been posed as predicting a video’s
co-occurring sound [29,42,68]. Yet the task that artists solve
is subtly different. They create a soundtrack for a video that
differs from its true sound, but that still plausibly matches
the on-screen events. Also, these prior systems largely do
not give artists control over the output sound.
To aid Foley artists while giving them artistic control,
we propose a conditional Foley problem inspired by classic
work on image analogies [27]. Our task is to generate a
soundtrack for an input silent video from a user-provided
conditional audio-visual example that specifies what the
input video should “sound like.” The generated soundtrack
should relate to the input video in an analogous way as
the provided example (Fig. 1). This formulation naturally
separates the problem of selecting an exemplar sound, which
arguably requires the artist’s judgment, from the problem
of manipulating that sound to match a video, such as by
precisely adjusting its timing and timbre.
This proposed task is challenging, since a system must
1 We encourage you to watch and listen to how sound artists work:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UO3N_PRIgX0

2426

