This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Where is My Spot? Few-shot Image Generation via
Latent Subspace Optimization
1

Chenxi Zheng 1 * Bangzhen Liu 1 * Huaidong Zhang 1† Xuemiao Xu1,2,3,4† Shengfeng He 5
South China University of Technology 2 State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
3
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
5
Singapore Management University

{cszcx, cs liubz}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {huaidongz, xuemx}@scut.edu.cn, shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg

(a) 3-shot Input

(b) AGE [7]

(c) WaveGAN [44]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. We propose a new image synthesis approach that allows generating diverse unseen results with only 1- or 3-shot samples. Our
key idea is to exploit the continuity of the StyleGAN latent space, and further empower it to generate unseen categories via latent subspace
optimization.

Abstract
Image generation relies on massive training data that
can hardly produce diverse images of an unseen category
according to a few examples. In this paper, we address
this dilemma by projecting sparse few-shot samples into a
continuous latent space that can potentially generate infinite unseen samples. The rationale behind is that we
aim to locate a centroid latent position in a conditional
StyleGAN, where the corresponding output image on that
centroid can maximize the similarity with the given samples. Although the given samples are unseen for the conditional StyleGAN, we assume the neighboring latent subspace around the centroid belongs to the novel category,
and therefore introduce two latent subspace optimization
objectives. In the first one we use few-shot samples as positive anchors of the novel class, and adjust the StyleGAN to
produce the corresponding results with the new class label
condition. The second objective is to govern the generation process from the other way around, by altering the cen* Equal Contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

troid and its surrounding latent subspace for a more precise generation of the novel class. These reciprocal optimization objectives inject a novel class into the StyleGAN
latent subspace, and therefore new unseen samples can be
easily produced by sampling images from it. Extensive experiments demonstrate superior few-shot generation performances compared with state-of-the-art methods, especially
in terms of diversity and generation quality. Code is available at https://github.com/chansey0529/LSO.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in generative models [3, 5, 8, 11, 19, 36]
allow synthesizing of high-quality and realistic images with
diverse styles. However, the success of these models relies heavily on large-scale data. Preparing new data for a
novel class is costly, so it is natural to raise a question, “can
we generate high-quality images with a glance at a few images?” This leads to the few-shot image generation problem, where the model is required to generate a novel category with only a few images available. Unfortunately, since
the extreme low-shot setting can easily cause catastrophic

3272

