This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Natural Language-Assisted Sign Language Recognition
Ronglai Zuo1
Fangyun Wei2†
Brian Mak1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{rzuo,mak}@cse.ust.hk

fawe@microsoft.com

Abstract
Sign languages are visual languages which convey information by signers’ handshape, facial expression, body
movement, and so forth. Due to the inherent restriction of combinations of these visual ingredients, there exist a significant number of visually indistinguishable signs
(VISigns) in sign languages, which limits the recognition
capacity of vision neural networks. To mitigate the problem,
we propose the Natural Language-Assisted Sign Language
Recognition (NLA-SLR) framework, which exploits semantic information contained in glosses (sign labels). First,
for VISigns with similar semantic meanings, we propose
language-aware label smoothing by generating soft labels
for each training sign whose smoothing weights are computed from the normalized semantic similarities among the
glosses to ease training. Second, for VISigns with distinct
semantic meanings, we present an inter-modality mixup
technique which blends vision and gloss features to further
maximize the separability of different signs under the supervision of blended labels. Besides, we also introduce a novel
backbone, video-keypoint network, which not only models
both RGB videos and human body keypoints but also derives knowledge from sign videos of different temporal receptive fields. Empirically, our method achieves state-ofthe-art performance on three widely-adopted benchmarks:
MSASL, WLASL, and NMFs-CSL. Codes are available at
https://github.com/FangyunWei/SLRT.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are the primary languages for communication among deaf communities. On the one hand, sign languages have their own linguistic properties as most natural
languages [1, 52, 64]. On the other hand, sign languages are
visual languages that convey information by the movements
of the hands, body, head, mouth, and eyes, making them
completely separate and distinct from natural languages
[6,69,71]. This work dedicates to sign language recognition
(SLR), which requires models to classify the isolated signs
† Corresponding author.

Gloss: “Cold”

Gloss: “Winter”
(a) VISigns may have similar semantic meanings.

Gloss: “Table”

Gloss: “Afternoon”
(b) VISigns may have distinct semantic meanings.

Figure 1. Vision neural networks are demonstrated to be less effective to recognize visually indistinguishable signs (VISigns) [2,
26, 34]. We observe that VISigns may have similar or distinct semantic meanings, inspiring us to leverage this characteristic to facilitate sign language recognition as illustrated in Figure 2.

from videos into a set of glosses1 . Despite its fundamental capacity of recognizing signs, SLR has a broad range of
applications including sign spotting [36, 42, 58], sign video
retrieval [8, 11], sign language translation [6, 35, 54], and
continuous sign language recognition [1, 6].
Since the lexical items of sign languages are defined
by the handshape, facial expression, and movement, the
combinations of these visual ingredients are restricted inherently, yielding plenty of visually indistinguishable signs
termed VISigns. VISigns are those signs with similar handshape and motion but varied semantic meanings. We show
two examples (“Cold” vs. “Winter” and “Table” vs. “Afternoon”) in Figure 1. Unfortunately, it has been demonstrated that vision neural networks are less effective at
1 Gloss is a unique label for a single sign. Each gloss is identified by a
word which is associated with the sign’s semantic meaning.

14890

