This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Avatars Grow Legs: Generating Smooth Human Motion
from Sparse Tracking Inputs with Diffusion Model
Yuming Du* Robin Kips

Albert Pumarola

Sebastian Starke
Meta AI

Ali Thabet

Artsiom Sanakoyeu

Figure 1. Full body motion synthesis based on HMD and hand controllers input. We show synthesis results of the proposed AGRoL
method. RGB axes illustrate the orientation of the head and hands which serves as the input to to our model.

Abstract
With the recent surge in popularity of AR/VR applications, realistic and accurate control of 3D full-body avatars
has become a highly demanded feature. A particular challenge is that only a sparse tracking signal is available from
standalone HMDs (Head Mounted Devices), often limited
to tracking the user’s head and wrists. While this signal is
resourceful for reconstructing the upper body motion, the
lower body is not tracked and must be synthesized from the
limited information provided by the upper body joints. In
this paper, we present AGRoL, a novel conditional diffusion model specifically designed to track full bodies given
sparse upper-body tracking signals. Our model is based
on a simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP) architecture and
a novel conditioning scheme for motion data. It can predict accurate and smooth full-body motion, particularly the
challenging lower body movement. Unlike common diffusion architectures, our compact architecture can run in
real-time, making it suitable for online body-tracking applications. We train and evaluate our model on AMASS motion
capture dataset, and demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods in generated motion accuracy and smoothness. We further justify our design choices
through extensive experiments and ablation studies.

* Work done during an internship at Meta AI.

Code is available at github.com/facebookresearch/AGRoL.

1. Introduction
Humans are the primary actors in AR/VR applications.
As such, being able to track full-body movement is in high
demand for these applications. Common approaches are
able to accurately track upper bodies only [25, 56]. Moving
to full-body tracking unlocks engaging experiences where
users can interact with the virtual environment with an increased sense of presence. However, in the typical AR/VR
setting there is no strong tracking signal for the entire human body – only the head and hands are usually tracked
by means of Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) sensors embedded in Head Mounted Displays (HMD) and hand controllers. Some works suggest adding additional IMUs to
track the lower body joints [22,25], those additions come at
higher costs and the expense of the user’s comfort [24, 27].
In an ideal setting, we want to enable high-fidelity full-body
tracking using the standard three inputs (head and hands)
provided by most HMDs.
Given the position and orientation information of the
head and both hands, predicting full-body pose, especially
the lower body, is inherently an underconstrained problem.
To address this challenge, different methods rely on generative models such as normalizing flows [44] and Variational
Autoencoders (VAE) [11] to synthesize lower body motions. In the realm of generative models, diffusion models
have recently shown impressive results in image and video
generation [21, 39, 46], especially for conditional generation. This inspires us to employ the diffusion model to generate the fully-body poses conditioned on the sparse track-

481

