This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tracking Multiple Deformable Objects in Egocentric Videos
Mingzhen Huang1,2†, Xiaoxing Li2 , Jun Hu2 , Honghong Peng2 , Siwei Lyu1
1
State University of New York at Buffalo, 2 Meta Reality Labs
Project Page: https://mingzhenhuang.com/projects/detracker.html

Deformation

Occlusion

Ego Motion

Motion Blur

Similar Appearance

Figure 1. Example frames from the DogThruGlasses dataset. The videos were captured using the smart glasses.

Abstract
Most existing multiple object tracking (MOT) methods
that solely rely on appearance features struggle in tracking
highly deformable objects. Other MOT methods that use
motion clues to associate identities across frames have difficulty handling egocentric videos effectively or efficiently.
In this work, we present DogThruGlasses, a large-scale
deformable multi-object tracking dataset, with 150 videos
and 73K annotated frames, which is collected exclusively
by smart glasses. We also propose DETracker, a new MOT
method that jointly detects and tracks deformable objects
in egocentric videos. DETracker uses three novel modules, namely the motion disentanglement network (MDN),
the patch association network (PAN) and the patch memory
network (PMN), to explicitly tackle severe ego motion and
track fast morphing target objects. DETracker is end-to-end
trainable and achieves near real-time speed, which outperforms existing state-of-the-art method on DogThruGlasses
and YouTube-Hand.

1. Introduction
Wearable cameras have become an emerging trend, promoted by the rapidly growing collection of consumer prod† Work done during Mingzhen’s internship with Meta.

ucts such as smart glasses. As the wearable cameras became
more powerful with increased battery capacity, sensor size,
on-board memory volume, and sophisticated in-device processors, there is an increasing demand for real-time scene
understanding to run reliably and yet efficiently on-device.
The underlying computer vision algorithms, on the other
hand, frequently starts from the detection and tracking of
objects within the scene. For the egocentric videos captured
from wearable cameras, besides being challenged by occlusion, morphing shapes, and multiple visually resembling
objects, the multiple object tracking (MOT) algorithms are
stressed by the constantly changing egocentric viewpoint.
Unique to wearable cameras, the large ego motion
caused by the head movements of the wearer is often drastic, unpredictable, and largely uncorrelated to the object
motions. The reduced predictability of motion patterns
forces traditional MOT algorithms [45] to search in larger
regions to maintain same performance level, which in turn
compromises the running speed and makes them less suitable for on-device execution. In the meanwhile, the ego
motion may also exacerbate the deformation and occlusion of objects, by imposing lens distortion, blurriness and
rolling shutter, especially those in the near field. The ego
motion also aggravates object occlusion due to the constantly changing of points of view. These side effects further downgrade the performance of appearance-based MOT

1461

