This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instant Multi-View Head Capture through Learnable Registration
Timo Bolkart1
Tianye Li2
1
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Michael J. Black1
2
University of Southern California

Figure 1. Given calibrated multi-view images (top: 4 of 16 views; contrast enhanced for visualization), TEMPEH directly infers 3D head
meshes in dense semantic correspondence (bottom) in about 0.3 seconds. TEMPEH reconstructs heads with varying expressions (left)
and head poses (right) for subjects unseen during training. Applied to multi-view video input, the frame-by-frame inferred meshes are
temporally coherent, making them directly applicable to full-head performance-capture applications. See Sup. Mat. for the video output.

Abstract
Existing methods for capturing datasets of 3D heads in
dense semantic correspondence are slow and commonly address the problem in two separate steps; multi-view stereo
(MVS) reconstruction followed by non-rigid registration. To
simplify this process, we introduce TEMPEH (Towards Estimation of 3D Meshes from Performances of Expressive
Heads) to directly infer 3D heads in dense correspondence
from calibrated multi-view images. Registering datasets of
3D scans typically requires manual parameter tuning to find
the right balance between accurately fitting the scans’ surfaces and being robust to scanning noise and outliers. Instead, we propose to jointly register a 3D head dataset while
training TEMPEH. Specifically, during training, we minimize a geometric loss commonly used for surface registration, effectively leveraging TEMPEH as a regularizer. Our
multi-view head inference builds on a volumetric feature
representation that samples and fuses features from each
view using camera calibration information. To account for
partial occlusions and a large capture volume that enables
head movements, we use view- and surface-aware feature
fusion, and a spatial transformer-based head localization
module, respectively. We use raw MVS scans as supervision
during training, but, once trained, TEMPEH directly predicts 3D heads in dense correspondence without requiring

scans. Predicting one head takes about 0.3 seconds with a
median reconstruction error of 0.26 mm, 64% lower than
the current state-of-the-art. This enables the efficient capture of large datasets containing multiple people and diverse facial motions. Code, model, and data are publicly
available at https://tempeh.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Capturing large datasets containing 3D heads of multiple people with varying facial expressions and head poses is
a key enabler for modeling and synthesizing realistic head
avatars. Typically, building such datasets is done in two
steps: unstructured 3D scans are captured with a calibrated
multi-view stereo (MVS) system, followed by a non-rigid
registration step to unify the mesh topology [23]. This twostage process has major drawbacks. MVS reconstruction
requires cameras with strongly overlapping views and the
resulting scans frequently contain holes and noise. Registering a template mesh to these scans typically involves
manual parameter tuning to balance the trade-off between
accurately fitting the scan’s surface and being robust to scan
artifacts. Both stages are computationally expensive, each
taking several minutes per scan. For professional captures,
both steps are augmented with manual clean-up to enhance

768

