This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Audio-Visual Grouping Network for Sound Localization from Mixtures
Shentong Mo
Carnegie Mellon University

Yapeng Tian*
University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract
Sound source localization is a typical and challenging
task that predicts the location of sound sources in a video.
Previous single-source methods mainly used the audiovisual association as clues to localize sounding objects in
each image. Due to the mixed property of multiple sound
sources in the original space, there exist rare multi-source
approaches to localizing multiple sources simultaneously,
except for one recent work using a contrastive random walk
in the graph with images and separated sound as nodes.
Despite their promising performance, they can only handle
a fixed number of sources, and they cannot learn compact
class-aware representations for individual sources. To alleviate this shortcoming, in this paper, we propose a novel
audio-visual grouping network, namely AVGN, that can directly learn category-wise semantic features for each source
from the input audio mixture and image to localize multiple sources simultaneously. Specifically, our AVGN leverages learnable audio-visual class tokens to aggregate classaware source features. Then, the aggregated semantic features for each source can be used as guidance to localize
the corresponding visual regions. Compared to existing
multi-source methods, our new framework can localize a
flexible number of sources and disentangle category-aware
audio-visual representations for individual sound sources.
We conduct extensive experiments on MUSIC, VGGSoundInstruments, and VGG-Sound Sources benchmarks. The
results demonstrate that the proposed AVGN can achieve
state-of-the-art sounding object localization performance
on both single-source and multi-source scenarios. Code
is available at https://github.com/stoneMo/
AVGN .

1. Introduction
When we hear a dog barking, we are naturally aware of
where the dog is in the room due to the strong correspondence between audio signals and visual objects in the world.
In the meanwhile, we are capable of separating individual
sources from a mixture of multiple sources in the daily envi* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of our AVGN with state-of-the-art methods
on single-source (Top Row) and multi-source (Bottom Row) sound
localization on MUSIC [51], VGGSound-Instruments [23], and
VGG-Sound Sources [9] benchmarks.

ronment. This human perception intelligence attracts many
researchers to explore audio-visual joint learning for visual
sound source localization.
Visual sound source localization is a typical and challenging task that predicts the location of sound sources in
a video. To tackle this problem, early single-source methods [1, 9, 21, 30, 31, 39, 40] mainly used the audio-visual association as clues to localize sounding objects in the frame.
Typically, Attention10k [39] introduced a two-stream architecture for audio and images to localize a sound source
in the image using an attention mechanism. Based on the
attention, Afouras et al. [1] incorporated the optical flow
for more accurate localization in a video. To explicitly
learn discriminative audio-visual corresponding fragments,
LVS [9] proposed hard sample mining with a differentiable
threshold-based contrastive loss, while HardPos [40] utilized hard positives from negative pairs in the loss. More
recently, EZVSL [31] developed a multiple-instance contrastive learning framework on the most aligned regions corresponding to the audio. SLAVC [30] adopted momentum
encoders and extreme visual dropout to address overfitting
and silence issues in single-source sound localization. However, those baselines are based on the single-source sound as
input and they achieve worse performance for sound localization from mixtures. In this work, we will solve the problem in our approach by extracting disentangled and compact

10565

