This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Resource-Efficient RGBD Aerial Tracking
Jinyu Yang1,2,† , Shang Gao1,† , Zhe Li1,† , Feng Zheng1,3∗ , Aleš Leonardis2
1
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 University of Birmingham 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
jinyu.yang96@outlook.com

gaos2021@mail.sustech.edu.cn

f.zheng@ieee.org

a.leonardis@cs.bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Aerial robots are now able to fly in complex environments, and drone-captured data gains lots of attention in
object tracking. However, current research on aerial perception has mainly focused on limited categories, such as
pedestrian or vehicle, and most scenes are captured in urban environments from a birds-eye view. Recently, UAVs
equipped with depth cameras have been also deployed for
more complex applications, while RGBD aerial tracking
is still unexplored. Compared with traditional RGB object tracking, adding depth information can more effectively deal with more challenging scenes such as target
and background interference. To this end, in this paper,
we explore RGBD aerial tracking in an overhead space,
which can greatly enlarge the development of drone-based
visual perception. To boost the research, we first propose a
large-scale benchmark for RGBD aerial tracking, containing 1,000 drone-captured RGBD videos with dense annotations. Then, as drone-based applications require for realtime processing with limited computational resources, we
also propose an efficient RGBD tracker named EMT. Our
tracker runs at over 100 fps on GPU, and 25 fps on the edge
platform of NVidia Jetson NX Xavier, benefiting from its efficient multimodal fusion and feature matching. Extensive
experiments show that our EMT achieves promising tracking performance. All resources are available at https://
github.com/yjybuaa/RGBDAerialTracking.

1. Introduction
Aerial robots have been widely used in complex missions. For example, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
equipped with cameras are able to perceive and understand
unknown environments and have wide applications on agriculture and surveillance [11, 43]. Specifically, color-based
visual tracking with drones has been rapidly developed,
thanks to large-scale datasets [27, 43] and dedicated algo† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

zhe.li.cs@outlook.com

rithms [2–4, 9, 10, 12, 17, 24, 35]. However, these UAVs
merely equipped with color-based sensors generally fail to
deal with the challenges in complex environments, such as
background clutters and dark scenes, which break the visibility and illumination limitations in color-only domain. For
example, current drones have difficulties on tracking a person in dark scenes. While, RGBD tracking is effective to
tackle such kinds of tracking failures.
However, for a long time, depth sensors are only incorporated with UAVs to enable aerial autonomy and collision
avoidance [14]. Visual perception like RGBD tracking with
drones is unexplored due to the multiple limitations. For
example, commercial RGBD sensors are strictly limited by
application scenarios and depth measurement range. On the
other hand, we notice that current UAV tracking datasets
record video sequences in the manner of aerial photography [8, 43]. The captured objects mainly focus on pedestrians and vehicles, and the captured scenes are in urban
environments from a birds-eye view.
In this work, we explore RGBD aerial tracking from
a more practical viewpoint. Different from existing UAV
tracking works, we focus on the unexplored overhead space
(2 - 5 meters above the ground), aiming to save the ground
space greatly with drone-based visual perception. Instead
of mainly focusing on people and vehicles, our research can
include more generic objects of different categories, such as
hands, cups, or balls. Thus, multimodal aerial platforms in
this space are very important, as flying robots with shortrange perception capabilities can potentially be used in a
wider range of scenarios, such as human-robot interaction.
Notably, the new task brings challenges in drone-based
visual perception, which can be concluded as follows:
Complex real-world circumstances. The real-world
flight comes with complicated and changeable natural environments. On the one hand, the high mobility of drones
brings intense pose changes, resulting in huge variations of
target scale and considerable motion blurs. Except for the
common challenges in visible situations, drone vision also
suffers from other problems like low illumination, similar
objects and background clutter.

13374

