This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compositor: Bottom-up Clustering and Compositing for Robust Part and Object
Segmentation
Ju He1 * Jieneng Chen1 * Ming-Xian Lin2 Qihang Yu1 Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
In this work, we present a robust approach for joint part
and object segmentation. Specifically, we reformulate object and part segmentation as an optimization problem and
build a hierarchical feature representation including pixel,
part, and object-level embeddings to solve it in a bottom-up
clustering manner. Pixels are grouped into several clusters where the part-level embeddings serve as cluster centers. Afterwards, object masks are obtained by compositing
the part proposals. This bottom-up interaction is shown to
be effective in integrating information from lower semantic levels to higher semantic levels. Based on that, our
novel approach Compositor produces part and object segmentation masks simultaneously while improving the mask
quality. Compositor achieves state-of-the-art performance
on PartImageNet and Pascal-Part by outperforming previous methods by around 0.9% and 1.3% on PartImageNet,
0.4% and 1.7% on Pascal-Part in terms of part and object
mIoU and demonstrates better robustness against occlusion
by around 4.4% and 7.1% on part and object respectively.

1. Introduction
Detecting objects and parsing them into semantic parts is
a fundamental ability of human visual system. When viewing images, humans not only detect, segment, and classify
objects but also segment their semantic parts and identify
them. This gives a hierarchical representation that enables a
detailed and interpretable understanding of the object which
is useful for downstream tasks. For example, humans can
estimate the pose of a tiger based on the spatial configuration of its parts and hence judge whether it is about to attack
or if it is peacefully sleeping. It is conjectured by cognitive
psychologists [3, 27] that these hierarchical representations
are constructed in a bottom-up manner where humans first
perceive parts and then group them together to form objects.
By contrast, the computer vision literature on semantic
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

segmentation mostly concentrates on object-level, neglecting intermediate part representations, although object and
part segmentation have been shown to be mutually beneficial to each other [13, 43]. We emphasize that parts help
many other tasks such as pose estimation [11, 46], detection [2, 7], and fine-grained recognition [49]. In addition,
exploiting local features or part information can increase
robustness of object models against occlusion [1, 25, 40].
Recently, He et al. [20] proposed PartImageNet, where
both part and object annotations are provided. Meanwhile,
their studies showed that naively using part annotation as
deep supervision can improve object segmentation. This
motivates us to further design a better interaction pipeline
between objects and parts for high-quality segmentation.
In this work, we present a strategy for jointly segmenting parts and objects in a bottom-up process. Specifically,
we consider a hierarchical representation of images in terms
of pixels, parts, and objects. We learn feature embeddings
which enables us to reformulate semantic segmentation as
an optimization problem whose goal is to find feature centroids that represent parts and objects. As shown in Figure 1, our method uses a bottom-up strategy where pixels
are grouped to form part embeddings which, in turn, are
grouped to form object embeddings. We implement this
in two steps. First, we cluster image pixels to make proposals for object parts. Here the feature embeddings are
learned so that pixels belonging to the same part have similar features. Second, we use a similar approach to compose these part proposals to segment the whole object which
involves selecting some part proposals and rejecting others. Our complete algorithm, Compositor, for segmenting
parts and objects consists of these clustering and compositing steps. This novel algorithm not only helps us to build a
hierarchical segmentation model but also increases the robustness of the model against occlusion since our parts are
clustered based on the similarity of pixel features, which are
less affected by occlusion compared to other context-based
methods. Moreover, objects are constructed using parts that
helps minimize the influence of occlusion.
We verify Compositor’s effectiveness on both PartImageNet [20] and Pascal-Part [7], where the former focuses on

11259

