This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-Supervised Stereo-based 3D Object Detection via Cross-View Consensus
Wenhao Wu1 , Hau-San Wong1 *, and Si Wu2
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
wenhaowu5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk, cswusi@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Stereo-based 3D object detection, which aims at detecting 3D objects with stereo cameras, shows great potential
in low-cost deployment compared to LiDAR-based methods
and excellent performance compared to monocular-based
algorithms. However, the impressive performance of stereobased 3D object detection is at the huge cost of high-quality
manual annotations, which are hardly attainable for any
given scene. Semi-supervised learning, in which limited annotated data and numerous unannotated data are required
to achieve a satisfactory model, is a promising method to
address the problem of data deficiency. In this work, we propose to achieve semi-supervised learning for stereo-based
3D object detection through pseudo annotation generation
from a temporal-aggregated teacher model, which temporally accumulates knowledge from a student model. To facilitate a more stable and accurate depth estimation, we
introduce Temporal-Aggregation-Guided (TAG) disparity
consistency, a cross-view disparity consistency constraint
between the teacher model and the student model for robust
and improved depth estimation. To mitigate noise in pseudo
annotation generation, we propose a cross-view agreement
strategy, in which pseudo annotations should attain high
degree of agreements between 3D and 2D views, as well
as between binocular views. We perform extensive experiments on the KITTI 3D dataset to demonstrate our proposed method’s capability in leveraging a huge amount of
unannotated stereo images to attain significantly improved
detection results.

1. Introduction
3D object detection, as one of the most significant perception tasks in the computer vision community, has witnessed great progress in recent years, especially after the
advent of neural-network-based deep learning. Most stateof-the-art works which focus on 3D object detection mainly
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Temporal-AggregationGuided (TAG) disparity consistency constraint, in which the
teacher model, temporally collecting knowledge from the student
model, leads the disparity estimation of the student model across
the views.

rely on LiDAR data [17,32,33,43,51] to extract accurate 3D
information, such as 3D structure and depth of the points.
However, LiDAR data are costly to harvest and annotate,
and have limited sensing ranges in some cases. Instead,
vision-based methods, which detect 3D objects based on
images only, have drawn more attention in recent years.
While it is convenient to collect image data, there are significant challenges in applying image-based methods to depth
sensing, which is an ill-posed problem when localizing objects with only images. This problem is further exacerbated
in monocular-based 3D object detection [24, 25, 48]. Stereo
images, in which image pairs took at different viewpoints
are available, can be used to reconstruct depth information
through pixel-to-pixel correspondence or stereo geometry,
making them more useful for detecting 3D objects without
the introduction of expensive LiDAR data.
With more attention focusing on stereo-based 3D object
detection, the performance of these methods gets continuously improved, and the gap between LiDAR-based methods and stereo-based methods becomes progressively narrower. However, the improving performance is built on
large-scale manual annotation, which is costly in terms of
both time and human resources. When the amount of annotation is limited, the performance of stereo-based methods deteriorates rapidly. Semi-supervised learning, which

17471

