This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Image-to-Point Distillation via Semantically Tolerant
Contrastive Loss
Anas Mahmoud1 , Jordan S. K. Hu1 , Tianshu Kuai1 , Ali Harakeh2 , Liam Paull2 , and Steven L. Waslander1
1
University of Toronto Robotics Institute, 2 Mila, UniversitÂe de MontrÂeal

Abstract
An effective framework for learning 3D representations
for perception tasks is distilling rich self-supervised image
features via contrastive learning. However, image-to-point
representation learning for autonomous driving datasets
faces two main challenges: 1) the abundance of selfsimilarity, which results in the contrastive losses pushing
away semantically similar point and image regions and thus
disturbing the local semantic structure of the learned representations, and 2) severe class imbalance as pretraining
gets dominated by over-represented classes. We propose to
alleviate the self-similarity problem through a novel semantically tolerant image-to-point contrastive loss that takes
into consideration the semantic distance between positive
and negative image regions to minimize contrasting semantically similar point and image regions. Additionally, we
address class imbalance by designing a class-agnostic balanced loss that approximates the degree of class imbalance
through an aggregate sample-to-samples semantic similarity measure. We demonstrate that our semantically-tolerant
contrastive loss with class balancing improves state-of-theart 2D-to-3D representation learning in all evaluation settings on 3D semantic segmentation. Our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art 2D-to-3D representation learning frameworks across a wide range of 2D selfsupervised pretrained models.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has shown significant
success in learning useful representations from unlabeled
images [7, 9, 11, 22], mainly due to large, diverse, and balanced 2D image datasets. These successes promise to alleviate the requirement for large labeled datasets, which can
be expensive, not attainable, or task-specific. These issues
are exacerbated when generating labels for 3D point clouds,
which are usually much more difficult to annotate [27] than
2D images. Additionally, the sparse nature of point clouds
generated using a LiDAR sensor, as is common in outdoor
autonomous driving data, substantially increases the diffi-

Figure 1. Bottom row: Superpixel-to-superpixel cosine similarity
with respect to, bottom left: a road anchor, and bottom right: a
vehicle anchor (both marked in red). Superpixel-driven contrastive
loss [21] treats all superpixels excluding the anchor as negative
samples. As such, loss will be dominated by gradients from semantically similar negative samples, disturbing the local semantic structure of the learned 3D representations. Our loss uses superpixel similarity to 1) Reduce the contribution of false negative
samples, and 2) Balance the contribution of well-represented (i.e.,
road) and under-represented (i.e., vehicle) anchors

culty of manually generating per-point labels, particularly
at large distances.
A common approach to learn 3D representations is
through multimodal invariance [16], where 3D representations are learned to be invariant to features extracted
from image encoders trained with self-supervised learning [17, 21]. The current state-of-the-art, SLidR [21], encourages learning representations of 3D point regions (superpoints) to match pre-trained representations of 2D image
regions (superpixels) through a novel contrastive loss. By
contrasting 2D and 3D regions, SLidR [21] enables learning
representations from point clouds with varying point densities, as is common in autonomous driving datasets.
Unfortunately, SlidR’s region-based sampling does not
address self-similarity, which results when fewer unique
semantic classes exist in the data relative to the number
of chosen contrastive pairs during training. Under selfsimilarity, many negative samples will belong to the same
semantic class as the positive sample used to compute the

7102

