This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Noisy Labels with Decoupled Meta Label Purifier
Yuanpeng Tu1* Boshen Zhang2* Yuxi Li2* Liang Liu2 Jian Li2
Yabiao Wang2 Chengjie Wang2,3† Cai Rong Zhao1†
1
Dept. of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji Univeristy, Shanghai
2
YouTu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{2030809, zhaocairong}@tongji.edu.cn
{boshenzhang, yukiyxli, leoneliu, swordli, caseywang, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Training deep neural networks (DNN) with noisy labels
is challenging since DNN can easily memorize inaccurate
labels, leading to poor generalization ability. Recently,
the meta-learning based label correction strategy is widely
adopted to tackle this problem via identifying and correcting
potential noisy labels with the help of a small set of clean
validation data. Although training with purified labels can
effectively improve performance, solving the meta-learning
problem inevitably involves a nested loop of bi-level optimization between model weights and hyper-parameters (i.e.,
label distribution). As compromise, previous methods resort to a coupled learning process with alternating update.
In this paper, we empirically find such simultaneous optimization over both model weights and label distribution
can not achieve an optimal routine, consequently limiting
the representation ability of backbone and accuracy of corrected labels. From this observation, a novel multi-stage
label purifier named DMLP is proposed. DMLP decouples the label correction process into label-free representation learning and a simple meta label purifier, In this way,
DMLP can focus on extracting discriminative feature and
label correction in two distinctive stages. DMLP is a plugand-play label purifier, the purified labels can be directly
reused in naive end-to-end network retraining or other robust learning methods, where state-of-the-art results are
obtained on several synthetic and real-world noisy datasets,
especially under high noise levels. Code is available at
https://github.com/yuanpengtu/DMLP.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved significant progress on various recognition tasks. The key to its success is the availabil* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) Traditional coupled alternating update to solve meta
label purification problem, and (b) the proposed DMLP method
that decouples the label purification process into representation
learning and a simple non-nested meta label purifier.

ity of large-scale datasets with reliable annotations. Collecting such datasets, however, is time-consuming and expensive.
Easy ways to obtain labeled data, such as web crawling [31],
inevitably yield samples with noisy labels, which is not
appropriate to be directly utilized to train DNN since these
complex models are vulnerable to memorize noisy labels [2].
Towards this problem, numerous Learning with Noisy Label (LNL) approaches were proposed. Classical LNL methods focus on identifying the noisy samples and reducing their
effect on parameter updates by abandoning [12] or assigning
smaller importance. However, when it comes to extremely
noisy and complex scenarios, such scheme struggles since
there is no sufficient clean data to train a discriminative classifier. Therefore, label correction approaches are proposed
to augment clean training samples by revising noisy labels to
underlying correct ones. Among them, meta-learning based
approaches [9, 16, 25] achieve state-of-the-art performance
via resorting to a small clean validation set and taking noisy
labels as hyper-parameters, which provides sound guidance

19934

