This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Fidelity Clothed Avatar Reconstruction from a Single Image
Tingting Liao1,2 *
Guo-Jun Qi4,5

Xiaomei Zhang1,2∗
Yuliang Xiu3
Hongwei Yi3
Yong Zhang6
Xuan Wang6
Xiangyu Zhu1,2

Xudong Liu4
Zhen Lei1,2,7†

1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
4
OPPO Research 5 Westlake University 6 Tencent AI Lab 7 CAIR, HKISI, CAS
2

{tingting.liao, xiaomei.zhang, xiangyu.zhu, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{yuliang.xiu, hongwei.yi}@tuebingen.mpg.de
{yongzhang201303, xwang.cv, guojunq}@gmail.com
{xudong.liu}@oppo.com

Abstract
This paper presents a framework for efficient 3D clothed
avatar reconstruction. By combining the advantages of the
high accuracy of optimization-based methods and the efficiency of learning-based methods, we propose a coarseto-fine way to realize a high-fidelity clothed avatar reconstruction (CAR) from a single image. At the first stage, we
use an implicit model to learn the general shape in the
canonical space of a person in a learning-based way, and
at the second stage, we refine the surface detail by estimating the non-rigid deformation in the posed space in an
optimization way. A hyper-network is utilized to generate
a good initialization so that the convergence o f the optimization process is greatly accelerated. Extensive experiments on various datasets show that the proposed CAR
successfully produces high-fidelity avatars for arbitrarily
clothed humans in real scenes. The codes will be released in
https://github.com/TingtingLiao/CAR.

1. Introduction
Clothed avatar reconstruction is critical to a variety of
applications for 3D content creations such as video gaming,
online meeting [54,55], virtual try-on and movie industry [10,
21, 39]. Early attempts are based on expensive scanning
devices such as 3D and 4D scanners, or complicated multicamera studios with carefully capturing processes. While
highly accurate reconstruction results can be obtained from
these recording equipment, they are inflexible and even not
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

feasible in many applications. An alternative is to collect
data using depth sensors [31, 42], which is however still
less ubiquitous than RGB cameras. A more practical and
low-cost way is to create an avatar from an image by RGB
cameras or mobile phones.
Monocular RGB reconstruction [19, 37, 51, 59] has
been extensively investigated and shows promising results.
ARCH [22] is the first method that reconstructs a clothed
avatar from a monocular image. Due to the disadvantage of
depth ambiguity, a number of methods that create an avatar
from a video are proposed to resolve the problem. Most existing monocular video-based methods [2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 14, 15, 46]
are typically restricted to parametric human body prediction,
which lacks geometry details like cloth surface. How to create a high-fidelity avatar from an in-the-wild image, with
consistent surface details is still a great challenge.
In this work, we focus on the shape recovery and propose an efficient high-fidelity clothed human avatar creation
method from a single image in a coarse-to-fine way. The
method consists of a learning-based canonical implicit model
and an optimization-based normal refinement process. The
canonical implicit model uses the canonical normal inverse
transformed from original space as geometric feature to help
grasp clothing detail of the general shape in canonical space.
Unlike occupancy-based methods [22, 36, 37], we adopt a
Signed Distance Function (SDF) to approximate the canonical human body surface, which gains advantages in learning
the human body in the surface level instead of the point
level, so that the reconstruction accuracy is improved. In
the normal refinement process, a SDF is learned to approximates the target surface in the posed space by enforcing its
surface normal closed to the predicted normal image. Compared with mesh-based refinement, our method can obtain

8662

