This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focus On Details:
Online Multi-object Tracking with Diverse Fine-grained Representation
Hao Ren 1 , Shoudong Han 1, ∗ , Huilin Ding, Ziwen Zhang, Hongwei Wang, Faquan Wang
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{haoren2000, shoudonghan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

...

Discriminative representation is essential to keep a
unique identiﬁer for each target in Multiple object tracking
(MOT). Some recent MOT methods extract features of the
bounding box region or the center point as identity embeddings. However, when targets are occluded, these coarsegrained global representations become unreliable. To this
end, we propose exploring diverse ﬁne-grained representation, which describes appearance comprehensively from
global and local perspectives. This ﬁne-grained representation requires high feature resolution and precise semantic
information. To effectively alleviate the semantic misalignment caused by indiscriminate contextual information aggregation, Flow Alignment FPN (FAFPN) is proposed for
multi-scale feature alignment aggregation. It generates semantic ﬂow among feature maps from different resolutions
to transform their pixel positions. Furthermore, we present
a Multi-head Part Mask Generator (MPMG) to extract ﬁnegrained representation based on the aligned feature maps.
Multiple parallel branches of MPMG allow it to focus on
different parts of targets to generate local masks without
label supervision. The diverse details in target masks facilitate ﬁne-grained representation. Eventually, beneﬁting
from a Shufﬂe-Group Sampling (SGS) training strategy with
positive and negative samples balanced, we achieve stateof-the-art performance on MOT17 and MOT20 test sets.
Even on DanceTrack, where the appearance of targets is extremely similar, our method signiﬁcantly outperforms ByteTrack by 5.0% on HOTA and 5.6% on IDF1. Extensive experiments have proved that diverse ﬁne-grained representation makes Re-ID great again in MOT.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, multi-object
tracking (MOT) is crucial for automatic driving, video
1 Equal contribution

∗ Corresponding author

11289

local

(a) Bbox-based
global

(b) Center-based

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison with different methods of appearance
representation: (a) Bbox-based, (b) Center-based, (c) globallocal ﬁne-grained representation (ours).

surveillance, etc. MOT aims to localize targets and maintain
their unique identities. Recent MOT methods [3, 4, 48, 50,
54] mainly follow the paradigm of tracking-by-detection,
and divide tracking into two independent steps: detection
and association. The detector detects targets in each frame
ﬁrst, and then appearance representation and position information are employed as the association basis to link targets with the corresponding trajectories. As the inherent attributes of the target, appearance and position complement
each other in the association.
However, due to targets or camera motion, intra-class
and inter-class occlusion are inevitable, which puts forward stricter requirements for appearance representation.
As shown in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b, these methods extract
the features of the bounding box region or the center point
as appearance embeddings. However, these coarse-grained
global embeddings are extremely sensitive to noise, so that
become unreliable once the signal-to-noise ratio is reduced.
With the headway of the detector [5, 11, 27, 35, 58], appearance representation gradually cannot keep the same performance as detection. Some researchers [54] ﬁnd that simply
using position cues is enough to obtain satisfactory results,
while appearance cues are unfavorable for further improvement.
To break this situation, we re-examine the recent
appearance-based methods. The bbox-based methods [38]

