This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Both Style and Distortion Matter: Dual-Path Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
for Panoramic Semantic Segmentation
Xu Zheng2 Jinjing Zhu1 Yexin Liu1 Zidong Cao1 Chong Fu2,4 Lin Wang1,3*
1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 Northeastern University 3 Dept. of CSE, HKUST
4
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing in Medical Image, Ministry of Education, NEU, China
zhengxu128@gmail.com, zhujinjing.hkust@gmail.com, yliu292@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
caozidong1996@gmail.com, fuchong@mail.neu.edu.cn, linwang@ust.hk

Abstract
The ability of scene understanding has sparked active research for panoramic image semantic segmentation. However, the performance is hampered by distortion of the
equirectangular projection (ERP) and a lack of pixel-wise
annotations. For this reason, some works treat the ERP
and pinhole images equally and transfer knowledge from
the pinhole to ERP images via unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). However, they fail to handle the domain gaps
caused by: 1) the inherent differences between camera sensors and captured scenes; 2) the distinct image formats
(e.g., ERP and pinhole images). In this paper, we propose a
novel yet flexible dual-path UDA framework, DPPASS, taking ERP and tangent projection (TP) images as inputs. To
reduce the domain gaps, we propose cross-projection and
intra-projection training. The cross-projection training includes tangent-wise feature contrastive training and prediction consistency training. That is, the former formulates the
features with the same projection locations as positive examples and vice versa, for the models’ awareness of distortion, while the latter ensures the consistency of cross-model
predictions between the ERP and TP. Moreover, adversarial
intra-projection training is proposed to reduce the inherent
gap, between the features of the pinhole images and those
of the ERP and TP images, respectively. Importantly, the
TP path can be freely removed after training, leading to
no additional inference cost. Extensive experiments on two
benchmarks show that our DPPASS achieves +1.06% mIoU
increment than the state-of-the-art approaches. https:
//vlis2022.github.io/cvpr23/DPPASS

1. Introduction
Increasing attention has been paid to the emerging 360◦
cameras for their omnidirectional scene perception abilities

Inherent Gap & Format Gap

Inherent Gap

Synthetic

Real Pinhole

Style (Content)

Real Panorama

Distortion

Figure 1. We tackle a new problem by addressing two types of domain gaps, i.e., the inherent gap (style) and format gap (distortion)
between the pinhole and panoramic (360◦ ) images.

with a broader field of view (FoV) than the traditional pinhole images [1]. Intuitively, the ability to understand the
surrounding environment from the panoramic images has
triggered the research for semantic segmentation as it is
pivotal to practical applications, such as autonomous driving [45, 50] and augmented reality [28]. Equirectangular
projection (ERP) [46] is the most commonly used projection type for the 360◦ images 1 and can provide a complete
view of the scene. However, the ERP type suffers from severe distortion in the polar regions, resulting in noticeable
object deformation. This significantly degrades the performance of the pixel-wise dense prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation. Some attempts have been made to design the convolution filters for feature extraction [32,50,53];
however, the specifically designed networks are less generalizable to other spherical image data. Moreover, labeled
datasets are scarce, thus making it difficult to train effective
360◦ image segmentation models.
To tackle these issues, some methods, e.g., [50] treat the
ERP and pinhole images equally, like the basic UDA task,
1 Here, panoramic and 360◦ images are interchangeably used.

* Corresponding author.

1285

