This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniCity: Omnipotent City Understanding
with Multi-level and Multi-view Images
Weijia Li1 , Yawen Lai2 , Linning Xu3 , Yuanbo Xiangli3 , Jinhua Yu1 ,
Conghui He2,4 ,* Gui-Song Xia5 ,* Dahua Lin3,4
1
Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 5 Wuhan University
liweij29@mail.sysu.edu.cn, alanlyawen@gmail.com, {xl020,xy019,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk,
yujh56@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, heconghui@sensetime.com, guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn
View 2

View 1

View 4
View 3

Satellite-level images and annotations of multiple views

Different satellite-level views
Satellite
Camera
#

Panorama
Camera

Selected regions for image collection

"
Ground
Plane

Annotations
Road type: Residential
Road scene: One road

!

Transformation relations

1

Annotations
Land use: Industrial
Height: 6.39 m
#Floors: 1

Annotations
Land use: Mixed
Height: 20.67 m
#Floors: 6

Street-level images and annotations of a panorama view

2
3

Existing label maps and street-view
image viewpoints of a zoomed area

Different street-level views

Street-level images and annotations of multiple mono-views

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed OmniCity dataset. The satellite and street-level images of our dataset are collected in the six
selected regions. The black dots along the streets denote the viewpoint locations and the land-lot colors indicate different fine-grained
categories provided by the existing label maps. Note that all the images in the right part correspond to the same geo-location, and the
intrinsic transformation relation between the satellite and street-level panorama view is demonstrated in the middle part.

Abstract
This paper presents OmniCity, a new dataset for omnipotent city understanding from multi-level and multi-view images. More precisely, OmniCity contains multi-view satellite images as well as street-level panorama and monoview images, constituting over 100K pixel-wise annotated
images that are well-aligned and collected from 25K geolocations in New York City. To alleviate the substantial
* Corresponding authors.

pixel-wise annotation efforts, we propose an efficient streetview image annotation pipeline that leverages the existing label maps of satellite view and the transformation relations between different views (satellite, panorama, and
mono-view). With the new OmniCity dataset, we provide benchmarks for a variety of tasks including building footprint extraction, height estimation, and building
plane/instance/fine-grained segmentation. Compared with
existing multi-level and multi-view benchmarks, OmniCity
contains a larger number of images with richer annotation types and more views, provides more benchmark results

17397

