This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DaFKD: Domain-aware Federated Knowledge Distillation
Haozhao Wang1 , Yichen Li1,3 , Wenchao Xu4 , Ruixuan Li1 ,* Yufeng Zhan5 and Zhigang Zeng2
{1 School of Computer Science and Technology,2 School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology}, Wuhan, China
2
Soochow University, Suzhou, China, and 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
4
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{hz wang, rxli, zgzeng}@hust.edu.cn, wenchxu@polyu.edu.hk, and yu-feng.zhan@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Distillation (FD) has recently attracted increasing attention for its efficiency in aggregating multiple diverse local models trained from statistically heterogeneous data of distributed clients. Existing FD methods
generally treat these models equally by merely computing
the average of their output soft predictions for some given
input distillation sample, which does not take the diversity
across all local models into account, thus leading to degraded performance of the aggregated model, especially
when some local models learn little knowledge about the
sample. In this paper, we propose a new perspective that
treats the local data in each client as a specific domain and
design a novel domain knowledge aware federated distillation method, dubbed DaFKD, that can discern the importance of each model to the distillation sample, and thus is
able to optimize the ensemble of soft predictions from diverse models. Specifically, we employ a domain discriminator for each client, which is trained to identify the correlation factor between the sample and the corresponding domain. Then, to facilitate the training of the domain discriminator while saving communication costs, we propose sharing its partial parameters with the classification model. Extensive experiments on various datasets and settings show
that the proposed method can improve the model accuracy
by up to 6.02% compared to state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a prominent distributed machine learning framework to train a global model
via the collaboration among users without sharing their
original dataset [17, 22, 27]. Due to the benefits of preserving privacy and economic communication efficiency, FL has
been widely adopted in various applications such as medical
* Ruixuan Li is the corresponding author.

image processing [8, 19, 32] and recommendation [2, 26].
The classic FL paradigm, FedAvg [22], iteratively optimize the global model by aggregating the parameters of local models trained from data resides on a number of remote
devices or servers. However, these methods usually suffer
from serious model performance degradation when the data
is not independently and identically distributed (Non-IID)
across clients, which is a common issue in FL scenarios.
This is mainly because the model parameters on different
clients are optimized towards diverse directions [14], leading to the overlarge variance of the aggregated model.
To tackle this challenge, federated distillation (FD) [13]
proposes to distill the knowledge of multiple local models
into the global model by aggregating only the output soft
predictions, which recently attracts increasing attention.
For instance, Tao et al. [18] leveraged the public dataset as
the distillation data samples to obtain the soft predictions
from multiple local models and then updated the global
model with the average of these soft predictions. Based
on [18], Zhu et al. [40] and Zhang et al. [37] improved the
distillation by replacing the public dataset with data generated by the generative model. Although these methods
achieve significant improvement over existing parameteraveraging methods, they still do not take the model diversity into account and may still limit the model performance.
More specifically, only computing the average of soft predictions will inevitably bring errors when some local models make wrong predictions for the distillation sample.
To break the limitations of existing federated distillation
methods, we in this paper propose a novel federated distillation method dubbed DaFKD that can discern the importance of each model to the given distillation sample, and
thus is able to reduce the impact of wrong soft predictions.
More specifically, we consider that the local data in each
client constitutes as a specific domain and employ a domain
discriminator for each client to identify the correlation factor between the sample and the domain. For a given distillation sample, we endow the local model with high im-

20412

