This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D E GPR: Deep Guided Posterior Regularization
for Multi-Class Cell Detection and Counting
Aayush Kumar Tyagi1∗ , Chirag Mohapatra1∗ , Prasenjit Das3 , Govind Makharia3 ,
Lalita Mehra3 , Prathosh AP2 , Mausam1
1
2
3
IIT Delhi
IISc, Bangalore
AIIMS, New Delhi
{tyagiaayushkumar, chirag131020, prasenaiims, govindmakharia, mehralalita9910, prathoshap}@gmail.com, mausam@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Multi-class cell detection and counting is an essential
task for many pathological diagnoses. Manual counting is
tedious and often leads to inter-observer variations among
pathologists. While there exist multiple, general-purpose,
deep learning-based object detection and counting methods, they may not readily transfer to detecting and counting
cells in medical images, due to the limited data, presence of
tiny overlapping objects, multiple cell types, severe classimbalance, minute differences in size/shape of cells, etc.
In response, we propose guided posterior regularization
(D E GPR), which assists an object detector by guiding it to
exploit discriminative features among cells. The features
may be pathologist-provided or inferred directly from visual data. We validate our model on two publicly available datasets (CoNSeP and MoNuSAC), and on MuCeD,
a novel dataset that we contribute. MuCeD consists of 55
biopsy images of the human duodenum for predicting celiac
disease. We perform extensive experimentation with three
object detection baselines on three datasets to show that
D E GPR is model-agnostic, and consistently improves baselines obtaining up to 9% (absolute) mAP gains.

1. Introduction
Multi-class multi-cell detection and counting (MC2DC)
is the problem of identifying and localizing bounding boxes
for different cells, followed by counting of each cell class.
MC2DC aids diagnosis of many clinical conditions. For example, CBC blood test counts red blood cells, white blood
cells, and platelets, for diagnosing anemia, blood cancer,
and infections [13, 31]. MC2DC over malignant tumor images helps assess the resistance and sensitivity of cancer
treatments [9]. MC2DC over duodenum biopsies is needed
to compute the ratio of counts of two cell types for diagnosing celiac disease [6]. Cell counting is a tedious process and
* Equal contribution

often leads to significant inter-observer and intra-observer
variations [4, 8]. This motivates the need for an AI system
that can provide robust and reproducible predictions.
Standard object detection models such as Yolo [21],
Faster-RCNN [35] and EfficientDet [44] have achieved
state-of-the-art performance on various object detection settings. However, extending these to detecting cells in medical images poses several challenges. These include limited availability of annotated datasets, tiny objects of interest (cells) that may be overlapping, similarity in the appearance of different cell types, and skewed cell class distribution. Due to the non-trivial nature of the problem, MC2DC
models may benefit from insights from trained pathologists,
e.g., via discriminative attributes. For instance, in duodenum biopsies, intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) are structurally smaller, circular, and darker stained, whereas epithelial nuclei (ENs) are bigger, elongated, and lighter. A key
challenge lies in incorporating these expert-insights within
a detection model. A secondary issue is that such insights
may not always be available or may be insufficient – this
motivates additional data-driven features.
We propose a novel deep guided posterior regularization
(D E GPR) framework. Posterior regularization (PR) is an
auxiliary loss [12], which enforces that the posterior distribution of a predictor should mimic the data distribution for
the given features. We call our method deep guided PR,
since we apply it to deep neural models, and it is meant
to formalize the clinical guidance given by pathologists.
D E GPR incorporates PR over two types of features, which
we term explicit and implicit features. Explicit features are
introduced through direct guidance by expert pathologists.
Implicit features are learned feature embeddings for each
class, trained through a supervised contrastive loss [22].
Subsequently, both features are feed into a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). D E GPR constrains the distributions
over the predicted features to follow that of the ground truth
features, via a KL divergence loss between them.
We test the benefits of D E GPR over three base object
detection models (Yolov5, Faster-RCNN, EfficientDet) on

23913

