This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Debiasing of Scene Graphs
Bashirul Azam Biswas and Qiang Ji
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY-12180
{biswab, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
The quality of scene graphs generated by the state-ofthe-art (SOTA) models is compromised due to the long-tail
nature of the relationships and their parent object pairs.
Training of the scene graphs is dominated by the majority relationships of the majority pairs and, therefore, the
object-conditional distributions of relationship in the minority pairs are not preserved after the training is converged. Consequently, the biased model performs well on
more frequent relationships in the marginal distribution of
relationships such as ‘on’ and ‘wearing’, and performs
poorly on the less frequent relationships such as ‘eating’
or ‘hanging from’. In this work, we propose virtual evidence incorporated within-triplet Bayesian Network (BN)
to preserve the object-conditional distribution of the relationship label and to eradicate the bias created by the
marginal probability of the relationships. The insufficient
number of relationships in the minority classes poses a significant problem in learning the within-triplet Bayesian network. We address this insufficiency by embedding-based
augmentation of triplets where we borrow samples of the
minority triplet classes from its neighboring triplets in the
semantic space. We perform experiments on two different
datasets and achieve a significant improvement in the mean
recall of the relationships. We also achieve a better balance
between recall and mean recall performance compared to
the SOTA de-biasing techniques of scene graph models.1

1. Introduction
Any visual relationship can be expressed as a triplet
subject-relationship-object and all triplets in an image can
be represented as a concise graph called Scene Graph (SG)
[21] where the nodes represent the objects and the edges
represent relationships. This representation has been proven
useful for many downstream tasks such as image captioning [39], visual reasoning [26], and image generation [12].
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) has become one of the ma1 Code available at https://github.com/bashirulazam/
within-triplet-debias.

jor computer vision research arenas after the introduction
of Visual Genome (VG) dataset [13]. The distribution of
triplets in VG images has two distinct characteristics: (1)
the presence of strong within-triplet prior, and (2) the longtail distribution of the relationship. As shown in Figure 1
(a), the within-triplet prior dictates that ‘window’ will most
likely be ‘on’ the ‘building’ rather than ‘eating’ it. Zeller
et al. [45] has utilized this within-triplet prior as the conditional probability of relationships given subject and object
by proposing a frequency baseline in the SGG task. On
the other hand, the distribution of relationship labels suffers
from a long-tailed nature and Tang et al. [29] addressed this
long-tailed issue by considering a causal interpretation of
the biased prediction. We argue that these two seemingly
different characteristics of the relationship distribution are
interrelated. The abundance of the head classes of the relationship distribution in Figure 1 (c), such as ‘on’ and ‘wearing’, arises from the abundance of their parent subject and
object lying in the head region of Figure 1 (b).
As indicated by [7], the long-tailed distribution exists
both in relationship and object label. Since relationship labels are dependent on their object pair, the long tail in object
labels worsens the long tail in relationship labels. Crowdcollection of VG images creates selection bias and crowdannotation of these images create label-bias [31] and cooccurring-bias [27]. We investigate such biases through the
distribution of the object pair of the triplets in VG database.
As shown in Figure 1 (b), ‘window-building’ and ‘manshirt’ are the most frequently annotated pairs and top 1%
object pair covers 33% of all triplets. As a result, the dominant relationships in these head pairs, such as ‘on’ and
‘wearing’, dominate the marginal distribution of Figure 1
(c).
In training a deep-learning-based SGG model, samplers
will sample more relationships from the head pairs. As a
result, the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) of the
parameters is biased to predict the relationship classes in the
head pairs [29] and the object-conditional representation of
the relationship in the tail pairs will be lost in the training
process. Therefore, various deep learning-based models,
which attempt to implicitly capture such object-conditional

10429

