This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G-MSM: Unsupervised Multi-Shape Matching with Graph-based Affinity Priors
1

1

1,†

1,2,3

Marvin Eisenberger , Aysim Toker , Laura Leal-Taixé , Daniel Cremers
1

2

3

TU Munich, Munich Center for Machine Learning, University of Oxford

Abstract
We present G-MSM (Graph-based Multi-Shape
Matching), a novel unsupervised learning approach for
non-rigid shape correspondence. Rather than treating a
collection of input poses as an unordered set of samples,
we explicitly model the underlying shape data manifold.
To this end, we propose an adaptive multi-shape matching
architecture that constructs an affinity graph on a given
set of training shapes in a self-supervised manner. The key
idea is to combine putative, pairwise correspondences by
propagating maps along shortest paths in the underlying
shape graph. During training, we enforce cycle-consistency
between such optimal paths and the pairwise matches which
enables our model to learn topology-aware shape priors.
We explore different classes of shape graphs and recover
specific settings, like template-based matching (star graph)
or learnable ranking/sorting (TSP graph), as special cases
in our framework. Finally, we demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance on several recent shape correspondence
benchmarks, including real-world 3D scan meshes with
1
topological noise and challenging inter-class pairs.

1. Introduction
Shape matching of non-rigid object categories is a central
problem in 3D computer vision and graphics that has been
studied extensively over the last few years. Especially in
recent times, there is a growing demand for such algorithms
as 3D reconstruction techniques and affordable scanning
devices become increasingly powerful and broadly available. Classical shape correspondence approaches devise
axiomatic algorithms that make specific assumptions about
the resulting maps, such as near-isometry, area preservation,
approximate rigidity, bounded distortion, or commutativity
with the intrinsic Laplacian. In contrast, real-world scan
meshes are often subject to various types of noise, including
†

Currently at NVIDIA
Our implementation is available under the following link: https:
//github.com/marvin-eisenberger/gmsm-matching
1

(i) Shape graph G

Source

(ii) Affinity edge weights
(1,2)

Π

(1,2)

(iii) Putative correspondences Π

(1,3)

Π

(1,3)

vs multi-matching Π

(3,2)

◦Π

(3,2)

◦Π

(i)

Figure 1. For a given collection of 3D meshes {X ∣1 ≤ i ≤ N },
(i) our method constructs, in a fully unsupervised manner, a shape
graph G which approximates the underlying shape data manifold.
(ii) Its edge weights (affinity scores) are derived from a putative
pairwise correspondence loss signal. (iii) During training, we
enforce cycle-consistency by propagating maps along shortest paths
(1)
(2)
in the graph G. As shown for the sample pair above (X , X ),
(1,3)
(3,2)
the resulting multi-matching Π
◦Π
is significantly more
(1,2)
accurate than the pairwise map Π
.

topological changes [16, 33], partial views [2], general nonisometric deformations [17, 65], objects in clutter [12], and
varying data representations [57]. In this work, we address
several of the aforementioned challenges and demonstrate
that our proposed method achieves improved stability for a
number of 3D scan mesh datasets.
The majority of existing deep learning methods for shape
matching [2, 15, 20, 21, 24, 39, 51, 56] treat a given set of
meshes as an unstructured collection of poses. During training, random pairs of shapes are sampled for which a neural
network is queried and a pairwise matching loss is minimized. While this approach is straightforward, it often fails
to recognize commonalities and context-dependent patterns

22762

