This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NVTC: Nonlinear Vector Transform Coding
Runsen Feng Zongyu Guo Weiping Li Zhibo Chen
University of Science and Technology of China
{fengruns, guozy}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wpli, chenzhibo}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In theory, vector quantization (VQ) is always better than
scalar quantization (SQ) in terms of rate-distortion (RD) performance [33]. Recent state-of-the-art methods for
neural image compression are mainly based on nonlinear
transform coding (NTC) with uniform scalar quantization,
overlooking the benefits of VQ due to its exponentially increased complexity. In this paper, we first investigate on
some toy sources, demonstrating that even if modern neural networks considerably enhance the compression performance of SQ with nonlinear transform, there is still an
insurmountable chasm between SQ and VQ. Therefore, revolving around VQ, we propose a novel framework for neural image compression named Nonlinear Vector Transform
Coding (NVTC). NVTC solves the critical complexity issue of VQ through (1) a multi-stage quantization strategy
and (2) nonlinear vector transforms. In addition, we apply
entropy-constrained VQ in latent space to adaptively determine the quantization boundaries for joint rate-distortion
optimization, which improves the performance both theoretically and experimentally. Compared to previous NTC
approaches, NVTC demonstrates superior rate-distortion
performance, faster decoding speed, and smaller model
size. Our code is available at https://github.com/
USTC-IMCL/NVTC.

1. Introduction
Recent works based on nonlinear transform coding
(NTC) [5] have achieved remarkable success in neural image compression [12, 34]. Unlike these traditional image
codecs that employ linear transform such as discrete cosine transform (DCT), NTC is constructed with the nonlinear transform layers and optimized with data-driven techniques, where the modern neural networks present excellent
capability in both encoding/decoding transform and entropy
estimation [12, 20, 35]. Most NTC methods apply scalar
quantization (SQ) to discretize the latent variables and use
the additive uniform noise to approximate the quantization
error during training [6]. However, in the era of 1990s, it

Figure 1. BD-rate vs. decoding time vs. model size on the
CLIC2021 validation set [1].

has already been known that vector quantization, in spite of
it exponentially increased complexity, is always better than
SQ in terms of rate-distortion (RD) performance [33]. It inspires us to design a novel neural image compression model
to fully leverages vector quantization.
Vector quantization (VQ) [18] is designed to map a continuous source distribution to a set of discrete vectors. The
discrete nature of VQ has been successfully applied in generative models to avoid the “posterior collapse” issue, including these well-known image synthesis models such as
VQVAE [40], VQGAN [16] and text-to-image synthesis
models such as DALLE [36], latent diffusion [38]. However, if we go back to the basic requirement of quantization, we will find that VQ offers unique advantages in terms
of rate-distortion performance, particularly the space-filling
advantage and the memory advantage [33].
Given a source distribution, the goal of quantization (no
matter SQ or VQ) is to determine the quantization centers
and boundaries, and then assign indices to denote these separated quantization regions/cells. Combining these regions
fills the whole space of source distribution. The spacefilling advantage of VQ against SQ is related to the sphere

6101

