This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LANIT: Language-Driven Image-to-Image Translation for Unlabeled Data
Jihye Park * 1 , Sunwoo Kim * 1 , Soohyun Kim * 1 , Seokju Cho 1 ,
Jaejun Yoo 2 , Youngjung Uh 3 , Seungryong Kim † 1
1

Korea University, Seoul, Korea
1

2

UNIST, Ulsan, Korea

3

Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea

{ghp1112,sw-kim,shkim1211,seokju cho,seungryong kim}@korea.ac.kr
2
jaejun.yoo@unist.ac.kr 3 yj.uh@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing techniques for image-to-image translation commonly have suffered from two critical problems: heavy
reliance on per-sample domain annotation and/or inability to handle multiple attributes per image. Recent trulyunsupervised methods adopt clustering approaches to easily provide per-sample one-hot domain labels. However,
they cannot account for the real-world setting: one sample
may have multiple attributes. In addition, the semantics of
the clusters are not easily coupled to human understanding.
To overcome these, we present LANguage-driven Image-toimage Translation model, dubbed LANIT. We leverage easyto-obtain candidate attributes given in texts for a dataset:
the similarity between images and attributes indicates persample domain labels. This formulation naturally enables
multi-hot labels so that users can specify the target domain
with a set of attributes in language. To account for the
case that the initial prompts are inaccurate, we also present
prompt learning. We further present domain regularization
loss that enforces translated images to be mapped to the
corresponding domain. Experiments on several standard
benchmarks demonstrate that LANIT achieves comparable
or superior performance to existing models. The code is
available at github.com/KU-CVLAB/LANIT.

1. Introduction
Unpaired image-to-translation frameworks aim to translate an image from one domain to another [21,31,46]. They
are typically trained on many images with their respective
domain labels. It has been widely studied for a decade in numerous computer vision applications, such as image manipulation [14,62,66], multi-modal translation [3,9,10,21,35],
and instance-aware translation [6, 23, 30].
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Conventional methods [9, 10, 21] required at least persample domain supervision based on the strict assumption
that each image should be described by a one-hot domain
label, which is frequently violated; e.g., a face can have
multiple attributes. In addition, annotating domain label
for each image may become considerably labor-intensive
and error-prone, and subjectivity may lead to inconsistency
across different annotators.
To mitigate such a heavy reliance on per-sample domain
annotation, some recent methods formulate the problem in
a few-shot setting [35, 51] or semi-supervised learning setting [55]. More recently, TUNIT [3] and Kim et al. [29]
present a framework for jointly learning domain clustering and translation within a unified model, thus enabling
a truly-unsupervised learning of image-to-image translation. Although these methods ease the burden of per-sample
domain annotation and show relatively competitive performance, they still inherit the limitation of using one-hot domain labels to train the image translation model. In addition, these truly-unsupervised learning methods only learn
domain clusters that are dominant in the dataset, which
sometimes do not reflect semantic meanings. Such limitations make users confused in understanding the semantic
meaning of each learned domain cluster.
In this paper, to overcome the problems in per-samplelevel and unsupervised learning methods, we propose using
the dataset-level annotation for the first time as exemplified
in Fig. 1. In practice, it could be much easier to list candidate textual domain descriptions that describe images in
the dataset. Using the candidate attributes given in texts for
a dataset, we specify the target domain given a reference
image according to its similarity to the attributes in visionlanguage embedding [49]. Then, a generator translates a
source image to the target domain using the target style code
of the reference image. As similarities naturally lead to a
multi-hot label, we can aggregate the style codes of multiple
domains to represent the style code for a joint domain. In
addition, to account for the fact that the initial prompts may

23401

