This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-specific and Model-adaptive Supervision for
Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Zhen Zhao1,2 * Sifan Long3,2 * Jimin Pi2 Jingdong Wang2† Luping Zhou1†
1
2
3
University of Sydney
Baidu VIS
Jilin University

Abstract
Recently, semi-supervised semantic segmentation has
achieved promising performance with a small fraction of
labeled data. However, most existing studies treat all unlabeled data equally and barely consider the differences and
training difficulties among unlabeled instances. Differentiating unlabeled instances can promote instance-specific
supervision to adapt to the model’s evolution dynamically.
In this paper, we emphasize the cruciality of instance
differences and propose an instance-specific and modeladaptive supervision for semi-supervised semantic segmentation, named iMAS. Relying on the model’s performance,
iMAS employs a class-weighted symmetric intersectionover-union to evaluate quantitative hardness of each unlabeled instance and supervises the training on unlabeled
data in a model-adaptive manner. Specifically, iMAS learns
from unlabeled instances progressively by weighing their
corresponding consistency losses based on the evaluated
hardness. Besides, iMAS dynamically adjusts the augmentation for each instance such that the distortion degree of
augmented instances is adapted to the model’s generalization capability across the training course. Not integrating
additional losses and training procedures, iMAS can obtain
remarkable performance gains against current state-of-theart approaches on segmentation benchmarks under different
semi-supervised partition protocols1 .

1. Introduction
Though semantic segmentation studies [6, 28] have
achieved significant progress, their enormous success relies
on large datasets with high-quality pixel-level annotations.
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation (SSS) [20, 30] has
been proposed as a powerful solution to mitigate the requirement for labeled data. Recent research on SSS has
* Equal contribution. The work was done during an internship at Baidu.
† Corresponding authors (luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au, wangjing-

dong@baidu.com). This work is supported by Australian Research
Council (ARC DP200103223).
1 Code and logs: https://github.com/zhenzhao/iMAS.

two main branches, including the self-training (ST) [26]
and consistency regularization (CR) [40] based approaches.
[46] follows a self-training paradigm and performs a selective re-training scheme to train on labeled and unlabeled
data alternatively. Differently, CR-based works [27, 34]
tend to apply data or model perturbations and enforce the
prediction consistency between two differently-perturbed
views for unlabeled data. In both branches, recent research
[13, 19, 47] demonstrates that strong data perturbations like
CutMix can significantly benefit the SSS training. To further improve the SSS performance, current state-of-the-art
approaches [1, 42] integrate the advanced contrastive learning techniques into the CR-based approaches to exploit the
unlabeled data more efficiently. Works in [21, 24] also aim
to rectify the pseudo-labels through training an additional
correcting network.
Despite their promising performance, SSS studies along
this line come at the cost of introducing extra network
components or additional training procedures. In addition, majorities of them treat unlabeled data equally and
completely ignore the differences and learning difficulties
among unlabeled samples. For instance, randomly and
indiscriminately perturbing unlabeled data can inevitably
over-perturb some difficult-to-train instances. Such overperturbations exceed the generalization capability of the
model and hinder effective learning from unlabeled data.
As discussed in [47], it may also hurt the data distribution.
Moreover, in most SSS studies, final consistency losses on
different unlabeled instances are minimized in an average
manner. However, blindly averaging can implicitly emphasize some difficult-to-train instances and result in model
overfitting to noisy supervision.
In this paper, we emphasize the cruciality of instance differences and aim to provide instance-specific supervision
on unlabeled data in a model-adaptive way. There naturally
exists two main questions. First, how can we differentiate
unlabeled samples? We design an instantaneous instance
“hardness,” to estimate 1) the current generalization ability
of the model and 2) the current training difficulties of distinct unlabeled samples. Its evaluation is closely related to
the training status of the model, e.g., a difficult-to-train sam1
23705

