This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Registration with Maximal Cliques
Xiyu Zhang Jiaqi Yang* Shikun Zhang Yanning Zhang
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
{2426988253, zhangshikun}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; {jqyang, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
As a fundamental problem in computer vision, 3D point
cloud registration (PCR) aims to seek the optimal pose to
align a point cloud pair. In this paper, we present a 3D registration method with maximal cliques (MAC). The key insight is to loosen the previous maximum clique constraint,
and mine more local consensus information in a graph for
accurate pose hypotheses generation: 1) A compatibility
graph is constructed to render the affinity relationship between initial correspondences. 2) We search for maximal
cliques in the graph, each of which represents a consensus
set. We perform node-guided clique selection then, where
each node corresponds to the maximal clique with the greatest graph weight. 3) Transformation hypotheses are computed for the selected cliques by the SVD algorithm and
the best hypothesis is used to perform registration. Extensive experiments on U3M, 3DMatch, 3DLoMatch and
KITTI demonstrate that MAC effectively increases registration accuracy, outperforms various state-of-the-art methods and boosts the performance of deep-learned methods.
MAC combined with deep-learned methods achieves stateof-the-art registration recall of 95.7% / 78.9% on 3DMatch
/ 3DLoMatch.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration (PCR) is an important and fundamental problem in 3D computer vision and has a wide
range of applications in localization [13], 3D object detection [17] and 3D reconstruction [25]. Given two 3D scans
of the same object (or scene), the goal of PCR is to estimate
a six-degree-of-freedom (6-DoF) pose transformation that
accurately aligns the two input point clouds. Using pointto-point feature correspondences is a popular and robust solution to the PCR problem. However, due to the limitations of existing 3D keypoint detectors & descriptors, the
limited overlap between point clouds and data noise, corre* Corresponding author.
Code will be available at https://github.com/zhangxy0517/
3D-Registration-with-Maximal-Cliques.

Success

(b) #corr in maximal clique: 4,
inlier ratio: 100%

(a) #corr: 5182,
inlier ratio: 8.97%

(c) RE=4.12°,
TE=12.88cm

Fail

(b) #corr in maximum clique: 6,
inlier ratio: 0%

(c) RE=12.59°,
TE=63.04cm

Figure 1. Comparison of maximal and maximum cliques on a
low overlapping point cloud pair. Maximal cliques (MAC) effectively choose the optimal 6-DoF transformation hypothesis with
low rotation error (RE) and translation error (TE) for two point
clouds with a low inlier ratio, while the maximum clique fails in
this case.

spondences generated by feature matching usually contain
outliers, resulting in great challenges to accurate 3D registration.
The problem of 3D registration by handling correspondences with outliers has been studied for decades. We
classify them into geometric-only and deep-learned methods. For geometric-only methods [5, 6, 21, 30, 31, 38–41],
random sample consensus (RANSAC) and its variants perform an iterative sampling strategy for registration. Although RANSAC-based methods are simple and efficient,
their performance is highly vulnerable when the outlier rate
increases, and it requires a large number of iterations to obtain acceptable results. Also, a series of global registration methods based on branch-and-bound (BnB) are proposed to search the 6D parameter space and obtain the optimal global solution. The main weakness of these methods is the high computational complexity, especially when
the correspondence set is of a large magnitude and has
an extremely high outlier rate. For deep-learned methods,
some [1–4, 9, 10, 14, 16, 18, 19, 27, 35] focus on improving

17745

