This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blind Image Quality Assessment via Vision-Language Correspondence: A
Multitask Learning Perspective

1

Weixia Zhang1 , Guangtao Zhai1 , Ying Wei2 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Kede Ma2,3 *
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
3
Shenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong
{zwx8981, zhaiguangtao, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
{yingwei, kede.ma}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
We aim at advancing blind image quality assessment
(BIQA), which predicts the human perception of image
quality without any reference information. We develop a
general and automated multitask learning scheme for BIQA
to exploit auxiliary knowledge from other tasks, in a way
that the model parameter sharing and the loss weighting
are determined automatically. Specifically, we first describe
all candidate label combinations (from multiple tasks) using a textual template, and compute the joint probability
from the cosine similarities of the visual-textual embeddings. Predictions of each task can be inferred from the
joint distribution, and optimized by carefully designed loss
functions. Through comprehensive experiments on learning three tasks - BIQA, scene classification, and distortion type identification, we verify that the proposed BIQA
method 1) benefits from the scene classification and distortion type identification tasks and outperforms the stateof-the-art on multiple IQA datasets, 2) is more robust in
the group maximum differentiation competition, and 3) realigns the quality annotations from different IQA datasets
more effectively. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/zwx8981/LIQE.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental computational vision task, blind image quality assessment (BIQA) [63] aims to predict the
visual quality of a digital image with no access to the
underlying pristine-quality counterpart (if any). In the
age of deep learning, the development of BIQA can be
mainly characterized by strategies to mitigate the conflict
between the large number of trainable parameters and the
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) A “parrots” image of pristine quality. (b) A distorted version of (a) by global Gaussian blurring. (c) A distorted
“cityscape” image by the same level of Gaussian blurring. Humans
are able to “see through” the Gaussian blur, and recognize the two
parrots in (b) with no effort, suggesting the internal representations
for the task of visual recognition should be distortion-insensitive.
This makes it conceptually conflicting to BIQA, which relies on
distortion-sensitive representations for quality prediction.

small number of human quality annotations in the form
of mean opinion scores (MOSs). When synthetic distortions (e.g., Gaussian noise and JPEG compression) are
of primary concern, patchwise training [4], quality-aware
pre-training [32, 37, 76], and learning from noisy pseudolabels [2, 38, 67] are practical training tricks with less (or
no) reliance on MOSs. Here the underlying assumptions
are that 1) the pristine-quality images exist and are accessible, 2) the visual distortions can be simulated efficiently
and automatically, and 3) full-reference IQA models [64]
are applicable and provide adequate quality approximations. However, all these assumptions do not hold when
it comes to realistic camera distortion (e.g., sensor noise,
motion blurring or a combination of both). A different
set of training tricks have been explored, including transfer learning [17, 76], meta learning [80], and contrastive
learning [40]. Emerging techniques that combine multiple
datasets for joint training [78] and that identify informative
samples for active fine-tuning [66] can also be seen as ways
to confront the data challenge in BIQA.
In this paper, we aim to accomplish something in the

14071

