This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Observation-Centric SORT:
Rethinking SORT for Robust Multi-Object Tracking
Jinkun Cao1 Jiangmiao Pang2 Xinshuo Weng3 Rawal Khirodkar1 Kris Kitani1
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Nvidia

Abstract
Kalman filter (KF) based methods for multi-object tracking (MOT) make an assumption that objects move linearly.
While this assumption is acceptable for very short periods of occlusion, linear estimates of motion for prolonged
time can be highly inaccurate. Moreover, when there is
no measurement available to update Kalman filter parameters, the standard convention is to trust the priori state
estimations for posteriori update. This leads to the accumulation of errors during a period of occlusion. The error causes significant motion direction variance in practice. In this work, we show that a basic Kalman filter can
still obtain state-of-the-art tracking performance if proper
care is taken to fix the noise accumulated during occlusion. Instead of relying only on the linear state estimate
(i.e., estimation-centric approach), we use object observations (i.e., the measurements by object detector) to compute
a virtual trajectory over the occlusion period to fix the error
accumulation of filter parameters. This allows more time
steps to correct errors accumulated during occlusion. We
name our method Observation-Centric SORT (OC-SORT).
It remains Simple, Online, and Real-Time but improves robustness during occlusion and non-linear motion. Given
off-the-shelf detections as input, OC-SORT runs at 700+
FPS on a single CPU. It achieves state-of-the-art on multiple datasets, including MOT17, MOT20, KITTI, head tracking, and especially DanceTrack where the object motion is
highly non-linear. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/noahcao/OC_SORT.

1. Introduction
We aim to develop a motion model-based multi-object
tracking (MOT) method that is robust to occlusion and nonlinear motion. Most existing motion model-based algorithms assume that the tracking targets have a constant velocity within a time interval, which is called the linear motion assumption. This assumption breaks in many practical
scenarios, but it still works because when the time interval
is small enough, the object’s motion can be reasonably ap-

(a) SORT

(b) The proposed OC-SORT

Figure 1. Samples from the results on DanceTrack [54].
SORT and OC-SORT use the same detection results. On the
third frame, SORT encounters an ID switch for the backflip
target while OC-SORT tracks it consistently.

proximated as linear. In this work, we are motivated by the
fact that most of the errors from motion model-based tracking methods occur when occlusion and non-linear motion
happen together. To mitigate the adverse effects caused, we
first rethink current motion models and recognize some limitations. Then, we propose addressing them for more robust
tracking performance, especially in occlusion.
As the main branch of motion model-based tracking,
filtering-based methods assume a transition function to predict the state of objects on future time steps, which are
called state “estimations”. Besides estimations, they leverage an observation model, such as an object detector, to
derive the state measurements of target objects, also called
“observations”. Observations usually serve as auxiliary information to help update the posteriori parameters of the
filter. The trajectories are still extended by the state estimations. Among this line of work, the most widely used one
is SORT [3], which uses a Kalman filter (KF) to estimate
object states and a linear motion function as the transition

9686

