This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiclass Confidence and Localization Calibration for Object Detection
Bimsara Pathiraja, Malitha Gunawardhana, Muhammad Haris Khan
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
{bimsara.pathiraja,malitha.gunawardhana,muhammad.haris}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Albeit achieving high predictive accuracy across many
challenging computer vision problems, recent studies suggest that deep neural networks (DNNs) tend to make overconfident predictions, rendering them poorly calibrated.
Most of the existing attempts for improving DNN calibration are limited to classification tasks and restricted to calibrating in-domain predictions. Surprisingly, very little
to no attempts have been made in studying the calibration of object detection methods, which occupy a pivotal
space in vision-based security-sensitive, and safety-critical
applications. In this paper, we propose a new train-time
technique for calibrating modern object detection methods. It is capable of jointly calibrating multiclass confidence and box localization by leveraging their predictive
uncertainties. We perform extensive experiments on several
in-domain and out-of-domain detection benchmarks. Results demonstrate that our proposed train-time calibration
method consistently outperforms several baselines in reducing calibration error for both in-domain and out-of-domain
predictions. Our code and models are available at https:
//github.com/bimsarapathiraja/MCCL

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are the backbone of many
top-performing systems due to their high predictive performance across several challenging domains, including computer vision [16,17,41,45,52] and natural language processing [5,7]. However, some recent works [14,15,38,47] report
that DNNs are susceptible to making overconfident predictions, which leaves them miscalibrated. This not only spurs
a mistrust in their predictions, but more importantly, could
lead to disastrous consequences in several safety-critical applications, such as healthcare diagnosis [8, 43], self-driving
cars [13], and legal research tools [50]. For instance, in selfdriving cars, if the perception component wrongly detects a
stop sign as a speed limit sign with high confidence, it can
potentially lead to disastrous outcomes.

Several strategies have been proposed in the recent past
for improving model calibration. A simple calibration technique is a post-processing step that re-scales the outputs
of a trained model using parameters which are learnt on
a hold-out portion of the training set [14]. Despite being
easy to implement, these post-processing approaches are
restrictive. They assume the availability of a hold-out set,
which is not always possible in many real-world settings.
Another route to reducing calibration error is train-time calibration techniques, which intervene at the training time by
involving all model parameters. Typically train-time calibration methods feature an auxiliary loss term that is added
to the application-specific loss function to regularize predictions [18, 27, 33, 35].
We note that almost all prior efforts towards improving
model calibration target the task of visual image classification. Surprisingly, little to no noticeable attempts have been
made in studying the calibration of visual object detection
models. Visual object detection methods account for a major and critical part of many vision-based decision-making
systems. Moreover, most of the current calibration techniques only aim at reducing calibration error for in-domain
predictions. However, in many realistic settings, it is likely
that, after model deployment, the incoming data distribution
could continuously change from the training data distribution. In essence, the model should be well-calibrated for
both in-domain and out-of-domain predictions.
To this end, in this paper, we aim to study the calibration of (modern) deep learning-based object detection
methods. In this pursuit, we observe that, (a) object detection methods are intrinsically miscalibrated, (b) besides displaying noticeable calibration errors for in-domain predictions, they are also poorly calibrated for out-of-domain predictions and, (c) finally, the current calibration techniques
for classification are sub-optimal for object detection (Figure 1). Towards improving the calibration performance of
object detection methods, inspired by the train-time calibration route, we propose a new train-time calibration approach aims at jointly calibrating the predictive multiclass
confidence and bounding box localization.

19734

