This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Metadata-Based RAW Reconstruction via Implicit Neural Functions
Leyi Li1 Huijie Qiao2 Qi Ye1,3 Qinmin Yang1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Key Lab of CS&AUS of Zhejiang Province
{lileyi,qi.ye,qmyang}@zju.edu.cn

qiaohj@ioz.ac.cn

Abstract
Many low-level computer vision tasks are desirable to
utilize the unprocessed RAW image as input, which remains
the linear relationship between pixel values and scene radiance. Recent works advocate to embed the RAW image samples into sRGB images at capture time, and reconstruct the RAW from sRGB by these metadata when needed.
However, there still exist some limitations in making full
use of the metadata. In this paper, instead of following
the perspective of sRGB-to-RAW mapping, we reformulate
the problem as mapping the 2D coordinates of the metadata to its RAW values conditioned on the corresponding
sRGB values. With this novel formulation, we propose to
reconstruct the RAW image with an implicit neural function,
which achieves significant performance improvement (more
than 10dB average PSNR) only with the uniform sampling.
Compared with most deep learning-based approaches, our
method is trained in a self-supervised way that requiring no
pre-training on different camera ISPs. We perform further
experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
and show that our framework is also suitable for the task of
guided super-resolution.

1. Introduction
Low-level computer vision tasks benefit a lot from the
scene-referred RAW images [7, 39, 19, 17, 16], which is
rendered to the display-referred standard RGB (sRGB) images via camera image signal processors (ISPs). Compared
with sRGB images, typical RAW images has the advantages
of linear relationship between pixel values and scene radiance, as well as higher dynamic range. However, RAW
images occupy obviously more memory than the sRGB images in common format like JPEG, which is unfavourable
for transferring and sharing. Moreover, since most display and printing devices are designed for images stored
and shared in sRGB format, it is inconvenient to directly replace sRGB with RAW. Consequently, mapping sRGB images back to their RAW counterparts, which is also called
RAW reconstruction, is regarded as the appropriate way to

PSNR: 49.15dB

PSNR: 46.72dB
1%

sRGB (input)

RIR [25]
PSNR: 51.12dB

SAM [28]
PSNR: 63.59dB
1%

RAW (GT)

CAM [24]

Ours

Figure 1. As RAW images are beneficial to many low-level computer vision tasks, we aim to reconstruct the RAW image from
the corresponding sRGB image with the assistance of extra metadata. In this figure, the reconstructed RAW images are visualized through error maps. As can be seen, our method remarkably
outperforms other related methods with the improvement of more
than 10 dB PSNR. We owe this performance boost to the effectiveness of our proposed implicit neural function (INF) .

utilize the advantage of RAW data [23, 25, 36, 10, 28, 24].
Early RAW reconstruction methods focus on building
standard models to reverse ISPs, which is parameterized
by either explicit functions [4, 18, 14, 5] or neural networks [23, 36, 10]. However, these approaches are faced
with the same issue that a parameterized model is only
suitable for a specific ISP. Meanwhile, a series of methods [25, 26, 28, 24] propose to overcome this problem by
embedding extra metadata into sRGB images at capture
time. For such methods, the main challenge is to improve
the accuracy with lower metadata generation cost. RIR [25]
implements complex optimization algorithm to estimate the
global mapping parameters as metadata, but suffers high
computational cost. SAM [28] adopts a uniform sampling
on RAW images to generate the metadata, which is further
replaced with a sampler network by CAM [24].
For the metadata-based methods of SAM [28] and
CAM [24], the embedded RAW samples stores partial information of ISPs which helps to reconstruct the RAW images
better; also, by conditioning the reconstruction algorithm on

18196

