This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Representation Learning with Adaptive Displacement Generation and
Transformer Fusion for Micro-Expression Recognition
Zhijun Zhai1 , Jianhui Zhao1 *, Chengjiang Long2 , Wenju Xu3 , Shuangjiang He4 , Huijuan Zhao4
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
Meta Reality Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA
3
OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology Inc, Palo Alto, CA, USA
4
FiberHome Telecommunication Technologies Co., Ltd, Wuhan, Hubei, China
zhijunzhai@whu.edu.cn, jianhuizhao@whu.edu.cn, clong1@meta.com, wenjuxu123@gmail.com

Abstract
Micro-expressions are spontaneous, rapid and subtle facial movements that can neither be forged nor suppressed.
They are very important nonverbal communication clues,
but are transient and of low intensity thus difficult to recognize. Recently deep learning based methods have been
developed for micro-expression (ME) recognition using feature extraction and fusion techniques, however, targeted
feature learning and efficient feature fusion still lack further study according to the ME characteristics. To address
these issues, we propose a novel framework Feature Representation Learning with adaptive Displacement Generation
and Transformer fusion (FRL-DGT), in which a convolutional Displacement Generation Module (DGM) with selfsupervised learning is used to extract dynamic features from
onset/apex frames targeted to the subsequent ME recognition task, and a well-designed Transformer Fusion mechanism composed of three Transformer-based fusion modules
(local, global fusions based on AU regions and full-face fusion) is applied to extract the multi-level informative features after DGM for the final ME prediction. The extensive
experiments with solid leave-one-subject-out (LOSO) evaluation results have demonstrated the superiority of our proposed FRL-DGT to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
As a subtle and short-lasting change, micro-expression
(ME) is produced by unconscious contractions of facial
muscles and lasts only 1/25th to 1/5th of a second, as illustrated in Figure 1, revealing a person’s true emotions underneath the disguise [8, 35]. The demands for ME recognition
technology are becoming more and more extensive [2, 18],
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A video sequence depicting the order of which onset,
apex and offset frames occur. Sample frames are from a “surprise”
sequence in CASME II. Our goal is to design a novel feature representation learning method based on an onset-apex frame pair for
facial ME recognition. (Images from CASME II ©Xiaolan Fu)

including multimedia entertainment, film-making, humancomputer interaction, affective computing, business negotiation, teaching and learning, etc. Since MEs have involuntary muscle movements with short duration and low intensity in nature, the research of ME is attractive but difficult [1, 22]. Therefore, it is crucial and desired to extract
robust feature representations to conduct ME analyses.
A lot of feature representation methods are already available including those relying heavily on hand-crafted features with expert experiences [4, 11, 25] and deep learning
techniques [33, 36, 40]. However, the performance of deep
learning networks is still restricted for ME classification,
mainly due to the complexity of ME and insufficient training data [28, 47]. Deep learning methods can automatically
extract optimal features and offer an end-to-end classification, but in the existing solutions, dynamic feature extraction is only taken as a data preprocessing strategy. It is not
integrated with the subsequent neural network, thus failing
to adapt the generated dynamic features to a specific training task, leading to redundancy or missing features. Such
shortcoming motivates us to design a dynamic feature extractor to adapt the subsequent ME recognition task.

22086

