This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Superclass Learning with Representation Enhancement
Jinlong Kang2
Liyuan Shang2
Suyun Zhao1,2, *
Hong Chen1,2
Cuiping Li1,2
1
Key Lab of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering of MOE Renmin University of China
2
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Zeyu Gan1,2

{zygan, zhaosuyun, kangjinlong, shangliyuan4032, chong, licuiping}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
In many real scenarios, data are often divided into
a handful of artificial super categories in terms of expert knowledge rather than the representations of images.
Concretely, a superclass may contain massive and various raw categories, such as refuse sorting. Due to the
lack of common semantic features, the existing classification techniques are intractable to recognize superclass without raw class labels, thus they suffer severe performance
damage or require huge annotation costs. To narrow this
gap, this paper proposes a superclass learning framework,
called SuperClass Learning with Representation Enhancement(SCLRE), to recognize super categories by leveraging enhanced representation. Specifically, by exploiting
the self-attention technique across the batch, SCLRE collapses the boundaries of those raw categories and enhances
the representation of each superclass. On the enhanced
representation space, a superclass-aware decision boundary is then reconstructed. Theoretically, we prove that by
leveraging attention techniques the generalization error of
SCLRE can be bounded under superclass scenarios. Experimentally, extensive results demonstrate that SCLRE outperforms the baseline and other contrastive-based methods on
CIFAR-100 datasets and four high-resolution datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent decades, basic-level raw categorization (e.g.
cats vs dogs, apples vs bananas) has greatly developed
[9, 27] while high-level or super-coarse-grained visual categorization (e.g., recyclable waste vs kitchen waste, creatures vs non-creatures) has received little attention. In many
real scenarios, there often exist a handful of high-level categories, wherein numerous images from diverse basic-level
categories share one common label. We tend to define this
kind of super-coarse-grained class as Superclass.
* Corresponding Author

Shared
Feature

Embedding
Space
Local
Feature

Local
Feature

Toy
Domain
“Apple”
Domain

“Rotten”
Domain

Fruit
Domain
Data Space

Data Space

(a) Image Feature Domain

(b) Separate Fine Domain

Data Space

(c) Superclass Concept Domain

Figure 1. Illustration of superclass learning. The samples from
a same superclass will be scatteredly distributed in the embedding space. The process of superclass learning is to break old
domains and construct new domains. Red indicates the superclass
of kitchen waste, and blue indicates the superclass of recyclable
waste.

Refuse sorting, as an example, is such a recognization
problem with four superclasses, i.e., kitchen waste, recyclable waste, hazardous waste, and others waste. One task
of refuse sorting is to accurately collect various items, such
as rotten fruits, bones, raw vegetables, and eggshells, into
kitchen waste. Traditional recognition needs to identify
what exact basic-level categories they are, then sort them
out. Obviously, it is wasteful and unrealistic for superclass
identification.
Essentially, high-level superclasses contain two characteristics, remarkably distinct from basic-level classes. First,
the basic-level classes contained in superclass problems are
usually scattered and share few common features. As depicted in the top-left corner subgraph of Fig. 1, the fruit
apple, bone, and eggs are remote from each other in feature spaces, though all of them belong to kitchen waste.

24060

