This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recurrent Vision Transformers for Object Detection with Event Cameras
Mathias Gehrig and Davide Scaramuzza
Robotics and Perception Group, University of Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
We present Recurrent Vision Transformers (RVTs), a
novel backbone for object detection with event cameras. Event cameras provide visual information with submillisecond latency at a high-dynamic range and with
strong robustness against motion blur. These unique properties offer great potential for low-latency object detection and tracking in time-critical scenarios. Prior work in
event-based vision has achieved outstanding detection performance but at the cost of substantial inference time, typically beyond 40 milliseconds. By revisiting the high-level
design of recurrent vision backbones, we reduce inference
time by a factor of 6 while retaining similar performance.
To achieve this, we explore a multi-stage design that utilizes three key concepts in each stage: first, a convolutional
prior that can be regarded as a conditional positional embedding. Second, local and dilated global self-attention for
spatial feature interaction. Third, recurrent temporal feature aggregation to minimize latency while retaining temporal information. RVTs can be trained from scratch to reach
state-of-the-art performance on event-based object detection - achieving an mAP of 47.2% on the Gen1 automotive
dataset. At the same time, RVTs offer fast inference (< 12
ms on a T4 GPU) and favorable parameter efficiency (5×
fewer than prior art). Our study brings new insights into
effective design choices that can be fruitful for research beyond event-based vision.
Code: https://github.com/uzh-rpg/RVT

1. Introduction
Time matters for object detection. In 30 milliseconds, a
human can run 0.3 meters, a car on public roads covers up
to 1 meter, and a train can travel over 2 meters. Yet, during
this time, an ordinary camera captures only a single frame.
Frame-based sensors must strike a balance between latency and bandwidth. Given a fixed bandwidth, a framebased camera must trade-off camera resolution and frame
rate. However, in highly dynamic scenes, reducing the resolution or the frame rate may come at the cost of missing
essential scene details, and, in safety-critical scenarios like

Figure 1. Detection performance vs inference time of our RVT
models on the 1 Mpx detection dataset using a T4 GPU. The circle
areas are proportional to the model size.

automotive, this may even cause fatalities.
In recent years, event cameras have emerged as alternative sensor that offers a different trade-off. Instead of
counterbalancing bandwidth requirements and perceptual
latency, they provide visual information at sub-millisecond
latency but sacrifice absolute intensity information. Instead of capturing intensity images, event cameras measure
changes in intensity at the time they occur. This results in
a stream of events, which encode time, location, and polarity of brightness changes [14]. The main advantages of
event cameras are their sub-millisecond latency, very high
dynamic range (> 120 dB), strong robustness to motion
blur, and ability to provide events asynchronously in a continuous manner.
In this work, we aim to utilize these outstanding properties of event cameras for object detection in time-critical
scenarios. Therefore, our objective is to design an approach that reduces the processing latency as much as possible while maintaining high performance. This is challenging because event cameras asynchronously trigger binary
events that are spread of pixel space and time. Hence, we
need to develop detection algorithms that can continuously
associate features in the spatio-temporal domain while simultaneously satisfying strict latency requirements.
Recent work has shown that dynamic graph neural networks (GNNs) [28, 43] and sparse neural networks [10, 34,
55, 57] can theoretically achieve low latency inference for

13884

