This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynIBaR: Neural Dynamic Image-Based Rendering
Zhengqi Li1 , Qianqian Wang1,2 , Forrester Cole1 , Richard Tucker1 , Noah Snavely1
1

Google Research

2

Cornell Tech

0.31
HyperNeRF

Ours

NSFF

GT

HyperNeRF

0.19
NSFF

0.04
Ours

Figure 1. Recent methods for synthesizing novel views from monocular videos of dynamic scenes–like HyperNeRF [50] and NSFF [35]–
struggle to render high-quality views from long videos featuring complex camera and scene motion. We present a new approach that
addresses these limitations, illustrated above via an application to 6DoF video stabilization, where we apply our approach and prior methods
on a 30-second, shaky video clip, and compare novel views rendered along a smoothed camera path (left). On a dynamic scenes dataset
(right) [75], our approach significantly improves rendering fidelity, as indicated by synthesized images and LPIPS errors computed on pixels
corresponding to moving objects (yellow numbers). Please see the supplementary video for full results.

Abstract
We address the problem of synthesizing novel views from
a monocular video depicting a complex dynamic scene. Stateof-the-art methods based on temporally varying Neural Radiance Fields (aka dynamic NeRFs) have shown impressive
results on this task. However, for long videos with complex object motions and uncontrolled camera trajectories,
these methods can produce blurry or inaccurate renderings,
hampering their use in real-world applications. Instead of
encoding the entire dynamic scene within the weights of
MLPs, we present a new approach that addresses these limitations by adopting a volumetric image-based rendering
framework that synthesizes new viewpoints by aggregating
features from nearby views in a scene motion–aware manner.
Our system retains the advantages of prior methods in its
ability to model complex scenes and view-dependent effects,
but also enables synthesizing photo-realistic novel views
from long videos featuring complex scene dynamics with
unconstrained camera trajectories. We demonstrate signifi-

cant improvements over state-of-the-art methods on dynamic
scene datasets, and also apply our approach to in-the-wild
videos with challenging camera and object motion, where
prior methods fail to produce high-quality renderings.

1. Introduction
Computer vision methods can now produce freeviewpoint renderings of static 3D scenes with spectacular
quality. What about moving scenes, like those featuring people or pets? Novel view synthesis from a monocular video of
a dynamic scene is a much more challenging dynamic scene
reconstruction problem. Recent work has made progress
towards synthesizing novel views in both space and time,
thanks to new time-varying neural volumetric representations like HyperNeRF [50] and Neural Scene Flow Fields
(NSFF) [35], which encode spatiotemporally varying scene
content volumetrically within a coordinate-based multi-layer
perceptron (MLP).
However, these dynamic NeRF methods have limitations

4273

