This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lift3D: Synthesize 3D Training Data
by Lifting 2D GAN to 3D Generative Radiance Field
Leheng Li1 * Qing Lian2 Luozhou Wang1 Ningning Ma3 Ying-Cong Chen1,2†
1
HKUST(GZ) 2 HKUST 3 NIO Autonomous Driving

Abstract
This work explores the use of 3D generative models to
synthesize training data for 3D vision tasks. The key requirements of the generative models are that the generated data
should be photorealistic to match the real-world scenarios, and the corresponding 3D attributes should be aligned
with given sampling labels. However, we find that the recent
NeRF-based 3D GANs hardly meet the above requirements
due to their designed generation pipeline and the lack of
explicit 3D supervision. In this work, we propose Lift3D, an
inverted 2D-to-3D generation framework to achieve the data
generation objectives. Lift3D has several merits compared to
prior methods: (1) Unlike previous 3D GANs that the output
resolution is fixed after training, Lift3D can generalize to any
camera intrinsic with higher resolution and photorealistic
output. (2) By lifting well-disentangled 2D GAN to 3D object
NeRF, Lift3D provides explicit 3D information of generated
objects, thus offering accurate 3D annotations for downstream tasks. We evaluate the effectiveness of our framework
by augmenting autonomous driving datasets. Experimental
results demonstrate that our data generation framework can
effectively improve the performance of 3D object detectors.
Code: len-li.github.io/lift3d-web

Goal: Synthesize downstream task dataset
Noise z ∈ 𝑍𝑍
Pose p ∈ 𝑃𝑃

Add novel objects

a: Previous 3D GANs
Noise z ∈ 𝑍𝑍
Pose p ∈ 𝑃𝑃

NeRF

2D

3D
Low
Reso.

High
Reso.
Image

Downstream
Tasks (3D)

2D Upsample

b: Our approach

Noise z ∈ 𝑍𝑍

Train 3D
Detectors

GAN

2D GAN

3D

2D

NeRF

Downstream
Tasks (3D)

Pose p ∈ 𝑃𝑃

Figure 1. Our goal is to generate novel objects and use them to
augment existing datasets. (a) Previous 3D GANs (e.g., [28, 45])
rely on a 2D upsampler to ease the training of 3D generative radiance field, while struggle a trade-off between high-resolution
synthesis and 3D consistency. (b) Our 2D-to-3D lifting process
disentangles the 3D generation from generative image synthesis,
leading to arbitrary rendering resolution and object pose sampling
for downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
It is well known that the training of current deep learning
models requires a large amount of labeled data. However, collecting and labeling the training data is often expensive and
time-consuming. This problem is especially critical when
the data is hard to annotate. For example, it is difficult for
humans to annotate 3D bounding boxes using a 2D image
due to the inherent ill-posed 3D-2D projection (3D bounding
boxes are usually annotated using LiDAR point clouds).
To alleviate this problem, a promising direction is to use
synthetic data to train our models. For example, data generation that can be conveniently performed using 3D graphics
* Work done during an internship at NIO Autonomous Driving.
† Corresponding author.

engines offers incredible convenience for visual perception
tasks. Several such simulated datasets have been created
in recent years [3, 14, 30, 31, 42]. These datasets have been
used successfully to train networks for perception tasks such
as semantic segmentation and object detection. However,
these datasets are expensive to generate, requiring specialists
to model specific objects and environments in detail. Such
datasets also tend to have a large domain gap from real-world
ones.
With the development of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [18], researchers have paid increasing attention to utilize GANs to replace graphics engines for synthesizing training data. For example, BigDatasetGAN [23]
utilizes condition GAN to generate classification datasets via

332

