This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Spot-Guided Transformer for Consistent Local Feature Matching
Jiahuan Yu1 ,* Jiahao Chang1 ,* Jianfeng He1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2†, Jiyang Yu3 , Feng Wu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Deep Space Exploration Lab, 3 China Academy of Space Technology

(a)Reference

(b)Linear Attention

(c)Vanilla Attention

(d)Ours

(e)Matching Result

Figure 1. The visualization of the cross attention heatmaps and matching results. We sample two similar adjacent points in the reference
image (a), marked with green and red. (b) are two heatmaps of the linear cross attention in LoFTR [50] when green and red pixels are
queries. (c) are two heatmaps obtained from the vanilla cross attention. (d) are two heatmaps generated by our spot-guided attention. (e)
are the comparison of the final matching results produced by LoFTR [50] (top) and our method (down).

Abstract
Local feature matching aims at finding correspondences
between a pair of images. Although current detector-free
methods leverage Transformer architecture to obtain an impressive performance, few works consider maintaining local consistency. Meanwhile, most methods struggle with
large scale variations. To deal with the above issues, we
propose Adaptive Spot-Guided Transformer (ASTR) for local feature matching, which jointly models the local consistency and scale variations in a unified coarse-to-fine architecture. The proposed ASTR enjoys several merits. First,
we design a spot-guided aggregation module to avoid interfering with irrelevant areas during feature aggregation.
Second, we design an adaptive scaling module to adjust the
size of grids according to the calculated depth information
at fine stage. Extensive experimental results on five standard benchmarks demonstrate that our ASTR performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods. Our code will be
released on https://astr2023.github.io.

* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

1. Introduction
Local feature matching (LFM) is a fundamental task in
computer vision, which aims to establish correspondence
for local features across image pairs. As a basis for many
3D vision tasks, local feature matching can be applied in
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [49], 3D reconstruction [13],
visual localization [48, 51], and pose estimation [18, 41].
Because of its broad applications, local feature matching
has attracted substantial attention and facilitated the development of many researches [14, 27, 42, 44, 50]. However,
finding consistent and accurate matches is still difficult due
to various challenging factors such as illumination variations, scale changes, poor textures, and repetitive patterns.
To deal with the above challenges, numerous matching
methods have been proposed, which can be generally categorized into two major groups, including detector-based
matching methods [2, 14, 15, 39, 42, 47] and detector-free
matching methods [9, 23, 27, 43, 44, 50]. Detector-based
matching methods require to first design a keypoint detector to extract the keypoints between two images, and
then establish matches between these extracted keypoints.
The quality of detected keypoints will significantly affect the performance of detector-based matching methods.
Therefore, many works aim to improve keypoint detection
through multi-scale detection [36], repeatable and reliable

21898

