This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-level Logit Distillation
Ying Jin1
1

Jiaqi Wang2

Dahua Lin1,2

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{jy021,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, wjqdev@gmail.com

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) aims at distilling the
knowledge from the large teacher model to a lightweight
student model. Mainstream KD methods can be divided
into two categories, logit distillation, and feature distillation. The former is easy to implement, but inferior in performance, while the latter is not applicable to some practical circumstances due to concerns such as privacy and
safety. Towards this dilemma, in this paper, we explore
a stronger logit distillation method via making better utilization of logit outputs. Concretely, we propose a simple yet effective approach to logit distillation via multilevel prediction alignment. Through this framework, the
prediction alignment is not only conducted at the instance
level, but also at the batch and class level, through which
the student model learns instance prediction, input correlation, and category correlation simultaneously. In addition, a prediction augmentation mechanism based on model
calibration further boosts the performance. Extensive experiment results validate that our method enjoys consistently higher performance than previous logit distillation
methods, and even reaches competitive performance with
mainstream feature distillation methods. Code is available at https://github.com/Jin-Ying/MultiLevel-Logit-Distillation.

1. Introduction
The last few decades have witnessed the prosperity of
deep learning in computer vision tasks, such as image classification [3, 7, 14, 26], object detection [21], and segmentation [25, 37]. However, due to their overwhelming large
model size, many deep models rely heavily on computation
and storage resources, which makes it nearly impossible to
deploy them in some practical scenarios, such as mobile devices. Towards this challenge, Knowledge Distillation [10]
(KD) was introduced to reduce model capacity. Concretely,
*

*

Corresponding author.

Teacher

Student
Feature Distillation

Teacher

Student
Logit Distillation

Figure 1. Problem Setting. Feature distillation methods utilize
features in the intermediate layers as well as logit outputs. On the
contrary, logit distillation methods conduct knowledge distillation
merely with logit outputs.

the KD framework consists of one teacher model (large) and
one student model (small). The main objective of KD is
to distill the knowledge in the teacher model to the lightweight student model, which can be readily deployed. Various KD methods [1, 8, 19, 22, 27] have been proposed and
proved to be effective.
Mainstream KD methods fall into two lines of work, 1)
logit distillation and 2) feature distillation. Logit distillation conveys knowledge from the teacher model to the student merely on the logit level. The earliest KD method [10],
which distills knowledge by reducing the divergence of predictions, is an example of logit distillation method. Towards better utilization of teacher knowledge, recent researches [1, 22] shed light on the intermediate layers in the
teacher model, conducting distillation by matching feature
distributions as well as logit outputs among the teacher and
student model. These methods are coined feature distillation methods. We compare feature distillation with logit
distillation in Figure 1.
Utilizing the feature knowledge in intermediate layers,
feature distillation methods are more likely to reach superior performance. However, in some real-world applications, the intrinsic architecture of the teacher model is invis-

24276

