This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Connecting Vision and Language with Video Localized Narratives
Paul Voigtlaender

Soravit Changpinyo Jordi Pont-Tuset
Google Research

Radu Soricut

Vittorio Ferrari

{voigtlaender,schangpi,jponttuset,rsoricut,vittoferrari}@google.com

Abstract
We propose Video Localized Narratives, a new form of
multimodal video annotations connecting vision and language. In the original Localized Narratives [36], annotators speak and move their mouse simultaneously on an image, thus grounding each word with a mouse trace segment.
However, this is challenging on a video. Our new protocol
empowers annotators to tell the story of a video with Localized Narratives, capturing even complex events involving
multiple actors interacting with each other and with several passive objects. We annotated 20k videos of the OVIS,
UVO, and Oops datasets, totalling 1.7M words. Based on
this data, we also construct new benchmarks for the video
narrative grounding and video question answering tasks,
and provide reference results from strong baseline models.
Our annotations are available at https://google.
github.io/video-localized-narratives/.

1. Introduction
Vision and language is a very active research area, which
experienced much exciting progress recently [1, 28, 38, 39,
48]. At the heart of many developments lie datasets connecting still images to captions, while grounding some of
the words in the caption to regions in the image, made with
a variety of protocols [6,20,23,25,29,34,36,44,46,56]. The
recent Localized Narratives (ImLNs) [36] offer a particularly attractive solution: the annotators describe an image
with their voice while simultaneously moving their mouse
over the regions they are describing. Speaking is natural and
efficient, resulting in long captions that describe the whole
scene. Moreover, the synchronization between the voice
and mouse pointer yields dense visual grounding for every
word. Yet, still images only show one instant in time. Annotating videos would be even more interesting, as they show
entire stories, featuring a flow of events involving multiple
actors and objects interacting with each other.
Directly extending ImLNs to video by letting the annotator move their mouse and talk while the video is playing
would lead to a “race against time”, likely resulting in following only one salient object. In this paper, we propose

a better annotation protocol which allows the annotator to
tell the story of the video in a calm environment (Fig. 1-3).
The annotators first watch the video carefully, identify the
main actors (“man”, “ostrich”), and select a few representative key-frames for each actor. Then, for each actor separately, the annotators tell a story: describing the events it
is involved in using their voice, while moving the mouse on
the key-frames over the objects and actions they are talking
about. The annotators mention the actor name, its attributes,
and especially the actions it performs, both on other actors (e.g., “play with the ostrich”) and on passive objects
(e.g., “grabs the cup of food”). For completeness, the annotators also briefly describe the background in a separate
step (bottom row). Working on keyframes avoids the race
against time, and producing a separate narration for each actor enables disentangling situations and thus cleanly capturing even complex events involving multiple actors interacting with each other and with several passive objects. As in
ImLN, this protocol localizes each word with a mouse trace
segment. We take several additional measures to obtain accurate localizations, beyond what was achieved in [36].
We annotated the OVIS [37], UVO [47], and Oops [12]
datasets with Video Localized Narratives (VidLNs). These
datasets cover a general domain, as opposed to only cooking [10, 62] or first-person videos [16]. Moreover, these
videos contain complex scenes with interactions between
multiple actors and passive objects, leading to interesting
stories that are captured by our rich annotations. In total our annotations span 20k videos, 72k actors, and 1.7
million words. On average, each narrative features transcriptions for 3.5 actors, totaling 75.1 words, including 23.0
nouns, 9.5 verbs, and 8.5 adjectives (Fig. 4). Our analysis
demonstrates the high quality of the data. The text descriptions almost always mention objects/actions that are actually present in the video, and the mouse traces do lie inside
their corresponding object in most cases.
The richness of our VidLNs makes them a strong basis for several tasks. We demonstrate this by creating new
benchmarks for the tasks of Video Narrative Grounding
(VNG) and Video Question Answering (VideoQA). The
new VNG task requires a method to localize the nouns in

2461

