This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-IQA: Unsupervised Learning for Image Quality Assessment in the Wild
Avinab Saha∗
Sandeep Mishra∗
Alan C. Bovik
Laboratory of Image and Video Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Automatic Perceptual Image Quality Assessment is a
challenging problem that impacts billions of internet, and
social media users daily. To advance research in this field,
we propose a Mixture of Experts approach to train two separate encoders to learn high-level content and low-level image quality features in an unsupervised setting. The unique
novelty of our approach is its ability to generate low-level
representations of image quality that are complementary to
high-level features representing image content. We refer to
the framework used to train the two encoders as Re-IQA.
For Image Quality Assessment in the Wild, we deploy the
complementary low and high-level image representations
obtained from the Re-IQA framework to train a linear regression model, which is used to map the image representations to the ground truth quality scores, refer Figure 1. Our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple
large-scale image quality assessment databases containing
both real and synthetic distortions, demonstrating how deep
neural networks can be trained in an unsupervised setting to
produce perceptually relevant representations. We conclude
from our experiments that the low and high-level features
obtained are indeed complementary and positively impact
the performance of the linear regressor. A public release of
all the codes associated with this work will be made available on GitHub.

1. Introduction
Millions of digital images are shared daily on social
media platforms such as Instagram, Snapchat, Flickr, etc.
Making robust and accurate Image Quality Assessments
(IQA) that correlate well with human perceptual judgments
is essential to ensuring acceptable levels of visual experience. Social media platforms also use IQA metrics to decide parameter settings for post-upload processing of the
images, such as resizing, compression, enhancement, etc.
* Equal

Contribution,
Correspondence
to
Avinab
Saha
(avinab.saha@utexas.edu) & Sandeep Mishra (sandy.mishra@utexas.edu).
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation AI Institute
for Foundations of Machine Learning (IFML) under Grant 2019844.

Test Image

Quality-Aware
Encoder

Loss propagation

Regressor
Content-Aware
Encoder

Ground truth
Quality Score

Predicted
Score

8192-dimensional
concatenated feature
representaion

L2 Loss

Figure 1. IQA score prediction uses two encoders trained for complementary tasks of learning content and quality aware image representations. The encoders are frozen while the regressor learns to
map image representations to quality predictions.

In addition, predictions generated by IQA algorithms are often used as input to recommendation engines on social media platforms to generate user feeds and responses to search
queries. Thus, accurately predicting the perceptual quality of digital images is a high-stakes endeavor affecting the
way billions of images are stored, processed, and displayed
to the public at large.
IQA metrics can be simply categorized into FullReference (FR) and No-Reference (NR) algorithms. FRIQA algorithms like SSIM [35], FSIM [43], and LPIPS [44]
require both reference (undistorted) and distorted version of
an image to quantify the human-perceivable quality. This
requirement limits their applicability for the “Images in the
Wild” scenario, where the reference image is unavailable.
On the contrary, NR-IQA algorithms like BRISQUE [19],
PaQ-2-PiQ [40], and CONTRIQUE [16] do not require
a reference image nor any knowledge about the kind of
present distortions to quantify human-perceivable quality in
a test image, paving the way for their use in “Images in the
Wild” scenarios.
No-Reference IQA for “Images in the Wild” presents exciting challenges due to the complex interplay among the
various kinds of distortions. Furthermore, due to the intricate nature of the human visual system, image content affects quality perception. In this work, we aim to learn lowlevel quality-aware image representations that are complementary to high-level features representative of image content. Figure 2 illustrates some of the challenges encountered

5846

