This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoMAE V2: Scaling Video Masked Autoencoders with Dual Masking
Limin Wang1,2,* Bingkun Huang1,2,* Zhiyu Zhao1,2 Zhan Tong1
Yinan He2 Yi Wang2 Yali Wang3,2 Yu Qiao2,3
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Shanghai AI Lab, China 3 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, CAS, China

Abstract
Scale is the primary factor for building a powerful foundation model that could well generalize to a variety of
downstream tasks. However, it is still challenging to train
video foundation models with billions of parameters. This
paper shows that video masked autoencoder (VideoMAE)
is a scalable and general self-supervised pre-trainer for
building video foundation models. We scale the VideoMAE
in both model and data with a core design. Specifically, we
present a dual masking strategy for efficient pre-training,
with an encoder operating on a subset of video tokens
and a decoder processing another subset of video tokens.
Although VideoMAE is very efficient due to high masking
ratio in encoder, masking decoder can still further reduce
the overall computational cost. This enables the efficient
pre-training of billion-level models in video. We also use
a progressive training paradigm that involves an initial
pre-training on a diverse multi-sourced unlabeled dataset,
followed by a post-pre-training on a mixed labeled dataset.
Finally, we successfully train a video ViT model with a
billion parameters, which achieves a new state-of-the-art
performance on the datasets of Kinetics (90.0% on K400
and 89.9% on K600) and Something-Something (68.7% on
V1 and 77.0% on V2). In addition, we extensively verify the
pre-trained video ViT models on a variety of downstream
tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness as a general video
representation learner.

1. Introduction
Effectively pre-training large foundation models [5] on
huge amounts of data is becoming a successful paradigm in
learning generic representations for multiple data modalities (e.g., language [6, 16], audio [13, 50], image [3, 22, 79],
video [18, 63, 76], vision-language [27, 55]). These foundation models could be easily adapted to a wide range
of downstream tasks through zero-shot recognition, linear
* : Equal contribution.

Figure 1. VideoMAE with dual masking. To improve the overall
efficiency of computation and memory in video masked autoencoding, we propose to mask the decoder as well and devise the
dual masking strategy. Like encoder, we also apply a masking map
to the deocoder and simply reconstruct a subset of pixel cubes selected by the running cell masking. The final reconstruction loss
only applies for the invisible tokens dropped by the encoder.

probe, prompt tuning, or fine tuning. Compared with the
specialized model to a single task, they exhibit excellent
generalization capabilities and have become the main driving force for advancing many areas in AI.
For vision research, many efforts have been devoted
to developing effective pre-trained models. Among them,
Transformer [65] with masked autoencoding [16] is becoming a conceptually simple yet effective self-supervised
visual learner (e.g., BEiT [3], SimMIM [79], MAE [22]
for images, and MaskFeat [76], VideoMAE [63], MAEST [18] for videos). Meanwhile, based on the results in
language models [6], scaling model capacity and data size
is an important ingredients for its remarkable performance
improvement. However, for pre-trained vision models, very
few work [44] has tried to scale up this masked autoencoder
pre-training to the billion-level models in image domain,
partially due to the high data dimension and the high computational overhead. This issue is even more serious for
scaling up video masked autoencoder pre-training owning
to its extra time dimension and strong temporal variations.
Following the promising findings in languages and images, we aim to study the scaling property of video

14549

