This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Run, Don’t Walk: Chasing Higher FLOPS for Faster Neural Networks
Jierun Chen1 , Shiu-hong Kao1 , Hao He1
Weipeng Zhuo1 , Song Wen2 , Chul-Ho Lee3 , S.-H. Gary Chan1
1
HKUST, 2 Rutgers University, 3 Texas State University

Abstract

(a) Convolution

∗

…

Neural networks have undergone rapid development in
various computer vision tasks such as image classification,
detection and segmentation. While their impressive performance has powered many applications, a roaring trend is
to pursue fast neural networks with low latency and high
throughput for great user experiences, instant responses,
safety reasons, etc.
How to be fast? Instead of asking for more costly computing devices, researchers and practitioners prefer to design cost-effective fast neural networks with reduced computational complexity, mainly measured in the number of

∗

=

=

(b) Depthwise/Group Convolution

…

1. Introduction

∗

…

To design fast neural networks, many works have been
focusing on reducing the number of floating-point operations (FLOPs). We observe that such reduction in FLOPs,
however, does not necessarily lead to a similar level of reduction in latency. This mainly stems from inefficiently low
floating-point operations per second (FLOPS). To achieve
faster networks, we revisit popular operators and demonstrate that such low FLOPS is mainly due to frequent memory access of the operators, especially the depthwise convolution. We hence propose a novel partial convolution
(PConv) that extracts spatial features more efficiently, by
cutting down redundant computation and memory access
simultaneously. Building upon our PConv, we further propose FasterNet, a new family of neural networks, which
attains substantially higher running speed than others on
a wide range of devices, without compromising on accuracy for various vision tasks. For example, on ImageNet1k, our tiny FasterNet-T0 is 2.8×, 3.3×, and 2.4× faster
than MobileViT-XXS on GPU, CPU, and ARM processors,
respectively, while being 2.9% more accurate. Our large
FasterNet-L achieves impressive 83.5% top-1 accuracy, on
par with the emerging Swin-B, while having 36% higher inference throughput on GPU, as well as saving 37% compute
time on CPU. Code is available at https://github.
com/JierunChen/FasterNet.

=

(c) Partial Convolution (ours)

Input/output
Filter
∗ Convolution
Identity

Figure 1. Our partial convolution (PConv) is fast and efficient by
applying filters on only a few input channels while leaving the
remaining ones untouched. PConv obtains lower FLOPs than the
regular convolution and higher FLOPS than the depthwise/group
convolution.

floating-point operations (FLOPs)1 . MobileNets [20, 21,
47], ShuffleNets [40, 76] and GhostNet [13], among others,
leverage the depthwise convolution (DWConv) [48] and/or
group convolution (GConv) [27] to extract spatial features.
However, in the effort to reduce FLOPs, the operators often suffer from the side effect of increased memory access.
MicroNet [29] further decomposes and sparsifies the network to push its FLOPs to an extremely low level. Despite
its improvement in FLOPs, this approach experiences inefficient fragmented computation. Besides, the above networks are often accompanied by additional data manipulations, such as concatenation, shuffling, and pooling, whose
running time tends to be significant for tiny models.
Apart from the above pure convolutional neural networks (CNNs), there is an emerging interest in making vision transformers (ViTs) [11] and multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) architectures [57] smaller and faster. For example, MobileViTs [42, 43, 63] and MobileFormer [6] reduce
the computational complexity by combining DWConv with
a modified attention mechanism. However, they still suffer from the aforementioned issue with DWConv and also
need dedicated hardware support for the modified attention
mechanism. The use of advanced yet time-consuming nor1 We follow a widely adopted definition of FLOPs, as the number of
multiply-adds [36, 76].

12021

