This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLPD: Context-Aware Pedestrian Detection
via Vision-Language Semantic Self-Supervision
Mengyin Liu1*

Jie Jiang2*

Chao Zhu1†

Xu-Cheng Yin1

1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering,
University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
2
Data Platform Department, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
blean@live.cn, zeus@tencent.com, {chaozhu, xuchengyin}@ustb.edu.cn

(a)

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the recent advances of pedestrian detection, enormous applications benefit from such a fundamental per∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

(c)

(d) Prototypical Semantic Contrastive

Semantic Classes

Learning (Self-Supervised)

Human Car Truck
Mapping
to Vision

…

Pretrained Linguistic
Vectors

Mapping
to Vision Segment

loss

Prediction

Aggregate
Pixel Features

Pedestrian Self-Supervised Pretrained Pedestrian
Detector
VL-Model
Detector
Initialize

Task 1: “Learn to Recognize the
Contexts by Cross-Modal Mapping”

Negative
Prototypes
…

Detecting pedestrians accurately in urban scenes is significant for realistic applications like autonomous driving
or video surveillance. However, confusing human-like objects often lead to wrong detections, and small scale or
heavily occluded pedestrians are easily missed due to their
unusual appearances. To address these challenges, only
object regions are inadequate, thus how to fully utilize
more explicit and semantic contexts becomes a key problem.
Meanwhile, previous context-aware pedestrian detectors either only learn latent contexts with visual clues, or need
laborious annotations to obtain explicit and semantic contexts. Therefore, we propose in this paper a novel approach
via Vision-Language semantic self-supervision for contextaware Pedestrian Detection (VLPD) to model explicitly semantic contexts without any extra annotations. Firstly, we
propose a self-supervised Vision-Language Semantic (VLS)
segmentation method, which learns both fully-supervised
pedestrian detection and contextual segmentation via selfgenerated explicit labels of semantic classes by visionlanguage models. Furthermore, a self-supervised Prototypical Semantic Contrastive (PSC) learning method is proposed to better discriminate pedestrians and other classes,
based on more explicit and semantic contexts obtained from
VLS. Extensive experiments on popular benchmarks show
that our proposed VLPD achieves superior performances
over the previous state-of-the-arts, particularly under challenging circumstances like small scale and heavy occlusion.
Code is available at https://github.com/lmy98129/VLPD.

(b)

Positive Prototype
and Queries

Pedestrian Bounding Boxes

Task 2: “Learn to Discriminate
Pedestrians and Contexts”

Figure 1. Illustration of the problems by previous works (top) and
our proposed method to tackle them (bottom). (a) and (b) are predicted by [27]. Green boxes are correct, red ones are human-like
traffic signs, and dashed blue ones are missing heavily occluded or
small scale pedestrians. (c) and (d): We propose self-supervisions
to recognize the contexts and discriminate them from pedestrians.

ception technique, including person re-identification, video
surveillance and autonomous driving. In the meantime,
various challenges from the urban contexts, i.e., pedestrians and non-human objects, still hinder the better performances of detection. For example, confusing appearances
of human-like objects often mislead the detector, as shown
in Figure 1(a). Moreover, heavily occluded or small scale
pedestrians have unusual appearances and cause missing
detections as Figure 1(a) and (b). Apart from the object regions, the contexts are crucial to address these challenges.
Nevertheless, previous methods still make inadequate investigations on the contexts in urban scenarios. For in-

6662

