This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Video ViTs: Sparse Video Tubes for Joint Image and Video Learning
AJ Piergiovanni

Weicheng Kuo
Google Research

Anelia Angelova

{ajpiergi,weicheng,anelia}@google.com

Abstract

Image-Only Stream
2D Patches
…

Video Stream

We present a simple approach which can turn a ViT encoder into an efficient video model, which can seamlessly
work with both image and video inputs. By sparsely sampling the inputs, the model is able to do training and inference from both input modalities. The model is easily
scalable and can be adapted to large-scale pre-trained ViTs
without requiring full finetuning. The model achieves SOTA
results1 .

1. Introduction
Visual Transformers (ViT) [9] have been an ubiquitous backbone for visual representation learning, leading to
many advances in image understanding [43, 54, 66], multimodal tasks [1, 2, 62, 65] and self-supervised learning
[5, 14, 45], etc. However, adaptations to video are both
challenging and computationally intensive, so video versions have been been specially designed to handle the larger
number of frames, for example, ViViT [3], MultiView [61],
TimeSFormer [6] and others [12].
Video understanding is an essential computer vision
task, and a large number of successful video architectures
have been developed [8, 13, 15, 28, 39, 46, 55, 60]. Previous video 3D CNNs [8, 46] were designed to handle videos
by learning spatio-temporal information; they often borrow
from mechanisms for learning on images, for example [8]
use pre-trained image CNN weights by inflating the kernels
to 3D. However, once adapted to videos, these kernels are
no longer applicable to images.
Furthermore, most previous works treat image and video
as entirely different inputs, providing independent methods
for either videos or images, since designing a model capable of handling both is challenging. At the same time,
image and video inputs are inherently related and a single
visual backbone should be able to handle either or both inputs. Previous methods for co-training image and video
[4,25,51,67] adapt the architectures to do so with significant
1 https://sites.google.com/view/tubevit

2D Patches from a few frames

ViT Encoder

…

Class
output

3D Sparse Tubes
…

Figure 1. TubeViT: With Sparse Video Tubes, Vision Transformers (ViTs) use both image and video inputs, providing an efficient
video backbone and more accurate performance.
Tube Patches

…
+ Position Embedding (Fixed Cosine/Sine)

portions of the network designed for each input. Works such
as Perceiver [19] and Flamingo [2] address this by resampling the input and compressing it into a fixed number of
features. However, this resampling can still be expensive for
long videos, and, in the case of Flamingo, it treats videos as
individual frames sampled at 1 FPS, which limits the temporal information. Such low FPS sampling and per-frame
modeling would often be insufficient for datasets which rely
on motion and temporal understanding, e.g., SomethingSomething [18], or for recognizing quick and short actions.
On the other hand, using one of the above-mentioned approaches with dense frames is computationally infeasible.
To address these limitations, we propose a simple but effective model, named TubeViT, to utilize a standard ViT
model seamlessly for both image and videos. We introduce Sparse Video Tubes, a lightweight approach for joint
image and video learning. Our method works by sparsely
sampling various sized 3D space-time tubes from the video
to generate learnable tokens, which are used by the vision
transformer (Figure 1). With sparse video tubes, the model
is easily applicable to either input, and can better leverage
either or both sources of data for training and fine-tuning.
The sparse video tubes naturally handle raw video signals
and image signals which is crucial to understanding actions
and other spatio-temporal information in videos.
Video models are also expensive to train, and previous
works have studied ways to leverage already trained models, such as using frozen ones [27] or adapting them to
videos [31]. We expand on these ideas, and use the Sparse
Video Tubes to adapt much larger ViT models to videos
with lightweight training (Sec. 3.6). Thus we create power-

2214

