This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Abstract Visual Reasoning: An Algebraic Approach for Solving Raven’s
Progressive Matrices
Jingyi Xu1∗ Tushar Vaidya2◦∗ Yufei Wu2◦ * Saket Chandra1 Zhangsheng Lai3◦ Kai Fong Ernest Chong1†
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
Nanyang Technological University 3 Singapore Polytechnic
jingyi xu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

tushar.vaidya@ntu.edu.sg

lai zhangsheng@sp.edu.sg

yufei002@e.ntu.edu.sg

{saket chandra,ernest chong}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We introduce algebraic machine reasoning, a new reasoning framework that is well-suited for abstract reasoning.
Effectively, algebraic machine reasoning reduces the difficult process of novel problem-solving to routine algebraic
computation. The fundamental algebraic objects of interest
are the ideals of some suitably initialized polynomial ring.
We shall explain how solving Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPMs) can be realized as computational problems in
algebra, which combine various well-known algebraic subroutines that include: Computing the Gröbner basis of an
ideal, checking for ideal containment, etc. Crucially, the
additional algebraic structure satisfied by ideals allows for
more operations on ideals beyond set-theoretic operations.
Our algebraic machine reasoning framework is not only
able to select the correct answer from a given answer set,
but also able to generate the correct answer with only the
question matrix given. Experiments on the I-RAVEN dataset
yield an overall 93.2% accuracy, which significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art accuracy of 77.0% and
exceeds human performance at 84.4% accuracy.

1. Introduction
When we think of machine reasoning, nothing captures
our imagination more than the possibility that machines
would eventually surpass humans in intelligence tests and
general reasoning tasks. Even for humans, to excel in IQ
tests, such as the well-known Raven’s progressive matrices
(RPMs) [5], is already a non-trivial feat. A typical RPM
instance is composed of a question matrix and an answer
set; see Fig. 1. A question matrix is a 3 × 3 grid of panels
* Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.
◦ This work was done when the author was previously at SUTD.

Code: https://github.com/Xu-Jingyi/AlgebraicMR

Figure 1. An example of RPM instance from the I-RAVEN dataset.
The correct answer is marked with a red box.

that satisfy certain hidden rules, where the first 8 panels are
filled with geometric entities, and the 9-th panel is “missing”. The goal is to infer the correct answer for this last
panel from among the 8 panels in the given answer set.
The ability to solve RPMs is the quintessential display of
what cognitive scientists call fluid intelligence. The word
“fluid” alludes to the mental agility of discovering new relations and abstractions [28], especially for solving novel
problems not encountered before. Thus, it is not surprising
that abstract reasoning on novel problems is widely hailed
as the hallmark of human intelligence [6].
Although there has been much recent progress in machine reasoning [15, 17, 30–33, 37, 38, 46, 47], a common
criticism [9, 25, 26] is that existing reasoning frameworks
have focused on approaches involving extensive training,
even when solving well-established reasoning tests such as
RPMs. Perhaps most pertinently, as [9] argues, reasoning
tasks such as RPMs should not need task-specific perforThis work is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singapore Program (AISG Award No: AISG-RP2019-015) and under its NRFF Program (NRFFAI1-2019-0005), and by
Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its Tier 2 Research Fund (MOET2EP20221-0016).

6715

