This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AVFormer: Injecting Vision into Frozen Speech Models for Zero-Shot AV-ASR
Paul Hongsuck Seo

Arsha Nagrani
Google Research

Cordelia Schmid

{phseo, anagrani, cordelias}@google.com

Abstract
Audiovisual automatic speech recognition (AV-ASR)
aims to improve the robustness of a speech recognition system by incorporating visual information. Training fully
supervised multimodal models for this task from scratch,
however is limited by the need for large labelled audiovisual datasets (in each downstream domain of interest). We
present AVFormer, a simple method for augmenting audioonly models with visual information, at the same time performing lightweight domain adaptation. We do this by
(i) injecting visual embeddings into a frozen ASR model
using lightweight trainable adaptors. We show that these
can be trained on a small amount of weakly labelled video
data with minimum additional training time and parameters. (ii) We also introduce a simple curriculum scheme during training which we show is crucial to enable the model
to jointly process audio and visual information effectively;
and finally (iii) we show that our model achieves state of
the art zero-shot results on three different AV-ASR benchmarks (How2, VisSpeech and Ego4D), while also crucially
preserving decent performance on traditional audio-only
speech recognition benchmarks (LibriSpeech). Qualitative
results show that our model effectively leverages visual information for robust speech recognition.

1. Introduction
Robustness or adaptation to new, unconstrained domains
is a key challenge for automatic speech recognition (ASR)
systems. In multimodal video (e.g., TV, online edited
videos), the visual stream can provide strong cues for improving the robustness of ASR systems, particularly in
cases where the audio is noisy – this is called audiovisual
ASR (AV-ASR). Unlike works that simply focus on lip motion [1, 7, 23, 24, 29, 33, 37, 41], we investigate the contribution of entire visual frames. This is particularly useful
for videos ‘in the wild’, where the mouth is not necessarily
visible (e.g., egocentric viewpoints, face coverings, and low
resolution etc.) [11]. The task is illustrated in Figure 1.
Building audiovisual datasets for training AV-ASR mod-

Audiovisual input stream

AVFormer

Audiovisual prediction

BEST-RQ

I am using a garlic loaf
to make the sandwich
Audio only prediction

BEST-RQ

I am using a garlic clove to
make the sandwich

Figure 1. Unconstrained audiovisual speech recognition. We
inject vision into a frozen speech model (BEST-RQ, in grey) for
zero-shot audiovisual ASR via lightweight modules to create a parameter and data efficient model called AVFormer (blue). The visual context can provide helpful clues for robust speech recognition especially when the audio signal is noisy (the visual loaf
of bread helps correct the audio-only mistake clove to loaf in the
generated transcript).

els, however, is challenging. Datasets such as How2 [36]
and VisSpeech [11] have been created from instructional
videos online, but they are small in size. Not only are
datasets for this task small, but models are typically large
and consist of both visual and audio encoders. For example the latest AV-ASR model AVATAR [11] shows impressive performance on both datasets, but requires the end-toend training of visual and audio components in tandem, and
consequently a large amount of compute. Like other AVASR works [4, 17, 25, 30, 38], it is also only trained and
tested on instructional videos, and as we show in the experiments, generalizes poorly to new domains in the zero-shot
setting.
On the other hand, there have been a number of recently
released large-scale audio-only models [6, 8, 19] that are
heavily optimised via self-supervised pretraining and largescale supervised training on audio-only data obtained from
audio books such as LibriLight [20] and LibriSpeech [31].
These models contain billions of parameters, are readily
available, and show strong generalization across domains.
Our goal is to reuse the extensive expertise and training time that has been invested in such models, by using
their weights. We are inspired by recent works adapting
frozen foundation models for multi-modal tasks. A popular
example is [2] that injects visual information into large language models (LLMs) for vision-text tasks. The benefit of

22922

