This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Power Bundle Adjustment for Large-Scale 3D Reconstruction
Simon Weber1,2

Nikolaus Demmel1,2

Tin Chon Chan1,2

Daniel Cremers1,2,3

sim.weber@tum.de

nikolaus.demmel@tum.de

tin-1254@hotmail.com

cremers@tum.de

Abstract
We introduce Power Bundle Adjustment as an expansion
type algorithm for solving large-scale bundle adjustment
problems. It is based on the power series expansion of the
inverse Schur complement and constitutes a new family of
solvers that we call inverse expansion methods. We theoretically justify the use of power series and we prove the
convergence of our approach. Using the real-world BAL
dataset we show that the proposed solver challenges the
state-of-the-art iterative methods and significantly accelerates the solution of the normal equation, even for reaching a
very high accuracy. This easy-to-implement solver can also
complement a recently presented distributed bundle adjustment framework. We demonstrate that employing the proposed Power Bundle Adjustment as a sub-problem solver
significantly improves speed and accuracy of the distributed
optimization.

(a) Ladybug-1197

1. Introduction
Bundle adjustment (BA) is a classical computer vision
problem that forms the core component of many 3D reconstruction and Structure from Motion (SfM) algorithms. It
refers to the joint estimation of camera parameters and 3D
landmark positions by minimization of a non-linear reprojection error. The recent emergence of large-scale internet
photo collections [1] raises the need for BA methods that
are scalable with respect to both runtime and memory. And
building accurate city-scale maps for applications such as
augmented reality or autonomous driving brings current BA
approaches to their limits.
As the solution of the normal equation is the most time
consuming step of BA, the Schur complement trick is usually employed to form the reduced camera system (RCS).
This linear system involves only the pose parameters and is
significantly smaller. Its size can be reduced even more by
using a QR factorization, deriving only a matrix square root
of the RCS, and then solving an algebraically equivalent
1 Technical University of Munich
2 Munich Center for Machine Learning
3 University of Oxford

(b) Venice-1102

Figure 1. Power Bundle Adjustment (PoBA) is a novel solver
for large-scale BA problems that is significantly faster and more
memory-efficient than existing solvers. (a) Optimized 3D reconstruction of a Ladybug BAL problem with 1197 poses. PoBA-32
(resp. PoBA-64) is 41% (resp. 36%) faster than the best competing
solver to reach a cost tolerance of 1%. (b) Optimized 3D reconstruction of a Venice BAL problem with 1102 poses. PoBA-32
(resp. PoBA-64) is 71% (resp. 69%) faster than the best competing solver to reach a cost tolerance of √
1%. PoBA is five times (resp.
twice) less memory-consuming than BA (resp. Ceres).

problem [4]. Both the RCS and its square root formulation
are commonly solved by iterative methods such as the popular preconditioned conjugate gradients algorithm for largescale problems or by direct methods such as Cholesky factorization for small-scale problems.
In the following, we will challenge these two families
of solvers by relying on an iterative approximation of the
inverse Schur complement. In particular, our contributions

281

