This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iDisc: Internal Discretization for Monocular Depth Estimation
Luigi Piccinelli

Christos Sakaridis

Fisher Yu

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is fundamental for 3D scene
understanding and downstream applications. However, even
under the supervised setup, it is still challenging and illposed due to the lack of full geometric constraints. Although
a scene can consist of millions of pixels, there are fewer
high-level patterns. We propose iDisc to learn those patterns
with internal discretized representations. The method implicitly partitions the scene into a set of high-level patterns.
In particular, our new module, Internal Discretization (ID),
implements a continuous-discrete-continuous bottleneck to
learn those concepts without supervision. In contrast to
state-of-the-art methods, the proposed model does not enforce any explicit constraints or priors on the depth output.
The whole network with the ID module can be trained endto-end, thanks to the bottleneck module based on attention.
Our method sets the new state of the art with significant
improvements on NYU-Depth v2 and KITTI, outperforming all published methods on the official KITTI benchmark.
iDisc can also achieve state-of-the-art results on surface
normal estimation. Further, we explore the model generalization capability via zero-shot testing. We observe the
compelling need to promote diversification in the outdoor
scenario. Hence, we introduce splits of two autonomous
driving datasets, DDAD and Argoverse. Code is available
at http://vis.xyz/pub/idisc.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is essential in computer vision, especially for understanding geometric relations in a scene. This
task consists in predicting the distance between the projection center and the 3D point corresponding to each pixel.
Depth estimation finds direct significance in downstream
applications such as 3D modeling, robotics, and autonomous
cars. Some research [62] shows that depth estimation is
a crucial prompt to be leveraged for action reasoning and
execution. In particular, we tackle the task of monocular
depth estimation (MDE). MDE is an ill-posed problem due
to its inherent scale ambiguity: the same 2D input image can
correspond to an infinite number of 3D scenes.

(a) Input image

(b) Output depth

(c) Intermediate representations

(d) Internal discretization

Figure 1. We propose iDisc which implicitly enforces an internal
discretization of the scene via a continuous-discrete-continuous
bottleneck. Supervision is applied to the output depth only, i.e., the
fused intermediate representations in (c), while the internal discrete
representations are implicitly learned by the model. (d) displays
some actual internal discretization patterns captured from the input,
e.g., foreground, object relationships, and 3D planes. Our iDisc
model is able to predict high-quality depth maps by capturing scene
interactions and structure.

State-of-the-art (SotA) methods typically involve convolutional networks [12, 13, 24] or, since the advent of vision
Transformer [11], transformer architectures [3, 41, 54, 59].
Most methods either impose geometric constraints on the
image [22, 33, 38, 55], namely, planarity priors or explicitly
discretize the continuous depth range [3,4,13]. The latter can
be viewed as learning frontoparallel planes. These imposed
priors inherently limit the expressiveness of the respective
models, as they cannot model arbitrary depth patterns, ubiquitous in real-world scenes.
We instead propose a more general depth estimation
model, called iDisc, which does not explicitly impose any
constraint on the final prediction. We design an Internal
Discretization (ID) of the scene which is in principle depthagnostic. Our assumption behind this ID is that each scene
can be implicitly described by a set of concepts or patterns,

21477

