This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FeatER: An Efficient Network for Human Reconstruction via Feature
Map-Based TransformER
Ce Zheng1 , Matias Mendieta1 , Taojiannan Yang1 , Guo-Jun Qi2,3 , Chen Chen1
1
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
2
OPPO Seattle Research Center, USA 3 Westlake University
{cezheng,mendieta,taoyang1122}@knights.ucf.edu; guojunq@gmail.com; chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Recently, vision transformers have shown great success
in a set of human reconstruction tasks such as 2D/3D human pose estimation (2D/3D HPE) and human mesh reconstruction (HMR) tasks. In these tasks, feature map representations of the human structural information are often extracted first from the image by a CNN (such as HRNet), and then further processed by transformer to predict
the heatmaps for HPE or HMR. However, existing transformer architectures are not able to process these feature
map inputs directly, forcing an unnatural flattening of the
location-sensitive human structural information. Furthermore, much of the performance benefit in recent HPE and
HMR methods has come at the cost of ever-increasing computation and memory needs. Therefore, to simultaneously
address these problems, we propose FeatER, a novel transformer design that preserves the inherent structure of feature map representations when modeling attention while reducing memory and computational costs. Taking advantage of FeatER, we build an efficient network for a set of
human reconstruction tasks including 2D HPE, 3D HPE,
and HMR. A feature map reconstruction module is applied
to improve the performance of the estimated human pose
and mesh. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of FeatER on various human pose and mesh datasets.
For instance, FeatER outperforms the SOTA method MeshGraphormer by requiring 5% of Params and 16% of MACs
on Human3.6M and 3DPW datasets. The project webpage
is https://zczcwh.github.io/feater_page/.

1. Introduction
Understanding human structure from monocular images
is one of the fundamental topics in computer vision. The
corresponding tasks of Human Pose Estimation (HPE) and
Human Mesh Reconstruction (HMR) have received a grow-

ing interest from researchers, accelerating progress toward
various applications such as VR/AR, virtual try-on, and AI
coaching. However, HPE and HMR from a single image
still remain challenging tasks due to depth ambiguity, occlusion, and complex human body articulation.
Gaussian kernel
on each joint

...

Abstract

Ground-Truth
joint coordinates

GT heatmap
of right ankle

GT heatmap
of left wrist

Figure 1. Generating heatmaps from joint coordinates.

With the blooming of deep learning techniques, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [10, 32, 33] architectures have been extensively utilized in vision tasks and
have achieved impressive performance. Most existing HPE
and HMR models [13, 33] utilize CNN-based architectures
(such as ResNet [10] and HRNet [33]) to predict feature maps, which are supervised by the ground-truth 2D
heatmap representation (encodes the position of each keypoint into a feature map with a Gaussian distribution) as
shown in Fig. 1. This form of output representation and
supervision can make the training process smoother, and
therefore has become the de facto process in HPE’s networks [1, 33, 43].
Recently, the transformer architecture has been fruitfully
adapted from the field of natural language processing (NLP)
into computer vision, where it has enabled state-of-the-art
performance in HPE and HMR tasks [23–25, 38, 47]. The
transformer architecture demonstrates a strong ability to
model global dependencies in comparison to CNNs via its
self-attention mechanism. The long-range correlations between tokens can be captured, which is critical for modeling
the dependencies of different human body parts in HPE and
HMR tasks. Since feature maps concentrate on certain human body parts, we aim to utilize the transformer architec-

13945

