This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpaText: Spatio-Textual Representation for Controllable Image Generation
Omri Avrahami1,2
Thomas Hayes1
Oran Gafni1
Sonal Gupta1
Yaniv Taigman1 Devi Parikh1 Dani Lischinski2 Ohad Fried3 Xi Yin1
1

Meta AI

2

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

3

Reichman University

“in the forest”

“on the moon”

“in the style of
The Starry Night”

“a black cat with a red
sweater and a blue jeans”

“an astronaut”
“a horse”

“a black horse”
“a red full moon”

“in an empty room”

“on a snowy day”

“at the beach”

“a canvas with a painting
of a Corgi dog”
“a metallic yellow robot”

“a mouse”
“boxing gloves”
“a black punching bag”

“a lion”
“a book”

Figure 1. Samples of generated images from input text and our proposed spatio-textual representations. Each pair consists of an (i)
input global text (top left, black), a spatio-textual representation describing each segment using free-form text prompts (left, colored text
and sketches), and (ii) the corresponding generated image (right). As can be seen, SpaText is able to generate high-quality images that
correspond to both the global text and spatio-textual representation content. (The colors are for illustration purposes only, and do not affect
the actual inputs.)

Abstract
Recent text-to-image diffusion models are able to generate convincing results of unprecedented quality. However,
it is nearly impossible to control the shapes of different regions/objects or their layout in a fine-grained fashion. Previous attempts to provide such controls were hindered by
their reliance on a fixed set of labels. To this end, we present
SpaText — a new method for text-to-image generation using
open-vocabulary scene control. In addition to a global text
prompt that describes the entire scene, the user provides a
segmentation map where each region of interest is annotated by a free-form natural language description. Due to
lack of large-scale datasets that have a detailed textual description for each region in the image, we choose to leverage the current large-scale text-to-image datasets and base
our approach on a novel CLIP-based spatio-textual representation, and show its effectiveness on two state-of-the-art
diffusion models: pixel-based and latent-based. In addi-

tion, we show how to extend the classifier-free guidance
method in diffusion models to the multi-conditional case
and present an alternative accelerated inference algorithm.
Finally, we offer several automatic evaluation metrics and
use them, in addition to FID scores and a user study, to
evaluate our method and show that it achieves state-of-theart results on image generation with free-form textual scene
control.

1. Introduction
Imagine you could generate an image by dipping your
digital paintbrush (so to speak) in a “black horse” paint,
then sketching the specific position and posture of the horse,
afterwards, dipping it again in a “red full moon” paint and
sketching it the desired area. Finally, you want the entire
image to be in the style of The Starry Night. Current stateof-the-art text-to-image models [51, 59, 72] leave much to
Project page is available at: https://omriavrahami.com/spatext

18370

