This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViLEM: Visual-Language Error Modeling for Image-Text Retrieval
Yuxin Chen1,2,4* , Zongyang Ma1,2,4* , Ziqi Zhang1,4* , Zhongang Qi2 , Chunfeng Yuan1† , Ying Shan2 ,
Bing Li1 , Weiming Hu1,4,5 , Xiaohu Qie3 , JianPing Wu6
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences; 2 ARC Lab, 3 Tencent PCG;
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences;
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology; 6 Tsinghua University
{chenyuxin2019,mazongyang2020}@ia.ac.cn, {ziqi.zhang,cfyuan,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{zhongangqi,yingsshan,tigerqie}@tencent.com, jianping@cernet.edu.cn

Abstract
Dominant pre-training works for image-text retrieval
adopt “dual-encoder” architecture to enable high efficiency, where two encoders are used to extract image and
text representations and contrastive learning is employed
for global alignment. However, coarse-grained global
alignment ignores detailed semantic associations between
image and text. In this work, we propose a novel proxy
task, named Visual-Language Error Modeling (ViLEM), to
inject detailed image-text association into “dual-encoder”
model by “proofreading” each word in the text against the
corresponding image. Specifically, we first edit the imagepaired text to automatically generate diverse plausible negative texts with pre-trained language models. ViLEM then
enforces the model to discriminate the correctness of each
word in the plausible negative texts and further correct the
wrong words via resorting to image information. Furthermore, we propose a multi-granularity interaction framework to perform ViLEM via interacting text features with
both global and local image features, which associates local text semantics with both high-level visual context and
multi-level local visual information. Our method surpasses
state-of-the-art “dual-encoder” methods by a large margin
on the image-text retrieval task and significantly improves
discriminativeness to local textual semantics. Our model
can also generalize well to video-text retrieval.

1. Introduction
Pre-training vision-language models on massive imagetext pairs to learn transferable representations for imagetext retrieval has attracted a lot of attention in recent
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Visual-Language
Error Modeling

Plausible negative texts
two

three dogs are sitting in the snow with its owner
dogs

Detailed two deer are sitting in the snow with its owner
sitting
Association two dogs are sleeping in the snow with its owner
snow

two dogs are sitting in the yard with its owner
dogs

with

two bears are sitting in the snow watching its owner

Automatic Text Edition

Image

Global
Alignment

Image-Text
Contrastive Learning

two dogs are sitting in the snow with its owner
a baker is working in the kitchen rolling dough
a bowl of potatoes next to a cup of carrots
a green street sign sitting on the side of a pole
a little girl riding a cart while in the airport

Image-paired text & texts of other images

Figure 1. Illustration of image-text contrastive learning (ITC) and
visual-language error modeling (ViLEM). ITC learns image-text
global alignment by distinguishing paired data from unpaired data.
ViLEM establishes detailed image-text association via discriminating and correcting wrong words in plausible negative texts.

years. Previous dominant methods [11, 29, 38] adopt “dualencoder” architecture to enable efficient retrieval, where
two separate encoders are used to extract image and text
representations. They learn a joint image-text embedding
space via constraining the coarse-grained alignment between global image and text features. However, the coarsegrained alignment constraint ignores the capture of detailed
image and text semantics, and associations between them,
impeding the performance improvement of image-text retrieval.
Humans achieve accurate image-text matching by carefully discriminating whether there exists semantic divergence between image and text, i.e., determining whether
each word can be precisely grounded to the image, which
requires a comprehensive perception of each modality and
well association between them. Humans can also eliminate semantic divergence effortlessly by correcting text errors through their powerful semantic association capability.
Inspired by these, we propose a novel proxy task, named

11018

