This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Canonical Fields: Self-Supervised Learning of Pose-Canonicalized Neural Fields
Rohith Agaram1
1

Shaurya Dewan1
Rahul Sajnani2
Adrien Poulenard3
Madhava Krishna1
Srinath Sridhar2

RRC, IIIT-Hyderabad

2

Brown University

3

Stanford University

ivl.cs.brown.edu/projects/canonicalfields

Figure 1. We present Canonical Field Network (CaFi-Net), a self-supervised method for 3D position and orientation (pose) canonicalization of objects represented as neural fields. We specifically focus on neural radiance fields (NeRFs) fitted to raw RGB images of arbitrarily
posed objects (left), and obtain a canonical field (fixed novel view shown on right) where all objects in a category are consistently positioned and oriented.

Abstract
Coordinate-based implicit neural networks, or neural
fields, have emerged as useful representations of shape
and appearance in 3D computer vision. Despite advances,
however, it remains challenging to build neural fields for
categories of objects without datasets like ShapeNet that
provide “canonicalized” object instances that are consistently aligned for their 3D position and orientation (pose).
We present Canonical Field Network (CaFi-Net), a selfsupervised method to canonicalize the 3D pose of instances
from an object category represented as neural fields, specifically neural radiance fields (NeRFs). CaFi-Net directly
learns from continuous and noisy radiance fields using a
Siamese network architecture that is designed to extract
equivariant field features for category-level canonicalization. During inference, our method takes pre-trained neural radiance fields of novel object instances at arbitrary 3D
pose and estimates a canonical field with consistent 3D pose
across the entire category. Extensive experiments on a new
dataset of 1300 NeRF models across 13 object categories
show that our method matches or exceeds the performance
of 3D point cloud-based methods.

1. Introduction
Neural fields [59]—coordinate-based neural networks
that implicitly parameterize signals—have recently gained

significant attention as representations of 3D shape [6, 22,
28], view-dependent appearance [24, 42], and motion [25].
In particular, neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [24], have been
successfully used in problems such as novel view synthesis [3, 4, 66], scene geometry extraction [55, 61], capturing
dynamic scenes [19, 29, 30, 33, 52], 3D semantic segmentation [53, 68], and robotics [1, 13, 21].
Despite the progress, it remains challenging to build neural fields that represent an entire category of objects. Previous methods sidestep the problem by overfitting on a single instance [24], or learning [22, 28, 63] on datasets like
ShapeNet [5] that contain objects that are manually canonicalized – oriented consistently for 3D position and orientation (3D pose) across a category. This strong supervision
makes it easier to learn over categories, but limits their application to data that contain these labels. Recent work has
proposed methods for self-supervised learning of 3D pose
canonicalization [40, 43, 47], however, these operate on 3D
point clouds, meshes, or voxels – but not neural fields.
In this paper, we present Canonical Field Network
(CaFi-Net), a self-supervised method for category-level
canonicalization of the 3D position and orientation of objects represented as neural fields, specifically neural radiance fields. Canonicalizing neural fields is challenging because, unlike 3D point clouds or meshes, neural fields are
continuous, noisy, and hard to manipulate since they are parameterized as the weights of a neural network [60]. To address these challenges, we first extend the notion of equiv-

4500

