This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Are Deep Neural Networks SMARTer than Second Graders?
Anoop Cherian1 Kuan-Chuan Peng1 Suhas Lohit1 Kevin A. Smith2 Joshua B. Tenenbaum2
1
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs (MERL) 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
{cherian, kpeng, slohit}@merl.com

{k2smith, jbt}@mit.edu

Abstract
Recent times have witnessed an increasing number of applications of deep neural networks towards solving tasks
that require superior cognitive abilities, e.g., playing Go,
generating art, question answering (e.g., ChatGPT), etc.
Such a dramatic progress raises the question: how generalizable are neural networks in solving problems that demand
broad skills? To answer this question, we propose SMART:
a Simple Multimodal Algorithmic Reasoning Task and the
associated SMART-101 dataset1 , for evaluating the abstraction, deduction, and generalization abilities of neural networks in solving visuo-linguistic puzzles designed specifically for children in the 6–8 age group. Our dataset consists of 101 unique puzzles; each puzzle comprises a picture
and a question, and their solution needs a mix of several
elementary skills, including arithmetic, algebra, and spatial reasoning, among others. To scale our dataset towards
training deep neural networks, we programmatically generate entirely new instances for each puzzle while retaining
their solution algorithm. To benchmark the performance on
the SMART-101 dataset, we propose a vision-and-language
meta-learning model that can incorporate varied state-ofthe-art neural backbones. Our experiments reveal that
while powerful deep models offer reasonable performances
on puzzles in a supervised setting, they are not better than
random accuracy when analyzed for generalization – filling
this gap may demand new multimodal learning approaches.

1. Introduction
“An attempt will be made to find how to make
machines use language, form abstractions and
concepts, solve kinds of problems now reserved for
humans, and improve themselves.”
The Dartmouth Summer Project on AI, 1956

Deep learning powered AI systems have been increasing in their data modeling abilities at an ever more vigor
1 The SMART-101 dataset is publicly available at:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7761800

Question: Bird Bobbie jumps on a fence from the post on the left
end to the other end. Each jump takes him 4 seconds. He makes 4
jumps ahead and then 1 jump back. Then he again makes 4 jumps
ahead and 1 jump back, and so on. In how many seconds can
Bobbie get from one end to the other end?
Answer Options: A: 64 B: 48 C: 56 D: 68 E: 72
Figure 1. An example puzzle instance from our SMART-101
dataset generated using our programmatic augmentation method.
Solving this puzzle needs various skills such as counting the number of posts, spatially locating Bobbie, and using the details in the
question to derive an algorithm for the solution. At a foundational
level, a reasoning agent needs to recognize abstracted objects such
as posts and identify the bird. The answer is shown below2 .

in the recent times, with compelling applications emerging frequently, many of which may even seem to challenge human abilities. A few notable such feats include but are not limited to game playing (e.g., AlphaGo [60]), language-guided image generation (e.g., the
recent DALLE-2 [54] and ImageGen [56]), creative story
writing (e.g., using GPT-3 [10]), solving university level
math problems [17], algorithmic inference [20], and general
question-answering/dialog (e.g., ChatGPT [48] and variants). Such impressive performances have prompted an introspection into the foundation of what constitutes artificial
intelligence and deriving novel tasks that could challenge
deep models further [13, 37, 45, 55].
While deep neural networks offer compelling performances on specialized tasks on which they are trained on, (i)
how well do they model abstract data, attend on key entities,
and transfer knowledge to solve new problems? (ii) how
fluid are they in acquiring new skills? and (iii) how effective are they in the use of language for visual reasoning? We
task ourselves to understand and seek a way to answer these
2 The answer to the puzzle in Figure 1 is: C.

10834

