This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Detailed Radiance Manifolds for High-Fidelity and 3D-Consistent
Portrait Synthesis from Monocular Image
Yu Deng

Input

Baoyuan Wang Heung-Yeung Shum
Xiaobing.AI

Novel views

Input

Novel views

Figure 1. Novel view synthesis results by our method. It can generate novel views of a portrait image with high-fidelity and strong 3Dconsistency via single forward pass (e.g., see the bangs and wrinkles). Best viewed with zoom-in and see the video for animations.

Abstract
A key challenge for novel view synthesis of monocular
portrait images is 3D consistency under continuous pose
variations. Most existing methods rely on 2D generative
models which often leads to obvious 3D inconsistency artifacts. We present a 3D-consistent novel view synthesis
approach for monocular portrait images based on a recent proposed 3D-aware GAN, namely Generative Radiance Manifolds (GRAM) [13], which has shown strong
3D consistency at multiview image generation of virtual
subjects via the radiance manifolds representation. However, simply learning an encoder to map a real image into
the latent space of GRAM can only reconstruct coarse radiance manifolds without faithful fine details, while improving the reconstruction fidelity via instance-specific optimization is time-consuming. We introduce a novel detail manifolds reconstructor to learn 3D-consistent fine details on the radiance manifolds from monocular images,
and combine them with the coarse radiance manifolds for
high-fidelity reconstruction. The 3D priors derived from
the coarse radiance manifolds are used to regulate the
learned details to ensure reasonable synthesized results

at novel views. Trained on in-the-wild 2D images, our
method achieves high-fidelity and 3D-consistent portrait
synthesis largely outperforming the prior art. Project page:
https://yudeng.github.io/GRAMInverter/

1. Introduction
Synthesizing photorealistic portrait images of a person from an arbitrary viewpoint is an important task that
can benefit diverse downstream applications such as virtual avatar creation and immersive online communication.
Thanks to the thriving of 2D Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18, 25, 26], people can now generate highquality portraits at desired views given only monocular images as input, via a simple invert-then-edit strategy by conducting GAN inversion [1, 38, 52] and latent space editing [12,20,41,50]. However, existing 2D GAN-based methods still have deficiencies when applied to applications that
require more strict 3D consistency (e.g. VR&AR). Due to
the non-physical rendering process of the 2D CNN-based
generators, their synthesized images under pose changes
usually bear certain kinds of multiview inconsistency, such

4423

