This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding and Improving Visual Prompting: A Label-Mapping Perspective
Aochuan Chen1 , Yuguang Yao1 , Pin-Yu Chen2 , Yihua Zhang1 , Sijia Liu1,2
1 Michigan State University, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research

Abstract
We revisit and advance visual prompting (VP), an input
prompting technique for vision tasks. VP can reprogram a
fixed, pre-trained source model to accomplish downstream
tasks in the target domain by simply incorporating universal prompts (in terms of input perturbation patterns) into
downstream data points. Yet, it remains elusive why VP
stays effective even given a ruleless label mapping (LM)
between the source classes and the target classes. Inspired
by the above, we ask: How is LM interrelated with VP? And
how to exploit such a relationship to improve its accuracy
on target tasks? We peer into the influence of LM on VP
and provide an affirmative answer that a better ‘quality’ of
LM (assessed by mapping precision and explanation) can
consistently improve the effectiveness of VP. This is in contrast to the prior art where the factor of LM was missing.
To optimize LM, we propose a new VP framework, termed
ILM-VP (iterative label mapping-based visual prompting),
which automatically re-maps the source labels to the target
labels and progressively improves the target task accuracy
of VP. Further, when using a contrastive language–image
pretrained (CLIP) model for VP, we propose to integrate
an LM process to assist the text prompt selection of CLIP
and to improve the target task accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposal significantly outperforms state-of-the-art VP methods. As highlighted below,
we show that when reprogramming an ImageNet-pretrained
ResNet-18 to 13 target tasks, ILM-VP outperforms baselines by a substantial margin, e.g., 7.9% and 6.7% accuracy
improvements in transfer learning to the target Flowers102
and CIFAR100 datasets. Besides, our proposal on CLIPbased VP provides 13.7% and 7.1% accuracy improvements
on Flowers102 and DTD respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/OPTML-Group/ILM-VP.

1. Introduction
When learning new knowledge, humans typically start to
compare and connect it with the knowledge that they were
familiar with. The same idea is also applied in ML. For example, in the ‘pretraining + finetuning’ paradigm, an ML
model (e.g., deep neural network or DNN) is first trained
on a (usually large) source dataset. When a relevant down-

Fig. 1. Overview of VP pipelines (prior art [1,2] and our proposal termed
ILM-VP) and accuracy improvement achieved by ILM-VP on target image
classification tasks at-a-glance. Generally speaking, VP aims to generate
a universal input perturbation template (i.e., ‘visual prompt’) and leverage a source-target LM (label mapping) in order to drive the fixed source
model (e.g., pretrained on ImageNet-1K) to conduct a target task (e.g.,
Flowers102 image classification). Compared to the prior art, our proposal
(ILM-VP) couples the design of LM with VP training. The resulting LMVP co-design improves target task accuracy across a variety of target image
classification tasks using a fixed ImageNet-pretrained source model.

stream task is present, the pre-trained model is then finetuned over the target dataset. This learning paradigm has
been predominant in the classical transfer learning [3–8] as
well as in the recent deep representation learning [9–13].
However, finetuning the pre-trained model requires either partial or entire model modifications. If the pretrained model is of large size, then it becomes too costly
to store a modified copy of the pre-trained model for each
downstream task. In contrast, visual prompting (VP) (see
Fig. 1), also known as model reprogramming or adversarial reprogramming, provides a new alternative to finetuning [1, 2, 14–17]. Instead of directly modifying the pretrained source model, VP integrates an input transforma-

19133

