This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporally Consistent Online Depth Estimation Using Point-Based Fusion
Numair Khan

Eric Penner

Douglas Lanman

Lei Xiao

numairkhan@meta.com

epenner@meta.com

douglas.lanman@meta.com

lei.xiao@meta.com

Abstract
Depth estimation is an important step in many computer
vision problems such as 3D reconstruction, novel view synthesis, and computational photography. Most existing work
focuses on depth estimation from single frames. When applied to videos, the result lacks temporal consistency, showing flickering and swimming artifacts. In this paper we
aim to estimate temporally consistent depth maps of video
streams in an online setting. This is a difficult problem as
future frames are not available and the method must choose
between enforcing consistency and correcting errors from
previous estimations. The presence of dynamic objects further complicates the problem. We propose to address these
challenges by using a global point cloud that is dynamically updated each frame, along with a learned fusion approach in image space. Our approach encourages consistency while simultaneously allowing updates to handle errors and dynamic objects. Qualitative and quantitative results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art quality
for consistent video depth estimation.

1. Introduction
Depth reconstruction is a long-standing, fundamental
problem in computer vision. For decades the most popular
depth estimation techniques were based on stereo matching [37] or structure-from-motion [36]. However, more recently the best results have come from learning-based approaches [7]. As the overall reconstruction quality has improved, focus has shifted to new areas such as monocular estimation [21,32,33], edge quality [58], and temporal consistency [20, 26]. The latter is particularly important for video
applications in computational photography and virtual reality [3, 52] as inconsistent depth can cause objectionable
flickering and swimming artifacts.
Consistent video depth estimation, however, remains a
difficult problem as even the best method will suffer from
unpredictable errors and imperfections based on scene content, especially in textureless and specular regions. This
difficulty is aggravated by many of the aforementioned applications requiring online reconstruction: future frames are

Figure 1. Comparing monocular depth estimation on the ScanNet
dataset across four frames. Clockwise from Top-left: Input RGB
image, Ranftl et al.’s DPT [32], our result with a DPT backbone,
RGB-D sensor ground truth.

not known beforehand and temporal consistency must be
balanced with error-correction. Furthermore, the presence
of dynamic objects — which are inherently inconsistent —
adds an additional layer of complication. Luo et al. [26]
address these problems by assuming all frames are known
beforehand and fine-tuning their method for each input
video. Other approaches seek an online solution by encoding consistency in network weights either through a training
loss [21], by using recurrent architectures [8, 30, 56], or by
conditioning it on the input [24]. Each method, however,
ultimately relies on the raw output of a neural network being consistent, which is difficult to achieve due to camera
noise and aliasing in convolutional networks [14, 44, 57].
In this work, we propose the use of a global point cloud
to encourage temporal consistency in online video depth estimation. We demonstrate how to tackle the twin problems
of handling dynamic objects and updating a static — and
potentially erroneous — point cloud when future frames
are not known. With quantitative and qualitative results,
we show our approach significantly improves the temporal
consistency of both stereo and monocular depth estimation
without sacrificing spatial quality. In summary, our contributions are as follows:

9119

