This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-based Blurry Frame Interpolation under Blind Exposure
Wenming Weng Yueyi Zhang* Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
wmweng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn
https://github.com/WarranWeng/EBFI-BE

Abstract
Restoring sharp high frame-rate videos from low framerate blurry videos is a challenging problem. Existing
blurry frame interpolation methods assume a predefined
and known exposure time, which suffer from severe performance drop when applied to videos captured in the wild. In
this paper, we study the problem of blurry frame interpolation under blind exposure with the assistance of an event
camera. The high temporal resolution of the event camera
is beneficial to obtain the exposure prior that is lost during
the imaging process. Besides, sharp frames can be restored
using event streams and blurry frames relying on the mutual constraint among them. Therefore, we first propose an
exposure estimation strategy guided by event streams to estimate the lost exposure prior, transforming the blind exposure problem well-posed. Second, we propose to model the
mutual constraint with a temporal-exposure control strategy through iterative residual learning. Our blurry frame
interpolation method achieves a distinct performance boost
over existing methods on both synthetic and self-collected
real-world datasets under blind exposure.

1. Introduction
Blurry frame interpolation (BFI) [23, 46, 73] aims to restore sharp high frame-rate videos from blurry low framerate videos, which is highly desirable for a wide range of
applications, such as novel view interpolation synthesis [7],
frame rate conversion [32], slow motion [21] and interframe video compression [64]. Compared with the cascade
scheme, i.e., combining frame deblurring [20, 25, 33, 39, 40,
51, 53, 59] with frame interpolation [2, 21, 31, 32, 35, 37, 38,
68], the joint method [46, 73] is more effective, which overcomes the error accumulation problem and ambiguity of the
temporal scope [46].
Despite remarkable improvement, prior works [23, 46]
* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62131003 and
62021001.

non-blind exposure
shutter period

blind exposure
shutter period

+

exposure
estimation
mutual constraint

exposure
predefined and
known

(a)

exposure
readout
variable and
unknown

…

…

…

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Non-blind exposure setting and blind exposure setting. (b) Illustrative flow of our solution to blurry frame interpolation under blind exposure.

assume that the exposure time is predefined or known as
the shutter period, which we call non-blind exposure as
shown in the left part of Fig. 1 (a). However, the complicated video capturing in the wild gives rise to variable
and unknown exposure time, which we call blind exposure.
The right part of Fig. 1 (a) presents that the shutter period
is the summation of exposure time and data readout time.
For better imaging, the exposure time is variable to fit the
changing light conditions in the real imaging environments,
especially when the auto-exposure function turns on [73].
Challenges and Motivation. In this paper, we focus on
the problem of BFI under blind exposure, which is practical yet has barely been investigated explicitly. The first
challenge of this problem can be attributed to the intrinsic
imaging mechanism of frame-based cameras. As can be
seen from Fig. 1 (a), the accumulation operation of framebased cameras inevitably results in the loss of motion information during the exposure time. Particularly, the variable
exposure time further leads to the temporal jittering, which
degrades the performance of the video enhancement algorithms with constant/predefined exposure time assumption.
Another challenge is that there misses a decent model as the
effective guidance. Conventional frame-based methods for
BFI are vulnerable to the artifacts introduced by flow-based
warping or straight forward prediction.
To overcome the above challenges, we attempt to provide a new perspective, by resorting to a novel sensor.

1588

