This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Initialization Noise in Image Gradients and Saliency Maps
Ann-Christin Woerl, Jan Disselhoff, Michael Wand
Institute of Computer Science
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany
{awoerl, jadissel, wandm}@uni-mainz.de

Abstract
In this paper, we examine gradients of logits of image
classification CNNs by input pixel values. We observe that
these fluctuate considerably with training randomness, such
as the random initialization of the networks. We extend
our study to gradients of intermediate layers, obtained via
GradCAM, as well as popular network saliency estimators
such as DeepLIFT, SHAP, LIME, Integrated Gradients, and
SmoothGrad. While empirical noise levels vary, qualitatively different attributions to image features are still possible with all of these, which comes with implications for
interpreting such attributions, in particular when seeking
data-driven explanations of the phenomenon generating the
data. Finally, we demonstrate that the observed artefacts
can be removed by marginalization over the initialization
distribution by simple stochastic integration.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have revolutionized pattern recognition, detecting complex structures at accuracies unheard of
just a few years back. Unsurprisingly, the newly gained
ability to model complex phenomena comes at costs in
terms of interpretability — it is usually not obvious how
nonlinear, multi-layer networks reach their conclusions.
Correspondingly, a lot of research has focused on developing interpretation methods for explaining how deep networks make decisions [11], and this often takes the form
of attributing decisions to subsets of the data. In the case
of image classification, this usually leads to saliency maps
highlighting the image area containing decisive information [25, 26, 29, 30, 32, 35].
Strong classifiers trained from example data combined
with suitable attribution methods have opened up a new approach to empirical research: understanding phenomena by
interpreting learned models [9]. We often know of posterior outcomes (for example, tumor growth rates or treatability with certain medication) but do not understand how
these are related to prior data (say, findings from histolog-

Figure 1. Logit-by-image gradients (ResNet18 on ”ImageNette”
[12]). First column: reference image; second column: mean over
50 models, column 3-4: single models with random initialization.

ical tissue samples). If we are able to train a strong classifier that can predict posterior outcomes from prior data, an
attribution method could potentially explain which aspects
of the data predict this outcome (for example, which visual
features in the histology indicate a negative or positive therapeutic prognosis [38]), thereby providing new insight into
the phenomenon at hand.
For these kinds of research approaches, the classifier
might only be an auxiliary tool: In terms of attribution, we
are not primarily interested in explaining how the classifier
reaches its decision (which, of course, would be highly relevant when studying potential data leakage or the fairness
of decisions [4, 27]), but our actual goal is to accurately
characterize which features in the data are related to the
phenomenon to be explained. Ultimately, it is of course impossible to be sure whether an ad-hoc classifier (even with

1766

