This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Erudite Fine-Grained Visual Classification Model
Dongliang Chang1 , Yujun Tong1 , Ruoyi Du1 , Timothy Hospedales2 , Yi-Zhe Song3 , and Zhanyu Ma1∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
3
University of Edinburgh, UK
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK
1
{changdongliang,tongyujun,duruoyi,mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn
2
{t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk 3 {y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
In daily life, most people can quickly identify the coarsegrained label of an object (e.g., car, bird, or aircraft). Then
if we want to go further and identify its fine-grained la* indicates the corresponding author.
1 In this paper, different datasets mean different fine-grained visual classification datasets.

Car
Bird

⋯ Flower
⋯
⋯ Aircraft

⋯

Current fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) models are isolated. In practice, we first need to identify the
coarse-grained label of an object, then select the corresponding FGVC model for recognition. This hinders the application of FGVC algorithms in real-life scenarios. In this
paper, we propose an erudite FGVC model jointly trained
by several different datasets1 , which can efficiently and accurately predict an object’s fine-grained label across the
combined label space. We found through a pilot study
that positive and negative transfers co-occur when different datasets are mixed for training, i.e., the knowledge
from other datasets is not always useful. Therefore, we
first propose a feature disentanglement module and a feature re-fusion module to reduce negative transfer and boost
positive transfer between different datasets. In detail, we
reduce negative transfer by decoupling the deep features
through many dataset-specific feature extractors. Subsequently, these are channel-wise re-fused to facilitate positive transfer. Finally, we propose a meta-learning based
dataset-agnostic spatial attention layer to take full advantage of the multi-dataset training data, given that localisation is dataset-agnostic between different datasets. Experimental results across 11 different mixed-datasets built on
four different FGVC datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. Furthermore, the proposed method
can be easily combined with existing FGVC methods to
obtain state-of-the-art results. Our code is available at
https://github.com/PRIS- CV/An- EruditeFGVC-Model.

FGVC Model Zoo
Coarse-Grained
Visual Classification
Model

An Erudite Fine-Grained
Visual Classification Model

Figure 1. How to identify the fine-grained labels of an object? Current paradigms require two stages: coarse-grained visual classification and fine-grained visual classification. This paper transforms
the two stages of recognition into an erudite fine-grained visual
classification model, which can directly recognise the fine-grained
labels of objects across different coarse-grained label spaces.

bels (e.g., “Ferrari FF Coupe” [20], “Sayornis” [36], “Boeing 727-200” [25]), we must learn and master the relevant
knowledge [7]. However, it is impossible to master the
knowledge and the classification topology of all objects in
the world. A critical way to address this problem is to develop FGVC algorithms which can assist humans to recognise the fine-grained labels of different objects. Moreover,
with the rapid development of deep learning, current FGVC
algorithms have already abandoned the reliance on additional information [2, 5] (e.g., attributes, bounding boxes)
and have achieved recognition performance of over 90% on
a wide range of fine-grained datasets [38], with the ability
to be applied in practice.
However, current FGVC algorithms are all based on a
single source of training data, e.g., a model trained on the
CUB-200-2011 [36] dataset can only be used to recognise
the species of a bird. If we want to identify a model for a
car, we have to use another FGVC model. Specifically, as
shown in Figure 1, if we want to recognise the fine-grained
label of an object, we first need to know its coarse-grained
label (e.g., birds vs. cars) through a coarse-grained visual classification model, then select its corresponding finegrained model from the FGVC model zoo and recognise

7268

