This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-modal Learning with Missing Modality via
Shared-Specific Feature Modelling
Hu Wang∗ , Yuanhong Chen∗ , Congbo Ma∗ , Jodie Avery∗ , Louise Hull∗ , Gustavo Carneiro◦
∗
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
◦
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, UK
∗

{firstname.lastname}@adelaide.edu.au , ◦ g.carneiro@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
The missing modality issue is critical but non-trivial to
be solved by multi-modal models. Current methods aiming to handle the missing modality problem in multi-modal
tasks, either deal with missing modalities only during evaluation or train separate models to handle specific missing
modality settings. In addition, these models are designed
for specific tasks, so for example, classification models are
not easily adapted to segmentation tasks and vice versa. In
this paper, we propose the Shared-Specific Feature Modelling (ShaSpec) method that is considerably simpler and
more effective than competing approaches that address the
issues above. ShaSpec is designed to take advantage of all
available input modalities during training and evaluation
by learning shared and specific features to better represent
the input data. This is achieved from a strategy that relies
on auxiliary tasks based on distribution alignment and domain classification, in addition to a residual feature fusion
procedure. Also, the design simplicity of ShaSpec enables
its easy adaptation to multiple tasks, such as classification
and segmentation. Experiments are conducted on both medical image segmentation and computer vision classification,
with results indicating that ShaSpec outperforms competing
methods by a large margin. For instance, on BraTS2018,
ShaSpec improves the SOTA by more than 3% for enhancing tumour, 5% for tumour core and 3% for whole tumour.1

1. Introduction
Recently, multi-modal learning has attracted much attention by research and industry communities in both computer
vision and medical image analysis. Audio, images and short
videos are becoming common types of media being used
for multiple types model prediction in many different appli1 This work received funding from the Australian Government through
the Medical Research Futures Fund: Primary Health Care Research Data
Infrastructure Grant 2020 and from Endometriosis Australia. G.C. was
supported by Australian Research Council through grant FT190100525.

cations, such as sound source localisation [6], self-driving
vehicles [32] and vision-and-language applications [28,33].
Similarly, in medical domain, combining different modalities to improve diagnosis accuracy has become increasingly
important [9, 29]. For instance, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a common tool for brain tumour detection,
which does not depend only on one type of MRI image, but
on multiple modalities (i.e. Flair, T1, T1 contrast-enhanced
and T2). However, the multi-modal methods above usually require the completeness of all modalities for training and evaluation, limiting their applicability in real-world
with missing-modality challenges when subsets of modalities may be missing during training and testing.
Such challenge has motivated both computer vision [20]
and medical image analysis [5, 8, 13, 25] communities to
study missing-modality multi-modal approaches. Wang et
al. [31] proposed an adversarial co-training network for
missing modality brain tumour segmentation. They specifically introduced a “dedicated” training strategy defined by
a series of independent models that are specifically trained
to each missing situation. Another interesting point about
all previous methods is that they have been specifically developed either for (computer vision) classification [20] or
(medical imaging) segmentation [5, 8, 13, 25, 31], making
their extension to multiple tasks challenging.
In this paper, we propose a multi-model learning with
missing modality approach, called Shared-Specific Feature
Modelling (ShaSpec), which can handle missing modalities in both training and testing, as well as dedicated training and non-dedicated training2 . Also, compared with previously models, ShaSpec is designed with a considerably
simpler and more effective architecture that explores wellunderstood auxiliary tasks (e.g., the distribution alignment
and domain classification of multi-modal features), which
enables ShaSpec to be easily adapted to classification and
segmentation tasks. The main contributions are:
• An extremely simple yet effective multi-modal learn2 Non-dedicated training refers to train one model to handle different

missing modality combinations.

15878

