This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CapDet: Unifying Dense Captioning and Open-World Detection Pretraining
Yanxin Long1 * Youpeng Wen1 * Jianhua Han2 Hang Xu2 Pengzhen Ren1
Wei Zhang2 Shen Zhao1† Xiaodan Liang1,3†
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

3

MBZUAI

longyx9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wenyoupeng0@outlook.com, hanjianhua4@huawei.com,
chromexbjxh@gmail.com, renpzh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wz.zhang@huawei.com,
z-s-06@163.com, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
Benefiting from large-scale vision-language pre-training
on image-text pairs, open-world detection methods have
shown superior generalization ability under the zero-shot
or few-shot detection settings. However, a pre-defined category space is still required during the inference stage of existing methods and only the objects belonging to that space
will be predicted. To introduce a “real” open-world detector, in this paper, we propose a novel method named
CapDet to either predict under a given category list or directly generate the category of predicted bounding boxes.
Specifically, we unify the open-world detection and dense
caption tasks into a single yet effective framework by introducing an additional dense captioning head to generate the region-grounded captions. Besides, adding the captioning task will in turn benefit the generalization of detection performance since the captioning dataset covers more
concepts. Experiment results show that by unifying the
dense caption task, our CapDet has obtained significant
performance improvements (e.g., +2.1% mAP on LVIS rare
classes) over the baseline method on LVIS (1203 classes).
Besides, our CapDet also achieves state-of-the-art performance on dense captioning tasks, e.g., 15.44% mAP on VG
V1.2 and 13.98% on the VG-COCO dataset.

1. Introduction
Most state-of-the-art object detection methods [33, 34,
50] benefit from a large number of densely annotated detection datasets (e.g., COCO [27], Object365 [36], LVIS [12]).
However, this closed-world setting results in the model only
being able to predict categories that appear in the training
set. Considering the ubiquity of new concepts in real-world
scenes, it is very challenging to locate and identify these
new visual concepts. This predictive ability of new concepts
in open-world scenarios has very important research value
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

sofa suitcase

unknown

remote

bottle
lamp

unknown
table
(a) OWD

dense captioning
head

a white wall outlet

alignment

region embeddings

(b) OVD

text encoder

a black lamp
bottle

pre-defined
category list remote,table, bottle, suitcase, sofa,…
(C) CapDet (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of the different model predictions under
OWD, OVD, and our setting. (a) OWD methods [14, 18, 48] are
not able to describe the detailed category of the detected unknown
objects and (b) the performance of OVD methods [8, 12, 41] usually depends on the pre-defined category list during the inference.
(c) With the unification of two pipelines of dense captioning and
open-world detection pre-training, our CapDet can either predict
under a given category list or directly generate the description of
predicted bounding boxes.

in real-world applications such as object search [29, 30], instance registration [45], and human-object interaction modeling [10].
Currently, the open world scenario mainly includes two
tasks: open world object detection [18] (OWD) and openvocabulary object detection [44] (OVD). Although the
paradigms of OWD and OVD tasks are closer to the real
world, the former cannot describe the specific concept of
the detected unknown objects and requires a pre-defined
category list during the inference. Specifically, as shown

15233

