This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation with Source Label Adaptation
Yu-Chu Yu
Hsuan-Tien Lin
National Taiwan University
{r09922104, htlin}@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation (SSDA) involves
learning to classify unseen target data with a few labeled
and lots of unlabeled target data, along with many labeled
source data from a related domain. Current SSDA approaches usually aim at aligning the target data to the labeled source data with feature space mapping and pseudolabel assignments. Nevertheless, such a source-oriented
model can sometimes align the target data to source data
of the wrong classes, degrading the classification performance. This paper presents a novel source-adaptive
paradigm that adapts the source data to match the target data. Our key idea is to view the source data as a
noisily-labeled version of the ideal target data. Then, we
propose an SSDA model that cleans up the label noise dynamically with the help of a robust cleaner component designed from the target perspective. Since the paradigm is
very different from the core ideas behind existing SSDA approaches, our proposed model can be easily coupled with
them to improve their performance. Empirical results on
two state-of-the-art SSDA approaches demonstrate that the
proposed model effectively cleans up the noise within the
source labels and exhibits superior performance over those
approaches across benchmark datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/chu0802/SLA.

1. Introduction
Domain Adaptation (DA) focuses on a general machine
learning scenario where training and test data may originate
from two related but distinct domains: the source domain
and the target domain. Many works have extensively studied unsupervised DA (UDA), where labels in the target domain cannot be accessed, from both theoretical [2, 19, 36]
and algorithmic [5, 8, 15, 16, 22, 37] perspectives. Recently,
Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation (SSDA), another DA
setting that allows access to a few target labels, has received
more research attention because it is a simple yet realistic
setting for application needs.
The most naı̈ve strategy for SSDA, commonly known as

Figure 1. Top. Training the model with the original source labels
might lead to the misalignment of the target data. Bottom. After
cleaning up the noisy source labels with our SLA framework, the
target data can be aligned with the correct classes.

S+T [21, 33], aims to train a model using the source data
and labeled target data with a standard cross entropy loss.
This strategy often suffers from a well-known domain shift
issue, which stems from the gap between different data distributions. To address this issue, many state-of-the-art algorithms attempt to explore better use of the unlabeled target data so that the target distribution can be aligned with
the source distribution. Recently, several Semi-Supervised
Learning (SSL) algorithms have been applied for SSDA
[12, 21, 30] to regularize the unlabeled data, such as entropy minimization [6], pseudo-labeling [11,24] and consistency regularization [1, 24]. These classic source-oriented
strategies have prevailed for a long time. However, these
algorithms typically require the target data to closely match
some semantically similar source data in the feature space.
Therefore, if the S+T space has been misaligned, it can be
challenging to recover from the misalignment, as illustrated
in Figure 1.
We take a deeper look into a specific example from the
Office-Home dataset [27] to confirm the abovementioned issue. Figure 2 visualizes the feature space trained by S+T using t-SNE [3]. We observed that the misalignment between

24100

