This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarially Masking Synthetic to Mimic Real:
Adaptive Noise Injection for Point Cloud Segmentation Adaptation
Guangrui Li1,2 * , Guoliang Kang3† , Xiaohan Wang4 , Yunchao Wei5 , Yi Yang4
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
4

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University

5

2

Baidu Inc.

3

Beihang University

Beijing Jiaotong University.

www.guangrui.li/projects/ASM

Abstract
This paper considers the synthetic-to-real adaptation of
point cloud semantic segmentation, which aims to segment
the real-world point clouds with only synthetic labels available. Contrary to synthetic data which is integral and
clean, point clouds collected by real-world sensors typically contain unexpected and irregular noise because the
sensors may be impacted by various environmental conditions. Consequently, the model trained on ideal synthetic
data may fail to achieve satisfactory segmentation results
on real data.
Influenced
such noise, previous adversarLiDAR
scan fromby
SynLiDAR
ial training methods, which are conventional for 2D adaptation tasks, become less effective. In this paper, we aim to
mitigate the domain gap caused by target noise via learning to mask the source points during the adaptation procedure. To this end, we design a novel learnable masking
module, which takes source features and 3D coordinates as
inputs. We incorporate Gumbel-Softmax operation into the
masking module so that it can generate binary masks and be
trained end-to-end via gradient back-propagation. With the
help of adversarial training, the masking module can learn
to generate source masks to mimic the pattern of irregular
target noise, thereby narrowing the domain gap. We name
scan formMasking”
SemKITTI as adversarial training
our methodLiDAR
“Adversarial
and learnable masking module depend on each other and
cooperate with each other to mitigate the domain gap. Experiments on two synthetic-to-real adaptation benchmarks
verify the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Recently, point cloud semantic segmentation task attracts increasing attention because of its important role in
various real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving,
augmented reality, etc. Despite remarkable progress [5,
* Work done during an internship at Baidu.
† Corresponding author: Guoliang Kang

LiDAR scan from a synthetic dataset (SynLiDAR)

LiDAR scan collected from real world (SemKITTI)

Figure 1. Comparison between a synthetic LiDAR scan (upper)
and a real scan (lower). Both original point clouds and projected
LiDAR images are given. Black points denote noise and other colors denote points from different classes. Compared with synthetic
data which is integral and clean, point clouds collected from the
real world typically contain unexpected and irregular noise which
may impede the adaptation.

19, 30, 33, 39, 40, 62, 63], most algorithms are designed
for the fully-supervised setting, where massive annotated
data is available. In the real world, it is costly and timeconsuming to annotate large amounts of data, especially
for labeling each point in the segmentation task. Syn-

20464

