This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CORA: Adapting CLIP for Open-Vocabulary Detection with
Region Prompting and Anchor Pre-Matching
Xiaoshi Wu1 , Feng Zhu2 , Rui Zhao2,3 , Hongsheng Li1,4
1
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research 3 Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII)
{wuxiaoshi@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, {zhufeng, zhaorui}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Open-vocabulary detection (OVD) is an object detection
task aiming at detecting objects from novel categories beyond the base categories on which the detector is trained.
Recent OVD methods rely on large-scale visual-language
pre-trained models, such as CLIP, for recognizing novel
objects. We identify the two core obstacles that need to
be tackled when incorporating these models into detector training: (1) the distribution mismatch that happens
when applying a VL-model trained on whole images to
region recognition tasks; (2) the difficulty of localizing
objects of unseen classes. To overcome these obstacles,
we propose CORA, a DETR-style framework that adapts
CLIP for Open-vocabulary detection by Region prompting and Anchor pre-matching. Region prompting mitigates
the whole-to-region distribution gap by prompting the region features of the CLIP-based region classifier. Anchor
pre-matching helps learning generalizable object localization by a class-aware matching mechanism. We evaluate
CORA on the COCO OVD benchmark, where we achieve
41.7 AP50 on novel classes, which outperforms the previous SOTA by 2.4 AP50 even without resorting to extra
training data. When extra training data is available, we
train CORA+ on both ground-truth base-category annotations and additional pseudo bounding box labels computed
by CORA. CORA+ achieves 43.1 AP50 on the COCO OVD
benchmark and 28.1 box APr on the LVIS OVD benchmark.
The code is available at https://github.com/tgxs002/CORA.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental vision problem that
involves localizing and classifying objects from images.
Classical object detection requires detecting objects from a
closed set of categories. Extra annotations and training are
required if objects of unseen categories need to be detected.
It has attracted much attention on detecting novel categories

without tedious annotations, or even detect object from new
category, which is currently referred as open-vocabulary detection (OVD) [36].
Recent advances on large-scale vision-language pretrained models, such as CLIP [30], enable new solutions for
tackling OVD. CLIP learns a joint embedding space of images and text from a large-scale image-text dataset, which
shows remarkable capability on visual recognition tasks.
The general idea of applying CLIP for OVD is to treat it
as an open-vocabulary classifier. However, there are two
obstacles hindering the effective use of CLIP on tackling
OVD.
How to adapt CLIP for region-level tasks? One trivial
solution is to crop regions and treat them as separate images, which has been adopted by multiple recent works
[7, 14, 31, 35]. But the distribution gap between region
crops and full images leads to inferior classification accuracy. MEDet [7] mitigates this issue by augmenting the
text feature with image features. However, it requires extra
image-text pairs to prevent overfitting to so-called “base”
classes that are seen during training. RegionCLIP [40] directly acquires regional features by RoIAlign [17], which
is more efficient but cannot generalize well to novel classes
without finetuning. The finetuning is costly when adopting
a larger CLIP model.
How to learn generalizable object proposals? ViLD [14],
OV-DETR [35], Object-Centric-OVD [31], RegionCLIP [40] need RPN or class-agnostic object detectors [29]
to mine potential novel class objects. However, these RPNs
are strongly biased towards the base classes on which they
are trained, while perform poorly on the novel classes.
MEDet [7] and VL-PLM [39] identify this problem and
adopt several handcrafted policies to rule out or merge
low-quality boxes, but the performance is still bounded by
the frozen RPN. OV-DETR [35] learns generalizable object
localization by conditioning box regression on class name
embeddings, but at the cost of efficiency issue induced by
repetitive per-class inference.
In this work, we propose a new framework based on DEtection TRansformers (DETR) [6] that incorporates CLIP

7031

