This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIFu: Depth-Guided Implicit Function for Clothed Human Reconstruction
Dae-Young Song†1,2 , HeeKyung Lee1 , Jeongil Seo1 , Donghyeon Cho*2
1
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, South Korea
2
Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South Korea
{eadyoung,lhk95,seoji}@etri.re.kr, cdh12242@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, implicit function (IF)-based methods for
clothed human reconstruction using a single image have
received a lot of attention. Most existing methods rely on
a 3D embedding branch using volume such as the skinned
multi-person linear (SMPL) model, to compensate for the
lack of information in a single image. Beyond the SMPL,
which provides skinned parametric human 3D information,
in this paper, we propose a new IF-based method, DIFu,
that utilizes a projected depth prior containing textured
and non-parametric human 3D information. In particular, DIFu consists of a generator, an occupancy prediction
network, and a texture prediction network. The generator
takes an RGB image of the human front-side as input, and
hallucinates the human back-side image. After that, depth
maps for front/back images are estimated and projected into
3D volume space. Finally, the occupancy prediction network extracts a pixel-aligned feature and a voxel-aligned
feature through a 2D encoder and a 3D encoder, respectively, and estimates occupancy using these features. Note
that voxel-aligned features are obtained from the projected
depth maps, thus it can contain detailed 3D information
such as hair and cloths. Also, colors of each query point
are also estimated with the texture inference branch. The
effectiveness of DIFu is demonstrated by comparing to recent IF-based models quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
In order to implement virtual reality and an immersive
metaverse environment, a method of reconstructing a realistic human avatar is an important technology. In particular, if
there are methods that can create a complete 3D model with
only a single view image without specialized devices such
* Corresponding author.
† This work was done while the first author was pursuing his Master’s
degree at Chungnam National University.
Project page is at https://eadcat.github.io/DIFu

Figure 1. (a) Front/back color images. (b) Parametric model volume. (c) Depth maps. (d) Projected depth volume.

as 3D scanning, it will be highly useful in various fields
such as education, video conference, and entertainment.
Recently, there have been approaches to clothed human reconstruction using a single-view image based on the implicit function (IF) [1,3,9,10,12,13,22,34,35,43,53]. While
IF-based methods have shown promising results thus far,
their performance is limited in unobservable parts. Also, IFbased methods often produce over-smoothed results, particularly in intricate areas such as clothing and hair. Without
proper conditions for occluded parts, clothed human reconstruction is still an open and highly ill-posed problem.
To overcome the aforementioned issue, there are several attempts using parametric models [17, 23, 30, 44] to
provide geometric patterns of the human. Leveraging
these benefits, Zheng et al. [53] proposed the parametric
model-conditioned implicit representation (PaMIR). Using
the skinned multi-person linear (SMPL) voxel from pretrained GCMR [19], PaMIR extracts 3D geometric features
to overcome depth ambiguity. Also, Xiu et al. [43] proposed a method using the signed distance from the skinned
model to the query points. Their approach helps approximate the distance from the skinned model to the target surface. While the skinned model can provide global and pose
information to condition occluded parts, it may struggle to
estimate surface that is far from the skin, such as long hair
or skirts. As shown in Figure 1-(b), significant discrepancies exist between the detailed surface shape of the skinned
model and the target model. Considering that the parametric
model-based methods are trained by losses on the sampled

8738

