This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayoutFormer++: Conditional Graphic Layout Generation via Constraint
Serialization and Decoding Space Restriction
Zhaoyun Jiang1 *, Jiaqi Guo2 , Shizhao Sun2 , Huayu Deng3 * , Zhongkai Wu4 * ,
Vuksan Mijovic5 , Zijiang James Yang1 , Jian-Guang Lou2 , Dongmei Zhang2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia,
3
Shanghai Jiaotong University, 4 Beihang University, 5 Microsoft,
jzy124@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, deng hy99@sjtu.edu.cn, 17376487@buaa.edu.cn,
zijiang@xjtu.edu.cn, {jiaqiguo, shizsu, vmijovic, jlou, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Conditional graphic layout generation, which generates
realistic layouts according to user constraints, is a challenging task that has not been well-studied yet. First, there
is limited discussion about how to handle diverse user constraints flexibly and uniformly. Second, to make the layouts conform to user constraints, existing work often sacrifices generation quality significantly. In this work, we
propose LayoutFormer++ to tackle the above problems.
First, to flexibly handle diverse constraints, we propose a
constraint serialization scheme, which represents different
user constraints as sequences of tokens with a predefined
format. Then, we formulate conditional layout generation
as a sequence-to-sequence transformation, and leverage
encoder-decoder framework with Transformer as the basic architecture. Furthermore, to make the layout better
meet user requirements without harming quality, we propose a decoding space restriction strategy. Specifically, we
prune the predicted distribution by ignoring the options that
definitely violate user constraints and likely result in lowquality layouts, and make the model samples from the restricted distribution. Experiments demonstrate that LayoutFormer++ outperforms existing approaches on all the
tasks in terms of both better generation quality and less constraint violation.

1. Introduction
Graphic designs greatly facilitate information communication in our daily life. During its creation, the layout, i.e.,
positions and sizes of elements, plays a critical role. To
assist layout design, conditional layout generation, which
takes user constraints as input and generates layouts as out* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

Bad
Quality

Previous Approaches:

Violate
Constraints

Constraints A:

Text Image Toolbar

model A

Constraints B:

Icon at the top of Text
Icon smaller than Text

model B

LayoutFormer++:

Good
Controllability

<sos> image|text|text <eos>
<sos> icon|text||icon top
text|icon smaller text <eos>

Layout
Former++

Sufficient Flexibility

Figure 1. Comparing with previous conditional layout generation
approaches, LayoutFormer++ performs better on sufficient flexibility and good controllability.

put, attracts great attention (see Figure 1). It is different
from unconditional layout generation, which generates layouts freely without constraints, from at least two aspects.
First, the model should be able to handle diverse user constraints, called sufficient flexibility. Figure 2 shows 6 typical
tasks of layout generation in real-world applications including layout completion, layout refinement, layout generation
conditioned on element types, element types with sizes, element relationships, or any of their combinations. Second,
the model should generate layouts conforming to user requirements (i.e., constraints) as many as possible without
harming quality, called good controllability (see Figure 1).
However, existing work cannot meet the above two requirements. First, there is no existing work can support all
the layout generation tasks with different user constraints.
Most existing approaches simply focus on tackling a single conditional layout generation task without considering
whether they can be applied to other tasks. For example,

18403

