This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Music-Driven Group Choreography
Nhat Le1 , Thang Pham1 , Tuong Do1 , Erman Tjiputra1 , Quang D. Tran1 , Anh Nguyen2
1

AIOZ, Singapore 2 University of Liverpool, UK

Figure 1. We present the AIOZ-GDANCE dataset with in-the-wild videos, music audio, and 3D group dance motion.

Abstract

Music-driven choreography is a challenging problem
with a wide variety of industrial applications. Recently,
many methods have been proposed to synthesize dance motions from music for a single dancer. However, generating dance motion for a group remains an open problem.
In this paper, we present AIOZ − GDANCE, a new largescale dataset for music-driven group dance generation. Unlike existing datasets that only support single dance, our
new dataset contains group dance videos, hence supporting the study of group choreography. We propose a semiautonomous labeling method with humans in the loop to
obtain the 3D ground truth for our dataset. The proposed
dataset consists of 16.7 hours of paired music and 3D motion from in-the-wild videos, covering 7 dance styles and 16
music genres. We show that naively applying single dance
generation technique to creating group dance motion may
lead to unsatisfactory results, such as inconsistent movements and collisions between dancers. Based on our new
dataset, we propose a new method that takes an input music
sequence and a set of 3D positions of dancers to efficiently
produce multiple group-coherent choreographies. We propose new evaluation metrics for measuring group dance
quality and perform intensive experiments to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method. Our project facilitates future research on group dance generation and is available at
https://aioz-ai.github.io/AIOZ-GDANCE/.

1. Introduction
Dancing is an important part of human culture and remains one of the most expressive physical art and communication forms [17, 25]. With the rapid development of
digital social media platforms, creating dancing videos has
gained significant attention from social communities. As
the consequence, millions of dancing videos are created and
watched daily on online platforms. Recently, studies of how
to create natural dancing motion from music have attracted
great attention in the research community [8]. The outcome
of dancing generation techniques can be applied to various
applications such as animation [39], virtual idol [47], metaverse [35], or in dance education [4, 51].
Although there is some progress towards synthesizing
realistic dancing motion from music in recent literature [26,
39, 47, 53] creating natural 3D dancing motions from the
input audio remains an open problem [39]. This is mainly
due to (i) the complex structure and the non-linear correlation between continuous human motion and the accompanying music audio, (ii) the variety in the repertoire of dancing motions for an expressive choreography performance,
(iii) the difficulty in generating long motion sequences, and
(iv) the complication of capturing the correspondences between the dancing motion and audio such as dancing styles
or music rhythms. Furthermore, recent works focus on generating dancing motion for solo dancer [16,20,39,61] while

8673

