This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

In-Hand 3D Object Scanning from an RGB Sequence
Shreyas Hampali1,3 * Tomas Hodan1 Luan Tran1
Lingni Ma1 Cem Keskin1 Vincent Lepetit2,3
1

Reality Labs at Meta
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
3
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
2

Project Website:

https://rgbinhandscanning.github.io/

Abstract
We propose a method for in-hand 3D scanning of an unknown object with a monocular camera. Our method relies on a neural implicit surface representation that captures both the geometry and the appearance of the object,
however, by contrast with most NeRF-based methods, we do
not assume that the camera-object relative poses are known.
Instead, we simultaneously optimize both the object shape
and the pose trajectory. As direct optimization over all
shape and pose parameters is prone to fail without coarselevel initialization, we propose an incremental approach
that starts by splitting the sequence into carefully selected
overlapping segments within which the optimization is likely
to succeed. We reconstruct the object shape and track its
poses independently within each segment, then merge all
the segments before performing a global optimization. We
show that our method is able to reconstruct the shape and
color of both textured and challenging texture-less objects,
outperforms classical methods that rely only on appearance
features, and that its performance is close to recent methods
that assume known camera poses.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D models of unknown objects from
multi-view images is a computer vision problem which has
received considerable attention [8]. With a single camera,
a user can capture multiple views of an object by manually
moving the camera around a static object [22, 26, 43] or by
turning the object in front of the camera [27, 31, 35, 36].
The latter approach is often referred to as in-hand object
scanning and is convenient for reconstructing objects from
cameras mounted on an AR/VR headset such as Microsoft
HoloLens or Meta Quest. Moreover, this approach can reconstruct the full object surface, including the bottom part
* Work done as part of Shreyas’s PhD thesis at TU Graz, Austria.

…
1. Input RGB sequence with unknown object poses

Segment 1/n

Segment 2/n

2. Per-segment reconstruction and pose tracking

Model

Trajectory

3. Object model and pose trajectory after global optimization

Figure 1. Given an RGB sequence of a hand manipulating an unknown object, our method reconstructs the 3D shape and color of
the object, even if the object surface is non-Lambertian or poorly
textured. We first split the input sequence into multiple overlapping segments (two in this figure) in which the object can be reliably reconstructed and tracked. We then use the tracked objectcamera relative poses to initialize a global optimization that produces the final object model and refined pose trajectory.

which cannot be scanned in the static-object setup.
Recent 3D reconstruction methods rely on neural representations [19, 21–23, 42, 43]. By contrast with earlier reconstruction methods [9], the recent methods can provide an
accurate dense 3D reconstruction even in non-Lambertian
conditions and without any prior knowledge of the object
shape. However, most of these methods assume that the
camera poses are provided, typically by Structure-fromMotion (SfM) methods such as COLMAP [29]. Apply-

17079

