This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Voting Field for Camera-Space 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Lin Huang1∗
Chung-Ching Lin2
Kevin Lin2
Lin Liang2
Lijuan Wang2
Junsong Yuan1
Zicheng Liu2
1
2
University at Buffalo
Microsoft
https://linhuang17.github.io/NVF
RGB input

3D hand mesh

Wrist

Thumb root

Index tip

Middle root

Ring tip

Pinky root

3D hand pose

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

Figure 1. We present Neural Voting Field (NVF), a 3D implicit function for camera-space 3D hand pose estimation from an RGB image.
Given an RGB input (a), for a 3D point in camera space, NVF can predict its signed distance to hand surface and a set of 4D offset vectors
(1D voting weight and 3D directional vector to each joint). 3D pose is then obtained via dense 3D point-wise voting. Rendered predictions:
(b) Hand mesh generated by Marching Cubes from the predicted signed distances (c-h) Predicted 1D voting weight from each predicted
near-surface 3D point to a joint. (Brighter line means larger weight, darker or no line means smaller weight) (i) Estimated 3D hand pose.

Abstract
We present a unified framework for camera-space 3D
hand pose estimation from a single RGB image based on 3D
implicit representation. As opposed to recent works, most of
which first adopt holistic or pixel-level dense regression to
obtain relative 3D hand pose and then follow with complex
second-stage operations for 3D global root or scale recovery, we propose a novel unified 3D dense regression scheme
to estimate camera-space 3D hand pose via dense 3D pointwise voting in camera frustum. Through direct dense modeling in 3D domain inspired by Pixel-aligned Implicit Functions for 3D detailed reconstruction, our proposed Neural
Voting Field (NVF) fully models 3D dense local evidence
and hand global geometry, helping to alleviate common 2Dto-3D ambiguities. Specifically, for a 3D query point in
camera frustum and its pixel-aligned image feature, NVF,
represented by a Multi-Layer Perceptron, regresses: (i) its
signed distance to the hand surface; (ii) a set of 4D offset
vectors (1D voting weight and 3D directional vector to each
hand joint). Following a vote-casting scheme, 4D offset vectors from near-surface points are selected to calculate the
3D hand joint coordinates by a weighted average. Experiments demonstrate that NVF outperforms existing state-ofthe-art algorithms on FreiHAND dataset for camera-space
3D hand pose estimation. We also adapt NVF to the classic task of root-relative 3D hand pose estimation, for which
NVF also obtains state-of-the-art results on HO3D dataset.
∗ Work done during Lin Huang’s internship with Microsoft.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D hand pose estimation, which aims to recover 3D locations of hand joints from an RGB image, has
attracted enormous attention and made remarkable progress
in recent years. As a long-standing task in computer vision,
it remains challenging due to its highly articulated structure,
large variations in orientations, severe (self-)occlusion, and
inherent 2D-to-3D scale and depth ambiguity.
Owing to the aforementioned difficulties, most existing
works [4–7, 15, 19, 26, 32, 35, 36, 45, 52, 53, 59, 60, 63] focused on one aspect of this general problem, which is to
estimate root-relative 3D hand pose (i.e., 3D joint coordinates relative to a pre-defined root joint, such as hand wrist).
While accurate 2D-to-3D root-relative pose estimation is
essential for numerous applications in Virtual/Augmented
Reality, there are various interactive tasks in which having
root-relative hand joint coordinates alone is insufficient. For
instance, being able to recover camera-space 3D hand joint
coordinates in an AR view enables the user to directly use
hands to manipulate virtual objects moving in 3D space.
To recover robust camera-space 3D hand pose, there
are two key design elements: (1) the ability to exploit
dense local evidence. Specifically, as demonstrated in previous works [14, 16, 25, 29, 34, 42, 43, 47, 49, 54–56], dense
regression-based methods are more effective than holistic
regression-based counterparts for handling highly articulated 3D pose structure, attributed to its ability to maintain the input data spatial structure and fully exploit local
evidence; (2) the ability to reason 3D hand global geome-

8969

