This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Panoptic Compositional Feature Field for Editable Scene Rendering
with Network-Inferred Labels via Metric Learning
Xinhua Cheng† , Yanmin Wu† , Mengxi Jia‡ , Qian Wang† , Jian Zhang†
†
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
‡
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University, China
chengxinhua@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite neural implicit representations demonstrating
impressive high-quality view synthesis capacity, decomposing such representations into objects for instance-level
editing is still challenging. Recent works learn objectcompositional representations supervised by ground truth
instance annotations and produce promising scene editing
results. However, ground truth annotations are manually
labeled and expensive in practice, which limits their usage
in real-world scenes. In this work, we attempt to learn an
object-compositional neural implicit representation for editable scene rendering by leveraging labels inferred from
the off-the-shelf 2D panoptic segmentation networks instead of the ground truth annotations. We propose a novel
framework named Panoptic Compositional Feature Field
(PCFF), which introduces an instance quadruplet metric
learning to build a discriminating panoptic feature space
for reliable scene editing. In addition, we propose semanticrelated strategies to further exploit the correlations between
semantic and appearance attributes for achieving better
rendering results. Experiments on multiple scene datasets
including ScanNet, Replica, and ToyDesk demonstrate that
our proposed method achieves superior performance for
novel view synthesis and produces convincing real-world
scene editing results.

1. Introduction
Virtually editing real-world scenes (e.g., moving a chair
in the room) in mixed reality applications on various devices is desired by users. Such expectation requires an
effective 3D scene representation with the capacity of
photo-realistic view rendering and promising scene decomposition. Recently, emerging neural implicit representations with volumetric rendering, especially neural radiance
field (NeRF) [29] and its variants, show impressive results in novel view synthesis [1, 2] and scene reconstrucThis work was supported in part by the Shenzhen General Research
Project JCYJ20220531093215035. (Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.)

tion [13, 31, 43] tasks. However, decomposing a neural implicit representation into objects for scene editing is challenging due to the holistic scene is implicitly encoded as
weights of connectionist networks like multi-layer perceptions (MLPs). To build object-compositional neural implicit representations for instance-level scene editing, several works [46, 47, 52] jointly encode the appearance and
instance attributes with extra instance annotations.
Though existing object-compositional methods can extract convincing object representations from the scene representation for further editing, their successes rely heavily on ground truth instance annotations, which are labeled manually and expensive to obtain in real-world practice. An intuitive alternative solution is training objectcompositional representations with labels inferred by 2D
panoptic segmentation networks [5, 6, 19] instead of ground
truth instance annotations. However, their methods are
tough to leverage the network-inferred labels due to the significant 3D index inconsistency, and a detailed discussion is
shown in Fig. 1. We note that 3D index consistency is the
instance indices of a specific object are same across multiview labels. Due to network-inferred labels are individually
predicted on each view image and objects order is uncertain
in each prediction, the instance indices of a specific object
in different view labels are usually index inconsistent from
the perspective of 3D, e.g., the index of the target chair is
purple in the label of view #1 and is red in the label of view
#2. Therefore, how to learn object-compositional neural implicit representations by leveraging network-inferred labels
is critical for real-world application.
In this work, we propose a novel panoptic compositional
feature field (PCFF), which integrates the deep metric learning [18, 27] into the learning of object-compositional representations to overcome the challenge of using 2D network predictions. Concretely, we employ metric learning
to constrain the distances among projected panoptic features of pixels in each view separately, which circumvents
the requirement of 3D index consistent labels and builds a
discriminating panoptic feature space. Combined with the

4947

