This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ABLE-NeRF: Attention-Based Rendering with Learnable Embeddings for
Neural Radiance Field
Zhe Jun Tang1
1

Tat-Jen Cham2

Haiyu Zhao3

2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Nanyang Technological University
3
SenseTime Research

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is a popular method in
representing 3D scenes by optimising a continuous volumetric scene function. Its large success which lies in applying
volumetric rendering (VR) is also its Achilles’ heel in producing view-dependent effects. As a consequence, glossy
and transparent surfaces often appear murky. A remedy
to reduce these artefacts is to constrain this VR equation
by excluding volumes with back-facing normal. While this
approach has some success in rendering glossy surfaces,
translucent objects are still poorly represented. In this paper, we present an alternative to the physics-based VR approach by introducing a self-attention-based framework on
volumes along a ray. In addition, inspired by modern game
engines which utilise Light Probes to store local lighting
passing through the scene, we incorporate Learnable Embeddings to capture view dependent effects within the scene.
Our method, which we call ABLE-NeRF, significantly reduces ‘blurry’ glossy surfaces in rendering and produces
realistic translucent surfaces which lack in prior art. In the
Blender dataset, ABLE-NeRF achieves SOTA results and
surpasses Ref-NeRF in all 3 image quality metrics PSNR,
SSIM, LPIPS.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has become the de facto
method for 3D scene representation. By representing the
scene as a continuous function, NeRF is able to generate
photo-realistic novel view images by marching camera rays
through the scene. NeRF first samples a set of 3D points
along a camera ray and outputs its outgoing radiance. The
final pixel colour of a camera ray is then computed using volumetric rendering (VR) which colours are alphacomposited. This simple approach allows NeRF to generate impressive photo-realistic novel views of a complex
3D scene. However, NeRF is unable to produce accurate
colours of objects with view-dependent effects. Colours of

Figure 1. We illustrate two views of the Blender ’Drums’ Scene.
The surface of the drums exhibit either a translucent surface or
a reflective surface at different angles. As shown, Ref-NeRF
model has severe difficulties interpolating between the translucent and reflective surfaces as the viewing angle changes. Our
method demonstrates its superiority over NeRF rendering models
by producing such accurate view-dependent effects. In addition,
the specularity of the cymbals are rendered much closer to ground
truth compared to Ref-NeRF.

translucent objects often appear murky and glossy objects
have blurry specular highlights. Our work aims to reduce
these artefacts.
The exhibited artefacts of the NeRF rendering model is
largely due to the inherent usage of VR as features are ac-

16559

