This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Robustness of Vision Transformers by Reducing
Sensitivity to Patch Corruptions
Yong Guo, David Stutz, Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
{yongguo,david.stutz,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Despite their success, vision transformers still remain
vulnerable to image corruptions, such as noise or blur. Indeed, we find that the vulnerability mainly stems from the
unstable self-attention mechanism, which is inherently built
upon patch-based inputs and often becomes overly sensitive to the corruptions across patches. For example, when
we only occlude a small number of patches with random
noise (e.g., 10%), these patch corruptions would lead to severe accuracy drops and greatly distract intermediate attention layers. To address this, we propose a new training
method that improves the robustness of transformers from a
new perspective – reducing sensitivity to patch corruptions
(RSPC). Specifically, we first identify and occlude/corrupt
the most vulnerable patches and then explicitly reduce sensitivity to them by aligning the intermediate features between clean and corrupted examples. We highlight that the
construction of patch corruptions is learned adversarially
to the following feature alignment process, which is particularly effective and essentially different from existing methods. In experiments, our RSPC greatly improves the stability of attention layers and consistently yields better robustness on various benchmarks, including CIFAR-10/100C, ImageNet-A, ImageNet-C, and ImageNet-P.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of vision transformers [10] in recent
years, they still lack robustness against common image corruptions [24, 52], such as noise or blur, and adversarial perturbations [13, 15, 42]. For example, even for the state-ofthe-art robust architectures, e.g., RVT [34] and FAN [61],
the accuracy drops by more than 15% on corrupted examples, e.g., with Gaussian noise, as shown in Figure 2 (blue
star on the right). We suspect that this vulnerability is inherent to the used self-attention mechanism, which relies on
patch-based inputs and may easily become overly sensitive
to corruptions or perturbations upon them.

Figure 1. Sensitivity to patch perturbations/corruptions in terms
of confidence score of the ground-truth class. We randomly select
10% patches to be perturbed/corrupted for RVT-Ti [34]. In practice, adversarial patch perturbations (often invisible) significantly
reduce the confidence, indicating the high sensitivity of transformers to patches. However, directly adding random noise only yields
marginal degradation even with the highest severity in ImageNetC [24]. By contrast, occluding patches with noise greatly reduces
the confidence and can be used as a good proxy of adversarial
patch perturbations to reveal the patch sensitivity issue.

A piece of empirical evidence is that transformers can
be easily misled by the adversarial perturbations only on
very few patches (even a single patch [13]). As shown
in Figure 1, given a clean image, we randomly sample a
small number of patches, e.g., 10%, and introduce perturbations/corruptions into them. Considering RVT [34] as
a strong baseline, when we generate adversarial perturbations using PGD-5, these perturbed patches greatly reduce
the confidence score from 63.8% to 3.1% and result in a
misclassification. Nevertheless, generating adversarial perturbations can be very computationally expensive (e.g., 5×
longer training time for PGD-5), which makes adversarial
training often infeasible on large-scale datasets [26, 39, 53],
e.g., ImageNet. Instead, an efficient way is directly adding
corruptions, e.g., random noise, on top of these patches. In
practice, even with the highest severity in ImageNet-C [24],
these corrupted patches only yield a marginal degradation
in terms of confidence score. Thus, how to construct patch
corruptions that greatly misleads the model and can be produced very efficiently becomes a critical problem.
Interestingly, if we totally discard these patches and occlude them with random noise, the model becomes very vulnerable again, e.g., with the confidence score dropping from
63.8% to 17.3% in Figure 1. More critically, these corrupted

4108

