This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

In-the-Wild Driving Data

GINA-3D

GINA-3D: Learning to Generate Implicit Neural Assets in the Wild
Bokui Shen1∗

Xinchen Yan2 Charles R. Qi2 Mahyar Najibi2 Boyang Deng1,2†
Leonidas Guibas3 Yin Zhou2 Dragomir Anguelov2
1
Stanford University, 2 Waymo LLC, 3 Google

Reconstruction

“Same kind…”

In-the-wild Driving Data

“Similar size…”

“Night time…”

“Random…”

GINA-3D Synthesis

Composition with Background NeRF

Figure 1. Leveraging in-the-wild data for generative assets modeling embodies a scalable approach for simulation. GINA-3D uses real-world
driving data to perform various synthesis tasks for realistic 3D implicit neural assets. Left: Multi-sensor observations in the wild. Middle:
Asset reconstruction and conditional synthesis. Right: Scene composition with background neural fields [1].

Abstract
Modeling the 3D world from sensor data for simulation is a scalable way of developing testing and validation environments for robotic learning problems such as
autonomous driving. However, manually creating or recreating real-world-like environments is difficult, expensive,
and not scalable. Recent generative model techniques have
shown promising progress to address such challenges by
learning 3D assets using only plentiful 2D images – but still
suffer limitations as they leverage either human-curated image datasets or renderings from manually-created synthetic
3D environments. In this paper, we introduce GINA-3D, a
generative model that uses real-world driving data from camera and LiDAR sensors to create realistic 3D implicit neural
assets of diverse vehicles and pedestrians. Compared to the
existing image datasets, the real-world driving setting poses
new challenges due to occlusions, lighting-variations and
long-tail distributions. GINA-3D tackles these challenges by
decoupling representation learning and generative modeling into two stages with a learned tri-plane latent structure,
inspired by recent advances in generative modeling of images. To evaluate our approach, we construct a large-scale
object-centric dataset containing over 520K images of vehicles and pedestrians from the Waymo Open Dataset, and
a new set of 80K images of long-tail instances such as construction equipment, garbage trucks, and cable cars. We
compare our model with existing approaches and demonstrate that it achieves state-of-the-art performance in quality
and diversity for both generated images and geometries.
∗ Work done during an internship at Waymo. † Work done at Waymo.

1. Introduction
Learning to perceive, reason, and interact with the 3D
world has been a longstanding challenge in the computer
vision and robotics community for decades [2–9]. Modern robotic systems [10–16] deployed in the wild are often
equipped with multiple sensors (e.g. cameras, LiDARs, and
Radars) that perceive the 3D environments, followed by an
intelligent unit for reasoning and interacting with the complex scene dynamics. End-to-end testing and validating these
intelligent agents in the real-world environments are difficult and expensive, especially in safety critical and resource
constrained domains like autonomous driving.
On the other hand, the use of simulated data has proliferated over the last few years to train and evaluate the
intelligent agents under controlled settings [17–27] in a safe,
scalable and verifiable manner. Such developments were
fueled by rapid advances in computer graphics, including
rendering frameworks [28–30], physical simulation [31, 32]
and large-scale open-sourced asset repositories [33–39]. A
key concern is to create realistic virtual worlds that align in
asset content, composition, and behavior with real distributions, so as to give the practitioner confidence that using such
simulations for development and verification can transfer to
performance in the real world [40–48]. However, manual
asset creation faces two major obstacles. First, manual creation of 3D assets requires dedicated efforts from engineers
and artists with 3D domain expertise, which is expensive
and difficult to scale [26]. Second, real-world distribution
contains diverse examples (including interesting rare cases)
and is also constantly evolving [49, 50].
Recent developments in the generative 3D modeling offer

4913

