This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask-Free Video Instance Segmentation
Lei Ke1,2 Martin Danelljan1 Henghui Ding1 Yu-Wing Tai2 Chi-Keung Tang2 Fisher Yu1
1
2
ETH Zürich
HKUST

Figure 1. Video instance segmentation (VIS) results of our MaskFreeVIS, trained without using any video or image mask annotation.
By achieving a remarkable 42.5% mask AP on the YouTube-VIS val dataset, with a ResNet-50 backbone, our approach demonstrates that
high-performing VIS can be learned even without any mask annotations.

Abstract
The recent advancement in Video Instance Segmentation
(VIS) has largely been driven by the use of deeper and increasingly data-hungry transformer-based models. However, video masks are tedious and expensive to annotate,
limiting the scale and diversity of existing VIS datasets. In
this work, we aim to remove the mask-annotation requirement. We propose MaskFreeVIS, achieving highly competitive VIS performance, while only using bounding box annotations for the object state. We leverage the rich temporal mask consistency constraints in videos by introducing
the Temporal KNN-patch Loss (TK-Loss), providing strong
mask supervision without any labels. Our TK-Loss finds
one-to-many matches across frames, through an efficient
patch-matching step followed by a K-nearest neighbor selection. A consistency loss is then enforced on the found
matches. Our mask-free objective is simple to implement,
has no trainable parameters, is computationally efficient,
yet outperforms baselines employing, e.g., state-of-the-art
optical flow to enforce temporal mask consistency. We validate MaskFreeVIS on the YouTube-VIS 2019/2021, OVIS
and BDD100K MOTS benchmarks. The results clearly
demonstrate the efficacy of our method by drastically narrowing the gap between fully and weakly-supervised VIS
performance. Our code and trained models are available
at http://vis.xyz/pub/maskfreevis.

1. Introduction
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) requires jointly detecting, tracking and segmenting all objects in a video from
a given set of categories. To perform this challenging
task, state-of-the-art VIS models are trained with complete
video annotations from VIS datasets [39, 61, 64]. However,
video annotation is costly, in particular regarding object
mask labels. Even coarse polygon-based mask annotation
is multiple times slower than annotating video bounding
boxes [7]. Expensive mask annotation makes existing VIS
benchmarks difficult to scale, limiting the number of object
categories covered. This is particularly a problem for the recent transformer-based VIS models [6,17,57], which tend to
be exceptionally data-hungry. We therefore revisit the need
for complete mask annotation by studying the problem of
weakly supervised VIS under the mask-free setting.
While there exist box-supervised instance segmentation models [13, 23, 27, 50], they are designed for images.
These weakly-supervised single-image methods do not utilize temporal cues when learning mask prediction, leading
to lower accuracy when directly applied to videos. As a
source for weakly supervised learning, videos contain much
richer information about the scene. In particular, videos adhere to the temporal mask consistency constraint, where the
regions corresponding to the same underlying object across
different frames should have the same mask label. In this
work, we set out to leverage this important constraint for
mask-free learning of VIS.

22857

