This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenScene: 3D Scene Understanding with Open Vocabularies
Songyou Peng1,2,3
1

Google Research

2

Kyle Genova1
Marc Pollefeys2

ETH Zurich

3

Chiyu “Max” Jiang4
Andrea Tagliasacchi1,5
Thomas Funkhouser1

MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

4

Waymo LLC

5

Simon Fraser University

pengsongyou.github.io/openscene

Input 3D Point Cloud

“fan” - Object

“metal” - Material

“kitchen” – Room Type

Zero-shot Semantic Segmentation
Zero-shot Semantic Segmentation

“soft” - Property

“sit” - Affordance

“work” - Activity

Figure 1. Open-vocabulary 3D Scene Understanding. We propose OpenScene, a zero-shot approach to 3D scene understanding that
co-embeds dense 3D point features with image pixels and text. The examples above show a 3D scene with surface points colored by how
well they match a user-specified query string – yellow is highest, green is middle, blue is low. Because its features are language-based,
OpenScene answers a wide variety of example queries, like “soft”, “kitchen”, or “work”, without labeled 3D data.

Abstract
Traditional 3D scene understanding approaches rely on
labeled 3D datasets to train a model for a single task with
supervision. We propose OpenScene, an alternative approach where a model predicts dense features for 3D scene
points that are co-embedded with text and image pixels in
CLIP feature space. This zero-shot approach enables taskagnostic training and open-vocabulary queries. For example, to perform SOTA zero-shot 3D semantic segmentation
it first infers CLIP features for every 3D point and later
classifies them based on similarities to embeddings of arbitrary class labels. More interestingly, it enables a suite
of open-vocabulary scene understanding applications that
have never been done before. For example, it allows a user
to enter an arbitrary text query and then see a heat map
indicating which parts of a scene match. Our approach is
effective at identifying objects, materials, affordances, activities, and room types in complex 3D scenes, all using a
single model trained without any labeled 3D data.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is a fundamental task in computer vision. Given a 3D mesh or point cloud with a set of

posed RGB images, the goal is to infer the semantics, affordances, functions, and physical properties of every 3D
point. For example, given the house shown in Figure 1, we
would like to predict which surfaces are part of a fan (semantics), made of metal (materials), within a kitchen (room
types), where a person can sit (affordances), where a person
can work (functions), and which surfaces are soft (physical
properties). Answers to these queries can help a robot interact intelligently with the scene or help a person understand
it through interactive query and visualization.
Achieving this broad scene understanding goal is challenging due to the diversity of possible queries. Traditional 3D scene understanding systems are trained with supervision from benchmark datasets designed for specific
tasks (e.g., 3D semantic segmentation for a closed set of 20
classes [5, 12]). They are each designed to answer one type
of query (is this point on a chair, table, or bed?), but provide
little assistance for related queries where training data is
scarce (e.g., segmenting rare objects) or other queries with
no 3D supervision (e.g., estimating material properties).
In this paper, we investigate how to use pre-trained textimage embedding models (e.g., CLIP [43]) to assist in 3D
scene understanding. These models have been trained from

815

