This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Kernel Surface Reconstruction
Jiahui Huang1

Zan Gojcic1
1

Matan Atzmon1

NVIDIA

2

Or Litany1

University of Toronto

Sanja Fidler1,2,3
3

Francis Williams1

Vector Institute
POCO

Input
Point
Cloud

Ours

SPSR

Ours

Figure 1: We present Neural Kernel Surface Reconstruction (NKSR) for recovering a 3D surface from an input point cloud.
Trained directly from dense points, our method reaches state-of-the-art reconstruction quality and scalability. NKSR is also
highly generalizable: All the meshes in this figure are reconstructed using a single trained model.

Abstract
We present a novel method for reconstructing a 3D implicit surface from a large-scale, sparse, and noisy point
cloud. Our approach builds upon the recently introduced
Neural Kernel Fields (NKF) [58] representation. It enjoys
similar generalization capabilities to NKF, while simultaneously addressing its main limitations: (a) We can scale
to large scenes through compactly supported kernel functions, which enable the use of memory-efficient sparse linear solvers. (b) We are robust to noise, through a gradient fitting solve. (c) We minimize training requirements,
enabling us to learn from any dataset of dense oriented
points, and even mix training data consisting of objects and
scenes at different scales. Our method is capable of reconstructing millions of points in a few seconds, and handling
very large scenes in an out-of-core fashion. We achieve
state-of-the-art results on reconstruction benchmarks consisting of single objects (ShapeNet [5], ABC [33]), indoor
scenes (ScanNet [11], Matterport3D [4]), and outdoor
scenes (CARLA [16], Waymo [49]).

1. Introduction
The goal of 3D reconstruction is to recover geometry
from partial measurements of a shape. In this work, we aim

to map a sparse set of oriented points sampled from the surface of a shape to a 3D implicit field. This is a challenging
inverse problem since point clouds acquired from real-world
sensors are often very large (millions or billions of points),
vary in sampling density, and are corrupted with sensor noise.
Furthermore, since surfaces are continuous but points are
discrete, there are many valid solutions which can explain
a given input. To address these issues, past approaches aim
to recover surfaces that agree with the input points while
satisfying some prior everywhere else in space. Classical
methods use an explicit prior (e.g. smoothness), while more
recent learning-based approaches promote a likely reconstruction under a data-driven prior.
There are, however, key limitations to both types of techniques that inhibit their application in practical situations.
Since classical methods are fast, scalable, and able to handle diverse inputs, they have become an industry standard
(e.g. [32, 61]). Yet, they suffer from quality issues in the
presence of high noise or sparse inputs, often failing to reconstruct even simple geometry such as a ground plane (see
the ground in Fig. 1). On the other hand, learning-based approaches were shown to handle large noise [42], and sparse
inputs [39, 3], yet they often struggle to generalize to out-ofdistribution shapes and sampling densities as was highlighted
in [58]. These generalization issues can be attributed to the

4369

