This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-level Meta-learning for Few-shot Domain Generalization
Xiaorong Qin1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
{xiaorong.qin, xinhang.song}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The goal of few-shot learning is to learn the generalization from seen to unseen data with only a few samples.
Most previous few-shot learning methods focus on learning the generalization within particular domains. However,
the more practical scenarios may also require the generalization ability across domains. In this paper, we study
the problem of few-shot domain generalization (FSDG),
which is a more challenging variant of few-shot classification. FSDG requires additional generalization with
larger gap from seen domains to unseen domains. We
address FSDG problem by meta-learning two levels of
meta-knowledge, where the lower-level meta-knowledge is
domain-specific embedding spaces as subspaces of a base
space for intra-domain generalization, and the upper-level
meta-knowledge is the base space and a prior subspace
over domain-specific spaces for inter-domain generalization. We formulate the two levels of meta-knowledge learning problem with bi-level optimization, and further develop
an optimization algorithm without higher-order derivative
information to solve it. We demonstrate our method is significantly superior to the previous works by evaluating it on
the widely used benchmark Meta-Dataset.

1. Introduction
Traditional few-shot classification addresses the problem
of learning to classify unseen classes through knowledge of
seen classes, and it is based on the i.i.d. assumption, corresponding to the practice that test (unseen) classes are consistently sampled from the same dataset (domain) as training (seen) classes. We refer to this generalization across
classes of the same domain as intra-domain generalization.
In real-life, how to achieve further generalization when facing unseen data from unknown domains may be a problem
with more practical interest.
The recently attention-grabbing problem few-shot domain generalization (FSDG) [5, 6, 28, 50] is to learn a uni-

versal model via multiple training domains (e.g., cat breeds,
traffic signs and textures) for good generalization to novel
classes from a wide range of domains, both in- and outof-domain. FSDG learns novel classes across domains,
and solves few-shot classification problem at an upper level
involving more general domain distribution. It is interdomain generalization, which is downward compatible with
intra-domain generalization.
Typically, the generalization ability of previous few-shot
works is obtained by virtue of meta-knowledge [15, 53]
learned through meta-learning. ProtoNet [48], a metalearning metric-based method, learns an embedding space
as meta-knowledge, in which instances gather around a prototype representation for each class. Such meta-knowledge
is learned with the assumption that all data comes from one
domain, and the generalization ability is required within the
domain. [19] shows that ProtoNet is only better adapted to
intra-domain generalization of a single domain, but leads
to a negative gain in inter-domain generalization based on
multiple known domains. It is manifested in that the model
co-learned by multi-domain data is worse than respective
models trained by each single domain on in-domain test
data, and that the generalization to out-of-domain data is
also poor. Most previous works [6, 11, 44] on FSDG tackle
the challenges by learning a flexible embedding space with
task-adaptive modules based on ProtoNet, which can be
seen as learning meta-knowledge that is more generalized
to domain-agnostic data than that of ProtoNet. But we
first argue that such a stronger meta-knowledge learned
in previous works is not effective enough for solving simultaneously in- and out-of-domain tasks with larger and
smaller generalization gaps respectively , and second that
the challenges about the negative gain and poor generalization arise because the meta-knowledge learning is not considered at two levels, inter- and intra-domain levels, where
inter-domain meta-knowledge applicable to all domains is
more meta-level than intra-domain meta-knowledge.
To this end, to solve inter-domain generalization compatible with intra-domain generalization, we propose to

15900

