This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Delving into Discrete Normalizing Flows on SO(3)
Manifold for Probabilistic Rotation Modeling
Yulin Liu*

Haoran Liu*

Yingda Yin*
Yang Wang
Peking University

Abstract
Normalizing flows (NFs) provide a powerful tool to construct an expressive distribution by a sequence of trackable
transformations of a base distribution and form a probabilistic model of underlying data. Rotation, as an important
quantity in computer vision, graphics, and robotics, can exhibit many ambiguities when occlusion and symmetry occur and thus demands such probabilistic models. Though
much progress has been made for NFs in Euclidean space,
there are no effective normalizing flows without discontinuity or many-to-one mapping tailored for SO(3) manifold.
Given the unique non-Euclidean properties of the rotation
manifold, adapting the existing NFs to SO(3) manifold is
non-trivial. In this paper, we propose a novel normalizing flow on SO(3) by combining a Mobius transformationbased coupling layer and a quaternion affine transformation. With our proposed rotation normalizing flows, one
can not only effectively express arbitrary distributions on
SO(3), but also conditionally build the target distribution
given input observations. Extensive experiments show that
our rotation normalizing flows significantly outperform the
baselines on both unconditional and conditional tasks.

1. Introduction
Endowing a neural network with the ability to express
uncertainty along with the prediction is of crucial influence
to safety and interpretability-critical systems and provides
valuable information for downstream tasks [4, 19, 32]. As
a widely used technique in computer vision and robotics,
rotation regression can also benefit from such uncertaintyaware predictions and enable many applications [5, 14, 31].
To this end, recent years have witnessed much effort in
modeling the uncertainty of rotation via probabilistic modeling of the SO(3) space, including von Mises distribution for Euler angles [27], Bingham distribution for quater* Equal contribution
† He Wang and Baoquan Chen are the corresponding authors ({hewang,

baoquan}@pku.edu.cn).

Baoquan Chen†

He Wang†

nions [6, 13], matrix Fisher distribution for rotation matrices [24], etc. Those distributions are all single-modal,
which fall short on modeling objects with continuous symmetry, which are ubiquitous in our daily life. Taking cup as
an example, it exhibits rotational symmetry for which modeling with the unimodal or the mixture of distributions is
clearly insufficient. How to model an arbitrary distribution
on SO(3) manifold is still a challenging open problem.
Normalizing flows [28], which maps samples from a
simple base distribution to the target distributions via invertible transformations, provides a flexible way to express
complex distributions and has been widely used in expressing arbitrary distributions in Euclidean space [1, 2, 7, 8, 16,
17]. However, developing normalizing flows on SO(3)
manifold is still highly under-explored.
Some works rely on normalizing flows in Euclidean
space and adapt them to handle rotations. ReLie [9] proposes normalizing flows for general Lie group via Lie algebra in Euclidean space. However, it suffers from discontinuous rotation representations [37] and leads to inferior performance. ProHMR [18] considers rotations as 6D vectors
in Euclidean space and leverages Glow [17] to model distributions, where a many-to-one Gram-Schmidt projection is
needed to close the gap between the two spaces. Although
composed of bijective transformations in Euclidean space,
the many-to-one mapping from Euclidean space to SO(3)
breaks the one-to-one regulation of normalizing flows [28].
Other works propose general normalizing flows for nonEuclidean spaces. Mathieu et al. [23], Lou et al. [21] and
Falorsi et al. [10] propose continuous normalizing flows
for general Riemannian manifold, without considering any
property of SO(3) space, which leads to unsatisfactory performance for probabilistic rotation modeling. Rezende et al.
[29] introduce normalizing flows on tori and spheres. Note
that despite unit quaternions lying on S 3 space, [29] does
not exhibit the antipodal symmetry property of quaternions
and thus is not suitable for modeling rotations in SO(3).
In this work, we introduce novel discrete normalizing
flows for rotations on the SO(3) manifold. The core building block of our discrete rotation normalizing flow consists
of a Mobius coupling layer with rotation matrix representa-

21264

