This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Articulated Shape with Keypoint Pseudo-labels from Web Images
Anastasis Stathopoulos
Rutgers University

Georgios Pavlakos
UC Berkeley

Abstract
This paper shows that it is possible to learn models for
monocular 3D reconstruction of articulated objects (e.g.
horses, cows, sheep), using as few as 50-150 images labeled with 2D keypoints. Our proposed approach involves
training category-specific keypoint estimators, generating
2D keypoint pseudo-labels on unlabeled web images, and
using both the labeled and self-labeled sets to train 3D reconstruction models. It is based on two key insights: (1)
2D keypoint estimation networks trained on as few as 50150 images of a given object category generalize well and
generate reliable pseudo-labels; (2) a data selection mechanism can automatically create a “curated” subset of the
unlabeled web images that can be used for training – we
evaluate four data selection methods. Coupling these two
insights enables us to train models that effectively utilize
web images, resulting in improved 3D reconstruction performance for several articulated object categories beyond
the fully-supervised baseline. Our approach can quickly
bootstrap a model and requires only a few images labeled
with 2D keypoints. This requirement can be easily satisfied
for any new object category. To showcase the practicality
of our approach for predicting the 3D shape of arbitrary
object categories, we annotate 2D keypoints on 250 giraffe
and bear images from COCO in just 2.5 hours per category.

1. Introduction
Predicting the 3D shape of an articulated object from
a single image is a challenging task due to its underconstrained nature. Various successful approaches [14, 19]
have been developed for inferring the 3D shape of humans.
These approaches rely on strong supervision from 3D joint
locations acquired using motion capture systems. Similar
breakthroughs for other categories of articulated objects,
such as animals, remain elusive. This is primarily due to the
scarcity of appropriate training data. Some works (such as
CMR [15]) learn to predict 3D shapes using only 2D labels
for supervision. However, for most object categories even

Ligong Han
Rutgers University

(a) Train Keypoint Estimator

train

Dimitris Metaxas
Rutgers University

(b) Generate Pseudo-labels (PLs)

inference

ℎ$

ℎ$
𝒰 w/ PLs

Labeled set 𝒮
(c) Data Selection

Unlabeled set 𝒰
𝒰′

(d) Train 3D Shape Predictor

{
𝒰 w/ PLs

}

∪
𝒮

train

𝑓%

𝒰′

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed framework. It includes:
(a) training a category-specific keypoint estimator with a limited
labeled set S, (b) generating keypoints pseudo-labels on web images, (c) automatic curation of web images to create a subset U ′ ,
and (d) training a model for 3D shape prediction with images from
S and U ′ .

2D labels are limited or non-existent. We ask: how can we
learn models that predict the 3D shape of articulated objects in-the-wild when limited or no annotated images are
available for a given object category?
In this paper we propose an approach that requires as few
as 50-150 images labeled with 2D keypoints. This labeled
set can be easily and quickly created for any object category.
Our proposed approach is illustrated in Figure 1 and summarized as follows: (a) train a category-specific keypoint
estimation network using a small set S of images labeled
with 2D keypoints; (b) generate 2D keypoint pseudo-labels
on a large unlabeled set U consisting of automatically acquired web images; (c) automatically curate U by creating
a subset of images and pseudo-labels U ′ according to a selection criterion; (d) train a model for 3D shape prediction
with data from both S and U ′ .
A key insight is that current 2D keypoint estimators
[30, 34, 38] are accurate enough to create robust 2D keypoint detections on unlabeled data, even when trained with
a limited number of images. Another insight is that images
from U increase the variability of several factors, such as

13092

