This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bitstream-Corrupted JPEG Images are Restorable: Two-stage Compensation and
Alignment Framework for Image Restoration
Wenyang Liu1 , Yi Wang1∗ , Kim-Hui Yap1∗ and Lap-Pui Chau2
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Dept. of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
1

{wenyang001, wang1241}@e.ntu.edu.sg, ekhyap@ntu.edu.sg, lap-pui.chau@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we study a real-world JPEG image restoration problem with bit errors on the encrypted bitstream.
The bit errors bring unpredictable color casts and block
shifts on decoded image contents, which cannot be resolved
by existing image restoration methods mainly relying on
pre-defined degradation models in the pixel domain. To
address these challenges, we propose a robust JPEG decoder, followed by a two-stage compensation and alignment framework to restore bitstream-corrupted JPEG images. Specifically, the robust JPEG decoder adopts an
error-resilient mechanism to decode the corrupted JPEG
bitstream. The two-stage framework is composed of the selfcompensation and alignment (SCA) stage and the guidedcompensation and alignment (GCA) stage. The SCA adaptively performs block-wise image color compensation and
alignment based on the estimated color and block offsets
via image content similarity. The GCA leverages the extracted low-resolution thumbnail from the JPEG header
to guide full-resolution pixel-wise image restoration in a
coarse-to-fine manner. It is achieved by a coarse-guided
pix2pix network and a refine-guided bi-directional Laplacian pyramid fusion network. We conduct experiments on
three benchmarks with varying degrees of bit error rates. Experimental results and ablation studies demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method. The code will be released at
https://github.com/wenyang001/Two-ACIR.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is a long-standing problem in computer
vision that has been extensively studied. Given a degraded
image, e.g., noisy, downscaled, hazing, or masked image,
existing image restoration works in image deblur [2, 23], dehazing [26], inpainting [16, 37], superresolution (SR) [6, 36]
are capable of restoring the high-quality counterpart, respectively. These methods are mainly based on pre-defined image
degradation models in the pixel domain, but few attempts
∗ Corresponding authors

GT
Image
𝒙

𝑬𝒏

𝑬𝑲
JPEG
Bitstream

Encrypted Bitstream
Bitstream Corruption

Corrupted
Encrypted
Bitstream

2. Two-stage Compensation and Alignment Framework

Restored
Image
"
𝒙

Stage 2
GCA

Conpensated
Image
𝒛

Stage 1
SCA

𝑫𝑲

Corrupted
Decrypted
Bitstream
1. Robust decoder

Decoded
Image
𝒚

𝑫𝒆

(a)
Abort JPEG decoding
Color cast for segments

Block shifting

1. Standard decoder output

3. Our self-compensation and
alignment output (𝒛) (SCA)

2. Our robust decoder output (𝒚)

(b)

4. Our guided compensation and
") (GCA)
alignment output (𝒙

Figure 1. (a) Our work considers a real-world JPEG image restoration
problem with bit errors on the encrypted bitstream, where En/De represent
JPEG encoding/decoding and EK /DK represent encryption/decryption
employed in disks with the secret key K. We propose a robust JPEG
decoder, followed by a two-stage compensation and alignment framework
to address this problem. (b) Comparison of the standard decoder results with
our robust decoder results and our proposed two-stage framework results.
The proposed robust decoder can decode the corrupted JPEG bitstream
and the proposed two-stage framework can ultimately restore high-quality
images gradually from the decoded color-casted and misaligned images.

have been made in JPEG image restoration with the corrupted bitstream. The big challenge of bitstream-corrupted
image restoration is the incurred JPEG decoding failures
make the decoding process stop at the bit errors and the
following bits cannot be decoded, as shown in Fig. 1 (b1).
In the real world, bit errors occur naturally in JPEG bitstream stored in digital devices, and as memory cells wear
out [27], uncorrectable bit errors are exposed externally.
NAND flash memory, as a type of non-volatile storage technology, is widely used in portable devices to store users’
data. Due to technology trends, it exhibits progressively
shorter lifetimes and increasingly relies on error correction
codes (ECC) to ensure the data storage integrity [20,24]. It is
well-known that [20,33] raw bit error rate (RBER) of NAND
flash memory grows rapidly as the program/erase cycle, temperature, and retention years increase. As a result, bit errors

9979

