This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parameter Efficient Local Implicit Image Function Network for Face
Segmentation
Mausoom Sarkar
MDSR Lab, Adobe

Nikitha SR*
IIT Madras

Mayur Hemani
MDSR Lab, Adobe

Rishabh Jain
MDSR Lab, Adobe

Balaji Krishnamurthy
MDSR Lab, Adobe

Abstract
Face parsing is defined as the per-pixel labeling of images containing human faces. The labels are defined to
identify key facial regions like eyes, lips, nose, hair, etc.
In this work, we make use of the structural consistency
of the human face to propose a lightweight face-parsing
method using a Local Implicit Function network, FP-LIIF.
We propose a simple architecture having a convolutional
encoder and a pixel MLP decoder that uses 1/26th number of parameters compared to the state-of-the-art models
and yet matches or outperforms state-of-the-art models on
multiple datasets, like CelebAMask-HQ and LaPa. We do
not use any pretraining, and compared to other works, our
network can also generate segmentation at different resolutions without any changes in the input resolution. This
work enables the use of facial segmentation on low-compute
or low-bandwidth devices because of its higher FPS and
smaller model size.

1. Introduction
Face parsing is the task of assigning pixel-wise labels
to a face image to distinguish various parts of a face, like
eyes, nose, lips, ears, etc. This segregation of a face image
enables many use cases, such as face image editing [20, 46,
57], face e-beautification [37], face swapping [16, 35, 36],
face completion [23].
Since the advent of semantic segmentation through the
use of deep convolutional networks [31], a multitude of
research has investigated face parsing as a segmentation
problem through the use of fully convolutional networks
[13, 14, 25, 26, 28, 29]. In order to achieve better results,
some methods [14, 28] make use of conditional random
fields (CRFs), in addition to CNNs. Other methods [25,27],
* Work done during internship at Adobe

Figure 1. The simple architecture of Local Implicit Image representation base FP-LIIF: A light convolutional encoder of modified
resblocks followed by a pixel only MLP decoder

focus on a two-step approach that predicts bounding boxes
of facial regions (nose, eyes, hair. etc.) followed by
segmentation within the extracted regions. Later works
like AGRNET [48] and EAGR [49] claim that earlier approaches do not model the relationship between facial components and that a graph-based system can model these
statistics, leading to more accurate segmentation.
In more recent research, works such as FaRL [59] investigate pretraining on a human face captioning dataset.
They pre-train a Vision Transformer (ViT) [8] and finetune
on face parsing datasets and show improvement in comparison to pre-training with classification based pre-training
like ImageNet [44], etc., or no pre-training at all. The current state-of-the-art model, DML CSR [58], tackles the face
parsing task using multiple concurrent strategies including
multi-task learning, graph convolutional network (GCN),
and cyclic learning. The Multi-task approach handles edge
discovery in addition to face segmentation. The proposed

20970

