This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SkyEye: Self-Supervised Bird’s-Eye-View Semantic Mapping
Using Monocular Frontal View Images
Nikhil Gosala1 * Kürsat Petek1∗ Paulo L. J. Drews-Jr1,2 Wolfram Burgard2 Abhinav Valada1
1
University of Freiburg 2 Federal University of Rio Grande 3 University of Technology Nuremberg
http://skyeye.cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) semantic maps have become an
essential component of automated driving pipelines due to
the rich representation they provide for decision-making
tasks. However, existing approaches for generating these
maps still follow a fully supervised training paradigm and
hence rely on large amounts of annotated BEV data. In this
work, we address this limitation by proposing the first selfsupervised approach for generating a BEV semantic map
using a single monocular image from the frontal view (FV).
During training, we overcome the need for BEV ground truth
annotations by leveraging the more easily available FV semantic annotations of video sequences. Thus, we propose
the SkyEye architecture that learns based on two modes of
self-supervision, namely, implicit supervision and explicit
supervision. Implicit supervision trains the model by enforcing spatial consistency of the scene over time based on FV
semantic sequences, while explicit supervision exploits BEV
pseudolabels generated from FV semantic annotations and
self-supervised depth estimates. Extensive evaluations on
the KITTI-360 dataset demonstrate that our self-supervised
approach performs on par with the state-of-the-art fully supervised methods and achieves competitive results using
only 1% of direct supervision in BEV compared to fully supervised approaches. Finally, we publicly release both our
code and the BEV datasets generated from the KITTI-360
and Waymo datasets.

1. Introduction
Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) maps are an integral part of
an autonomous driving pipeline as they allow the vehicle to perceive the environment using a feature-rich yet
computationally-efficient representation. These maps capture both static and dynamic obstacles in the scene while
encoding their absolute distances in the metric scale using a
low-cost 2D representation. Such characteristics allow them
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. SkyEye: The first self-supervised framework for semantic BEV
mapping. We use sequences of FV semantic annotations to train the network
to estimate a semantic map in BEV using a single RGB input.

to be used in many distance-based time-sensitive applications
such as trajectory estimation and collision avoidance [12,14].
Existing approaches that estimate BEV maps from frontal
view (FV) images and/or LiDAR scans require large datasets
annotated in the BEV as they are trained in a fully supervised manner [6, 19, 23, 43]. However, BEV ground truth
generation relies on the presence of HD maps, annotated
3D point clouds, and/or 3D bounding boxes, which are extremely arduous to obtain [27]. Recent approaches [29, 36]
circumvent this problem of requiring BEV ground truths by
leveraging data from simulation environments. However,
these approaches suffer from the large domain gap between
simulated and real-world images, which results in their reduced performance in the real world.
In this work, we address the aforementioned limitations
by proposing SkyEye, the first self-supervised learning framework for generating an instantaneous semantic map in BEV,
given a single monocular FV image. During training, our
approach, depicted in Fig. 1, overcomes the need for BEV
ground truths by leveraging FV semantic ground truth labels
along with the spatial and temporal consistency offered by
video sequences. FV semantic ground truth labels can easily
be obtained with reduced human annotation effort due to the
relatively small domain gap between FV images of different
datasets which allows for efficient label transfer [15, 17, 37].
Additionally, no range sensor is required for data recording.

14901

