This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Generalisable Video Moment Retrieval:
Visual-Dynamic Injection to Image-Text Pre-Training
Dezhao Luo1 , Jiabo Huang1 , Shaogang Gong1 , Hailin Jin2 , and Yang Liu3 *
1

Queen Mary University of London

{dezhao.luo, jiabo.huang, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk
2

Adobe Research, 3 WICT, Peking University

hljin@adobe.com, yangliu@pku.edu.cn

The correlation between the vision and text is essential for video moment retrieval (VMR), however, existing
methods heavily rely on separate pre-training feature extractors for visual and textual understanding. Without sufficient temporal boundary annotations, it is non-trivial to
learn universal video-text alignments. In this work, we
explore multi-modal correlations derived from large-scale
image-text data to facilitate generalisable VMR. To address
the limitations of image-text pre-training models on capturing the video changes, we propose a generic method, referred to as Visual-Dynamic Injection (VDI), to empower
the model’s understanding of video moments. Whilst existing VMR methods are focusing on building temporalaware video features, being aware of the text descriptions
about the temporal changes is also critical but originally
overlooked in pre-training by matching static images with
sentences. Therefore, we extract visual context and spatial dynamic information from video frames and explicitly
enforce their alignments with the phrases describing video
changes (e.g. verb). By doing so, the potentially relevant
visual and motion patterns in videos are encoded in the corresponding text embeddings (injected) so to enable more
accurate video-text alignments. We conduct extensive experiments on two VMR benchmark datasets (Charades-STA
and ActivityNet-Captions) and achieve state-of-the-art performances. Especially, VDI yields notable advantages when
being tested on the out-of-distribution splits where the testing samples involve novel scenes and vocabulary.

1. Introduction
Video moment retrieval (VMR) aims at locating a video
moment by its temporal boundary in a long and untrimmed
video according to a natural language sentence [3, 13]. It
* Corresponding authors

(a) Separated Training
Vision
Text

(d) Ours

√

Vision

√

Text

(b) Video Text Joint Training
Moment
Video
√
Text
Text

A person opens the door

x

(c) Image Text Joint Training
Image
Text

√

Text

x

Moment

Abstract

Visual-Dynamic
Injection

√
Actions
Actions

x

Visual Encoder Textual Encoder

Figure 1. Contemporary methods lack moment-text correlations.
Our method takes the advantage of image-text pre-trained models
and learns moment-text correlations by visual-dynamic injection.

is a critical task which has been extensively studied in a variety of real-world applications including human-computer
interaction [5], and intelligent surveillance [9]. In practice,
raw videos are usually unscripted and unstructured, while
the words being chosen for describing the same video moments can be varied from person to person [45, 63]. To
be generalisable to different scenes, VMR is fundamentally
challenging as it requires the comprehension of arbitrary
complex visual and motion patterns in videos and an unbounded vocabulary with their intricate relationships.
For the fine-grained retrieval objective of VMR, the precise segment-wise temporal boundary labels are intuitively
harder to be collected than conventional image/video-level
annotations. In this case, rather than training from scratch
with a limited number of temporally labelled videos, existing VMR solutions [3, 13, 14, 62] heavily rely on singlemodal pre-training [8, 48] for visual and textual understanding (Fig. 1 (a)). By doing so, they focus on modelling the
correlations between the pre-learned features of videos and
sentences. Nonetheless, without sufficient training data, it
is non-trivial to derive universal video-text alignments so to

23045

