This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual-Tactile Sensing for In-Hand Object Reconstruction
Wenqiang Xu* 1, 2 , Zhenjun Yu* 1 , Han Xue1 , Ruolin Ye3 , Siqiong Yao1 , Cewu Lu§ 1, 2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi institute 3 Cornell University
1

{vinjohn, jeffson-yu, xiaoxiaoxh, yaosiqiong, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
3

ry273@cornell.edu

Figure 1. Our proposed visual-tactile learning framework VTacO and its extended version VTacOH can reconstruct both the rigid and
non-rigid in-hand objects. It also supports refining the mesh in an incremental manner.

Abstract
Tactile sensing is one of the modalities humans rely on
heavily to perceive the world. Working with vision, this
modality refines local geometry structure, measures deformation at the contact area, and indicates the hand-object
contact state. With the availability of open-source tactile
sensors such as DIGIT, research on visual-tactile learning
is becoming more accessible and reproducible. Leveraging this tactile sensor, we propose a novel visual-tactile
in-hand object reconstruction framework VTacO, and extend it to VTacOH for hand-object reconstruction. Since
our method can support both rigid and deformable object reconstruction, no existing benchmarks are proper for
the goal. We propose a simulation environment, VT-Sim,
which supports generating hand-object interaction for both
rigid and deformable objects. With VT-Sim, we generate a large-scale training dataset and evaluate our method
on it. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method can outperform the previous baseline methods qualitatively and quantitatively. Finally, we directly apply our model trained in simulation to various real-world

test cases, which display qualitative results. Codes, models, simulation environment, and datasets are available at
https://sites.google.com/view/vtaco/.

1. Introduction
Human beings have a sense of object geometry by seeing
and touching, especially when the object is in manipulation
and undergoes a large portion of occlusion, where visual
information is not enough for the details of object geometry. In such cases, vision-based tactile sensing is a good
supplement as a way of proximal perception. In the past,
few vision-based tactile sensors were commercially available or open-source, so the visual-tactile sensing techniques
could not be widely studied. Previous works [27, 34] on
in-hand object reconstruction either studied rigid objects or
were limited to simple objects with simple deformation.
* indicates equal contributions.
§ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

8803

