This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detection of out-of-distribution samples using binary neuron activation patterns
Bartłomiej Olber1,2 , Krystian Radlak1,2 , Adam Popowicz2 ,
Michal Szczepankiewicz3 , Krystian Chachuła1
1
Warsaw University of Technology 2 Silesian University of Technology 3 NVIDIA
{bartlomiej.olber.stud, krystian.radlak, krystian.chachula}@pw.edu.pl
adam.popowicz@polsl.pl msz@nvidia.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNN) have outstanding performance in various applications. Despite numerous efforts of
the research community, out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
remain a significant limitation of DNN classifiers. The ability to identify previously unseen inputs as novel is crucial
in safety-critical applications such as self-driving cars, unmanned aerial vehicles, and robots. Existing approaches to
detect OOD samples treat a DNN as a black box and evaluate the confidence score of the output predictions. Unfortunately, this method frequently fails, because DNNs are not
trained to reduce their confidence for OOD inputs. In this
work, we introduce a novel method for OOD detection. Our
method is motivated by theoretical analysis of neuron activation patterns (NAP) in ReLU-based architectures. The
proposed method does not introduce a high computational
overhead due to the binary representation of the activation
patterns extracted from convolutional layers. The extensive
empirical evaluation proves its high performance on various DNN architectures and seven image datasets.

1. Introduction
Even the most efficient deep neural network (DNN) architectures, designed for image recognition tasks, cannot
ensure that they will not malfunction during their operation. Thus, deployment of those safety-critical applications,
such as in self-driving cars, unmanned aerial vehicles, and
robots, is still an unresolved problem [9, 35]. The use of
safety mechanisms, such as runtime monitors, is a viable
strategy to keep the system in a safe state despite of DNN
failure. The design and development of such monitors in the
context of safety-critical applications is a significant challenge [10,48]. Therefore, it is required to define robust metrics that can allow to detect and control of DNN’s failures
at runtime and mitigate potential hazards caused by their
performance limitations.
DNNs are trained over a set of inputs sampled from real-

world scenarios. However, due to the large variation of the
input images, the training dataset cannot contain all possible variants of input samples. Although it is expected that
the trained models can perform well on unknown inputs, especially those that are similar to the training data, it cannot
be guaranteed that they will perform well for OOD noisy
samples that present the objects not considered before [15].
While DNN training techniques should allow a network to
achieve high generalization capabilities, it is also crucial to
ensure the dependability of safety-critical systems to train
a model so that any outlying input will result in low confidence of the network’s decision.
The fundamental challenge to ensure the safety of DNNs
is to estimate if a given input sample comes from the same
data distribution for which a DNN was trained. This is very
hard to estimate because the network usually extrapolates
its decision while receiving new image samples. Another
cause of the incorrect recognition of outlying samples can
be the distributional shift of input data over time (e.g. the
time-dependent variations of an object’s appearance) [19].
In the vast literature, this problem has been formulated
as a problem of detecting whether input data are from an
in-distribution (ID) or out-of-distribution (OOD). This has
been studied for many years and discussed in the following aspects: sample rejection, anomaly detection, open-set
samples recognition, familiar vs unfamiliar samples or uncertainty estimation [2, 24, 38].
In this work, we present a novel algorithm for the identification of OOD image samples. In our method, we extract
the binary neuron activation patterns on various hidden layers of a DNN and compare them with the ones collected
in the training procedure. By measuring the Hamming distances between extracted binary patterns of any test sample
and the patterns extracted during the training, we can identify OOD samples.
The main contributions of this paper are the following:
• We introduce NAP - an algorithm that extracts binary patterns from both fully connected and convolutional layers and estimates a classifier’s predictive un-

3378

