This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Text-to-Parameter Translation for Game Character Auto-Creation
Rui Zhao1 , Wei Li2 , Zhipeng Hu1 , Lincheng Li1 ,* Zhengxia Zou3 ,* Zhenwei Shi3 , Changjie Fan1
1
Netease Fuxi AI Lab, 2 Nankai University, 3 Beihang University
{zhaorui10, zphu, lilincheng, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com,
liwei@dbis.nankai.edu.cn, {zhengxiazou, zhenweishi}@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1. Game characters created by the proposed text-to-parameter translation (T2P) given different text prompts. The front view and
three side views are shown for each character.

Abstract
Recent popular Role-Playing Games (RPGs) saw the
great success of character auto-creation systems. The bonedriven face model controlled by continuous parameters (like
the position of bones) and discrete parameters (like the
hairstyles) makes it possible for users to personalize and
customize in-game characters. Previous in-game character
auto-creation systems are mostly image-driven, where facial parameters are optimized so that the rendered character looks similar to the reference face photo. This paper proposes a novel text-to-parameter translation method (T2P) to
achieve zero-shot text-driven game character auto-creation.
With our method, users can create a vivid in-game character with arbitrary text description without using any reference photo or editing hundreds of parameters manually.
In our method, taking the power of large-scale pre-trained
multi-modal CLIP and neural rendering, T2P searches both
continuous facial parameters and discrete facial parame-

ters in a unified framework. Due to the discontinuous parameter representation, previous methods have difficulty in
effectively learning discrete facial parameters. T2P, to our
best knowledge, is the first method that can handle the optimization of both discrete and continuous parameters. Experimental results show that T2P can generate high-quality
and vivid game characters with given text prompts. T2P
outperforms other SOTA text-to-3D generation methods on
both objective evaluations and subjective evaluations.

1. Introduction
Role-Playing Games (RPGs) are praised by gamers for
providing immersive experiences. Some of the recent popular RPGs, like Grand Theft Auto Online1 and Naraka2 ,
have opened up character customization systems to players. In such systems, in-game characters are bone-driven
and controlled by continuous parameters, like the position,
1 https://www.rockstargames.com/GTAOnline
2 http://www.narakathegame.com

* Corresponding Authors.

21013

