This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LEGO-Net: Learning Regular Rearrangements of Objects in Rooms
Qiuhong Anna Wei1
Sijie Ding* 1
Jeong Joon Park* 2
Rahul Sajnani1
Adrien Poulenard2
Srinath Sridhar1
Leonidas Guibas2
Brown University1

Stanford University2

Figure 1. LEGO-Net LEarns to reGularly rearrange Objects in a messy indoor scene via an iterative denoising process. Different from
scene synthesis or methods that require goal state specification, our method learns clean re-arrangements directly from data, retains the
flavor of the original scene, and minimizes object travel distance.

Abstract
Humans universally dislike the task of cleaning up a
messy room. If machines were to help us with this task,
they must understand human criteria for regular arrangements, such as several types of symmetry, co-linearity
or co-circularity, spacing uniformity in linear or circular patterns, and further inter-object relationships that relate to style and functionality. Previous approaches for
this task relied on human input to explicitly specify goal
state, or synthesized scenes from scratch – but such methods do not address the rearrangement of existing messy
scenes without providing a goal state. In this paper, we
present LEGO-Net, a data-driven transformer-based iterative method for LEarning reGular rearrangement of
Objects in messy rooms. LEGO-Net is partly inspired by
diffusion models – it starts with an initial messy state and
iteratively “de-noises” the position and orientation of objects to a regular state while reducing distance traveled.
Given randomly perturbed object positions and orientations
∗ Core contribution.

in an existing dataset of professionally-arranged scenes,
our method is trained to recover a regular re-arrangement.
Results demonstrate that our method is able to reliably rearrange room scenes and outperform other methods. We
additionally propose a metric for evaluating regularity in
room arrangements using number-theoretic machinery.

1. Introduction
What makes the arrangement of furniture and objects in
a room appear regular? While exact preferences may vary,
humans have by-and-large universally shared criteria of regular room arrangements: for instance, heavy cabinets are
arranged to align with walls, chairs are positioned evenly
around a table in linear or circular configurations, or night
stands are placed symmetrically on the two sides of a bed.
Humans also share a common dislike of physically performing the task of rearranging a messy room. To build automated robotic systems that can guide or actually rearrange
objects in a room, we first need methods that understand the
shared human criteria for regular room rearrangements and
respect the physical constraints of rearrangements.

19037

