This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Delving into Shape-aware Zero-shot Semantic Segmentation
Xinyu Liu1,2 , Beiwen Tian2,4 , Zhen Wang3 , Rui Wang3 , Kehua Sheng3 , Bo Zhang3 ,
Hao Zhao2 , Guyue Zhou2
1
Xidian University 3 Didi Chuxing
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
liuxinyu@stu.xidian.edu.cn, zhaohao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Pizza*

Thanks to the impressive progress of large-scale visionlanguage pretraining, recent recognition models can classify arbitrary objects in a zero-shot and open-set manner,
with a surprisingly high accuracy. However, translating this
success to semantic segmentation is not trivial, because this
dense prediction task requires not only accurate semantic
understanding but also fine shape delineation and existing
vision-language models are trained with image-level language descriptions. To bridge this gap, we pursue shapeaware zero-shot semantic segmentation in this study. Inspired by classical spectral methods in the image segmentation literature, we propose to leverage the eigen vectors of
Laplacian matrices constructed with self-supervised pixelwise features to promote shape-awareness. Despite that this
simple and effective technique does not make use of the
masks of seen classes at all, we demonstrate that it outperforms a state-of-the-art shape-aware formulation that
aligns ground truth and predicted edges during training.
We also delve into the performance gains achieved on different datasets using different backbones and draw several
interesting and conclusive observations: the benefits of promoting shape-awareness highly relates to mask compactness and language embedding locality. Finally, our method
sets new state-of-the-art performance for zero-shot semantic segmentation on both Pascal and COCO, with significant
margins. Code and models will be accessed at SAZS.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has been an established research
area for some time now, which aims to predict the categories
of an input image in a pixel-wise manner. In real-world applications including autonomous driving [17], medical diagnosis [31,46] and robot vision and navigation [9,63], an accurate semantic segmentation module provides a pixel-wise

Dining
Table

Cup*

Cat
Input Images

Ours w/o shape
awareness

Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Without retraining, SAZS is able to precisely segments
both seen and unseen objects in the zero-shot setting, largely outperforming a strong baseline. * denotes unseen categories during
training).

understanding of the input image and is crucial for subsequent tasks (like decision making or treatment selection).
Despite that significant progress has been made in the
field of semantic segmentation [6,7,32,49,52,54,57,59,61],
most existing methods focus on the closed-set setting in
which dense prediction is performed on the same set of categories in training and testing time. Thus, methods that are
trained and perform well in the closed-set setting may fail
when applied to the open world, as pixels of unseen objects in the open world are likely to be assigned categories
that are seen during training, causing catastrophic consequences in safety-critical applications such as autonomous
driving [62]. Straightforward solutions include fine-tuning
or retraining the existing neural networks, but it is impractical to enumerate unlimited unseen categories during retraining, let along large quantities of time and efforts needed.
More recent works [4, 14, 24, 27, 40] address this issue
by shifting to the zero-shot setting, in which the methods
are evaluated with semantic categories that are unseen during training. While large-scale pre-trained visual-language
models such as CLIP [41] or ALIGN [18] shed light on the

2999

