This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-Aware Optimal Transport for Semantically Coherent
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Fan Lu1,∗

Kai Zhu1,∗,‡
Wei Zhai1
Kecheng Zheng2
Yang Cao1,3,†
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Ant Group
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
1

{lufan@mail., zkzy@mail., wzhai056@}ustc.edu.cn

zkccloud@gmail.com

forrest@ustc.edu.cn

Semantically coherent out-of-distribution (SCOOD) detection aims to discern outliers from the intended data
distribution with access to unlabeled extra set. The coexistence of in-distribution and out-of-distribution samples
will exacerbate the model overfitting when no distinction
is made. To address this problem, we propose a novel
uncertainty-aware optimal transport scheme. Our scheme
consists of an energy-based transport (ET) mechanism that
estimates the fluctuating cost of uncertainty to promote
the assignment of semantic-agnostic representation, and an
inter-cluster extension strategy that enhances the discrimination of semantic property among different clusters by
widening the corresponding margin distance. Furthermore,
a T-energy score is presented to mitigate the magnitude gap
between the parallel transport and classifier branches. Extensive experiments on two standard SCOOD benchmarks
demonstrate the above-par OOD detection performance,
outperforming the state-of-the-art methods by a margin of
27.69% and 34.4% on FPR@95, respectively. Code is
available at https://github.com/LuFan31/ET-OOD.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models trained in close-set world often
suffer from performance degradation in real-world scenarios due to the interference of out-of-distribution (OOD)
inputs—unknown samples whose classes don’t overlap with
those already seen during training [33]. Full-supervised
models tend to make overconfident predictions on OOD
inputs [20, 21] , which severely limits the application in
high-risk fields such as autonomous driving [7] and medical
analysis [22]. To this end, OOD detection [10,17,18,28,31]
aims to obtain a reliable model to identify these unknown
∗Co-first Author. †Corresponding Author. ‡Work done during an
internship at Ant Group.

FPR@95 (%)

Abstract

Number of Accurately Assigned Labels

Figure 1. The effect of the number of accurately assigned
labels. We gradually increase the ground-truth labels of unlabeled
ID samples during the baseline [11] training and report the
FPR@95% (lower value is better) results averaged by multiple
tests. The trend shows that more accurately assigned labels
enhance the OOD detection capability of the model.

samples as abnormal ones and reject them at test time.
To learn the discrepancy between ID/OOD samples
better, a rich line of OOD detection methods like OE [11]
and MCD [31] utilizing extra OOD data during training has
been developed. OE flattens the prediction probability of
OOD samples among all ID classes, and MCD maximizes
the entropy discrepancy between ID and OOD samples
outputted by two parallel classifiers. Although extra data
greatly enhances the performance of models across traditional OOD benchmarks, these benchmarks still face two
problems: 1) to ensure the sampling effectiveness, ID
samples in extra unlabeled datasets are manually removed
to obtain the pure OOD set, which does not correspond
to reality since ID samples are inevitably mixed into the
unlabeled set and expensive to be purified. 2) the great
improvement on them is most likely due to the overfitting on
the training OOD samples [28], so the model paying attention to the lower-level covariate shifts between datasets has
difficulty generalizing to other OOD domains, especially
when the scale of the dataset is not large.
To overcome these challenges, the SCOOD benchmarks

3282

