This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bit-shrinking: Limiting Instantaneous Sharpness for Improving Post-training
Quantization
Chen Lin1 Bo Peng1 Zheyang Li1 Wenming Tan1 Ye Ren1 Jun Xiao2 Shiliang Pu1
1
Hikvision Research Institute 2 Zhe Jiang University
linchen7@hikvision.com

pengbo7@hikvision.com

renye@hikvision.com

lizhengyang@hikvision.com

tanwenming@hikvision.com

junxiao@zju.edu.com pushingliang@hikvision.com

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) is an effective compression method to reduce the model size and computational cost. However, quantizing a model into a low-bit
one, e.g., lower than 4, is difficult and often results in nonnegligible performance degradation. To address this, we
investigate the loss landscapes of quantized networks with
various bit-widths. We show that the network with more
ragged loss surface, is more easily trapped into bad local
minima, which mostly appears in low-bit quantization. A
deeper analysis indicates, the ragged surface is caused by
the injection of excessive quantization noise. To this end,
we detach a sharpness term from the loss which reflects the
impact of quantization noise. To smooth the rugged loss
surface, we propose to limit the sharpness term small and
stable during optimization. Instead of directly optimizing
the target bit network, we design a self-adapted shrinking
scheduler for the bit-width in continuous domain from high
bit-width to the target by limiting the increasing sharpness
term within a proper range. It can be viewed as iteratively
adding small “instant” quantization noise and adjusting the
network to eliminate its impact. Widely experiments including classification and detection tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of the Bit-shrinking strategy in PTQ. On the Vision Transformer models, our INT8 and INT6 models drop
within 0.5% and 1.5% Top-1 accuracy, respectively. On
the traditional CNN networks, our INT4 quantized models
drop within 1.3% and 3.5% Top-1 accuracy on ResNet18
and MobileNetV2 without fine-tuning, which achieves the
state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
In recent years, network compression, such as Knowledge distillation [16], Pruning [9, 17, 38], and Quantization [30, 34, 35, 45] are rapidly developing to achieve efficient inference for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) both at

Figure 1. The loss landscapes of the full-precision and various
bits ResNet-20 on CIFAR-100. We plot the loss landscapes using
the visualization methods in [18]. The landscape of the lower-bit
quantized network is more ragged, and is more easily trapped into
bad local minima.

edge devices and in the clouds. Among them, quantization
is a promising as well as hardware-friendly approach. It reduces the computation complexity and memory footprint by
representing weights and activations with low-bit integers.
Traditional approaches often perform a Quantizationaware Training (QAT) [35–37, 45] process to achieve guaranteed accuracy. However, the long time re-training and
the requirements of full training data consume unacceptable computation and storage resources, making it impractical in industry. On the contrary, Post Training Quantization (PTQ) [2, 12, 25, 26, 43] is fast and light. PTQ efficiently turns a pre-trained full precision network to quantized one with only a small calibration set. Although more

16196

