This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IDGI: A Framework to Eliminate Explanation Noise from Integrated Gradients
Ruo Yang, Binghui Wang, and Mustafa Bilgic
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, USA
ryang23@hawk.iit.edu, bwang70@iit.edu, mbilgic@iit.edu

Abstract
Integrated Gradients (IG) as well as its variants are wellknown techniques for interpreting the decisions of deep neural networks. While IG-based approaches attain state-ofthe-art performance, they often integrate noise into their explanation saliency maps, which reduce their interpretability. To minimize the noise, we examine the source of
the noise analytically and propose a new approach to reduce the explanation noise based on our analytical findings. We propose the Important Direction Gradient Integration (IDGI) framework, which can be easily incorporated
into any IG-based method that uses the Reimann Integration for integrated gradient computation. Extensive experiments with three IG-based methods show that IDGI improves them drastically on numerous interpretability metrics. The source code for IDGI is available at https:
//github.com/yangruo1226/IDGI.

1. Introduction
With the deployment of deep neural network (DNN)
models for safety-critical applications such as autonomous
driving [5–7] and medical diagnostics [10, 24], explaining
the decisions of DNNs has become a critical concern. For
humans to trust the decision of DNNs, not only the model
must perform well on the specified task, it also must generate explanations that are easy to interpret. A series of explanation methods (e.g., gradient-based saliency/attribution
map approaches [21, 22, 29, 33, 36, 38, 43, 46] as well as
many that are not based on gradients [4, 11, 13, 19, 25, 27,
30, 32, 35, 39, 40, 42, 47, 48]) have been developed to connect a DNN’s prediction to its input. Among them, Integrated Gradients (IG) [43], a well-known gradient-based
explanation method, and its variants [22, 46] have attracted
significant interest due to their state-of-the-art explanation
performance and desirable theoretical properties. However,
we observe that explanation noise exists in the attribution
generated by these IG methods (please see Fig. 1). In this
research, we investigate IG-based methods, study the explanation noise introduced by these methods, propose a frame-

Figure 1. Saliency/attribution map of the existing IG-based methods and those with our method on explaining the prediction from
InceptionV3 model. Our method significantly reduces the noise in
the saliency map created by these IG-based methods.

work to remove the explanation noise, and empirically validate the effectiveness of our approach.
A few recent IG-based methods (e.g., [38] [22], [46],
[41]) have been proposed to address the noise issue.
Kapishnikov et al. [22] provide the following main reasons1
that could generate the noise: 1) DNN model’s shape often
has a high curvature; and 2) The choice of the reference
point impacts explanation. They propose Guided Integrated
Gradients (GIG) [22], which tackles point #1 by iteratively
finding the integration path that tries to avoid the high curvature points in the space. Blur Integral Gradients [46], on
the other hand, shows that the noise could be reduced by
finding the integration path through the frequency domain
instead of the original image domain. Formally, it finds the
path by successively blurring the input via a Gaussian blur
filter. Sturmfels et al. [41] tackle point #2 by performing the
integration from multiple reference points, while Smilkov
et al. [38] aggregate the attribution with respect to multiple
Gaussian noisy inputs to reduce the noise. Nevertheless,
all IG-based methods share a common point in that they
compute the integration of gradients via the Riemann integral. We highlight that, the integration calculation by the
existing methods fundamentally introduces the explanation
noise. To this end, we offer a general solution that elimi1 [22] mentions the accuracy of integration is also a reason to generate
the noise, but this is not the focus of existing IG methods and this paper.

23725

