This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense Distinct Query for End-to-End Object Detection
Shilong Zhang1,3 * , Xinjiang Wang2 * , Jiaqi Wang1 , Jiangmiao Pang1 ,
Chengqi Lyu1 , Wenwei Zhang4,1 , Ping Luo3,1 , Kai Chen1
1
3

Shanghai AI Laboratory

The University of Hong Kong

4

2

SenseTime Research

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Figure 1. Pros and Cons of different queries and their corresponding learning paradigms.

Abstract
One-to-one label assignment in object detection has successfully obviated the need for non-maximum suppression
(NMS) as postprocessing and makes the pipeline end-toend. However, it triggers a new dilemma as the widely
used sparse queries cannot guarantee a high recall, while
dense queries inevitably bring more similar queries and encounter optimization difficulties. As both sparse and dense
queries are problematic, then what are the expected queries
in end-to-end object detection? This paper shows that the
solution should be Dense Distinct Queries (DDQ). Concretely, we first lay dense queries like traditional detectors
and then select distinct ones for one-to-one assignments.
DDQ blends the advantages of traditional and recent endto-end detectors and significantly improves the performance
of various detectors including FCN, R-CNN, and DETRs.
Most impressively, DDQ-DETR achieves 52.1 AP on MSCOCO dataset within 12 epochs using a ResNet-50 backbone, outperforming all existing detectors in the same setting. DDQ also shares the benefit of end-to-end detectors in crowded scenes and achieves 93.8 AP on CrowdHuman. We hope DDQ can inspire researchers to consider the complementarity between traditional methods and
end-to-end detectors. The source code can be found at
https://github.com/jshilong/DDQ.

* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental tasks in
computer vision, which aims at answering what objects are
in an image and where they are. To achieve the objective,
the detector is expected to detect all objects and mark each
object with only one bounding box.
Due to the complex spatial distribution and the vast
shape variance of objects, detecting all objects is quite challenging. To solve the problem, traditional detectors [17,21,
27] first lay predefined dense grid queries1 to achieve a high
recall. Convolutions with shared weights are then applied to
quickly process dense queries in a sliding-window manner.
At last, one ground truth bounding box is assigned to multiple similar candidate queries for optimization. However,
the one-to-many assignment results in redundant predictions and thus requires extra duplicate-removal operations
(e.g., non-maximum suppression) during inference, which
causes misaligned inference with training and hinders the
pipeline from being end-to-end (as shown in Fig. 1.(a)).
This paradigm is broken by DETR [2], which assigns
only one positive query to each ground truth bounding
box (one-to-one assignment) to achieve end-to-end. This
scheme requires heavy computation to refine queries and
adopts self-attention to model interactions between queries
1 Anchors [17, 21] or anchor points [27] in conventional detectors
play the same role as sparse object queries in [2]. Hence, we collectively refer to densely distributed anchor boxes and anchor points as dense
queries.

7329

