This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tangentially Elongated Gaussian Belief Propagation
for Event-based Incremental Optical Flow Estimation
Jun Nagata† and Yusuke Sekikawa† DENSO IT LAB., INC., Japan.

Abstract
Optical ﬂow estimation is a fundamental functionality in
computer vision. An event-based camera, which asynchronously detects sparse intensity changes, is an ideal
device for realizing low-latency estimation of the optical
ﬂow owing to its low-latency sensing mechanism. An
existing method using local plane ﬁtting of events could
utilize the sparsity to realize incremental updates for
low-latency estimation; however, its output is merely a
normal component of the full optical ﬂow. An alternative approach using a frame-based deep neural network
could estimate the full ﬂow; however, its intensive nonincremental dense operation prohibits the low-latency
estimation. We propose tangentially elongated Gaussian
(TEG) belief propagation (BP) that realizes incremental
full-ﬂow estimation. We model the probability of full ﬂow
as the joint distribution of TEGs from the normal ﬂow
measurements, such that the marginal of this distribution
with correct prior equals the full ﬂow. We formulate the
marginalization using a message-passing based on the
BP to realize efﬁcient incremental updates using sparse
measurements. In addition to the theoretical justiﬁcation,
we evaluate the effectiveness of the TEGBP in real-world
datasets; it outperforms SOTA incremental quasi-full ﬂow
method by a large margin. (The code is available at
https://github.com/DensoITLab/tegbp/).

1. Introduction
Optical ﬂow estimation, which computes the correspondence of pixels in different time measurements, is a fundamental building block of computer vision. One needs to
estimate the ﬂow at low latency in many practical applications, such as autonomous driving cars, unmanned aerial
vehicles, and factory automation robots. Most of the existing optical ﬂow algorithm utilizes dense video frames; it
computes the ﬂow by searching the similar intensity pattern [15, 29]. Recently, methods using deep neural network (DNN) [29] demonstrate impressive accuracy at the
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed TEGBP. We model a belief
about the full ﬂow from a normal ﬂow measurement using TEG
(RGB ellipse). The mean of the marginal distribution of each TEG
with an appropriate prior equals the full ﬂow (magenta arrow). The
marginal (magenta ellipse) is computed incrementally using local
message passing (RGB arrows) based on BP.

cost of higher-computational cost. Either model-based or
DNN-based, the frame-based algorithm needs to compute
the entire pixel for every frame, even when there are subtle
changes or no changes at all. This dense operation makes it
difﬁcult to realize low-latency estimation, especially on the
resource-constrained edge device.
The event-based camera is a bio-inspired vision sensor, which asynchronously detects intensity change on each
pixel. Thanks to the novel sensing mechanism, the camera
equips favorable characteristics for optical ﬂow estimation,
such as high dynamic range (HDR), blur-free measurement,
and, most importantly, sparse low-latency data acquisition.
Many researchers have explored the way to utilize sparsity
to realize efﬁcient low-latency estimation; one extends the
well-known Lucas-Kanade algorithm [7], and the other exploits the local planer shape of the spatiotemporal event
streams [6]. These methods could utilize the sparsity for
efﬁcient incremental processing; however, the optical ﬂow
computed in this way (e.g., by plane ﬁtting) is the normal
ﬂow, which is a normal component of full ﬂow and often
different from them1 we want to obtain. The normal ﬂow
is the component of the full ﬂow perpendicular to the edge
(i.e., parallel to the intensity gradient). Some work tried to
recover the full ﬂow from the normal ﬂow [2]; however, it
does not precisely equal the full ﬂow (refer to Sec. 2). There
exist methods that could estimate full ﬂow, such as a varia1 full ﬂow is usually simply called optical ﬂow or ﬂow, yet, we use full
ﬂow when we want to highlight the difference with the normal ﬂow.

21940

