This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Domain 3D Hand Pose Estimation with Dual Modalities
Qiuxia Lin*
Linlin Yang*
Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
{qiuxia, yangll, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent advances in hand pose estimation have shed
light on utilizing synthetic data to train neural networks,
which however inevitably hinders generalization to realworld data due to domain gaps. To solve this problem,
we present a framework for cross-domain semi-supervised
hand pose estimation and target the challenging scenario of
learning models from labelled multi-modal synthetic data
and unlabelled real-world data. To that end, we propose
a dual-modality network that exploits synthetic RGB and
synthetic depth images. For pre-training, our network uses
multi-modal contrastive learning and attention-fused supervision to learn effective representations of the RGB images.
We then integrate a novel self-distillation technique during
fine-tuning to reduce pseudo-label noise. Experiments show
that the proposed method significantly improves 3D hand
pose estimation and 2D keypoint detection on benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Hand pose estimation supports a wide range of applications, including sign language recognition [18, 19] and
gesture-based interaction systems [1]. However, it is difficult to obtain the large amounts of accurate ground truth
labels required for training deep-learning-based hand pose
estimation systems. Training models with synthetic data is
one option, but such models exhibit a sim-to-real domain
gap and generalize poorly to real-world settings. More sophisticated synthesis can narrow this gap, but the performance drop is still noticeable [23].
This paper addresses the cross-domain pose estimation
problem and focuses on a semi-supervised setting. We target learning from labelled synthetic data and unlabelled
real-world data for application to real-world data. Pretraining with synthetic data is common [14, 32]; surprisingly, only RGB synthetic images have been considered.
Yet when generating synthetic data, it is relatively easy to
render multiple data modalities. For example, the RHD
* Equal contribution

RGB input

RGB attention

RGB attention overlay

Depth attention

Depth attention overlay

Figure 1. Attention comparisons between RGB and depth maps.
Apart from the hand region, the RGB attention shows high activation on the background. The depth map attention however provides high activation only on the hand, confirming its strength to
focus on task-relevant information.

dataset [41] features both RGB images and depth maps.
Across the modalities, there are shared common visual
cues relating to the underlying geometry or semantics that
are task-relevant for hand pose estimation. To exploit such
information during pre-training, a simple solution is to apply pixel-wise ℓ1 alignment between feature maps of RGB
and depth maps [37]. However, the large discrepancy between RGB images and depth maps might cause the pixelwise alignment to also focus on irrelevant regions related
to the background. Fig. 1 shows the attention derived from
RGB versus depth maps and their overlays on the original
RGB input. We observe that the RGB attention is strong in
task-related areas, i.e. the hand, but also on unrelated areas
of the background. In contrast, the attention from the depth
map is successfully localized on the hand.
To focus more on relevant regions, we propose a dualmodality network for RGB images and depth maps that
improves RGB-based hand pose estimation via a multilevel alignment. Specifically, we design an attention module to apply information learned from depth maps to the
RGB image to produce attention-fused RGB features. The
learned information is then aligned to RGB features by
multi-modal supervision on the predictions from all modalities with ground truth. This limits the RGB encoder’s sen-

17184

