This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-based Generation, Optimization, and Planning in 3D Scenes
Siyuan Huang1˚ , Zan Wang1,2˚ , Puhao Li1,3 , Baoxiong Jia1
Tengyu Liu1 , Yixin Zhu4 , Wei Liang2,5 , Song-Chun Zhu1,3,4
1
2
3

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
4

Dept. of Automation, Tsinghua University
5

Institute for AI, Peking University

Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing

https://scenediffuser.github.io

Figure 1. Illustration of the SceneDiffuser, applicable to various scene-conditioned 3D tasks: (a) human pose generation, (b) human motion
generation, (c) dexterous grasp generation, (d) path planning for 3D navigation with goals, and (e) motion planning for robot arms.

Abstract
We introduce the SceneDiffuser, a conditional generative model for 3D scene understanding. SceneDiffuser provides a unified model for solving scene-conditioned generation, optimization, and planning. In contrast to prior
work, SceneDiffuser is intrinsically scene-aware, physicsbased, and goal-oriented. With an iterative sampling strategy,
SceneDiffuser jointly formulates the scene-aware generation, physics-based optimization, and goal-oriented planning
via a diffusion-based denoising process in a fully differentiable fashion. Such a design alleviates the discrepancies
among different modules and the posterior collapse of previous scene-conditioned generative models. We evaluate the
SceneDiffuser on various 3D scene understanding tasks, including human pose and motion generation, dexterous grasp
˚ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Corresponding authors: Siyuan Huang (syhuang@bigai.ai)
and Wei Liang (liangwei@bit.edu.cn).

generation, path planning for 3D navigation, and motion
planning for robot arms. The results show significant improvements compared with previous models, demonstrating
the tremendous potential of the SceneDiffuser for the broad
community of 3D scene understanding.

1. Introduction
The ability to generate, optimize, and plan in 3D scenes
is a long-standing goal across computer vision, graphics,
and robotics. Various tasks have been devised to achieve
these goals, fostering downstream applications in motion
generation [32, 69, 73, 90], motion planning [42, 43, 60, 75],
grasp generation [25, 31, 34], navigation [1, 95], scene synthesis [24, 47, 72, 82], embodied perception and manipulation [30, 39, 61], and autonomous driving [3, 52].
Despite rich applications and great successes, existing
models designed for these tasks exhibit two fundamental
limitations for real-world 3D scene understanding.

16750

