This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Picture that Sketch: Photorealistic Image Generation from Abstract Sketches
Subhadeep Koley1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1,2 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{s.koley, a.bhunia, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
Edgemap

Sketch

Sketch

Sketch

Existing Methods

(a)

Sketch

Sketch

Proposed Method

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Set of photos generated by the proposed method. (b) While existing methods can generate faithful photos from perfectly
pixel-aligned edgemaps, they fall short drastically in case of highly deformed and sparse free-hand sketches. In contrast, our autoregressive
sketch-to-photo generation model produces highly photorealistic outputs from highly abstract sketches.

Abstract
Given an abstract, deformed, ordinary sketch from untrained amateurs like you and me, this paper turns it into a
photorealistic image – just like those shown in Fig. 1(a),
all non-cherry-picked. We differ significantly from prior
art in that we do not dictate an edgemap-like sketch to
start with, but aim to work with abstract free-hand human
sketches. In doing so, we essentially democratise the sketchto-photo pipeline, “picturing” a sketch regardless of how
good you sketch. Our contribution at the outset is a decoupled encoder-decoder training paradigm, where the decoder is a StyleGAN trained on photos only. This importantly ensures that generated results are always photorealistic. The rest is then all centred around how best to deal
with the abstraction gap between sketch and photo. For
that, we propose an autoregressive sketch mapper trained
on sketch-photo pairs that maps a sketch to the StyleGAN
latent space. We further introduce specific designs to tackle
the abstract nature of human sketches, including a finegrained discriminative loss on the back of a trained sketchphoto retrieval model, and a partial-aware sketch augmentation strategy. Finally, we showcase a few downstream
tasks our generation model enables, amongst them is showing how fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval, a wellstudied problem in the sketch community, can be reduced
to an image (generated) to image retrieval task, surpassing state-of-the-arts. We put forward generated results in
the supplementary for everyone to scrutinise. Project page:
https:// subhadeepkoley.github.io/ PictureThatSketch

1. Introduction
People sketch, some better than others. Given a shoe
image like ones shown in Fig. 1(a), everyone can scribble
a few lines to depict the photo, again mileage may vary –
top left sketch arguably lesser than that at bottom left. The
opposite, i.e., hallucinating a photo based on even a very abstract sketch, is however something humans are very good
at having evolved on the task over millions of years. This
seemingly easy task for humans, is exactly one that this paper attempts to tackle, and apparently does fairly well at –
given an abstract sketch from untrained amateurs like us,
our paper turns it into a photorealistic image (see Fig. 1).
This problem falls into the general image-to-image translation literature [41, 64]. Indeed, some might recall prior
arts (e.g., pix2pix [41], CycleGAN [105], MUNIT [38], BicycleGAN [106]), and sketch-specific variants [33, 86] primarily based on pix2pix [41] claiming to have tackled the
exact problem. We are strongly inspired by these works, but
significantly differ on one key aspect – we aim to generate
from abstract human sketches, not accurate photo edgemaps
which are already “photorealistic”.
This is apparent in Fig. 1(b), where when edgemaps are
used prior works can hallucinate high-quality photorealistic photos, whereas rather “peculiar” looking results are obtained when faced with amateur human sketches. This is because all prior arts assume pixel-alignment during translation – so your drawing skill (or lack of it), got accurately reflected in the generated result. As a result, chance is you and
me will not fetch far on existing systems if not art-trained to

6850

