This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Images Speak in Images: A Generalist Painter for In-Context Visual Learning
Xinlong Wang1 *

Wen Wang2∗

Yue Cao1∗

1 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, China

Chunhua Shen2
2 Zhejiang University

Tiejun Huang1,3
3 Peking University

https://github.com/baaivision/Painter
Task prompts

Paintings

Input images

Painter

Figure 1. An illustration of the in-context inference of Painter. Painter is a generalist vision model, which can automatically perform
vision tasks according to the input task prompts without the task specific heads. Painter can not only perform in-domain tasks with highly
competitive performance, such as semantic segmentation (Row 1), instance segmentation (Row 2), depth estimation (Row 3), keypoint
detection (Row 4), denoising (Row 5), deraining (Row 6), and image enhancement (Row7), but also be able to rapidly adapt to various
out-of-domain vision tasks using simple prompts, such as open-category object segmentation, keypoint detection, and instance segmentation
(Row 8-10).

Abstract
In-context learning, as a new paradigm in NLP, allows
the model to rapidly adapt to various tasks with only a handful of prompts and examples. But in computer vision, the
difficulties for in-context learning lie in that tasks vary significantly in the output representations, thus it is unclear
how to define the general-purpose task prompts that the vi* Equal contribution. Correspondence to xinlong.wang96@gmail.com.
This work is done when Wen Wang is an intern at BAAI.

sion model can understand and transfer to out-of-domain
tasks. In this work, we present Painter, a generalist model
which addresses these obstacles with an “image”-centric
solution, that is, to redefine the output of core vision tasks
as images, and specify task prompts as also images. With
this idea, our training process is extremely simple, which
performs standard masked image modeling on the stitch of
input and output image pairs. This makes the model capable
of performing tasks conditioned on visible image patches.
Thus, during inference, we can adopt a pair of input and

6830

