This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LidarGait: Benchmarking 3D Gait Recognition with Point Clouds
Chuanfu Shen1,2 , Fan Chao2,3 , Wei Wu2 , Rui Wang2 , George Q. Huang4 , Shiqi Yu2,3 *
1

Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous System, Southern University of Science and Technology
4
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2

noahshen@connect.hku.hk, {12131100, 12032501, 12232385}@mail.sustech.edu.cn
gq.huang@polyu.edu.hk, yusq@sustech.edu.cn.

Abstract
Video-based gait recognition has achieved impressive results in constrained scenarios. However, visual cameras
neglect human 3D structure information, which limits the
feasibility of gait recognition in the 3D wild world. Instead of extracting gait features from images, this work
explores precise 3D gait features from point clouds and
proposes a simple yet efficient 3D gait recognition framework, termed LidarGait. Our proposed approach projects
sparse point clouds into depth maps to learn the representations with 3D geometry information, which outperforms
existing point-wise and camera-based methods by a significant margin. Due to the lack of point cloud datasets,
we build the first large-scale LiDAR-based gait recognition
dataset, SUSTech1K, collected by a LiDAR sensor and an
RGB camera. The dataset contains 25,239 sequences from
1,050 subjects and covers many variations, including visibility, views, occlusions, clothing, carrying, and scenes.
Extensive experiments show that (1) 3D structure information serves as a significant feature for gait recognition. (2)
LidarGait outperforms existing point-based and silhouettebased methods by a significant margin, while it also offers
stable cross-view results. (3) The LiDAR sensor is superior
to the RGB camera for gait recognition in the outdoor environment. The source code and dataset have been made
available at https://lidargait.github.io.

1. Introduction
Gait is an essential biometric, which has the unique
advantage of human identification at a distance without
physical contact. Gait empowers real-world applications
such as human retrieval, forensic identification, and serving robots. Recently, great progress has been made to pro* Corresponding Author

Single-view
Appearance

Camera

RGB

Alice Bob Calvin

Silhouette

Probability

(a) Camera-based gait recognition with silhouettes
Multi-view
Appearance
Shape
Height
LiDAR
Alice Bob Calvin

Point Cloud

Probability

(b) LiDAR-based gait recognition with point clouds

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) camera-based and (b) LiDAR-based
gait recognition. Camera-based gait recognition commonly uses
silhouettes to learn shape information from a single view. LiDARbased gait recognition can use 3D structure, shape, and scale information to identify a subject.

mote gait recognition from in-the-lab setting [19, 42, 50]
to in-the-wild scenario [17, 52, 56, 58]. Despite these
studies have made significant contributions to recent advances [5, 7, 11, 30, 31, 38, 55], two inherent problems still
remain (1) lack of 3D geometry information, and (2) poor
feasibility in the real-world scenario.
Existing camera-based methods [18, 53] are counterintuitive to human nature. When recognizing a subject [56, 57],
humans consider not only the 2D appearance characteristics, but also 3D geometry structure information like
height, shape, and viewpoints. Differently, camera-based
gait recognition methods [5, 26, 31] either capture 2D representations from a single viewpoint, as shown in Fig. 1a,
or exploit 3D representations from estimated 3D pose/mesh

1054

