This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-set Semantic Segmentation for Point Clouds
via Adversarial Prototype Framework

1

Jianan Li1,2 , Qiulei Dong∗,1,2,3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
lijianan211@mails.ucas.ac.cn, qldong@nlpr.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, point cloud semantic segmentation has attracted
much attention in computer vision. Most of the existing
works in literature assume that the training and testing
point clouds have the same object classes, but they are generally invalid in many real-world scenarios for identifying
the 3D objects whose classes are not seen in the training
set. To address this problem, we propose an Adversarial
Prototype Framework (APF) for handling the open-set
3D semantic segmentation task, which aims to identify 3D
unseen-class points while maintaining the segmentation
performance on seen-class points. The proposed APF
consists of a feature extraction module for extracting point
features, a prototypical constraint module, and a feature
adversarial module. The prototypical constraint module is
designed to learn prototypes for each seen class from point
features. The feature adversarial module utilizes generative
adversarial networks to estimate the distribution of unseenclass features implicitly, and the synthetic unseen-class
features are utilized to prompt the model to learn more
effective point features and prototypes for discriminating
unseen-class samples from the seen-class ones. Experimental results on two public datasets demonstrate that the
proposed APF outperforms the comparative methods by a
large margin in most cases.

1. Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation is an important and
challenging topic in computer vision. Most of the existing
works [9–11, 29] in literature are based on the assumption
that both the training and testing point clouds have the same
*Corresponding author

(a) AD

(b) O3D

Figure 1. Visualization of the goals of anmaly detection (AD) and
open-set 3D semantic segmentation (O3D) on SemanticKITTI [2].
AD is to identify the unseen-class data, while O3D is to simultaneously identify the unseen-class data and segment seen-class data.
The unseen-class points are colorized in yellow.

object classes, however, this assumption is no more valid in
many real-world scenarios, due to the fact that the classes
of some observed 3D points may not be presented in the
training set. Hence, the following problem on open-set 3D
semantic segmentation is naturally raised: How does a segmentation model simultaneously identify unseen-class 3D
points and maintain the segmentation accuracy of seen-class
3D points in open-set scenarios?
Compared with anomaly detection [3, 23, 26], open-set
3D semantic segmentation (O3D) is more challenging, for
it also needs to assign labels to seen-class data simultaneously, as shown in Figure 1. In fact, some existing techniques [6,15,17,18] for open-set 2D semantic segmentation
(O2D) task could be extended to handle the O3D task, however, their open-set ability is generally limited in 3D scenarios. In addition, to our best knowledge, only one pioneering
work [7] has investigated a special technique for O3D task.
In [7], an O3D method called REAL is proposed to utilize
normal classifiers to segment seen-class points and regard
the randomly resized objects as unseen-class objects which
are detected by the redundancy classifiers. REAL outperforms some extended O2D methods in the O3D task, how-

9425

