This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gazeformer: Scalable, Effective and Fast Prediction of
Goal-Directed Human Attention
Sounak Mondal1 , Zhibo Yang1,2 , Seoyoung Ahn1 , Dimitris Samaras1 , Gregory Zelinsky1 , Minh Hoai1,3
1
Stony Brook University, 2 Waymo LLC, 3 VinAI Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
The prediction of human gaze behavior is a computer vision problem with clear application to the design of more
interactive systems that can anticipate a user’s attention.
In addition to addressing basic cognitive science questions,
gaze modeling has applications in human-computer interaction (HCI) and Augmented/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) systems [2,12,24], non-invasive healthcare [35,43], visual display design [18, 40], robotics [17, 25], education [3, 11, 39],

Training

“Scalable”

IRL
FFM

Inferences per Second

IRL
FFM

Gazeformer

Chen

“Effective”

Inference

Inference
Throughput

Performance for
search target
in N categories
(GazeTrain setting)
e.g. find “fork”
Scanpath Similarity

FFM

Chen

IRL

Gazeformer

Performance for
search target
outside N categories
(ZeroGaze setting)
e.g. find “knife”

…

find “laptop”

Gazeformer

find “cup”

Chen

find “fork”

Scanpath Similarity

Predicting human gaze is important in HumanComputer Interaction (HCI). However, to practically serve
HCI applications, gaze prediction models must be scalable,
fast, and accurate in their spatial and temporal gaze predictions. Recent scanpath prediction models focus on goaldirected attention (search). Such models are limited in their
application due to a common approach relying on trained
target detectors for all possible objects, and the availability of human gaze data for their training (both not scalable). In response, we pose a new task called ZeroGaze,
a new variant of zero-shot learning where gaze is predicted for never-before-searched objects, and we develop
a novel model, Gazeformer, to solve the ZeroGaze problem. In contrast to existing methods using object detector modules, Gazeformer encodes the target using a natural language model, thus leveraging semantic similarities in
scanpath prediction. We use a transformer-based encoderdecoder architecture because transformers are particularly
useful for generating contextual representations. Gazeformer surpasses other models by a large margin (19%–
70%) on the ZeroGaze setting. It also outperforms existing target-detection models on standard gaze prediction for
both target-present and target-absent search tasks. In addition to its improved performance, Gazeformer is more
than five times faster than the state-of-the-art target-present
visual search model. Code can be found at https://
github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/Gazeformer/

Training Dataset:
human fixations searching for search target in N categories

“Fast”
“Fast”

Figure 1. An example scenario where human scanpaths for only N
categories such as “fork”, “cup” and “laptop” are available during
training. In the traditional GazeTrain setting, the model is asked
to predict scanpaths for only those N target categories it has seen
during training, such as “fork”. However, in the ZeroGaze setting,
the model is expected to predict scanpaths for target categories
for which training scanpaths are not available, such as “knife”.
Gazeformer is overall superior since it is more scalable (better
ZeroGaze performance), more effective (better GazeTrain performance) and faster (higher inference speed) than previous methods.

etc. It is likely that gaze modeling will be ubiquitous in all
HCI interfaces in the near future. Hence, there is a need
for gaze prediction models that are reliable and effective
yet efficient and capable of fast inference for use with edge
devices (e.g., smartglasses, AR/VR headsets).
Our focus is on goal-directed behavior (not free viewing), and specifically the prediction of gaze fixations as a
person searches for a given target-object category (e.g., a
clock or fork). Visual search is engaged in innumerable
task-oriented human activities (e.g., driving) in both real
and AR/VR environments. The gaze prediction problem for
visual search takes an image input and outputs a sequence
of eye movements conditioned on the target. Existing ar-

1441

