This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Document Image Shadow Removal Guided by Color-Aware Background
Ling Zhang1 , Yinghao He1 , Qing Zhang 2 , Zheng Liu3 , Xiaolong Zhang1 , Chunxia Xiao4∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University
3
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences (Wuhan)
4
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
zhling@wust.edu.cn, hyhwust@163.com, zhangqing.whu.cs@gmail.com
liu.zheng.jojo@gmail.com, xiaolong.zhang@wust.edu.cn, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing works on document image shadow removal
mostly depend on learning and leveraging a constant background (the color of the paper) from the image. However,
the constant background is less representative and frequently ignores other background colors, such as the printed colors, resulting in distorted results. In this paper, we present
a color-aware background extraction network (CBENet) for
extracting a spatially varying background image that accurately depicts the background colors of the document. Furthermore, we propose a background-guided document images shadow removal network (BGShadowNet) using the predicted spatially varying background as auxiliary information, which consists of two stages. At Stage
I, a background-constrained decoder is designed to promote a coarse result. Then, the coarse result is refined
with a background-based attention module (BAModule) to
maintain a consistent appearance and a detail improvement
module (DEModule) to enhance the texture details at Stage
II. Experiments on two benchmark datasets qualitatively
and quantitatively validate the superiority of the proposed
approach over state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Documents, such as textbooks, newspapers, leaflets, and
receipts, are available daily, often saved as electronic documents for digital document archives or online message
transfer. Since the wide use and convenience of mobile
phones, people currently prefer to use mobile phones for
digital document copying. However, the captured document images become highly susceptible to shadows when
the light sources are blocked. The low brightness in shadow
regions reduces the quality and readability of the documen∗ Corresponding author: Chunxia Xiao (cxxiao@whu.edu.cn).

(a) Shadow image

(b) Our background

(c) Our result

(d) Result of [2]

(e) Background of [24]

(f) Result of [24]

Figure 1. Document image shadow removal. With the assumption
of constant background, results of [2] and [24] may cause color
distortion or shadow remnant. By using a spatially varying background, our method can produce more desirable result.

t image, resulting in illegible content and unpleasant user
experience [2, 10, 12, 19, 28, 29]. Thus, shadow removal for
document images is a required image processing task in various vision applications [3, 4, 33, 37, 46, 48].
Although natural image shadow removal has made substantial progress [16, 20, 22, 40, 44, 45], these approaches generally perform poorly on document pictures due
to their drastically different features from natural images.
Natural image, for example, emphasizes background content (shadow-free image) without a shadow layer [6, 7, 13,
27, 41], whereas document image emphasizes text content
[2, 19, 30]. Without considering the particular properties of
the document image, traditional approaches to natural image generally yield incorrect result when they are applied
to document image, as well as learning-based methods (see
Figure 9(c-f)) due to the less attention to the content structures.

1818

