This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JRDB-Pose: A Large-scale Dataset for Multi-Person Pose Estimation and
Tracking
Edward Vendrow1 *, Duy Tho Le2 *, Jianfei Cai2 , Hamid Rezatofighi2
1
Stanford University, 2 Monash University
evendrow@stanford.edu, {tho.le, jianfei.cai, hamid.rezatofighi}@monash.edu

Abstract
Autonomous robotic systems operating in human environments must understand their surroundings to make accurate and safe decisions. In crowded human scenes with
close-up human-robot interaction and robot navigation, a
deep understanding of surrounding people requires reasoning about human motion and body dynamics over time with
human body pose estimation and tracking. However, existing datasets captured from robot platforms either do not
provide pose annotations or do not reflect the scene distribution of social robots. In this paper, we introduce JRDBPose, a large-scale dataset and benchmark for multi-person
pose estimation and tracking. JRDB-Pose extends the existing JRDB which includes videos captured from a social
navigation robot in a university campus environment, containing challenging scenes with crowded indoor and outdoor locations and a diverse range of scales and occlusion types. JRDB-Pose provides human pose annotations
with per-keypoint occlusion labels and track IDs consistent
across the scene and with existing annotations in JRDB.
We conduct a thorough experimental study of state-of-theart multi-person pose estimation and tracking methods on
JRDB-Pose, showing that our dataset imposes new challenges for the existing methods. JRDB-Pose is available at
https://jrdb.erc.monash.edu/.

1. Introduction
Visual scene understanding of human environments is a
difficult and crucial task for autonomous driving, humanrobot interaction, safe robotic navigation, and human action
recognition. Although rough predictions of human location
are sufficient for some applications, a deep understanding
of crowded human scenes and close-up human-robot interaction requires reasoning about human motion and body
dynamics with human body pose estimation and tracking.
Developing an AI model to predict human body pose is
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. JRDB-Pose provides high frequency annotations of
tracks and body joints in long scenes of crowded indoor and outdoor locations featuring dynamic motion and occlusion.

made more difficult by the varied and highly imbalanced
range of human motion found in daily living environments,
including a variety of scales, occlusions, and overlapping
humans, representing a long-tailed distribution of human
poses which is difficult for existing methods.
Human pose estimation and tracking is an active research
area with many new large-scale datasets [13, 16, 26, 46]
contributing to significant recent progress; however, these
datasets do not primarily target robotic perception tasks in
social navigation environments, and thus rarely reflect specific challenges found in human-robot interaction and robot
navigation in crowded human environments, e.g. shopping
malls, university campus, etc.
JRDB [28] previously introduced a large-scale dataset
and a benchmark for research in perception tasks related to
robotics in human environments. The dataset was captured
using a social manipulator robot with a multi-modal sensor
suite including a stereo RGB 360° cylindrical video stream,
3D point clouds from two LiDAR sensors, audio and GPS
positions. JRDB [28] additionally introduced annotations
for 2D bounding boxes and 3D oriented cuboids. Recently,
JRDB-Act [15] further introduced new annotations on the
JRDB videos for individual actions, human social group

4811

