This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta Omnium: A Benchmark for General-Purpose Learning-to-Learn
Ondrej Bohdal1,∗ , Yinbing Tian2,∗ , Yongshuo Zong1 , Ruchika Chavhan1 ,
Da Li3 , Henry Gouk1 , Li Guo2 , Timothy Hospedales1,3
The University of Edinburgh 2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge ∗ Joint-First Authors

Abstract
Meta-learning and other approaches to few-shot learning are widely studied for image recognition, and are increasingly applied to other vision tasks such as pose estimation and dense prediction. This naturally raises the question
of whether there is any few-shot meta-learning algorithm
capable of generalizing across these diverse task types? To
support the community in answering this question, we introduce Meta Omnium, a dataset-of-datasets spanning multiple vision tasks including recognition, keypoint localization,
semantic segmentation and regression. We experiment with
popular few-shot meta-learning baselines and analyze their
ability to generalize across tasks and to transfer knowledge
between them. Meta Omnium enables meta-learning researchers to evaluate model generalization to a much wider
array of tasks than previously possible, and provides a single framework for evaluating meta-learners across a wide
suite of vision applications in a consistent manner. Code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
edi-meta-learning/meta-omnium.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning is a long-standing research area that aims
to replicate the human ability to learn from a few examples by learning-to-learn from a large number of learning
problems [61]. This area has become increasingly important recently, as a paradigm with the potential to break the
data bottleneck of traditional supervised learning [26, 70].
While the largest body of work is applied to image recognition, few-shot learning algorithms have now been studied in most corners of computer vision, from semantic segmentation [37] to pose estimation [49] and beyond. Nevertheless, most of these applications of few-shot learning
are advancing independently, with increasingly divergent
application-specific methods and benchmarks. This makes
it hard to evaluate whether few-shot meta-learners can solve
diverse vision tasks. Importantly it also discourages the de-

Support

Query

Prediction

+

+

General
Few-shot
MetaLearner

+

In-Distribution Evaluation

Transfer

1

Out-of-Distribution Evaluation

+

+

General
Few-shot
MetaLearner

Figure 1. Illustration of the diverse visual domains and task types
in Meta Omnium. Meta-learners are required to generalize across
multiple task types, multiple datasets, and held-out datasets.

velopment of meta-learners with the ability to learn-to-learn
across tasks, transferring knowledge from, e.g., keypoint
localization to segmentation – a capability that would be
highly valuable for vision systems if achieved.
The overall trend in computer vision [20, 52] and AI
[5, 55] more generally is towards more general-purpose
models and algorithms that support many tasks and ideally leverage synergies across them. However, it has not
yet been possible to explore this trend in meta-learning,
due to the lack of few-shot benchmarks spanning multiple
tasks. State-of-the-art benchmarks [63, 65] for visual fewshot learning are restricted to image recognition across a
handful of visual domains. There is no few-shot benchmark

7693

