This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LOGO: A Long-Form Video Dataset for Group Action Quality Assessment
Shiyi Zhang1,2,3 , Wenxun Dai1 , Sujia Wang1 , Xiangwei Shen1 , Jiwen Lu2,3 , Jie Zhou2,3 , Yansong Tang1, *
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
{shiyi-zh19@mails.,lujiwen@,jzhou@,tang.yansong@sz.}tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. An overview of the LOGO dataset. LOGO is a multi-person long-form video dataset with frame-wise annotations on both action
procedures (as shown in the second line) and formations (as shown in the third line, which reflects relations among actors) based on artistic
swimming scenarios. It provides a potential for constructing an action quality assessment approach with the ability of modeling group
information among actors. Longer video durations also challenge the ability of the method to aggregate long-term temporal information.

Abstract
Action quality assessment (AQA) has become an emerging topic since it can be extensively applied in numerous
scenarios. However, most existing methods and datasets focus on single-person short-sequence scenes, hindering the
application of AQA in more complex situations. To address
this issue, we construct a new multi-person long-form video
dataset for action quality assessment named LOGO. Distinguished in scenario complexity, our dataset contains 200
videos from 26 artistic swimming events with 8 athletes in
each sample along with an average duration of 204.2 seconds. As for richness in annotations, LOGO includes formation labels to depict group information of multiple athletes and detailed annotations on action procedures. Furthermore, we propose a simple yet effective method to model
relations among athletes and reason about the potential
* indicates the corresponding author.

temporal logic in long-form videos. Specifically, we design a group-aware attention module, which can be easily plugged into existing AQA methods, to enrich the clipwise representations based on contextual group information. To benchmark LOGO, we systematically conduct investigations on the performance of several popular methods in AQA and action segmentation. The results reveal
the challenges our dataset brings. Extensive experiments
also show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art on
the LOGO dataset. The dataset and code will be released at
https://github.com/shiyi-zh0408/LOGO.

1. Introduction
Action quality assessment (AQA) is applicable to many
real-world contexts where people evaluate how well a specific action is performed such as sports events [13, 18, 29–

2405

