This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compression-Aware Video Super-Resolution
Xu Jia1†
Xin Tao3
Takashi Isobe2 *
Huchuan Lu1,4
Yu-Wing Tai5
1
2
Dalian University of Technology
Xiaohongshu Inc.
3
4
Kuaishou Technology
Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Yingwei Wang1 *

{xjia, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

{isobetakashi}@xiaohongshu.com

{yingweiwangapr2000, jiangsutx, yuwing}@gmail.com

Abstract

Compressed VSR Cloud Server
VSR

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution aims at restoring a sequence
of high-resolution (HR) frames by utilizing the complementary temporal information within low-resolution (LR)
frames. There have been many efforts [1–3, 7, 13, 15–18,
20, 24, 35, 38, 47] made on this task, especially after the
rise of deep learning. Most of these methods, however,
* T. ISOBE and Y. WANG contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Uploading
Transcoder
LR Video

Bitstream

Decoder

Previous Methods

Frames

Compression-aware
VSR

Mobile Phone
Meta Data

Our Method

（a）
Train
CRF15

CRF15

CRF35
CRF35

Videos stored on mobile devices or delivered on the Internet are usually in compressed format and are of various
unknown compression parameters, but most video superresolution (VSR) methods often assume ideal inputs resulting in large performance gap between experimental settings and real-world applications. In spite of a few pioneering works being proposed recently to super-resolve the
compressed videos, they are not specially designed to deal
with videos of various levels of compression. In this paper, we propose a novel and practical compression-aware
video super-resolution model, which could adapt its video
enhancement process to the estimated compression level.
A compression encoder is designed to model compression
levels of input frames, and a base VSR model is then conditioned on the implicitly computed representation by inserting compression-aware modules. In addition, we propose
to further strengthen the VSR model by taking full advantage of meta data that is embedded naturally in compressed
video streams in the procedure of information fusion. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method on compressed VSR benchmarks. The codes will be available at
https://github.com/aprBlue/CAVSR

Bicubic

BasicVSR STDF+BasicVSR
（b）

Ours

Test
CRF15

CRF35
（c）

Figure 1. Motivation of this work. (a) Application scenario of
the VSR task this work focuses on, (b) performance of existing
VSR methods on compressed VSR task, and (c) performance of
previous VSR models trained on videos of different compression.

assume an ideal input such as directly taking either bicubicly downsampled frames or Gaussian smoothed and decimated ones as the degraded inputs. In real world, videos
stored on mobile devices or delivered on the Internet are
all in a compressed format with different compression levels [10, 11, 14, 25, 30, 33, 41, 45]. Unless the compression is
very lightweight, directly applying an existing VSR model
would give unsatisfactory results with magnified compression artifacts, as shown in Fig. 1(a). One straightforward solution is to first apply a multi-frame decompression method
[5, 9, 41, 45] to remove blocking artifacts and then feed the
enhanced frames to an uncompressed VSR model. However, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the performance is still not good
with artifacts remained. In addition, the decompression network usually cannot handle video frames of different compression levels adaptively, which will cause over-smoothing

2012

