This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleGene: Crossover and Mutation of Region-level Facial Genes for Kinship
Face Synthesis

1

Hao Li1 , Xianxu Hou2,5 , Zepeng Huang1 , Linlin Shen1,2,3,4 *
Computer Vision Institute, College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University
White
White
Asia
Asia
Black
Black
5
School of AI and Advanced Computing, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
{haoli2021, huangzepeng2021}@email.szu.edu.cn, hxianxu@gmail.com, llshen@szu.edu.cn

Descendant

Grandparents
Parents
Children

Figure 1. Our StyleGene method synthesizes kinship faces with resemblance to parents, exhibiting diversity and reasonable variations. The
first row is the input grandparents, and the second and third rows are their descendants generated by our method.

Abstract
High-fidelity kinship face synthesis has many potential
applications, such as kinship verification, missing child
identification, and social media analysis. However, it
is challenging to synthesize high-quality descendant faces
with genetic relations due to the lack of large-scale, highquality annotated kinship data. This paper proposes RFG
(Region-level Facial Gene) extraction framework to address
this issue. We propose to use IGE (Image-based Gene Encoder), LGE (Latent-based Gene Encoder) and Gene Decoder to learn the RFGs of a given face image, and the
relationships between RFGs and the latent space of StyleGAN2. As cycle-like losses are designed to measure the L2
distances between the output of Gene Decoder and image
encoder, and that between the output of LGE and IGE, only
*Corresponding Author

face images are required to train our framework, i.e. no
paired kinship face data is required. Based upon the proposed RFGs, a crossover and mutation module is further
designed to inherit the facial parts of parents. A Gene Pool
has also been used to introduce the variations into the mutation of RFGs. The diversity of the faces of descendants
can thus be significantly increased. Qualitative, quantitative, and subjective experiments on FIW, TSKinFace, and
FF-Databases clearly show that the quality and diversity of
kinship faces generated by our approach are much better
than the existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Humans can identify kinship through photographs based
on the resemblance between parents and children. Many
works have investigated this intrinsic relation in the fields

20960

