This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynthVSR: Scaling Up Visual Speech Recognition With Synthetic Supervision
Xubo Liu1∗ , Egor Lakomkin2 , Konstantinos Vougioukas2 , Pingchuan Ma2 , Honglie Chen2 , Ruiming Xie2 ,
Morrie Doulaty2 , Niko Moritz2 , Jachym Kolar2 , Stavros Petridis2 , Maja Pantic2 , Christian Fuegen2
1

1. Speech-Driven Lip Animation
Lip Image

2

University of Surrey

Meta AI

2. Synthetic Dataset Generation

3. Semi-Supervised VSR Learning

Speech Utterance
Real
Dataset

Synthetic
Dataset

"How are you?"
Synthetic Video

"So cool!"
Visual Speech
Recognition

"That's
awesome!"

Transcribed Speech Dataset

Figure 1. Scaling up visual speech recognition with synthetic supervision (SynthVSR): we propose SynthVSR, a semi-supervised
framework that can substantially improve the performance of VSR models by using synthetic lip movements. Firstly, we introduce a speechdriven lip animation model that generates lip movement videos conditioned on input lip images and speech utterances (left). Secondly,
we generate large-scale synthetic videos using transcribed speech datasets and lip images. The combination of synthetic videos and their
corresponding speech transcriptions constitutes the synthetic dataset (centre). Finally, we conduct semi-supervised VSR training with
synthetic and real datasets. Our method substantially improves the performance of VSR models with large-scale synthetic data (right).

Abstract
Recently reported state-of-the-art results in visual
speech recognition (VSR) often rely on increasingly large
amounts of video data, while the publicly available transcribed video datasets are limited in size. In this paper, for
the first time, we study the potential of leveraging synthetic
visual data for VSR. Our method, termed SynthVSR, substantially improves the performance of VSR systems with
synthetic lip movements. The key idea behind SynthVSR is
to leverage a speech-driven lip animation model that generates lip movements conditioned on the input speech. The
speech-driven lip animation model is trained on an unlabeled audio-visual dataset and could be further optimized
towards a pre-trained VSR model when labeled videos are
available. As plenty of transcribed acoustic data and face
images are available, we are able to generate large-scale
synthetic data using the proposed lip animation model for
semi-supervised VSR training. We evaluate the performance of our approach on the largest public VSR benchmark - Lip Reading Sentences 3 (LRS3). SynthVSR achieves
a WER of 43.3% with only 30 hours of real labeled data,
∗ Work done during an internship at Meta AI.

outperforming off-the-shelf approaches using thousands of
hours of video. The WER is further reduced to 27.9% when
using all 438 hours of labeled data from LRS3, which is
on par with the state-of-the-art self-supervised AV-HuBERT
method. Furthermore, when combined with large-scale
pseudo-labeled audio-visual data SynthVSR yields a new
state-of-the-art VSR WER of 16.9% using publicly available
data only, surpassing the recent state-of-the-art approaches
trained with 29 times more non-public machine-transcribed
video data (90,000 hours). Finally, we perform extensive
ablation studies to understand the effect of each component
in our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Visual speech recognition (VSR), also known as lip reading, is the task of recognizing speech content based on visual lip movements. VSR has a wide range of applications in real-world scenarios such as helping the hearingimpaired perceive human speech and improving automatic
speech recognition (ASR) in noisy environments.
VSR is a challenging task, as it requires capturing speech
from high-dimensional spatio-temporal videos, while multiple words are visually ambiguous (e.g., “world” and

18806

