This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-fidelity 3D GAN Inversion by Pseudo-multi-view Optimization
Jiaxin Xie1 * Hao Ouyang1 * Jingtan Piao2† Chenyang Lei3 Qifeng Chen1†
1
2
3
HKUST
MMLab, CUHK
CAIR, HKISI-CAS

Abstract
We present a high-fidelity 3D generative adversarial network (GAN) inversion framework that can synthesize photorealistic novel views while preserving specific details of the
input image. High-fidelity 3D GAN inversion is inherently
challenging due to the geometry-texture trade-off, where
overfitting to a single view input image often damages the
estimated geometry during the latent optimization. To solve
this challenge, we propose a novel pipeline that builds on
the pseudo-multi-view estimation with visibility analysis.
We keep the original textures for the visible parts and utilize generative priors for the occluded parts. Extensive experiments show that our approach achieves advantageous
reconstruction and novel view synthesis quality over prior
work, even for images with out-of-distribution textures. The
proposed pipeline also enables image attribute editing with
the inverted latent code and 3D-aware texture modification. Our approach enables high-fidelity 3D rendering from
a single image, which is promising for various applications of AI-generated 3D content. The source code is at
https://github.com/jiaxinxie97/HFGI3D/.

1. Introduction
Real-world 3D-aware editing with a single 2D image fascinates various essential applications in computer graphics,
such as virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and
immersive meetings. Recent advancement in 3D GANs [12,
13,21,45] has achieved photo-realistic 3D-consistent image
generation. With the GAN inversion approaches [19,51,72],
which can map the images to the latent space of the pretrained 3D-aware model, high-fidelity 3D-aware editing becomes promising.
High-fidelity 3D-aware inversion aims to generate novel
views with high-quality reconstruction and 3D consistency,
but existing methods can hardly meet these two goals simultaneously. Although current GAN inversion methods
based on 2D GANs [1, 53, 54, 69] can perform 3D-related
attributes (e.g., head pose) editing, the generated view is
* Joint first authors
† Joint corresponding authors

inconsistent due to the lack of the underlying 3D representation. When applying the existing optimization-based inversion approaches on 3D-aware GANs [12, 36], we can retrieve high-fidelity reconstruction by overfitting to a single
input image. However, different from 2D GAN inversion,
the reconstruction quality of 3D GAN depends not only on
the input view’s faithfulness but also on the quality of the
synthesized novel views. During the optimization process,
the obvious artifacts in the synthesized novel views occur
with the appearance of high-fidelity details in the input view
as analyzed in Sec. 3. As only a single image is available
in the optimization process, the reconstruction suffers from
extreme ambiguity: infinite combinations of color and density can reconstruct the single input image, especially with
out-of-distribution textures.
Based on the above observation, we propose our 3Daware inversion pipeline by optimizing the reconstruction
not only on the input image but also on a set of pseudomulti-views. The pseudo views provide additional regularization, and thus the ambiguity is greatly reduced. Estimating the pseudo views is non-trivial as it requires maintaining
the texture details while also generating the occluded parts
in a plausible manner, based on the input view. We first estimate an initial geometry and conduct a visibility analysis to
solve these challenges. We directly utilize the textures from
the input image for the visible parts to preserve the texture
details. For the occluded parts, we use a pretrained generator to synthesize the reasonable inpainted regions. With
the additional supervision from the pseudo-multi-views, our
approach achieves high-fidelity reconstruction results with
the correct 3D geometry.
Our approach enables two types of editing: latent attributes editing and 3D-aware texture modification. We follow the previous work [55] and calculate the attribute direction in the latent code space. By modifying the inverted latent code in a specific direction, we can control the general
attribute (e.g., smile, ages for portraits as in Figure 1(b)).
Since the proposed pipeline enables inversion with out-ofdistribution textures, we can achieve compelling 3D consistent editing by only modifying the textures of the input
images (e.g., stylization or adding a tattoo in Figure 1(c)).
In summary, we propose a high-fidelity 3D GAN in-

321

