This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Model Barrier: A Compact Un-Transferable Isolation Domain
for Model Intellectual Property Protection
Lianyu Wang1 ,* Meng Wang2 ,* Daoqiang Zhang1†, Huazhu Fu2†
1
2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China.

Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 138632.

Abstract

Correct predictions

Correct predictions

As scientiﬁc and technological advancements result from
human intellectual labor and computational costs, protecting model intellectual property (IP) has become increasingly important to encourage model creators and owners.
Model IP protection involves preventing the use of welltrained models on unauthorized domains. To address this
issue, we propose a novel approach called Compact UnTransferable Isolation Domain (CUTI-domain), which acts
as a barrier to block illegal transfers from authorized to
unauthorized domains. Speciﬁcally, CUTI-domain blocks
cross-domain transfers by highlighting the private style features of the authorized domain, leading to recognition failure on unauthorized domains with irrelevant private style
features. Moreover, we provide two solutions for using
CUTI-domain depending on whether the unauthorized domain is known or not: target-speciﬁed CUTI-domain and
target-free CUTI-domain. Our comprehensive experimental results on four digit datasets, CIFAR10 & STL10, and
VisDA-2017 dataset demonstrate that CUTI-domain can be
easily implemented as a plug-and-play module with different backbones, providing an efﬁcient solution for model IP
protection.

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep learning models heavily relies on massive amounts of high-quality data, specialized
training resources, and elaborate manual ﬁne-tuning [4, 10,
26, 35]. Obtaining a well-trained deep model is both timeconsuming and labor-intensive [22]. Therefore, it should be
protected as a kind of scientiﬁc and technological achievement intellectual property (IP) [5, 50], thereby stimulating
innovation enthusiasm in the community and further promoting the development of deep learning. As shown in
* L. Wang and M. Wang contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author: D. Zhang (dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn) and H. Fu

(hzfu@ieee.org).

20475

Authorization

Authorization

Authorized domain
Transferable

Model

Model

Authorized domain
Untransferable

CUTI-domain
Stealer

Unauthorized domain

Wrong predictions

Model owner

Model owner

Unauthorized domain

Wrong predictions

Figure 1. Model IP protection with our proposed CUTI-domain.
Left: In standard supervised learning (SL), the model owner trains
a high-performance model on the authorized domain (pink square)
and then authorizes a speciﬁc user. Authorized users have the right
to use the model on the authorized domain to get the correct prediction. However, a stealer can easily access the model on the
unauthorized domain (blue square), which violates the legitimate
rights and interests of the model owner. Right: Our method constructs a CUTI-domain between the authorized and unauthorized
domains, which could block the illegal transferring and lead to a
wrong prediction for unauthorized domains.

Fig. 1, in supervised learning (SL), the model owner uses
the overall features of the authorized domain (pink square)
for training, obtains a high-performance model, and grants
the right to use it to a speciﬁc user. Authorized users can
use the model on the authorized domain to obtain correct
predictions. However, since the model is trained with overall features, its potential feature generalization region is
large and may cover some unauthorized domains. Therefore, there is a natural pathway between the authorized domain and the unauthorized domain, and the released highperformance model obtained by SL can be illegally transferred to the unauthorized domain (blue squares) through
methods such as domain adaptation [30, 51], and domain
generalization [44, 52], to obtain correct prediction results.
This presents a challenge in protecting well-trained models.
One of the most concerning threats raised is “Will releasing

