This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teaching Matters: Investigating the Role of Supervision in Vision Transformers
Saksham Suri* Kamal Gupta Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract

Contrastive Self-Supervision (DINO, MoCo)

Reconstruction-Based Self-Supervision (MAE, BEiT)

1

Layer

What: Features
CLS CKA

Why: Downstream Tasks
Retrieval
Correspondence

FS

1. Introduction
The field of Computer Vision has advanced massively
in the past decade, largely built on the backbone of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). More recently, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [18] have shown the potential
to overtake CNNs as the go-to visual processing model.
Prior works have asked the question do ViTs see like CNNs
do? [52], but in this work, we ask: how do ViTs learn under different supervision? Past examinations of ViTs have
largely focused on models trained through full supervision.
Instead, we aim to characterize the differences and similarities of ViTs trained through varying training methods, including self-supervised methods. Unlike CNNs, the ViT architecture imposes few structural biases to guide the learning of representations. This gives them the flexibility to
* Equal contributors.

Web: www.cs.umd.edu/˜sakshams/vit_analysis
Code: www.github.com/mwalmer-umd/vit_analysis

12

mAP

BEiT
MAE
MoCo
DINO
CLIP
FS

FS
CLIP
DINO
MoCo
MAE
BEiT

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have gained significant popularity in recent years and have proliferated into many
applications. However, their behavior under different
learning paradigms is not well explored. We compare
ViTs trained through different methods of supervision,
and show that they learn a diverse range of behaviors in
terms of their attention, representations, and downstream
performance. We also discover ViT behaviors that are
consistent across supervision, including the emergence
of Offset Local Attention Heads. These are self-attention
heads that attend to a token adjacent to the current token
with a fixed directional offset, a phenomenon that to the
best of our knowledge has not been highlighted in any prior
work. Our analysis shows that ViTs are highly flexible and
learn to process local and global information in different
orders depending on their training method. We find that
contrastive self-supervised methods learn features that are
competitive with explicitly supervised features, and they
can even be superior for part-level tasks. We also find that
the representations of reconstruction-based models show
non-trivial similarity to contrastive self-supervised models.

How: Attention
Explicit Supervision (Fully Supervised, CLIP)

PCK@0.1

Matthew Walmer*

CLIP

Layer

DINO

MoCo

Layer

MAE

BEiT

Random

Figure 1. ViTs exhibit highly varied behaviors depending on
their method of training. In this work, we compare ViTs through
three domains of analysis representing the How, What, and Why of
ViTs. How do ViTs process information through attention? (Top)
Attention maps averaged over 5000 images show clear differences
in the mid-to-late layers. What do ViTs learn to represent? (Left)
Contrastive self-supervised ViTs have a greater feature similarity
to explicitly supervised ViTs, but also have some similarity with
ViTs trained through masked reconstruction. Why do we care
about using ViTs? (Right) We evaluate ViTs on a variety of global
and local tasks and show that the best model and layer vary greatly.

learn diverse information processing strategies, and through
our analyses, we uncover a wide array of ViT behaviors.
There are countless ways to analyze ViTs, so to guide
this analysis we choose three major domains which correspond to the How, What, and Why of ViTs. For the How,
we focus on how ViTs process information through Attention. Multi-Headed Attention (MHA) layers are arguably
the key element of ViTs, and they most distinguish them

7486

