This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learned Two-Plane Perspective Prior based Image Resampling for
Efficient Object Detection
Anurag Ghosh

N. Dinesh Reddy
Christoph Mertz
Carnegie Mellon University

Srinivasa G. Narasimhan

{anuraggh, dnarapur, cmertz, srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

1. Introduction
Visual perception is important for autonomous driving and
decision-making for smarter and sustainable cities. Realtime efficient perception is critical to accelerate these advances. For instance, a single traffic camera captures half
a million frames every day or a commuter bus acting as a
city sensor captures one million frames every day to monitor road conditions [10] or to inform public services [22].
There are thousands of traffic cameras [24] and nearly a million commuter buses [53] in the United States. It is infeasible to transmit and process visual data on the cloud, leading
to the rise of edge architectures [43]. However, edge devices are severely resource constrained and real-time inference requires down-sampling images to fit both latency and
memory constraints severely impacting accuracy.
On the other hand, humans take visual shortcuts [19] to

(a)

Original (b)

Warped

(d)

Self Driving

(c)

City Sensing

Real-time efficient perception is critical for autonomous
navigation and city scale sensing. Orthogonal to architectural improvements, streaming perception approaches
have exploited adaptive sampling improving real-time detection performance. In this work, we propose a learnable
geometry-guided prior that incorporates rough geometry of
the 3D scene (a ground plane and a plane above) to resample images for efficient object detection. This significantly improves small and far-away object detection performance while also being more efficient both in terms of
latency and memory. For autonomous navigation, using the
same detector and scale, our approach improves detection
rate by +4.1 APS or +39% and in real-time performance
by +5.3 sAPS or +63% for small objects over state-of-theart (SOTA). For fixed traffic cameras, our approach detects
small objects at image scales other methods cannot. At the
same scale, our approach improves detection of small objects by 195% (+12.5 APS ) over naive-downsampling and
63% (+4.2 APS ) over SOTA.

Traffic Cameras

Abstract

(e)

May Need
Assistance

(f) Empty Trashcan

(g)

Figure 1. Geometric cues (black dashed lines) are implicitly
present in scenes. Our Perspective based prior exploits this geometry. Our method (a) takes an image and (b) warps them, and
performs detection on warped images. Small objects which are (d)
not detected when naively downsampled but (e) are detected when
enlarged with our geometric prior. Our method (f) uses a geometric model to construct a saliency prior to focus on relevant areas
and (g) enables sensing on resource-constrained edge devices.

recognize objects efficiently and employ high-level semantics [19, 52] rooted in scene geometry to focus on relevant
parts. Consider the scene in Figure 1 (c), humans can recognize the distant car despite its small appearance (Figure 1
(d)). We are able to contextualize the car in the 3D scene,
namely (1) it’s on the road and (2) is of the right size we’d
expect at that distance. Inspired by these observations, can
we incorporate semantic priors about scene geometry in our
neural networks to improve detection?

13364

