This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HGNet: Learning Hierarchical Geometry from Points, Edges, and Surfaces
Ting Yao, Yehao Li, Yingwei Pan, Tao Mei
HiDream.ai Inc.
{tingyao.ustc, yehaoli.sysu, panyw.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@hidream.ai

Abstract
Parsing an unstructured point set into constituent local
geometry structures (e.g., edges or surfaces) would be helpful for understanding and representing point clouds. This
motivates us to design a deep architecture to model the
hierarchical geometry from points, edges, surfaces (triangles), to super-surfaces (adjacent surfaces) for the thorough analysis of point clouds. In this paper, we present
a novel Hierarchical Geometry Network (HGNet) that integrates such hierarchical geometry structures from supersurfaces, surfaces, edges, to points in a top-down manner for learning point cloud representations. Technically,
we first construct the edges between every two neighbor
points. A point-level representation is learnt with edge-topoint aggregation, i.e., aggregating all connected edges into
the anchor point. Next, as every two neighbor edges compose a surface, we obtain the edge-level representation of
each anchor edge via surface-to-edge aggregation over all
neighbor surfaces. Furthermore, the surface-level representation is achieved through super-surface-to-surface aggregation by transforming all super-surfaces into the anchor surface. A Transformer structure is finally devised to
unify all the point-level, edge-level, and surface-level features into the holistic point cloud representations. Extensive
experiments on four point cloud analysis datasets demonstrate the superiority of HGNet for 3D object classification
and part/semantic segmentation tasks. More remarkably,
HGNet achieves the overall accuracy of 89.2% on ScanObjectNN, improving PointNeXt-S by 1.5%.

1. Introduction
With the growing popularity of 3D acquisition technologies (such as 3D scanners, RGBD cameras, and LiDARs),
3D point cloud analysis has been a fast-developing topic in
the past decade. Practical point cloud analysis systems have
great potential for numerous applications, e.g., autonomous
driving, robotics, and virtual reality. In comparison to 2D
RGB image data, 3D data of point clouds has an additional
dimension of depth, leading to a three dimensional world as

Super-surface

Surface

Edge

Point
Figure 1. The progressive development of a four-level hierarchical geometry structure among points, edges, surfaces, and supersurfaces. Such hierarchical geometry structure further in turn
strengthens surface-level, edge-level, and point-level features in
a top-down manner.

in our daily life. The 3D point clouds are armed with several
key merits, e.g., preserving rich geometry information and
being invariant to lighting conditions. Nevertheless, considering that point clouds are naturally unstructured without
any discretization, it is not trivial to directly applying the
typical CNN operations widely adopted in 2D vision over
the primary point set for analyzing 3D data.
To alleviate this limitation, a series of efforts have attempted to interpret the geometry information rooted in
unstructured point clouds, such as the regular point-based
[30, 38], edge/relation-based [32, 46], or surface-based [39]
representations. For instance, PointNet [30] builds up the
foundation of regular point-based feature extraction via
stacked Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) plus symmetric
aggregation. The subsequent works (e.g., PointNet++ [32]
and DGCNN [46]) further incorporate edge/relation-based
features by using set abstraction or graph models for aggregating/propagating points and edges, pursuing the mining
of finer geometric structures. More recently, RepSurf [39]
learns surface-based features over triangle meshes to enable
an amplified expression of local geometry. Despite showing
encouraging performances, most existing point cloud anal-

21846

