This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Compositional Adversarial Robustness:
Generalizing Adversarial Training to Composite Semantic Perturbations

1

Lei Hsiung1,4 , Yun-Yun Tsai2 , Pin-Yu Chen3 , Tsung-Yi Ho1,4
National Tsing Hua University, 2 Columbia University, 3 IBM Research,
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://hsiung.cc/CARBEN/

Abstract
Model robustness against adversarial examples of single
perturbation type such as the ℓp -norm has been widely studied, yet its generalization to more realistic scenarios involving multiple semantic perturbations and their composition
remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we first propose
a novel method for generating composite adversarial examples. Our method can find the optimal attack composition
by utilizing component-wise projected gradient descent and
automatic attack-order scheduling. We then propose generalized adversarial training (GAT) to extend model robustness
from ℓp -ball to composite semantic perturbations, such as
the combination of Hue, Saturation, Brightness, Contrast,
and Rotation. Results obtained using ImageNet and CIFAR10 datasets indicate that GAT can be robust not only to all the
tested types of a single attack, but also to any combination
of such attacks. GAT also outperforms baseline ℓ∞ -norm
bounded adversarial training approaches by a significant
margin.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown remarkable success in
a wide variety of machine learning (ML) applications, ranging from biometric authentication (e.g., facial image recognition), medical diagnosis (e.g., CT lung cancer detection)
to autonomous driving systems (traffic sign classification),
etc. However, while these models can achieve outstanding performance on benign data points, recent research has
shown that state-of-the-art models can be easily fooled by
malicious data points crafted intentionally with adversarial
perturbations [37].
To date, the most effective defense mechanism is to incorporate adversarial examples during model training, known
as adversarial training (AT) [21, 48]. Nonetheless, current
adversarial training approaches primarily only consider a
single perturbation type (or threat model) quantified in a specific distance metric (e.g., ℓp -ball). In this regard, the lack

of exploration of the compositional adversarial robustness
against a combination of several threat models could lead to
impractical conclusions and undesirable bias in robustness
evaluation. For example, a model that is robust to perturbations within ℓp -ball does not imply it can simultaneously
be robust to other realistic semantic perturbations (e.g., hue,
saturation, rotation, brightness, and contrast).
To tackle this issue, in this paper, we propose generalized
adversarial training (GAT), which can harden against a
wide range of threat models, from single ℓ∞ -norm or semantic perturbation to a combination of them. Notably,
extending standard adversarial training to composite adversarial perturbations is a challenging and non-trivial task, as
each perturbation type is sequentially applied, and thus the
attack order will affect the effectiveness of the composite
adversarial example. To bridge this gap, we propose an efficient attack order scheduling algorithm to learn the optimal
ordering of various perturbation types, which will then be
incorporated into the GAT framework.
Different from existing works, this paper aims to address
the following fundamental questions: (a) How to generalize
adversarial training from a single threat model to multiple?
(b) How to optimize the perturbation order from a set of
semantic and ℓp -norm perturbations? (c) Can GAT outperform other adversarial training baselines against composite
perturbations?
Our main contributions in this paper provide affirmative
answers to the questions:
1. We propose composite adversarial attack (CAA), a novel
and unified approach to generate adversarial examples
across from multiple perturbation types with attack-orderscheduling, including semantic perturbations (Hue, Saturation, Contrast, Brightness and Contrast) and ℓp -norm
space. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first
work that leverages a scheduling algorithm for finding
the optimal attack order in composite adversarial attacks.
2. Building upon our composite adversarial attack framework, we propose generalized adversarial training (GAT)
toward achieving compositional adversarial robustness,

24658

