This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning with Noisy labels via Self-supervised Adversarial Noisy Masking
Yuanpeng Tu1* Boshen Zhang2* Yuxi Li2 Liang Liu2 Jian Li2
Jiangning Zhang2 Yabiao Wang2† Chengjie Wang2,3 Cai Rong Zhao1†
1
Dept. of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji Univeristy, Shanghai
2
YouTu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{2030809, zhaocairong}@tongji.edu.cn
{boshenzhang, yukiyxli, leoneliu, swordli, vtzhang, caseywang, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Collecting large-scale datasets is crucial for training
deep models, annotating the data, however, inevitably yields
noisy labels, which poses challenges to deep learning algorithms. Previous efforts tend to mitigate this problem via
identifying and removing noisy samples or correcting their
labels according to the statistical properties (e.g., loss values) among training samples. In this paper, we aim to tackle
this problem from a new perspective, delving into the deep
feature maps, we empirically find that models trained with
clean and mislabeled samples manifest distinguishable activation feature distributions. From this observation, a novel
robust training approach termed adversarial noisy masking is proposed. The idea is to regularize deep features
with a label quality guided masking scheme, which adaptively modulates the input data and label simultaneously,
preventing the model to overfit noisy samples. Further, an
auxiliary task is designed to reconstruct input data, it naturally provides noise-free self-supervised signals to reinforce the generalization ability of models. The proposed
method is simple yet effective, it is tested on synthetic and
real-world noisy datasets, where significant improvements
are obtained over previous methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/yuanpengtu/SANM .

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success, relying
on large-scale datasets with human-annotated accurate labels. However, collecting such high-quality labels is timeconsuming and expensive. As an alternative, inexpensive
strategies are usually used for generating labels for largescale samples, such as web crawling, leveraging search engines, or using machine-generated annotations. All these
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Clean-trained
Mis-predicted

(b) Noisy-trained
Mis-predicted

(c) Noisy-trained
Correctly-predicted

Figure 1. Activation maps of mis-predicted (a-b) and correctlypredicted (c) samples when training PreAct ResNet-18 with clean
(i.e., clean-trained) and noisy (i.e., noisy-trained) data on CIFAR10 (1st and 2nd row) and Clothing1M [38] (3rd row).

alternative methods inevitably yield numerous noisy samples. However, previous research [2] has revealed that deep
networks can easily overfit to noisy labels and suffer from
dramatic degradation in the generalization performance.
Towards this problem, numerous Learning with Noisy
labels (LNL) approaches have been proposed. Sample selection methods [3, 8, 34, 41] are the most straightforward
methods, which attempt to select clean samples based on
certain criterion (e.g., loss value) and then reweight or discard the noisy instances to reduce the interference of mislabeled training samples. However, these methods fail to
leverage the potential information of the discarded samples.
Similarly, label correction based methods [32, 40, 48] try
to correct labels, which often impose assumptions on the
existence of a small correctly-labeled validation subset or
directly utilize predictions of deep models. However, such
assumptions can not be always full-filled in real-world noisy
datasets [27], leading to limited application scenarios. Besides, the predictions of deep model tend to fluctuate when
training with mislabeled samples, making the label correction process unstable and sub-optimal [36]. On the contrary,
regularization based methods [2, 6, 15, 20, 26, 29, 43, 47, 50]
aim to alleviate the side effect of label noise by preventing the deep models from overfitting to all training sam-

16186

