This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Video Representations from Large Language Models
Yue Zhao1,2 * Ishan Misra1
1
FAIR, Meta AI

Philipp Krähenbühl2 Rohit Girdhar1
2
University of Texas, Austin

facebookresearch.github.io/LaViLa
CharadesEgo
Recognition
(mAP)

Abstract
EgoMCQ
(intra-vid. acc.)

We introduce L AV I L A, a new approach to learning
video-language representations by leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs). We repurpose pre-trained LLMs to
be conditioned on visual input, and finetune them to create
automatic video narrators. Our auto-generated narrations
offer a number of advantages, including dense coverage
of long videos, better temporal synchronization of the visual information and text, and much higher diversity of text.
The video-language embedding learned contrastively with
these narrations outperforms the previous state-of-the-art
on multiple first-person and third-person video tasks, both
in zero-shot and finetuned setups. Most notably, L AV I L A
obtains an absolute gain of 10.1% on EGTEA classification and 5.9% Epic-Kitchens-100 multi-instance retrieval
benchmarks. Furthermore, L AV I L A trained with only half
the narrations from the Ego4D dataset outperforms models
trained on the full set, and shows positive scaling behavior
on increasing pre-training data and model size.

1. Introduction
Learning visual representation using web-scale imagetext data is a powerful tool for computer vision. Visionlanguage approaches [31, 49, 80] have pushed the state-ofthe-art across a variety of tasks, including zero-shot classification [49], novel object detection [87], and even image
generation [52]. Similar approaches for videos [4, 39, 46],
however, have been limited by the small size of paired
video-text corpora compared to the billion-scale image-text
datasets [31, 49, 84]—even though access to raw video data
has exploded in the past decade. In this work, we show it
is possible to automatically generate text pairing for such
videos by leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs), thus
taking full advantage of the massive video data. Learning
video-language models with these automatically generated
annotations leads to stronger representations, and as Figure 1 shows, sets a new state-of-the-art on six popular first
* Work done during an internship at Meta.

EK-100
Multi-Instance
Retrieval (mAP)

36.1

32.1

63.1

50.9

57.2
EGTEA
Recognition
(mean acc.)

45.0

65.9

76.0

50.5
51.0
EK-100 Recognition (top-1
action acc.)

59.4

82.7

66.5

EK-100
Multi-Instance
Retrieval
(nDCG)

54.3
61.5

88.1
UCF-101
Recognition
(linear probing
mean acc.)

HMDB-51
Recognition
(linear probing
mean acc.)
L AV I L A (Ours)
Previous SOTA

Figure 1. L AV I L A sets a new state-of-the-art across a number
of first and third-person video understanding tasks (cf . Table 1 for
details), by learning a video-language representation using supervision from large language models as narrators.

and third-person video benchmarks.
Our method, called L AV I L A:
Language-model
augmented Video-Language pre-training, leverages pretrained LLMs, e.g. GPT-2 [50], which encode within
their weights a treasure trove of factual knowledge and
conversational ability. As shown in Figure 2, we repurpose
these LLMs to be “visually-conditioned narrators”, and
finetune on all accessible paired video-text clips. Once
trained, we use the model to densely annotate thousands
of hours of videos by generating rich textual descriptions.
This pseudo-supervision can thus pervade the entire video,
in between and beyond the annotated snippets. Paired
with another LLM trained to rephrase existing narrations,
L AV I L A is able to create a much larger and more diverse
set of text targets for video-text contrastive learning. In
addition to setting a new state-of-the-art as noted earlier,
the stronger representation learned by L AV I L A even
outperforms prior work using only half the groundtruth
annotations (Figure 5).
L AV I L A’s strong performance can be attributed to a
number of factors. First, L AV I L A can provide temporally
dense supervision for long-form videos, where the associ-

6586

