This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GarmentTracking: Category-Level Garment Pose Tracking
Han Xue1,2 , Wenqiang Xu2 , Jieyi Zhang2 , Tutian Tang2 , Yutong Li2 , Wenxin Du2 , Ruolin Ye3 , Cewu Lu†1,2
1
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Cornell University
2

{xiaoxiaoxh, vinjohn, yi eagle, tttang, davidliyutong, mnkmYuki, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
3

ry273@cornell.edu

Abstract
Garments are important to humans. A visual system
that can estimate and track the complete garment pose
can be useful for many downstream tasks and real-world
applications. In this work, we present a complete package to address the category-level garment pose tracking
task: (1) A recording system VR-Garment, with which
users can manipulate virtual garment models in simulation through a VR interface. (2) A large-scale dataset VRFolding, with complex garment pose configurations in manipulation like flattening and folding. (3) An end-to-end
online tracking framework GarmentTracking, which predicts complete garment pose both in canonical space and
task space given a point cloud sequence. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed GarmentTracking achieves great performance even when the garment
has large non-rigid deformation. It outperforms the baseline approach on both speed and accuracy. We hope our
proposed solution can serve as a platform for future research. Codes and datasets are available in https://
garment-tracking.robotflow.ai.

1. Introduction
Garments are one of the most important deformable objects in daily life. A vision system for garment pose estimation and tracking can benefit downstream tasks like MR/AR
and robotic manipulation [7, 17]. The category-level garment pose estimation task is firstly introduced in GarmentNets [11], which aims to recover the full configuration of an
unseen garment from a single static frame. Unlike the nonrigid tracking methods [9, 10, 16, 19, 27, 34, 35] which can
only recover the geometry of the visible regions, pose estimation task can also reconstruct the occluded parts of the
object. Another line of works [14, 15, 21, 22, 28–30] (nonrigid 4D reconstruction which can reconstruct complete ob† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute.

ject geometry) cannot be directly applied on garments, since
they assume the object has a watertight geometry. In contrast, garments have thin structures with holes.
In this paper, we propose a new task called Categorylevel Garment Pose Tracking, which extends the singleframe pose estimation setting in [11] to pose tracking in
dynamic videos. Specifically, we focus on the pose tracking problem in garment manipulation (e.g. flattening, folding). In this setting, we do not have the priors of the human
body like previous works for clothed humans [18,26,31,41].
Therefore, we must address the extreme deformation that
manipulated garments could undergo.
To tackle the garment pose tracking problem, we need
a dataset of garment manipulation with complete pose annotations. However, such a dataset does not exist so far to
the best of our knowledge. To build such a dataset, we turn
to a VR-based solution due to the tremendous difficulty of
garment pose annotation in the real world [10]. We first
create a real-time VR-based recording system named VRGarment. Then the volunteer can manipulate the garment
in a simulator through the VR interface. With VR-Garment,
we build a large-scale garment manipulation dataset called
VR-Folding. Compared to the single static garment configuration (i.e. grasped by one point) in GarmentNets, our manipulation tasks include flattening and folding, which contain much more complex garment configurations. In total,
our VR-Folding dataset contains 9767 manipulation videos
which consist of 790K multi-view RGB-D frames with full
garment pose and hand pose annotations on four garment
categories selected from the CLOTH3D [8] dataset.
With the VR-Folding dataset, we propose an end-to-end
online tracking method called GarmentTracking to perform category-level garment pose tracking during manipulation. For the garment pose modeling, we follow GarmentNets [11] to adopt the normalized object coordinate space
(NOCS) for each category. Nevertheless, tracking garment
pose raises new challenges compared to single-frame pose
estimation: (1) How to fuse inter-frame geometry and correspondence information? (2) How to make the tracking prediction robust to pose estimation errors? (3) How to achieve

21233

