This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transformer-Based Learned Optimization
Luke Metz1
Mykhaylo Andriluka1
Erik Gärtner1,2 *
C. Daniel Freeman1
Cristian Sminchisescu1
1

Google Research

2

Lund University

erik.gartner@math.lth.se
{lmetz,mykhayloa,cdfreeman,sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We propose a new approach to learned optimization
where we represent the computation of an optimizer’s update step using a neural network. The parameters of the optimizer are then learned by training on a set of optimization
tasks with the objective to perform minimization efficiently.
Our innovation is a new neural network architecture, Optimus, for the learned optimizer inspired by the classic BFGS
algorithm. As in BFGS, we estimate a preconditioning matrix as a sum of rank-one updates but use a Transformerbased neural network to predict these updates jointly with
the step length and direction. In contrast to several recent
learned optimization-based approaches [24, 27], our formulation allows for conditioning across the dimensions of
the parameter space of the target problem while remaining
applicable to optimization tasks of variable dimensionality
without retraining. We demonstrate the advantages of our
approach on a benchmark composed of objective functions
traditionally used for the evaluation of optimization algorithms, as well as on the real world-task of physics-based
visual reconstruction of articulated 3d human motion.

1. Introduction
This work focuses on a new learning-based optimization methodology. Our approach belongs to the category
of learned optimization methods, which represent the update step of an optimizer by means of an expressive function
such as a multi-layer perceptron. We then learn the parameters of this function on a set of training optimization tasks.
Since the update function of the learned optimizers is estimated from data, it can in principle learn various desirable
behaviors such as learning-rate schedules [22] or strategies
for the exploration of multiple local minima [23]. This is
in contrast to traditional optimizers such as Adam [15], or
* Work done during an internship at Google.

BFGS [11] in which updates are derived in terms of firstprinciples. However, as these are general and hard-coded,
they may not be able to take advantage of the regularities in
the loss functions for specific classes of problems.
Learned optimizers are particularly appealing for applications that require repeatedly solving related optimization
tasks. For example, 3d human pose estimation is often formulated as the minimization of a particular loss function
[12, 19, 30, 46]. Such approaches estimate the 3d state (e.g.
pose and shape) given image observations by repeatedly optimizing the same objective function for many closely related problems, including losses and state contexts. Traditional optimization treats each problem as independent,
which is potentially suboptimal as it does not aggregate experience across multiple related optimization runs.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel neural network architecture for learned optimization. Our architecture
is inspired by classical BFGS approaches that iteratively estimate the Hessian matrix to precondition the gradient. Similarly to BFGS, our approach iteratively updates the preconditioner using rank-one updates. In contrast to BFGS,
we use a transformer-based [40] neural network to generate
such updates from features encoding an optimization trajectory. We train the architecture using Persistent Evolution Strategies (PES) introduced in [41]. In contrast to prior
work [4, 24, 27], which rely on updates over each target parameter independently (or coupled only via normalization),
our approach allows for more complex inter-dimensional
dependencies via self-attention while still showing good
generalization to different target problem sizes than those
used in training. We refer to our learned optimization approach as Optimus in the sequel.
We evaluate Optimus on classical optimization objectives used to benchmark optimization methods in the literature [17, 31, 37] (cf. fig. 1) as well as on a real-world task
of physics-based human pose reconstruction. In our experiments, we typically observe that Optimus is able to reach
a lower objective value compared to popular off-the-shelf

11970

