This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exemplar-FreeSOLO: Enhancing Unsupervised Instance Segmentation
with Exemplars

1

Taoseef Ishtiak,1 Qing En,1 Yuhong Guo1,2
2
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
CIFAR AI Chair, Amii, Canada

taoseefishtiak@cmail.carleton.ca, qingen@cunet.carleton.ca, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

Abstract
Instance segmentation seeks to identify and segment each
object from images, which often relies on a large number of dense annotations for model training. To alleviate this burden, unsupervised instance segmentation methods have been developed to train class-agnostic instance
segmentation models without any annotation. In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised instance segmentation approach, Exemplar-FreeSOLO, to enhance unsupervised instance segmentation by exploiting a limited number of unannotated and unsegmented exemplars. The proposed framework offers a new perspective on directly perceiving top-down information without annotations. Specifically, Exemplar-FreeSOLO introduces a novel exemplarknowledge abstraction module to acquire beneficial topdown guidance knowledge for instances using unsupervised
exemplar object extraction. Moreover, a new exemplar embedding contrastive module is designed to enhance the discriminative capability of the segmentation model by exploiting the contrastive exemplar-based guidance knowledge in
the embedding space. To evaluate the proposed ExemplarFreeSOLO, we conduct comprehensive experiments and
perform in-depth analyses on three image instance segmentation datasets. The experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed approach is effective and outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is among the most fundamental
and challenging tasks in computer vision, aiming to recognize and segment each object in an image. By utilizing a
significant amount of densely annotated data to train segmentation models, existing techniques have achieved desirable results [4, 5, 10, 16, 26, 41, 47]. However, acquiring numerous pixel-level labels requires substantial labour and financial resources, limiting the developments and practical
applications in the field. To reduce the costly annotation re-

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed idea. The proposed
Exemplar-FreeSOLO framework addresses the unsupervised instance segmentation problem by excavating information from unlabeled data through an exemplar mechanism, which produces topdown knowledge guidance and enhances the discriminability of
the segmentation model.

quirement, some solutions have been put forth to investigate
ways of using less expensive training labels to complete
complex tasks, such as weakly-supervised [18, 22, 29, 42],
partially-supervised [20, 51] and semi-supervised instance
segmentation [3, 52, 55].
Although some significant advances have been achieved,
the labelling conundrum obstacle remains as these methods
still require nontrivial dense labels and precise position information. By contrast, unsupervised instance segmentation methods benefit from not requiring any annotated data;
they can directly exploit many existing unannotated images
while being able to continuously upgrade the effectiveness
of the segmentation models with incoming data. Therefore
it is important to investigate unsupervised instance segmentation, which enables learning class-agnostic instance segmentation models without any data annotation. Recently, an
unsupervised instance segmentation framework, FreeSOLO
[48], has been proposed to extract coarse object masks as
pseudo-labels and train an instance segmentation model
using a self-supervised method. Although FreeSOLO attempts to improve the quality of pseudo labels and prediction masks, it can hardly overcome the detrimental effects
of the considerable noise in pseudo labels without any guid-

15424

