This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PAniC-3D: Stylized Single-view 3D Reconstruction
from Portraits of Anime Characters
Shuhong Chen*†
Guoxian Song†

Kevin Zhang*
Sizhe An†

Yichun Shi†

Janus Kristjansson*

Heng Wang†
Xiao Yang†

Yiheng Zhu†
Matthias Zwicker*

University of Maryland - College Park, MD, USA*
ByteDance†

Abstract
We propose PAniC-3D, a system to reconstruct stylized
3D character heads directly from illustrated (p)ortraits of
(ani)me (c)haracters. Our anime-style domain poses unique
challenges to single-view reconstruction; compared to natural images of human heads, character portrait illustrations have hair and accessories with more complex and
diverse geometry, and are shaded with non-photorealistic
contour lines. In addition, there is a lack of both 3D model
and portrait illustration data suitable to train and evaluate
this ambiguous stylized reconstruction task. Facing these
challenges, our proposed PAniC-3D architecture crosses
the illustration-to-3D domain gap with a line-filling model,
and represents sophisticated geometries with a volumetric
radiance field. We train our system with two large new
datasets (11.2k Vroid 3D models, 1k Vtuber portrait illustrations), and evaluate on a novel AnimeRecon benchmark
of illustration-to-3D pairs. PAniC-3D significantly outperforms baseline methods, and provides data to establish the
task of stylized reconstruction from portrait illustrations.

struct a stylized 3D character head directly from illustrated
(p)ortraits of (ani)me (c)haracters. We formulate our problem in two parts: 1) implicit single-view head reconstruction, 2) from across an illustration-3D domain gap. To summarize our contributions:
• PAniC-3D: a system to reconstruct the 3D radiance
field of a stylized character head from a single linebased portrait illustration.
• The Vroid 3D dataset of 11.2k character models and
renders, the first such dataset in the anime-style domain to provide 3D assets with multiview renders.
• The Vtuber dataset of 1.0k reconstruction-friendly
portraits (aligned, front-facing, neutral-expression)
that bridges the illustration-render domain gap through
the novel task of line removal from drawings.
• The AnimeRecon benchmark with 68 pairs of
aligned 3D models and corresponding illustrations, enabling quantitative evaluation of both image and geometry metrics for stylized reconstruction.

1. Introduction & Related Work

1.1. Implicit 3D Reconstruction

With the rise of AR/VR applications, there is increased
demand for not only high-fidelity human avatars, but also
non-photorealistic 3D characters, especially in the “anime”
style. Most character designers typically create concept
illustrations first, allowing them to express complex and
highly diverse characteristics like hair, accessories, eyes,
skins, headshapes, etc. Unfortunately, the process of developing illustrated concept art into an AR/VR-ready 3D
asset is expensive, requiring professional 3D artists trained
to use expert modeling software. While template-based creators democratize 3D avatars to an extent, they are often restricted to 3D assets compatible with a specific body model.
We propose PAniC-3D, a system to automatically recon-

While there has been much work on mesh-based reconstruction from images [23], these systems are not expressive enough to capture the extreme complexity and diversity of topology of our 3D characters. Inspired by the recent successes in generating high-quality 3D radiance fields
[4, 5, 25, 39], we instead turn to implicit representations.
However, to achieve high-quality results, recent implicit reconstruction work such as PixelNerf [40] tend to operate
solely from 2D images, due to the lack of publicly-available
high-quality 3D data. Some implicit reconstruction systems
like Pifu [31] employing complex 3D assets have shown
reasonable success using point-based supervision, but require careful point sampling techniques and loss balancing.

21068

