This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial-temporal Concept based Explanation of 3D ConvNets
Ying Ji∗
Nagoya University

Yu Wang∗
Hitotsubashi University

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown remarkable performance on various tasks. Despite its
widespread adoption, the decision procedure of the network
still lacks transparency and interpretability, making it difficult to enhance the performance further. Hence, there has
been considerable interest in providing explanation and interpretability for CNNs over the last few years. Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) investigates the relationship between input images or videos and output predictions. Recent studies have achieved outstanding success
in explaining 2D image classification ConvNets. On the
other hand, due to the high computation cost and complexity of video data, the explanation of 3D video recognition
ConvNets is relatively less studied. And none of them are
able to produce a high-level explanation. In this paper, we
propose a STCE (Spatial-temporal Concept-based Explanation) framework for interpreting 3D ConvNets. In our
approach: (1) videos are represented with high-level supervoxels, similar supervoxels are clustered as a concept,
which is straightforward for human to understand; and (2)
the interpreting framework calculates a score for each concept, which reflects its significance in the ConvNet decision
procedure. Experiments on diverse 3D ConvNets demonstrate that our method can identify global concepts with different importance levels, allowing us to investigate the impact of the concepts on a target task, such as action recognition, in-depth. The source codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/yingji425/STCE.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of large-scale datasets and
powerful computational devices, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely used in various computer
vision tasks, such as image classification [16, 17, 37], semantic segmentation [24, 42], object detection [22, 27] and
so on. Despite the fact that CNN models show competitive performance in these tasks, current neural networks are
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Jien Kato (jien@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp) is the corresponding author.

Jien Kato†
Ritsumeikan University

still regarded as black boxes. Due to the large number of
parameters and high nonlinearity [25], the underlying prediction mechanism is opaque. This reduces the reliability of
neural networks in high-stakes real-world applications such
as autonomous driving and medical image analysis [18,29].
In recent years, explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) has
become a popular topic to help comprehend model predictions and increase the credibility of CNNs.
In general, the explanation methods can be divided into
local methods and global methods. Local methods concentrate on understanding predictions on individual data instances, while global methods attempt to explain the overall
logic of the target ConvNets at the class or dataset level. In
this paper, we focus on the global explanation, which is crucial to comprehend the overall behavior of the black boxes.
There are already some methods that provide explanations for 2D image classification ConvNets [6,14,26,28,36],
and most of them are local techniques. Zhou et al. [43]
generated a Class Activation Map (CAM) using global average pooling for each image to highlight the discriminate
regions that are used for the 2D ConvNet to predict class.
Ribeiro et al. proposed Local Interpretable Model-agnostic
Explanations (LIME) [28] to interpret the model by approximating the predictions in a local similarity neighborhood
of a target image. However, these methods are not only
limited to a single prediction, but they are also difficult for
humans to comprehend. The highlighted regions are pixellevel, devoid of human-understandable semantic interpretation. More recently, interpretation with high-level concepts
has attracted considerable attention. Kim et al. [19] introduced concept activation vectors (CAVs) which use the directional derivatives to quantify the importance of the network prediction to user-defined concepts. Based on [19],
Ghorbani et al. [12] proposed ACE (Automatic Conceptbased) to discover the relationship between image segments
and image classification prediction.
Despite solid achievements in 2D image classification
interpretation, only a few studies have attempted to interpret 3D action recognition ConvNets, primarily due to the
huge computational cost and rich spatial-temporal content
of video data. Existing 3D explanation methods are mainly
extended from 2D local explanation methods. Stergiou et

15444

