This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test Time Adaptation with Regularized Loss for Weakly Supervised Salient
Object Detection
Olga Veksler
University of Waterloo, Canada
oveksler@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
It is well known that CNNs tend to overfit to the training
data. Test-time adaptation is an extreme approach to deal
with overfitting: given a test image, the aim is to adapt the
trained model to that image. Indeed nothing can be closer to
the test data than the test image itself. The main difficulty of
test-time adaptation is that the ground truth is not available.
Thus test-time adaptation, while intriguing, applies to only
a few scenarios where one can design an effective loss function that does not require ground truth. We propose the first
approach for test-time Salient Object Detection (SOD) in
the context of weak supervision. Our approach is based on
a so called regularized loss function, which can be used for
training CNN when pixel precise ground truth is unavailable. Regularized loss tends to have lower values for the
more likely object segments, and thus it can be used to finetune an already trained CNN to a given test image, adapting
to images unseen during training. We develop a regularized
loss function particularly suitable for test-time adaptation
and show that our approach significantly outperforms prior
work for weakly supervised SOD.

1. Introduction
A well known problem with CNNs is that they tend to
overfit to the training data. One approach to deal with overfitting is test-time adaptation [30]. A model is trained on
the training data, and then fine-tuned for a few epochs during test time on a given test image. The main difficulty of
test-time adaptation is that there is no ground truth for the
test image. Thus test-time adaptation has been previously
used for only a few applications [11, 16, 22, 30, 45] where a
suitable loss function can be designed without ground truth.
We propose the first approach for test-time Salient Object Detection (SOD). The goal of SOD is to find image
regions that attract human attention. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [14, 15] brought a significant breakthrough for SOD [18, 28, 46, 47]. Traditional training of

CNNs for SOD requires pixel precise ground truth, but obtaining such annotations is a substantial effort. Therefore,
there is an increased interest in semi-supervised [20,23] and
weakly supervised SOD [17, 25, 33, 40, 41, 44]. Weak supervision requires less annotation effort, compared to semisupervision. In this paper, we assume image level supervision, the weakest supervision type, where one provides only
images containing salient objects, with no other annotation.
Most image level weakly supervised SOD approaches [17, 25, 40, 41, 44] are based on noisy pseudo
labels, constructed from unsupervised SOD methods.
These approaches are hard to modify for test-time adaptation, as at test time, one has only one image to create noisy
pseudo-ground truth samples, but combating noise requires
diverse samples.
Our test-time adaptation is based on the approach in [33].
Different from the other image level supervised SOD methods, the approach in [33] does not require pseudo labels.
They design a regularized loss1 to use for CNN training
without pixel precise annotations. Regularized loss models
class-independent properties of object shapes and is likely
to have lower values for segmentations that separate the object from the background. This makes regularized loss approach particularly suitable for test time adaptation.
We design a regularized loss function tailored for test
time adaptation. The main problem with regularized loss
in [33] is that it may result in a trivial empty solution if hyperparameters of the loss function are not chosen correctly.
When training on a large dataset, an occasional empty result
is not a big problem, but when training on a single test image, an empty result is disastrous, catastrophically worsening the performance. Thus we must develop a hyperparameter setting method that avoids empty solutions. However, in
the absence of ground truth, setting hyperparameter weights
is not trivial. We propose a method for setting hyperparameters specific for each test image such that an empty solution
is avoided. This method is crucial for obtaining good results
1 In the context of CNNs, regularization is a term often used to refer to
the norm regularization on the network weights [8]. Here, regularized loss
refers to the loss function on the output of CNN.

17360

