This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PACO: Parts and Attributes of Common Objects
Vignesh Ramanathan∗1 Anmol Kalia∗1 Vladan Petrovic∗1 Yi Wen1 Baixue Zheng1
Baishan Guo1 Rui Wang1 Aaron Marquez1 Rama Kovvuri1 Abhishek Kadian1
Amir Mousavi2† Yiwen Song1 Abhimanyu Dubey1 Dhruv Mahajan1
1
Meta AI 2 Simon Fraser University

Figure 1. (left) PACO includes objects with object masks, object attributes, part masks, and part attributes. (right) Object instance queries
composed of object and part attributes are shown with corresponding positive images in green and negative images in red.

Abstract
Object models are gradually progressing from predicting just category labels to providing detailed descriptions
of object instances. This motivates the need for large
datasets which go beyond traditional object masks and provide richer annotations such as part masks and attributes.
Hence, we introduce PACO: Parts and Attributes of Common Objects. It spans 75 object categories, 456 objectpart categories and 55 attributes across image (LVIS) and
video (Ego4D) datasets. We provide 641K part masks annotated across 260K object boxes, with roughly half of
them exhaustively annotated with attributes as well. We
design evaluation metrics and provide benchmark results
for three tasks on the dataset: part mask segmentation, object and part attribute prediction and zero-shot instance detection. Dataset, models, and code are open-sourced at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/paco.
∗ Equal contribution † Work done during internship at Meta AI

1. Introduction
Today, tasks requiring fine-grained understanding of
objects like open vocabulary detection [8, 14, 20, 51],
GQA [17], and referring expressions [3, 21, 32] are gaining
importance besides traditional object detection. Representing objects through category labels is no longer sufficient.
A complete object description requires more fine-grained
properties like object parts and their attributes, as shown by
the queries in Fig. 1.
Currently, there are no large benchmark datasets for
common objects with joint annotation of part masks, object attributes and part attributes (Fig. 1). Such datasets
are found only in specific domains like clothing [18, 47],
birds [42] and pedestrian description [25]. Current datasets
with part masks for common objects [2, 15, 50] are limited in number of object instances with parts (59K for
ADE20K [2] Tab. 1). On the attributes side, there exists
large-scale datasets like Visual Genome [23], VAW [35] and
COCO-attributes [34] that provide object-level attributes.
17141

