This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modality-Agnostic Debiasing for Single Domain Generalization
Sanqing Qu, Yingwei Pan, Guang Chen*, Ting Yao, Changjun Jiang, Tao Mei
Tongji University, HiDream.ai Inc.
{2011444, guangchen, cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn, {panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@hidream.ai

Samples in Training Domain

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
success in various tasks under the assumption that training and testing domains are independent and sampled from
identical or sufﬁciently similar distribution [2, 48]. However, this assumption often does not hold in most realworld scenarios. When deploying DNNs to unseen or outof-distribution (OOD) testing domains, inevitable performance degeneration is commonly observed. The difﬁculty
mainly originates from that the backbone of DNNs ex* Corresponding author

Point Clouds

Deep neural networks (DNNs) usually fail to generalize well to outside of distribution (OOD) data, especially in
the extreme case of single domain generalization (singleDG) that transfers DNNs from single domain to multiple unseen domains. Existing single-DG techniques commonly devise various data-augmentation algorithms, and
remould the multi-source domain generalization methodology to learn domain-generalized (semantic) features. Nevertheless, these methods are typically modality-speciﬁc,
thereby being only applicable to one single modality (e.g.,
image). In contrast, we target a versatile Modality-Agnostic
Debiasing (MAD) framework for single-DG, that enables
generalization for different modalities. Technically, MAD
introduces a novel two-branch classiﬁer: a biased-branch
encourages the classiﬁer to identify the domain-speciﬁc (superﬁcial) features, and a general-branch captures domaingeneralized features based on the knowledge from biasedbranch. Our MAD is appealing in view that it is pluggable
to most single-DG models. We validate the superiority of
our MAD in a variety of single-DG scenarios with different
modalities, including recognition on 1D texts, 2D images,
3D point clouds, and semantic segmentation on 2D images.
More remarkably, for recognition on 3D point clouds and
semantic segmentation on 2D images, MAD improves DSU
by 2.82% and 1.5% in accuracy and mIOU.

Data Augmentation

OOD Samples

Images

Abstract

Can not directly
transfer ...

Figure 1. Most existing single-DG techniques devise various
data augmentation algorithms to introduce various image textures
and styles, pursuing the learning of domain-generalized features.
However, these approaches are modality-speciﬁc, and only applicable to single modality (e.g., image). Hence it is difﬁcult to directly employ such single-DG approach for 3D point clouds, since
the domain shifts in 3D point clouds only reﬂect the geometric differences rather than texture and style differences.

tracts more domain-speciﬁc (superﬁcial) features together
with domain-generalized (semantic) features. Therefore,
the classiﬁer is prone to paying much attention to those
domain-speciﬁc features, and learning unintended decision
rule [53]. To mitigate this issue, several appealing solutions have been developed, including Domain Adaptation (DA) [18, 32, 36, 40, 41] and Domain Generalization
(DG) [31, 56, 62, 65]. Despite showing encouraging performances on OOD data, their real-world applications are
still limited due to the requirement to have the data from
other domain (i.e., the unseen target domain or multiple
source domains with different distributions). In this work,
we focus on an extreme case in domain generalization: single domain generalization (single-DG), in which DNNs are
trained with single source domain data and then required to
generalize well to multiple unseen target domains.
Previous researches [19,55] demonstrate that the speciﬁc
local textures and image styles tailored to each domain are
two main causes, resulting in domain-speciﬁc features for
images. To alleviate this, recent works [30, 37, 58, 63] de-

24142

