This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnchorFormer: Point Cloud Completion from Discriminative Nodes
Zhikai Chen, Fuchen Long, Zhaofan Qiu, Ting Yao, Wengang Zhou, Jiebo Luo and Tao Mei
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY USA
HiDream.ai Inc.
czk654@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {longfc.ustc, zhaofanqiu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com
zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu, tmei@hidream.ai
Partial Observation

Abstract
Point cloud completion aims to recover the completed 3D
shape of an object from its partial observation. A common
strategy is to encode the observed points to a global feature vector and then predict the complete points through a
generative process on this vector. Nevertheless, the results
may suffer from the high-quality shape generation problem
due to the fact that a global feature vector cannot sufficiently characterize diverse patterns in one object. In this paper, we present a new shape completion architecture, namely AnchorFormer, that innovatively leverages pattern-aware
discriminative nodes, i.e., anchors, to dynamically capture
regional information of objects. Technically, AnchorFormer
models the regional discrimination by learning a set of anchors based on the point features of the input partial observation. Such anchors are scattered to both observed and
unobserved locations through estimating particular offsets, and form sparse points together with the down-sampled
points of the input observation. To reconstruct the finegrained object patterns, AnchorFormer further employs a
modulation scheme to morph a canonical 2D grid at individual locations of the sparse points into a detailed 3D
structure. Extensive experiments on the PCN, ShapeNet55/34 and KITTI datasets quantitatively and qualitatively
demonstrate the efficacy of AnchorFormer over the state-ofthe-art point cloud completion approaches. Source code is
available at https://github.com/chenzhik/AnchorFormer.

1. Introduction
As a 3D data description, point cloud can characterize
various attributes of real-world objects. Although the point
cloud data is readily acquired via laser scanners or depth
cameras, factors like occlusion, transparency of surface, or
the limit of sensor resolution, often cause geometric information loss and result in incomplete point cloud. As a result, it is an essential task of point cloud completion to improve the data quality for the downstream tasks, e.g., point

Global Feature

Dense Points

3.33x10-3

(a) Point Cloud Completion by Global Feature
Partial Observation

Sparse Points

Dense Points

Anchors

2.99x10-3

(b) Point Cloud Completion from Anchors

Figure 1. An illustration of point cloud completion by leveraging
(a) a global feature vector and (b) anchors in our AnchorFormer.
We highlight the reconstruction results of two local patterns in the
bounding boxes and visualize the details in the zoomed-in view.
The L1 Chamfer Distance are also given.

cloud classification [21–23] and 3D object detection [20].
Recent works [1, 34, 41, 46, 47] on point cloud completion usually formulate the task as a generation problem and
mainly capitalize on an encoder-decoder architecture. The
input partial points are encoded as a global feature vector which is further decoded to reconstruct the point cloud.
Figure 1(a) conceptually depicts a typical process of point
cloud completion through leveraging a global feature vector, which is generally measured by the pooling operation
in the encoding phase to encapsulate the holistic shape information. The pooling operation inevitably leads to the
loss of the fine-grained details and limits the capability of
the global feature. It is thus difficult to decode from such
degenerated global feature vector to reconstruct the diverse
patterns of a 3D object, especially for completing some geometric details, e.g., the airplane tail in the green box in
Figure 1(a). In contrast, we propose to rebuild object shape
from a set of discriminative nodes, i.e., anchors, which indicate the local geometry of different patterns in an object,
as shown in Figure 1(b). We derive the anchors from the
input partial observation via self-attention. As such, the

13581

