This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalization Matters: Loss Minima Flattening via Parameter Hybridization
for Efficient Online Knowledge Distillation
Tianli Zhang1 , Mengqi Xue2 , Jiangtao Zhang1 , Haofei Zhang1 , Yu Wang1 , Lechao Cheng3 ,
Jie Song1, † , and Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Hangzhou City University, 3 Zhejiang Lab
{zhangtianli,zhjgtao,haofeizhang,yu.wang,sjie,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
mqxue@zucc.edu.cn, chenglc@zhejianglab.com

Abstract
Most existing online knowledge distillation (OKD) techniques typically require sophisticated modules to produce
diverse knowledge for improving students’ generalization
ability. In this paper, we strive to fully utilize multi-model
settings instead of well-designed modules to achieve a distillation effect with excellent generalization performance.
Generally, model generalization can be reflected in the flatness of the loss landscape. Since averaging parameters of
multiple models can find flatter minima, we are inspired
to extend the process to the sampled convex combinations
of multi-student models in OKD. Specifically, by linearly
weighting students’ parameters in each training batch, we
construct a Hybrid-Weight Model (HWM) to represent the
parameters surrounding involved students. The supervision loss of HWM can estimate the landscape’s curvature of the whole region around students to measure the
generalization explicitly. Hence we integrate HWM’s loss
into students’ training and propose a novel OKD framework via parameter hybridization (OKDPH) to promote
flatter minima and obtain robust solutions. Considering
the redundancy of parameters could lead to the collapse
of HWM, we further introduce a fusion operation to keep
the high similarity of students. Compared to the state-ofthe-art (SOTA) OKD methods and SOTA methods of seeking flat minima, our OKDPH achieves higher performance
with fewer parameters, benefiting OKD with lightweight
and robust characteristics. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/tianlizhang/OKDPH.

1. Introduction
Deep learning achieves breakthrough progress in a variety of tasks by constructing a large capacity network
† Corresponding author

pre-trained on massive data [6]. In order to apply highparameterized models in the real-world scene with limited resources, the knowledge distillation (KD) technique
[12] aims to obtain a compact and effective student model
guided by a large-scale teacher model for model compression. Based on the developments of KD, Zhang et al. [44]
propose the concept of online knowledge distillation (OKD)
to view all networks as students and achieve mutual learning from scratch through peer teaching, liberating the distillation process from the dependency on pre-trained teachers. Existing OKD methods mainly encourage students to
acquire diverse and rich knowledge, including aggregating
predictions [10, 33, 37], combining features [19, 22, 28],
working with peers [39, 47], learning from group leaders [2], and receiving guidance from online teachers [39].
Nevertheless, these strategies focus on designing sophisticated architectures to exploit heterogeneous knowledge to
enhance students’ generalization, but they lack explicit constraints on generalization. The concept of generalization to
deep models is the ability to fit correctly on previously unseen data [25], which can be reflected by the flatness of the
loss landscape [14, 18]. Flatness is the landscape’s local
curvature, which is costly to direct calculate by the Hessian.
Considering the setting of multiple students in OKD, we utilize the theory of multi-model fusion in parameter space [9]
to estimate the local curvature by the linear combination
of students’ parameters (we call it a hybrid-weight model,
which is expressed as HWM). More specifically, HWM is
a stochastic convex combination of parameters of multiple
students on different data augmentations, which can sample
multiple local points on the landscape. Intuitively, HWM’s
loss reflects the upper and lower bounds of the local region’s
loss and estimates the curvature of the landscape. Minimizing HWM’s loss flattens the region and forms a landscape
with smaller curvature.
Based on the above observation, we propose a concise
and effective OKD framework, termed online knowledge

20176

