This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robot Structure Prior Guided Temporal Attention for Camera-to-Robot Pose
Estimation from Image Sequence
Yang Tian*

Jiyao Zhang* Zekai Yin*
CFCS, Peking University

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of online camera-torobot pose estimation from single-view successive frames
of an image sequence, a crucial task for robots to interact with the world. The primary obstacles of this task are
the robot’s self-occlusions and the ambiguity of single-view
images. This work demonstrates, for the first time, the effectiveness of temporal information and the robot structure
prior in addressing these challenges. Given the successive frames and the robot joint configuration, our method
learns to accurately regress the 2D coordinates of the predefined robot’s keypoints (e.g. joints). With the camera intrinsic and robotic joints status known, we get the camerato-robot pose using a Perspective-n-point (PnP) solver. We
further improve the camera-to-robot pose iteratively using
the robot structure prior. To train the whole pipeline, we
build a large-scale synthetic dataset generated with domain randomisation to bridge the sim-to-real gap. The extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
and the downstream robotic grasping task demonstrate that
our method achieves new state-of-the-art performances and
outperforms traditional hand-eye calibration algorithms in
real-time (36 FPS). Code and data are available at the
project page: https://sites.google.com/view/sgtapose.

1. Introduction
Camera-to-robot pose estimation is a crucial task in
determining the rigid transformation between the camera
space and robot base space in terms of rotation and translation. Accurate estimation of this transformation enables
robots to perform downstream tasks autonomously, such as
grasping, manipulation, and interaction. Classic camerato-robot estimation approaches, e.g. [11, 14, 33], typically
involve attaching augmented reality (AR) tags as markers to the end-effector and directly solving a homogeneous
matrix equation to calculate the transformation. However,
these approaches have critical drawbacks. Capturing multiple joint configurations and corresponding images is al*: Equal contributions. †: Corresponding author

Hao Dong†

Online Camera-to-Robot Pose Estimation

Downstream Tasks

SGTAPose

𝑻𝒄𝒓
𝑻𝒐𝒄
Image sequence

Keypoint belief maps

Grasping Pose

PnP

𝑻𝒄𝒓

Robot structure prior

Camera to robot pose

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed SGTAPose. Given a temporal sequence of RGB frames and known robot structure priors,
our method estimates the 2D keypoints (e.g., joints) of the robot
and performs real-time estimation of the camera-to-robot pose by
combining a Perspective-n-point (PnP) solver(left). This real-time
camera-to-robot pose estimation approach can be utilised for various downstream tasks, such as robotic grasping(right).

ways troublesome, and these methods cannot be used online. These flaws become greatly amplified when downstream tasks require frequent camera position adjustment.
To mitigate this limitation of classic offline hand-eye calibration, some recent works [19, 20] introduce vision-based
methods to estimate the camera-to-robot pose from a single
image, opening the possibility of online hand-eye calibration. Such approaches significantly grant mobile and itinerant autonomous systems the ability to interact with other
robots using only visual information in unstructured environments, especially in collaborative robotics [21].
Most existing learning-based camera-to-robot pose estimation works [19, 21, 26, 30] focus on single-frame estimation. However, due to the ambiguity of the single-view image, these methods do not perform well when the robotic
arm is self-occluded. Since the camera-to-robot pose is
likely invariant during a video sequence and the keypoints
are moving continually, one way to tackle this problem is

8917

