This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraVoS: Voxel Selection for 3D Point-Cloud Detection
Oren Shrout
Technion, Israel

Yizhak Ben-Shabat
Technion, Israel & ANU, Australia

Ayellet Tal
Technion, Israel

shrout.oren@gmail.com

sitzikbs@technion.ac.il

ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

Figure 1. GraVoS for 3D object detection. Given a 3D point cloud (cyan) and its associated voxels, we propose a method that selects a
subset of network-dependent meaningful voxels (salmon). Our method selects most of the voxels of the challenging classes, those with
relatively few training instances (such as the Cyclists and Pedestrians), less from the prevalent classes (e.g. Cars) and very few from the
background. It is shown that considering only this subset improves the performance of numerous SoTA voxel-based detectors.

Abstract
3D object detection within large 3D scenes is challenging not only due to the sparsity and irregularity of 3D
point clouds, but also due to both the extreme foregroundbackground scene imbalance and class imbalance. A common approach is to add ground-truth objects from other
scenes. Differently, we propose to modify the scenes by removing elements (voxels), rather than adding ones. Our
approach selects the "meaningful" voxels, in a manner that
addresses both types of dataset imbalance. The approach
is general and can be applied to any voxel-based detector,
yet the meaningfulness of a voxel is network-dependent. Our
voxel selection is shown to improve the performance of several prominent 3D detection methods.

1. Introduction
3D object detection has gained an increasing importance
in both industry and academia due to its wide range of applications, including autonomous driving and robotics [8, 33].
LiDAR sensors are the de-facto standard acquisition devices
for capturing 3D outdoor scenes (Fig. 1). They produce
sparse and irregular 3D point clouds, which are used in a
variety of scene perception and understanding tasks.
There are three prominent challenges in outdoor point
cloud datasets for detection. The first is the small size of
the datasets, in terms of the number of scenes. The second
is the large number of points in the scene vs. the small
number of points on the training examples (objects). A single
scene might contain hundreds of thousands, or even millions,
of points but only a handful of objects. The third is class
imbalance, where some classes might contain significantly

21684

