This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeepLSD: Line Segment Detection and Refinement with Deep Image Gradients
Rémi Pautrat1
1

Daniel Barath1

Viktor Larsson2

Martin R. Oswald1,3

2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Lund University
4
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich Lab

3

Marc Pollefeys1,4

University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Line segments are ubiquitous in our human-made world
and are increasingly used in vision tasks. They are complementary to feature points thanks to their spatial extent
and the structural information they provide. Traditional line
detectors based on the image gradient are extremely fast
and accurate, but lack robustness in noisy images and challenging conditions. Their learned counterparts are more
repeatable and can handle challenging images, but at the
cost of a lower accuracy and a bias towards wireframe lines.
We propose to combine traditional and learned approaches
to get the best of both worlds: an accurate and robust line
detector that can be trained in the wild without ground truth
lines. Our new line segment detector, DeepLSD, processes
images with a deep network to generate a line attraction field,
before converting it to a surrogate image gradient magnitude and angle, which is then fed to any existing handcrafted
line detector. Additionally, we propose a new optimization
tool to refine line segments based on the attraction field and
vanishing points. This refinement improves the accuracy of
current deep detectors by a large margin. We demonstrate
the performance of our method on low-level line detection
metrics, as well as on several downstream tasks using multiple challenging datasets. The source code and models are
available at https://github.com/cvg/DeepLSD.

1. Introduction
Line segments are ubiquitous in human-made environments and encode the underlying scene structure in a compact way. As such, line features have been used in multiple vision tasks: 3D reconstruction and Structure-fromMotion (SfM) [17, 32, 34], Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping [13, 15, 25, 37, 62], visual localization [14], tracking [38], vanishing point estimation [49], etc. Thanks to
their spatial extent and presence even in textureless areas,
they offer a good complement to feature points [14, 15, 37].
All these applications require a robust and accurate detector to extract line features from images. Traditionally,
line segments are extracted from the image gradient using

LSD [51]

HAWP [54]

Line distance field

Ours

Figure 1. Line detection in the wild. Top row: on challenging
images, handcrafted methods such as LSD [51] suffer from noisy
image gradients, while current learned methods like HAWP [54]
were trained on wireframe images and generalize poorly. Bottom
row: we combine deep learning to regress a line attraction field
and a handcrafted detector to get both accurate and robust lines.

handcrafted heuristics, such as in the Line Segment Detector
(LSD) [51]. These methods are fast and very accurate since
they rely on low-level details of the image. However, they
can suffer from a lack of robustness in challenging conditions such as in low illumination, where the image gradient
is noisy. They also miss global knowledge from the scene
and will detect any set of pixels with the same gradient
orientation, including uninteresting and noisy lines.
Recently, deep networks offer new possibilities to tackle
these drawbacks. This resurgence of line detection methods
was initiated by the deep wireframe methods aiming at inferring the line structure of indoor scenes [19, 30, 53, 54, 61].
Since then, more generic deep line segment detectors have
been proposed [10, 16, 20, 28, 50], including joint line detectors and descriptors [1,36,56]. These methods can, in theory,
be trained on challenging images and, thus, gain robustness
where classical methods fail. As they require a large receptive field to be able to handle the extent of line segments in

17327

