This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Label Compound Expression Recognition: C-EXPR Database & Network
Dimitrios Kollias
Queen Mary University of London, UK
d.kollias@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Research in automatic analysis of facial expressions
mainly focuses on recognising the seven basic ones. However, compound expressions are more diverse and represent
the complexity and subtlety of our daily affective displays
more accurately. Limited research has been conducted for
compound expression recognition (CER), because only a
few databases exist, which are small, lab controlled, imbalanced and static. In this paper we present an in-thewild A/V database, C-EXPR-DB, consisting of 400 videos
of 200K frames, annotated in terms of 13 compound expressions, valence-arousal emotion descriptors, action units,
speech, facial landmarks and attributes. We also propose
C-EXPR-NET, a multi-task learning (MTL) method for CER
and AU detection (AU-D); the latter task is introduced to enhance CER performance. For AU-D we incorporate AU semantic description along with visual information. For CER
we use a multi-label formulation and the KL-divergence
loss. We also propose a distribution matching loss for coupling CER and AU-D tasks to boost their performance and
alleviate negative transfer (i.e., when MT model’s performance is worse than that of at least one single-task model).
An extensive experimental study has been conducted illustrating the excellent performance of C-EXPR-NET, validating the theoretical claims. Finally, C-EXPR-NET is
shown to effectively generalize its knowledge in new emotion recognition contexts, in a zero-shot manner.

1. Introduction
For the past twenty years research in automatic analysis
of facial behaviour was mainly limited to the recognition of
the so-called six universal expressions (e.g., anger, happiness), plus the neutral state, influenced by the seminal work
of Ekman [7]. However, the affect model based on basic expressions is limited in the ability to represent the complexity
and subtlety of our daily affective displays [19]. Many more
facial expressions exist and are used regularly by humans.
The compound expressions are a better representation of affective displays in everyday interactions. Compound means

that the expression category is constructed as a combination
of two basic expression categories. Obviously, not all combinations are meaningful for humans. Twelve compound
expressions are most typically expressed by humans, e.g.,
people regularly produce a happily surprised expression and
observers do not have any problem distinguishing it from an
angrily surprised expression.
The design of systems capable of understanding the
community perception of expressional attributes and affective displays is receiving increasing interest. Benefited
from the great progress in deep learning research, the performance of expression recognition has greatly improved.
However, deep-model based methods are starved for labeled
data, whereas the annotation is a highly labor intensive and
time consuming process and the complexity of expression
categories obscures the labelling procedure. Initially, research was mainly limited to posed behavior captured in
highly controlled conditions. Some representative datasets
are CK+ [17], MMI [26], CFEE [6] and iCV-MEFED [18].
However, it is now widely accepted that progress in
a particular application domain is significantly catalysed
when a large number of datasets are collected in-the-wild
(i.e., in unconstrained conditions). Thus, expression analysis could not only focus on spontaneous behaviors, but also
on behaviours captured in unconstrained conditions. Hence,
two in-the-wild databases have been generated, EmotioNet
[1] and RAF-DB [15]. These databases, although in-thewild, are: i) very small in terms of size (RAF-DB contains
around 4,000 images; EmotioNet contains around 1,500 images); ii) very imbalanced (in RAF-DB one category consists of 1,700 images; in EmotioNet one category contains
half the samples); iii) static (i.e., they contain only images);
iv) lacking a training-validation-test set split.
It is evident that these databases are very small and do
not contain sufficient data for both training and evaluating
deep learning systems, so that the results are meaningful
and illustrate good generalization. Compound expression
recognition (CER) is in its infancy due to the above limitations. To this end, we collected the largest, diverse, in-thewild audiovisual database, C-EXPR-DB, reliably annotated
for 12 compound expressions plus a category referring to

5589

