This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plug-and-Play Diffusion Features for Text-Driven Image-to-Image Translation
Narek Tumanyan∗

Michal Geyer∗

Shai Bagon

Tali Dekel

Weizmann Institute of Science
Project webpage: https://pnp-diffusion.github.io

Input Real Image

“a photo of a bronze
horse in a museum”

“A photo of a pink
horse on the beach”

“A photo of a
robot horse”

Input Real Image

Input Real Image

“A wooden sculpture
of a couple dancing”

“A cartoon of
a couple dancing”

“a photo of
robots dancing”

Input Generated Image

“A polygonal illustration
of a cat and a bunny”

“A photo of bear
cubs in the snow”

“A polygonal illustartion “A photo of sharks
of fish in the ocean”
in the ocean”

Figure 1. Given a single real-world image as input, our framework enables versatile text-guided translations of the original content. Our
results exhibit high fidelity to the input structure and scene layout, while significantly changing the perceived semantic meaning of objects
and their appearance. Our method does not require any training, but rather harnesses the power of a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
model through its internal representation. We present new insights about deep features encoded in such models, and an effective framework
to control the generation process through simple modification of these features.

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image generative models have been
a revolutionary breakthrough in the evolution of generative AI, synthesizing diverse images with highly complex
visual concepts. However, a pivotal challenge in leveraging such models for real-world content creation is providing users with control over the generated content. In this
paper, we present a new framework that takes text-to- image synthesis to the realm of image-to-image translation –
given a guidance image and a target text prompt as input,
our method harnesses the power of a pre-trained text-toimage diffusion model to generate a new image that complies with the target text, while preserving the semantic layout of the guidance image. Specifically, we observe and
empirically demonstrate that fine-grained control over the
generated structure can be achieved by manipulating spatial features and their self-attention inside the model. This
results in a simple and effective approach, where features
extracted from the guidance image are directly injected into
the generation process of the translated image, requiring no
training or fine-tuning. We demonstrate high-quality results
on versatile text-guided image translation tasks, including
translating sketches, rough drawings and animations into
realistic images, changing the class and appearance of ob∗ Equal contribution.

jects in a given image, and modifying global qualities such
as lighting and color.

1. Introduction
With the rise of text-to-image foundation models –
billion-parameter models trained on a massive amount of
text-image data, it seems that we can translate our imagination into high-quality images through text [13, 35, 37, 41].
While such foundation models unlock a new world of creative processes in content creation, their power and expressivity come at the expense of user controllability, which is
largely restricted to guiding the generation solely through
an input text. In this paper, we focus on attaining control over the generated structure and semantic layout of the
scene – an imperative component in various real-world content creation tasks, ranging from visual branding and marketing to digital art. That is, our goal is to take text-to-image
generation to the realm of text-guided Image-to-Image (I2I)
translation, where an input image guides the layout (e.g., the
structure of the horse in Fig. 1), and the text guides the perceived semantics and appearance of the scene (e.g., “robot
horse” in Fig. 1).
A possible approach for achieving control of the generated layout is to design text-to-image foundation models
that explicitly incorporate additional guiding signals, such
as user-provided masks [13, 29, 35]. For example, recently

1921

