This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blind Video Deflickering by Neural Filtering with a Flawed Atlas

Output

Input

Chenyang Lei1,2 * Xuanchi Ren3,4 * Zhaoxiang Zhang1,5† Qifeng Chen6†
1
CAIR, HKISI-CAS 2 Princeton University 3 University of Toronto
4
Vector Institute 5 CASIA 6 HKUST

Figure 1. Blind deflickering performance of our approach on Betty Boop (1934). Many videos can have flickering artifacts for various
reasons. Our approach takes only the input video and removes the flicker automatically without any extra guidance.

Abstract
Many videos contain flickering artifacts; common causes
of flicker include video processing algorithms, video generation algorithms, and capturing videos under specific situations. Prior work usually requires specific guidance such
as the flickering frequency, manual annotations, or extra
consistent videos to remove the flicker. In this work, we
propose a general flicker removal framework that only receives a single flickering video as input without additional
guidance. Since it is blind to a specific flickering type or
guidance, we name this “blind deflickering.” The core of
our approach is utilizing the neural atlas in cooperation
with a neural filtering strategy. The neural atlas is a unified representation for all frames in a video that provides
temporal consistency guidance but is flawed in many cases.
To this end, a neural network is trained to mimic a filter
to learn the consistent features (e.g., color, brightness) and
avoid introducing the artifacts in the atlas. To validate our
method, we construct a dataset that contains diverse realworld flickering videos. Extensive experiments show that
our method achieves satisfying deflickering performance
and even outperforms baselines that use extra guidance on a
public benchmark. The source code is publicly available at
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

https://chenyanglei.github.io/deflicker.

1. Introduction
A high-quality video is usually temporally consistent,
but many videos suffer from flickering artifacts for various reasons, as shown in Figure 2. For example, the
brightness of old movies can be very unstable since some
old cameras with low-quality hardware cannot set the exposure time of each frame to be the same [16]. Besides, high-speed cameras with very short exposure time
can capture the high-frequency (e.g., 60 Hz) changes of indoor lighting [25]. Effective processing algorithms such
as enhancement [38, 45], colorization [29, 60], and style
transfer [33] might bring flicker when applied to temporally consistent videos. Videos from video generations approaches [46, 50, 61] also might contain flickering artifacts.
Since temporally consistent videos are generally more visually pleasing, removing the flicker from videos is highly
desirable in video processing [9, 13, 14, 54, 59] and computational photography.
In this work, we are interested in a general approach for
deflickering: (1) it is agnostic to the patterns or levels of
flickering (e.g., old movies, high-speed cameras, processing artifacts), (2) it only takes a single flickering video and
does not require other guidance (e.g., flickering types, extra consistent videos). That is to say, this model is blind
to flickering types and guidance, and we name this task as

10439

