This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backdoor Defense via Deconfounded Representation Learning
Zaixi Zhang1,2 , Qi Liu1,2 ,* Zhicai Wang4 , Zepu Lu4 , Qingyong Hu3
1: Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2:State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui, China
3:Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 4: University of Science and Technology of China
zaixi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn
{wangzhic, zplu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qhuag@cse.ust.hk
Trigger Pattern

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are recently shown to be
vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where attackers embed hidden backdoors in the DNN model by injecting a few poisoned examples into the training dataset. While extensive efforts have been made to detect and remove backdoors from backdoored DNNs, it is still not clear whether
a backdoor-free clean model can be directly obtained from
poisoned datasets. In this paper, we first construct a causal
graph to model the generation process of poisoned data
and find that the backdoor attack acts as the confounder,
which brings spurious associations between the input images and target labels, making the model predictions less
reliable. Inspired by the causal understanding, we propose the Causality-inspired Backdoor Defense (CBD), to
learn deconfounded representations for reliable classification. Specifically, a backdoored model is intentionally
trained to capture the confounding effects. The other clean
model dedicates to capturing the desired causal effects by
minimizing the mutual information with the confounding
representations from the backdoored model and employing a sample-wise re-weighting scheme. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets against 6 state-ofthe-art attacks verify that our proposed defense method is
effective in reducing backdoor threats while maintaining
high accuracy in predicting benign samples. Further analysis shows that CBD can also resist potential adaptive attacks. The code is available at https://github.com/
zaixizhang/CBD.

1. Introduction
Recent studies have revealed that deep neural networks
(DNNs) are vulnerable to backdoor attacks [18, 38, 53],
* Qi Liu is the corresponding author.

B

DNN Classifier
Dog Turtle Cat

Image

X

Y

Predicted Label

(a) Illustration of Backdoor Attack

(b) Causal Graph

Figure 1. (a) A real example of the backdoor attack. The backdoored DNN classifies the “turtle” image with a trigger pattern
as the target label “dog”. (b) The causal graph represents the
causalities among variables: X as the input image, Y as the label, and B as the backdoor attack. Besides the causal effect of X
on Y (X → Y ), the backdoor attack can attach trigger patterns
to images (B → X), and change the labels to the targeted label
(B → Y ). Therefore, as a confounder, the backdoor attack B
opens a spurious path between X and Y (X ← B → Y ).

where attackers inject stealthy backdoors into DNNs by poisoning a few training data. Specifically, backdoor attackers attach the backdoor trigger (i.e., a particular pattern) to
some benign training data and change their labels to the
attacker-designated target label. The correlations between
the trigger pattern and target label will be learned by DNNs
during training. In the inference process, the backdoored
model behaves normally on benign data while its prediction will be maliciously altered when the backdoor is activated. The risk of backdoor attacks hinders the applications of DNNs to some safety-critical areas such as automatic driving [38] and healthcare systems [14].
On the contrary, human cognitive systems are known to
be immune to input perturbations such as stealthy trigger
patterns induced by backdoor attacks [17]. This is because
humans are more sensitive to causal relations than the statistical associations of nuisance factors [29,60]. In contrast,
deep learning models that are trained to fit the poisoned
12228

