This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Extracting Motion and Appearance via Inter-Frame Attention
for Efficient Video Frame Interpolation
Guozhen Zhang1 Yuhan Zhu1 Haonan Wang1 Youxin Chen3 Gangshan Wu1 Limin Wang1, 2, *
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Shanghai AI Lab, China 3 Samsung Electronics (China) R&D Centre, China

Abstract
Effectively extracting inter-frame motion and appearance information is important for video frame interpolation
(VFI). Previous works either extract both types of information in a mixed way or devise separate modules for each
type of information, which lead to representation ambiguity
and low efficiency. In this paper, we propose a new module to explicitly extract motion and appearance information
via a unified operation. Specifically, we rethink the information process in inter-frame attention and reuse its attention map for both appearance feature enhancement and
motion information extraction. Furthermore, for efficient
VFI, our proposed module could be seamlessly integrated
into a hybrid CNN and Transformer architecture. This hybrid pipeline can alleviate the computational complexity
of inter-frame attention as well as preserve detailed lowlevel structure information. Experimental results demonstrate that, for both fixed- and arbitrary-timestep interpolation, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on various datasets. Meanwhile, our approach enjoys a
lighter computation overhead over models with close performance. The source code and models are available at
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/EMA-VFI.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental low-level vision task, the goal of
video frame interpolation (VFI) is to generate intermediate
frames given a pair of consecutive frames [17, 33]. It has
a wide range of real-life applications, such as video compression [53], novel-view rending [13,47], and slow-motion
video creation [19]. In general, VFI can be seen as the process of capturing the motion between consecutive frames
and then blending the corresponding appearance to synthesize the intermediate frames. From this perspective, the motion and appearance information between input frames is
essential for achieving excellent performance in VFI tasks.
*: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Illustration of various approaches in video frame interpolation for acquiring motion and appearance information.

Concerning the extraction paradigm of motion and appearance information, the current VFI approaches can be
divided into two categories. The first is to handle both appearance and motion information in a mixed way [2, 11, 14,
17, 20, 21, 30, 33, 37, 38, 44], as shown in Fig. 1(a). The
two neighboring frames are directly concatenated and fed
into a backbone composed of stacked similar modules to
generate features with mixed motion and appearance information. Though simple, this approach requires an elaborate design and high capacity in the extractor module, as it
needs to deal with both motion and appearance information
jointly. The absence of explicit motion information also results in limitations for arbitrary-timestep interpolation. The
second category, as shown in Fig. 1(b), is to design separate modules for motion and appearance information extraction [9, 18, 35, 40–42, 45, 56]. This approach requires
additional modules, such as cost volume [18, 40, 41], to extract motion information, which often imposes a high computational overhead. Also, only extracting appearance fea-

5682

