This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-Based Frame Interpolation with Ad-hoc Deblurring
Lei Sun1,2

Christos Sakaridis2 Jingyun Liang2 Peng Sun1 Jiezhang Cao2
Qi Jiang1 Kaiwei Wang1 Luc Van Gool2,3
1

Zhejiang University

2

ETH Zürich

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) methods synthesize intermediate frames between consecutive input frames, increasing the frame rate of the input video, with wide applications in super-slow generation [11, 13, 20], video editing [27, 45], virtual reality [1], and video compression [40].
With the absence of inter-frame information, frame-based
methods explicitly or implicitly utilize motion models such
as linear motion [13] or quadratic motion [41]. However,

KU Leuven
Sharp Frame Interpolation

Abstract
The performance of video frame interpolation is inherently correlated with the ability to handle motion in the input scene. Even though previous works recognize the utility
of asynchronous event information for this task, they ignore
the fact that motion may or may not result in blur in the
input video to be interpolated, depending on the length of
the exposure time of the frames and the speed of the motion,
and assume either that the input video is sharp, restricting themselves to frame interpolation, or that it is blurry,
including an explicit, separate deblurring stage before interpolation in their pipeline. We instead propose a general
method for event-based frame interpolation that performs
deblurring ad-hoc and thus works both on sharp and blurry
input videos. Our model consists in a bidirectional recurrent network that naturally incorporates the temporal dimension of interpolation and fuses information from the input frames and the events adaptively based on their temporal proximity. In addition, we introduce a novel real-world
high-resolution dataset with events and color videos named
HighREV, which provides a challenging evaluation setting
for the examined task. Extensive experiments on the standard GoPro benchmark and on our dataset show that our
network consistently outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods on frame interpolation, single image deblurring
and the joint task of interpolation and deblurring. Our code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
AHupuJR/REFID.

3

Kai Zhang2

𝑡!
𝑡!,#

𝑡%
𝑡!,$

𝑡%,#

𝑡%,$

Blurry Frame Interpolation

Figure 1. Our unified framework for event-based sharp and blurry
frame interpolation. Red/blue dots: negative/positive events;
Curly braces: exposure time range.

the non-linearity of motion in real-world videos makes it
hard to accurately capture inter-frame motion with these
simple models.
Recent works introduce event cameras in VFI as a proxy
to estimate the inter-frame motion between consecutive
frames. Event cameras [7] are bio-inspired asynchronous
sensors that report per-pixel intensity changes, i.e., events,
instead of synchronous full intensity images. The events
are recorded at high temporal resolution (in the order of
µs) and high dynamic range (over 140 dB) within and between frames, providing valid compressed motion information. Previous works [9, 36, 37] show the potential of event
cameras in VFI, comparing favorably to frame-only methods, especially in high-speed non-linear motion scenarios,
by using spatially aligned events and RGB frames. These
event-based VFI methods make the crucial assumption that
the input images are sharp. However, this assumption is
violated in real-world scenes because of the ubiquitous motion blur. In particular, because of the finite exposure time
of frames in real-world videos, especially of those captured with event cameras that output both image frames and
an event stream (i.e., Dynamic and Activate VIsion Sensor (DAVIS) [3])—which have a rather long exposure time
and low frame rate, motion blur is inevitable for high-speed
scenes. In such a scenario, where the reference frames for
VFI are degraded by motion blur, the performance of frame
interpolation also degrades.
As events encode motion information within and between frames, several studies [4, 18, 22] are carried out on

18043

