This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Multimodal Fusion via Interactive Prompting
Yaowei Li 1

Ruijie Quan 2

Linchao Zhu 2

Yi Yang 2

yaowei.li@uts.edu.au, {quanruijie, zhulinchao, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn
1

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
CCAI, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Large-scale pre-training has brought unimodal fields
such as computer vision and natural language processing to a new era. Following this trend, the size of multimodal learning models constantly increases, leading to an
urgent need to reduce the massive computational cost of
finetuning these models for downstream tasks. In this paper, we propose an efficient and flexible multimodal fusion
method, namely PMF, tailored for fusing unimodally pretrained transformers. Specifically, we first present a modular multimodal fusion framework that exhibits high flexibility and facilitates mutual interactions among different
modalities. In addition, we disentangle vanilla prompts
into three types in order to learn different optimizing objectives for multimodal learning. It is also worth noting that
we propose to add prompt vectors only on the deep layers
of the unimodal transformers, thus significantly reducing
the training memory usage. Experiment results show that
our proposed method achieves comparable performance to
several other multimodal finetuning methods with less than
3% trainable parameters and up to 66% saving of training
memory usage.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of largescale pretrained language models [8,31,32] and visual models [6,10,23,39], leading to a surge of pretrained multimodal
models [13, 14, 43, 47, 48] trying to align different modalities. Many prior methods utilize finetuning to update the
entire set of model parameters for every target cross-modal
task. Although finetuning can achieve good performance,
it requires a large number of computational costs since the
gradients and optimizer states for all parameters of multimodal models have to store. Therefore, it encourages researchers to propose more parameter-efficient methods than
finetuning for multimodal learning.

Figure 1. Comparison over three multimodal classification
tasks. We compare our proposed PMF and PMF-Large with multiple finetuning (yellow) and prompt-based (purple) methods. The
y-axis is the average score of three tasks, and the x-axis is the maximum GPU memory usage during training.

More recently, prompting tuning [17, 19, 21, 22, 29] is
proposed to address this problem by freezing all parameters of a pretrained model while tuning only the continuous
prompts. Specifically, it adds trainable continuous prompts
to the original token sequences of input data. During training, only the continuous prompts are updated. For multimodal prompt-based learning, a most recent method [20]
proposes to disentangle the functionality of the pretrained
model which exhibits high flexibility. Although this method
significantly reduces the tuned parameters (e.g., less than
0.1% of the pretrained model), there still exists a large performance gap between it and the finetuning-based methods.
In addition, this method adopts a sequential modular structure that the pretrained image transformer model is followed
by a language transformer model, which causes two main
problems in cross-modal learning: a one-way path learn-

2604

