This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-Time Evaluation in Online Continual Learning:
A New Hope
Yasir Ghunaim1∗
Adel Bibi2∗
Kumail Alhamoud1
Motasem Alfarra1
1
2
Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud
Ameya Prabhu
Philip H.S. Torr2
Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) 2 University of Oxford

Abstract
Current evaluations of Continual Learning (CL) methods typically assume that there is no constraint on training time and computation. This is an unrealistic assumption for any real-world setting, which motivates us to propose: a practical real-time evaluation of continual learning, in which the stream does not wait for the model to complete training before revealing the next data for predictions.
To do this, we evaluate current CL methods with respect
to their computational costs. We conduct extensive experiments on CLOC, a large-scale dataset containing 39 million
time-stamped images with geolocation labels. We show that
a simple baseline outperforms state-of-the-art CL methods
under this evaluation, questioning the applicability of existing methods in realistic settings. In addition, we explore
various CL components commonly used in the literature, including memory sampling strategies and regularization approaches. We find that all considered methods fail to be
competitive against our simple baseline. This surprisingly
suggests that the majority of existing CL literature is tailored to a specific class of streams that is not practical. We
hope that the evaluation we provide will be the first step towards a paradigm shift to consider the computational cost
in the development of online continual learning methods.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated impressive success in solving complex tasks [20, 29, 42] when
trained offline, for several passes, over large well-curated labeled datasets. However, in many real-world scenarios, data
is only available in the form of a stream with a changing
distribution. Due to this challenge, there has been a growing interest in the problem of learning from a time-varying
stream, also known as Continual Learning (CL), which is
* Equal Contribution.
Correspondence to: yasir.ghunaim@kaust.edu.sa
Code: github.com/Yasir-Ghunaim/RealtimeOCL

a key challenge for DNNs due to a phenomenon known as
catastrophic forgetting [17, 36]. In particular, when a DNN
is trained with data from a new distribution, the DNN performance significantly drops on previously learned data.
While mitigation efforts have been proposed, e.g.
through regularizing the training [2, 25, 53], replaying previously seen examples [11, 23, 39], and many other approaches [16,40,51], current evaluation approaches are still
far from real-world scenarios. For example, the majority
of literature is on Offline Continual Learning, under which
methods are allowed unlimited budget, both time and computation. Furthermore, the majority of CL evaluations are
conducted on small-scale datasets with well-defined temporal distribution boundaries in the form of learning a sequence of tasks.
To that end, there has recently been a growing interest
in the more realistic setting – Online Continual Learning
(OCL). In such a setup [1, 4, 21, 32], CL methods are restricted to a single training pass over a shuffled split of existing offline CL benchmarks. This is certainly a step forward towards resolving some of the unrealistic assumptions
of offline CL. However, current evaluations do not sufficiently address the challenges of real-time learning for highthroughput streams with rapid distribution changes.
To illustrate this, consider the problem of continuously
learning a Twitter stream where 350K tweets are uploaded
per minute on various trending topics [41]. Every uploaded
tweet needs to be predicted with a DNN for misinformation
and hate speech, among other things, while simultaneously
learning and adapting to them. Given the scale at which
data is being updated, there is an inherent key limitation on
the time and computational budget affordable to learning
incoming tweets, an aspect that is often overlooked in the
prior art from the OCL literature. Consider an OCL method
that is 10 times slower than the Twitter high throughput
stream, i.e., it takes 10 minutes to train on one minute worth
of tweets (350K tweets). This inefficiency results in an accumulation of ∼3.1 million new samples that need to be
predicted and trained on. Since it is not acceptable to pause

11888

