This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Dynamic Style Kernels for Artistic Style Transfer
Wenju Xu
OPPO US Research Center
Palo Alto, CA, USA

Chengjiang Long
Meta Reality Lab
Burlingame, CA, USA

Yongwei Nie
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

xuwenju123@gmail.com

clong1@meta.com

nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn

Content

Style

Ours

StrTr2 ’22

AdaAttN’21

DRG-GAN’21

IEC’21

MAST’21

Figure 1. The first two rows show comparisons with state-of-the-art methods. The last row shows results of our proposed method, which
can faithfully transfer various styles and preserve the content structure.

Abstract
Arbitrary style transfer has been demonstrated to be efficient in artistic image generation. Previous methods either globally modulate the content feature ignoring local
details, or overly focus on the local structure details leading to style leakage. In contrast to the literature, we propose
a new scheme “style kernel” that learns spatially adaptive
kernels for per-pixel stylization, where the convolutional
kernels are dynamically generated from the global stylecontent aligned feature and then the learned kernels are
applied to modulate the content feature at each spatial position. This new scheme allows flexible both global and local
interactions between the content and style features such that
the wanted styles can be easily transferred to the content image while at the same time the content structure can be easily preserved. To further enhance the flexibility of our style
transfer method, we propose a Style Alignment Encoding
(SAE) module complemented with a Content-based Gating
Modulation (CGM) module for learning the dynamic style
kernels in focusing regions. Extensive experiments strongly
demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms stateof-the-art methods and exhibits superior performance in
terms of visual quality and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Artistic style transfer [48] refers to a hot computer vision technology that allows us to recompose the content of
an image in the style of an artistic work. Figure 1 shows
several vivid examples. We might have ever imagined what
a photo might look like if it were painted by a famous artist
like Pablo Picasso or Van Gogh. Now style transfer is the
computer vision technique that turns this into a reality. It
has great potential values in various real-world applications
and therefore attracts a lot of researchers to constantly put
efforts to make progress towards both quality and efficiency.
Most of existing style transfer works [6, 15, 18, 26, 33]
either globally modulate the content feature ignoring local
details or overly focus on the local structure details leading
to style leakage. In particular, [15,18] seeks to match global
statistics between content and style images, resulting in inconsistent stylizations that either remain large parts of the
content unchanged or contain local content with distorted
style patterns. SANet [33] and AdaAttN [31] improve the
content similarity by learning attention maps that match the
semantics between the style and stylized images, but these
methods tend to distort object instances when improper
style patterns are involved. Recently, IEC [5] adopts contrastive learning to pull close both the content and style representations between input and output images. MAST [16]

10083

