This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDC-UDA: Volumetric Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Framework for
Slice-Direction Continuous Cross-Modality Medical Image Segmentation
Hyungseob Shin1∗

Hyeongyu Kim1∗

Sewon Kim4,5

Yohan Jun7,8

Taejoon Eo1,6

Dosik Hwang1,2,3,9†,
{1 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 2 Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology, College of
Dentistry, 3 Department of Radiology and Center for Clinical Imaging Data Science, College of Medicine}
@Yonsei University 4 Naver AI Lab 5 Naver Cloud 6 Probe Medical, Inc. 7 Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging
8
Harvard Medical School 9 Center for Healthcare Robotics, Korea Institute of Science and Technology
{whatzupsup, lion4309, dosik.hwang}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning-based medical image segmentation studies achieve nearly human-level performance in fully supervised manner. However, acquiring
pixel-level expert annotations is extremely expensive and
laborious in medical imaging fields. Unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) can alleviate this problem, which makes
it possible to use annotated data in one imaging modality to train a network that can successfully perform segmentation on target imaging modality with no labels. In
this work, we propose SDC-UDA, a simple yet effective
volumetric UDA framework for Slice-Direction Continuous
cross-modality medical image segmentation which combines intra- and inter-slice self-attentive image translation,
uncertainty-constrained pseudo-label refinement, and volumetric self-training. Our method is distinguished from previous methods on UDA for medical image segmentation in
that it can obtain continuous segmentation in the slice direction, thereby ensuring higher accuracy and potential in
clinical practice. We validate SDC-UDA with multiple publicly available cross-modality medical image segmentation
datasets and achieve state-of-the-art segmentation performance, not to mention the superior slice-direction continuity of prediction compared to previous studies.

1. Introduction
With the surprising development of deep learning (DL),
many studies are now showing remarkable performance in
various applications [8,16,20]. However, when a DL model
*

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An illustration that describes the comparison between
our proposed method with previous methods. (A) Previous UDA
for medical image segmentation studies mostly utilize 2D UDA,
which leads to inconsistent predictions in the slice direction when
the predictions are stacked. (B) The proposed framework (SDCUDA) considers volumetric information in the translation and segmentation process, respectively, which leads to improved slicedirection continuity of segmentation that is much practical for clinical use.

faces data from an unseen domain, performance degradation occurs [9, 32]. Resolving this issue is important for the
DL techniques to be applied in real world since collecting
data from all domains and labeling them is very impractical
and inefficient. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
aims to alleviate this problem by adapting a model trained
on source domain data to target domain, without the necessity of supervision in the target domain. Data dependency
is more serious in medical image segmentation field since
acquiring pixel-level expert annotation is extremely expensive and time-consuming [3, 22, 37].
Previous studies on UDA in the field of cross-modality med-

7412

