This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoStGAN-V: Video Generation with Temporal Motion Styles
Xiaoqian Shen
Xiang Li
Mohamed Elhoseiny
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
{xiaoqian.shen, xiang.li.1, mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Video generation remains a challenging task due to spatiotemporal complexity and the requirement of synthesizing
diverse motions with temporal consistency. Previous works
attempt to generate videos in arbitrary lengths either in an
autoregressive manner or regarding time as a continuous
signal. However, they struggle to synthesize detailed and diverse motions with temporal coherence and tend to generate
repetitive scenes after a few time steps. In this work, we argue that a single time-agnostic latent vector of style-based
generator is insufficient to model various and temporallyconsistent motions. Hence, we introduce additional timedependent motion styles to model diverse motion patterns.
In addition, a Motion Style Attention modulation mechanism, dubbed as MoStAtt, is proposed to augment frames
with vivid dynamics for each specific scale (i.e., layer),
which assigns attention score for each motion style w.r.t deconvolution filter weights in the target synthesis layer and
softly attends different motion styles for weight modulation. Experimental results show our model achieves stateof-the-art performance on four unconditional 2562 video
synthesis benchmarks trained with only 3 frames per clip
and produces better qualitative results with respect to dynamic motions. Code and videos have been made available at https://github.com/xiaoqian- shen/
MoStGAN-V .

1. Introduction
Learning algorithms for image generation are rapidly
reaching maturity and are expected to soon approach human levels of performance. However, the video generation
task does not share similar success and remains a research
opportunity to be further explored. Since videos are computationally intensive to model, a key question is how to
generate high-quality videos with limited computation resources. Another challenge is that due to the very nature
of video data, video synthesis is not simply tantamount to
generating high-quality images that change over time but
also requires generating these frames with temporal con-

Figure 1. Intuitively show how motion styles model different motion patterns along time steps. Each curve corresponds to one
motion style as a function of time step t. Each motion style will
adaptively modulate filter weights of the generator with our proposed MoStAtt mechanism and further stylize input features with
dynamic motions.

sistency, i.e., natural transitions between frames as well as
realistic motions. This problem gets even more severe when
the number of elements (e.g., objects and background) that
move spatiotemporally grows.
Towards low computation consumption, several RNN or
LSTM-based autoregressive approaches [5, 22, 28, 29] reduce computation complexity and make long video generation possible but the resulting videos tend to accumulate
errors over time and contain inconsistent frames. Recent
works use implicit neural representations by regarding time
as continuous signals and mapping time to either spatial coordinates [39] or StyleGAN [12] feature inputs [26]. Although these methods leverage sparse training to enhance
training efficiency and produce arbitrarily long videos, they
fall short in capturing diverse patterns of changing motions.
For instance, a generated video of a person talking may contain only low-frequency global motions like moving head
to different angles but lack the ability to synthesize highfrequency mouth and eye actions, e.g., open/close mouth
and blink eyes.
The limitation of previous works leads us to rethink
how to explicitly model the diversity of motions and leverage them for motion synthesis in the video generation pro-

5652

