This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Unlabelled Photos for Stronger Fine-Grained SBIR
Aneeshan Sain1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Subhadeep Koley1,2 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2
Soumitri Chattopadhyay* Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{a.sain, a.bhunia, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk}

Sketch [7, 17, 39] has long established itself as a worthy
query modality that is complementary to text [16, 23, 26].
Conceived as a category-level retrieval task [10,18], sketchbased image retrieval (SBIR) has recently taken a turn to a
“fine-grained” setting (i.e., FG-SBIR), where the emphasis
* Interned with SketchX

Transformer
Encoder
EMA

Intra-modal
photo

Cross-modal

Intra-modal
sketch

Sketch-photo
pairs

1. Introduction

Input

This paper advances the fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR) literature by putting forward a
strong baseline that overshoots prior state-of-the-arts by
≈11%. This is not via complicated design though, but by
addressing two critical issues facing the community (i) the
gold standard triplet loss does not enforce holistic latent
space geometry, and (ii) there are never enough sketches to
train a high accuracy model. For the former, we propose a
simple modification to the standard triplet loss, that explicitly enforces separation amongst photos/sketch instances.
For the latter, we put forward a novel knowledge distillation module can leverage photo data for model training.
Both modules are then plugged into a novel plug-n-playable
training paradigm that allows for more stable training.
More specifically, for (i) we employ an intra-modal triplet
loss amongst sketches to bring sketches of the same instance closer from others, and one more amongst photos to
push away different photo instances while bringing closer a
structurally augmented version of the same photo (offering
a gain of ≈4-6%). To tackle (ii), we first pre-train a teacher
on the large set of unlabelled photos over the aforementioned intra-modal photo triplet loss. Then we distill the
contextual similarity present amongst the instances in the
teacher’s embedding space to that in the student’s embedding space, by matching the distribution over inter-feature
distances of respective samples in both embedding spaces
(delivering a further gain of ≈4-5%). Apart from outperforming prior arts significantly, our model also yields satisfactory results on generalising to new classes. Project page:
https:// aneeshan95.github.io/ Sketch PVT/

Proposed Strong
Transformer FGSBIR Baseline

Unlabelled
photos

Abstract

Teacher

Learned
Latent space

Pre-trained on
unlabelled photos

Student

Knowledge
Distillation

Training
Latent space

Training from unlabelled data

Figure 1. (left) A strong FG-SBIR baseline with strong PVT [74]
backbone trained on intra-modal triplet loss, stabilised by EMA.
(right) It additionally leverages unlabelled photos to enrich its latent space by distilling instance-wise discriminative knowledge of
a teacher pre-trained on unlabelled photos.

is on fully utilising the faithful nature of sketches to conduct
instance-level retrieval [70, 81].
Despite great strides made in the field, without exception, all existing FG-SBIR models [60, 82] work around a
cross-modal triplet objective [81] to learn a discriminative
embedding to conduct retrieval. The general intuition has
always been to make a sketch sit closer to its paired photo
while pushing away non-matching ones (Fig. 1). However,
a conventional triplet setup does not enforce sufficient separation amongst different photos or sketch instances – largely
because the conventional objective fails to retain the holistic
latent space geometry, being overly restrictive on learning
within-triplet feature separation.
For that and as our first contribution, we utilise an intramodal triplet objective in both modalities, in addition to
the regular cross-modal [81] triplet objective. For sketch, a
query-sketch (anchor), is brought closer to another sketch of
the same target-photo (positive) while distancing it from a
sketch of any non-matching photo (negative). For the photo
modality, as there is only one uniquely paired photo (anchor), we treat a morphologically augmented version of the
photo as positive, and a non-matching one as negative. Importantly, we show that the best morphological operations
are those that operate on visual attributes bearing relevance
with information exclusive to sketches (e.g., shape) Fig. 1.
The other, perhaps more pressing problem, facing the

6873

