This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupling Human and Camera Motion from Videos in the Wild
Vickie Ye

Georgios Pavlakos
Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley

Angjoo Kanazawa

Input Video

…

…

…

…

Human Motion in the World Frame

Figure 1. 4D Reconstruction of People from Videos in-the-Wild. We present SLAHMR: Simultaneous Localization And Human Mesh
Recovery, a method that given a video of moving people (top), recovers the global trajectories of all people and cameras in the world
coordinate space (bottom). We combine geometric insights, which determine relative camera motion, with learned human motion priors,
which constrain a person’s plausible displacement between frames, to position the people and cameras in the shared world frame through
time. Our method can recover the global trajectories of all detected people from in-the-wild videos with uncontrolled camera and human
motion. Please see the project page to see the full video results.

Abstract
We propose a method to reconstruct global human trajectories from videos in the wild. Our optimization method
decouples the camera and human motion, which allows us
to place people in the same world coordinate frame. Most
existing methods do not model the camera motion; methods that rely on the background pixels to infer 3D human
motion usually require a full scene reconstruction, which
is often not possible for in-the-wild videos. However, even
when existing SLAM systems cannot recover accurate scene
reconstructions, the background pixel motion still provides
enough signal to constrain the camera motion. We show
that relative camera estimates along with data-driven human motion priors can resolve the scene scale ambiguity
and recover global human trajectories. Our method robustly
recovers the global 3D trajectories of people in challenging in-the-wild videos, such as PoseTrack. We quantify our
improvement over existing methods on 3D human dataset
Egobody. We further demonstrate that our recovered camera
scale allows us to reason about motion of multiple people in
a shared coordinate frame, which improves performance of
downstream tracking in PoseTrack.

1. Introduction
Consider the video sequence in Figure 1. As human observers, we can clearly perceive that the camera is following
the athlete as he runs across the field. However, when this
dynamic 3D scene is projected onto 2D images, because the
camera tracks the athlete, the athlete appears to be at the
center of the camera frame throughout the sequence — i.e.
the projection only captures the net motion of the underlying
human and camera trajectory. Thus, if we rely only on the
person’s 2D motion, as many human video reconstruction
methods do, we cannot recover their original trajectory in
the world (Figure 1 bottom left). To recover the person’s 3D
motion in the world (Figure 1 bottom right), we must also
reason about how much the camera is moving.
We present an approach that models the camera motion
to recover the 3D human motion in the world from videos
in the wild. Our system can handle multiple people and reconstructs their motion in the same world coordinate frame,
enabling us to capture their spatial relationships. Recovering
the underlying human motion and their spatial relationships
is a key step towards understanding humans from in-the-wild
videos. Tasks, such as autonomous planning in environments
with humans [50], or recognition of human interactions with

21222

