This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-grained Audible Video Description
⋆

Xuyang Shen2 , ⋆ Dong Li1 , ⋆ Jinxing Zhou3 , Zhen Qin2 , Bowen He2 , Xiaodong Han2 , Aixuan Li4 ,
Yuchao Dai4 , Lingpeng Kong5 , Meng Wang3 , Yu Qiao1 , Yiran Zhong1
1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 OpenNLPLab, 3 Hefei University of Technology,
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 5 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
We explore a new task for audio-visual-language modeling called fine-grained audible video description (FAVD). It
aims to provide detailed textual descriptions for the given
audible videos, including the appearance and spatial locations of each object, the actions of moving objects, and
the sounds in videos. Existing visual-language modeling
tasks often concentrate on visual cues in videos while undervaluing the language and audio modalities. On the
other hand, FAVD requires not only audio-visual-language
modeling skills but also paragraph-level language generation abilities. We construct the first fine-grained audible video description benchmark (FAVDBench) to facilitate this research. For each video clip, we first provide a
one-sentence summary of the video, i.e., the caption, followed by 4-6 sentences describing the visual details and 12 audio-related descriptions at the end. The descriptions
are provided in both English and Chinese. We create two
new metrics for this task: an EntityScore to gauge the completeness of entities in the visual descriptions, and an AudioScore to assess the audio descriptions. As a preliminary approach to this task, we propose an audio-visuallanguage transformer that extends existing video captioning model with an additional audio branch. We combine
the masked language modeling and auto-regressive language modeling losses to optimize our model so that it
can produce paragraph-level descriptions. We illustrate
the efficiency of our model in audio-visual-language modeling by evaluating it against the proposed benchmark using both conventional captioning metrics and our proposed
metrics. We further put our benchmark to the test in video
generation models, demonstrating that employing finegrained video descriptions can create more intricate videos
than using captions. Code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/OpenNLPLab/FAVDBench. Our online
benchmark is available at www.avlbench.opennlplab.cn.
⋆ These authors have equal contributions.
Yiran Zhong is the corresponding author (e-mail: zhongyiran@gmail.com).

1. Introduction
Language serves as the primary form of human communication, providing not only complementary information to
other modalities such as vision and audio, but also an efficient means of exchanging information [17, 27, 46]. For
example, we can use voice navigation to guide us to our
destination. Visually impaired people can watch a movie
by listening to its narration. The former shows that the
language can provide complementary information to other
modalities, while the latter indicates that the language can
carry the most information in other modalities.
Recent multi-modal modeling tasks attempt to connect
the language to other modalities, including image/video
captioning [16, 32, 45, 48, 51, 64, 65, 74, 75, 84, 91], text-toimage/video synthesis [15,19–21,58,59,62,63,73,79], textdriven image/video manipulation [3, 30, 44, 87, 88], and etc.
However, in these tasks, since the language is frequently
used to provide complementary information to other modalities, they often fail to give a fine-grained description of the
exchange of information between modalities, and only consider the simplified language, i.e., one-sentence captions.
Due to the conciseness of captions, only salient objects and
activities have got descriptions. As a result, the information
carried by the captions will be much less than that carried by
other modalities, causing significant information loss when
exchanging information from other modalities to language.
In this paper, we consider language as a tool for conveying information from other modalities in multi-modal
modeling and propose a new task called Fine-grained Audible Video Description (FAVD). We compare it with existing
captioning tasks in Fig. 1. Video captioning aims to generate one concise sentence to summarize the whole video.
Dense video captioning first detects the multiple temporal
events and then provides one caption for each event. The
generated sentences of these two tasks merely cover the
main objects or movements while losing many details when
translating the video information into language. Unlike this,
the FAVD task requires a model to describe videos in a similar way that humans do, i.e., starting with an overview of the
video and then focusing on each fine-grained detail to con-

10585

