This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Human Matting for Dynamic Videos
Chung-Ching Lin, Jiang Wang, Kun Luo, Kevin Lin, Linjie Li, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu
Microsoft
{chungching.lin,jiangwang,kun.luo,keli,linjli,lijuanw,zliu}@microsoft.com

Figure 1. Our method predicts reliable alpha mattes on dynamic videos without requiring trimaps or pre-captured backgrounds.

Abstract
The most recent efforts in video matting have focused
on eliminating trimap dependency since trimap annotations
are expensive and trimap-based methods are less adaptable for real-time applications. Despite the latest tripmapfree methods showing promising results, their performance
often degrades when dealing with highly diverse and unstructured videos. We address this limitation by introducing Adaptive Matting for Dynamic Videos, termed AdaM,
which is a framework designed for simultaneously differentiating foregrounds from backgrounds and capturing alpha
matte details of human subjects in the foreground. Two interconnected network designs are employed to achieve this
goal: (1) an encoder-decoder network that produces alpha
mattes and intermediate masks which are used to guide the
transformer in adaptively decoding foregrounds and backgrounds, and (2) a transformer network in which long- and
short-term attention combine to retain spatial and temporal contexts, facilitating the decoding of foreground details. We benchmark and study our methods on recently
introduced datasets, showing that our model notably improves matting realism and temporal coherence in complex
real-world videos and achieves new best-in-class generalizability. Further details and examples are available at
https://github.com/microsoft/AdaM .

1. Introduction
Video human matting aims to estimate a precise alpha
matte to extract the human foreground from each frame of

an input video. In comparison with image matting [6,10,14,
21, 30, 39, 44, 47], video matting [2, 5, 11, 18, 19, 33, 36, 38]
presents additional challenges, such as preserving spatial
and temporal coherence.
Many different solutions have been put forward for the
video matting problem. A straightforward approach is to
build on top of image matting models [44], which is to implement an image matting approach frame by frame. It may,
however, result in inconsistencies in alpha matte predictions
across frames, which will inevitably lead to flickering artifacts [42]. On the other hand, top performers leverage
dense trimaps to predict alpha mattes, which is expensive
and difficult to generalize across large video datasets. To
alleviate the substantial trimap limitation, OTVM [35] proposed a one-trimap solution recently. BGM [22, 33] proposes a trimap-free solution, which needs to take an additional background picture without the subject at the time of
capture. While the setup is less time-consuming than creating trimaps, it may not work well if used in a dynamic
background environment. The manual prior required by
these methods limits their use in some real-time applications, such as video conferencing. Lately, more general solutions, e.g., MODNet [16] and RVM [23], have been proposed which involve manual-free matting without auxiliary
inputs. However, in challenging real-world videos, backgrounds are inherently non-differentiable at some points,
causing these solutions to produce blurry alpha mattes.
It is quite challenging to bring together the benefits of
both worlds, i.e., a manual-free model that produces accurate alpha mattes in realistic videos. In our observation, the

10229

