This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Scale-Invariant Generator with Column-Row Entangled Pixel Synthesis
Thuan Hoang Nguyen∗ Thanh Van Le∗ Anh Tran
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{v.thuannh5,v.thanhlv19,v.anhtt152}@vinai.io

Anyres GAN

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] are one
of the most widely used structures for image generation
and manipulation [2, 28]. Previously, a GAN model could
only generate images with a fixed scale and layout as defined in the training dataset. However, natural images come
with varying resolutions and contain unstructured objects
at diverse poses. Therefore, designing a generative model
that can handle more flexible geometric configurations is
gaining more attention in the machine-learning community.
StyleGAN3 [13] already supports out-of-the-box translation and rotation with consistent and artifact-free outputs.
* Equal contribution.

Ours

x2 Scale

Any-scale image synthesis offers an efficient and scalable solution to synthesize photo-realistic images at any
scale, even going beyond 2K resolution. However, existing GAN-based solutions depend excessively on convolutions and a hierarchical architecture, which introduce inconsistency and the “texture sticking” issue when scaling the output resolution. From another perspective, INRbased generators are scale-equivariant by design, but their
huge memory footprint and slow inference hinder these networks from being adopted in large-scale or real-time systems. In this work, we propose Column-Row Entangled
Pixel Synthesis (CREPS), a new generative model that is
both efficient and scale-equivariant without using any spatial convolutions or coarse-to-fine design. To save memory
footprint and make the system scalable, we employ a novel
bi-line representation that decomposes layer-wise feature
maps into separate “thick” column and row encodings. Experiments on various datasets, including FFHQ, LSUNChurch, MetFaces, and Flickr-Scenery, confirm CREPS’
ability to synthesize scale-consistent and alias-free images
at any arbitrary resolution with proper training and inference speed. Code is available at https://github.
com/VinAIResearch/CREPS.

ScaleParty

Original

Abstract

Figure 1. Previous any-scale image synthesis networks, including
AnyresGAN [4] and ScaleParty [18], produce inconsistent image
details when changing the output scale (see zoomed-in patches).
In contrast, our proposed network can produce the same details
but sharper when increasing the scale. Check the supplemental
video for a clearer comparison.

Any-scale synthesis, however, remains under-explored.
In this paper, we are interested in the task of arbitraryscale image synthesis where a single generator can effortlessly synthesize images at many different scales while
strongly preserving detail consistency. Such a model can be
a promising research direction and bring many benefits. It
enables synthesizing a high-resolution image from a lowerresolution training dataset. Hence, it eliminates the need for
collecting and training models on high-resolution images,
which is costly in storage, time, and computation resources.
The output resolution can be ultra-high, e.g., 2048 × 2048,
which is impossible for standard GAN models due to the
limit of GPU memory. Any-scale image synthesis also allows geometric interactions like zooming in and out. Despite promising results, previous works on this topic, such
as AnyresGAN [4] and ScaleParty [18], show strong inconsistency when scaling the output resolution (see Fig. 1).
We investigate the GAN structures to find the potential cause of the inconsistency at image scaling. Traditional GAN models are based on convolutional generators

22408

