This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenGait: Revisiting Gait Recognition Toward Better Practicality
Chao Fan1,2 , Junhao Liang1,2 , Chuanfu Shen3,1 , Saihui Hou4,5 ,
Yongzhen Huang4,5 , Shiqi Yu1,2 *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous System, Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University 5 WATRIX.AI

{12131100, 12132342, 11950016}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, {housaihui, huangyongzhen}@bnu.edu.cn, yusq@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract

CASIA-B

OUMVLP

GREW

94

1. Introduction
Gait recognition has recently gained growing interest
from the vision research community. It utilizes the physiological and behavioral characteristics from walking videos
to authenticate individuals’s identities [34]. Compared with
other biometrics, e.g., face, fingerprint, and iris, gait patterns can be captured from a distance in uncontrolled settings, without requiring any physical contact. As a walking
* Corresponding Author

GaitPart (CVPR 2020)
GaitGL (ICCV 2021)

92

CSTL (ICCV 2021)

Rank-1 accuracy (%)

Gait recognition is one of the most critical long-distance
identification technologies and increasingly gains popularity in both research and industry communities. Despite the
significant progress made in indoor datasets, much evidence
shows that gait recognition techniques perform poorly in
the wild. More importantly, we also find that some conclusions drawn from indoor datasets cannot be generalized
to real applications. Therefore, the primary goal of this
paper is to present a comprehensive benchmark study for
better practicality rather than only a particular model for
better performance. To this end, we first develop a flexible
and efficient gait recognition codebase named OpenGait.
Based on OpenGait, we deeply revisit the recent development of gait recognition by re-conducting the ablative experiments. Encouragingly,we detect some unperfect parts
of certain prior woks, as well as new insights. Inspired by
these discoveries, we develop a structurally simple, empirically powerful, and practically robust baseline model, GaitBase. Experimentally, we comprehensively compare GaitBase with many current gait recognition methods on multiple public datasets, and the results reflect that GaitBase
achieves significantly strong performance in most cases regardless of indoor or outdoor situations. Code is available
at https://github.com/ShiqiYu/OpenGait.

Gait3D

GaitSet (AAAI 2019)

3DLocal (ICCV 2021)

90

SMPLGait (CVPR 2022)
88

Our Baseline: GaitBase

86

60

40

20

Indoor dataset
CASIA-B

OUMVLP

Outdoor dataset

Dataset

GREW

Gait3D

Figure 1. Performance of popular models and ours baseline on 4
major gait datasets [2, 5, 11, 12, 18, 41]. The left two are indoor
datasets [32, 38], the right two are outdoor datasets [41, 43].

behavior, gait is also hard to disguise and thus promisingly
robust for usual subject-related covariates, such as dressing, carrying, and standing conditions. These advantages
make gait recognition suitable for public security applications, e.g., criminal investigation, and suspect tracking [35].
With the boom of deep learning, gait recognition in the
laboratory [32, 38] has achieved significant progress [2, 5,
18] over the last decade. However, much evidence [41, 43]
reveal that gait recognition techniques may not perform optimally in the wild. As shown in Figure 1, most existing gait
recognition methods suffer an over 40% accuracy degradation when transitioning from indoor to outdoor datasets.
Typically, this performance gap should be mainly caused by
real-world noisy factors, such as complex occlusion, background variation, and illumination changes.
Nevertheless, our further ablative study shows that this
situation is not unique, as many of the conclusions drawn

9707

