This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Patch-based 3D Natural Scene Generation from a Single Example
Weiyu Li1 *
1

Xuelin Chen2 *†

Shandong University

2

Jue Wang2

Tencent AI Lab

Baoquan Chen3
3

Peking University

Figure 1. From a single example (inset), our method can generate diverse samples with highly realistic geometric structure and visual
appearance. None of existing 3D generative models can achieve these results. More generated samples that are intricate and intriguing,
ranging from single-object scenes (e.g., plants) to mid-scale ones, and large terrains, can be found in Section 4 and the supplementary.

Abstract
We target a 3D generative model for general natural
scenes that are typically unique and intricate. Lacking the
necessary volumes of training data, along with the difficulties of having ad hoc designs in presence of varying
scene characteristics, renders existing setups intractable.
Inspired by classical patch-based image models, we advocate for synthesizing 3D scenes at the patch level, given a
single example. At the core of this work lies important algorithmic designs w.r.t the scene representation and generative patch nearest-neighbor module, that address unique
challenges arising from lifting classical 2D patch-based
framework to 3D generation. These design choices, on a
collective level, contribute to a robust, effective, and efficient model that can generate high-quality general natural
scenes with both realistic geometric structure and visual appearance, in large quantities and varieties, as demonstrated
upon a variety of exemplar scenes. Data and code can be
found at http://wyysf-98.github.io/Sin3DGen.

* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
3D scene generation generally carries the generation of
both realistic geometric structure and visual appearance. A
wide assortment of scenes on earth, or digital ones across
the internet, exhibiting artistic characteristics and ample
variations over geometry and appearance, can be easily
listed. Being able to populate these intriguing scenes in the
virtual universe has been a long pursuit in the community.
Research has taken several routes, among which a prevalent one is learning to extract common patterns of the geometry or appearance from homogeneous scene samples,
such as indoor scenes [14, 25, 34, 37, 59, 63, 71, 72, 75], terrains [15, 19, 21, 26], urban scenes [12, 30, 44], etc. Another
line learns to generate single objects [6, 7, 16, 25, 33, 35, 45,
74]. A dominant trend in recent has emerged that learns 3D
generative models to jointly synthesize 3D structures and
appearances via differentiable rendering [4, 5, 8, 18, 43, 50].
Nevertheless, all these learning setups are limited in their
ability to generalize in terms of varied scene types. While a
more promising direction is the exemplar-based one, where
one or a few exemplars featuring the scene of interest are
provided, algorithm designs tailored for certain scene types
in existing methods [38–40,73] again draw clear boundaries

16762

