This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring the Relationship between Architectural Design and
Adversarially Robust Generalization
Aishan Liu1 , Shiyu Tang1 , Siyuan Liang2 , Ruihao Gong1,6 , Boxi Wu3 ,
Xianglong Liu1,4,5 , Dacheng Tao7
1

4

Beihang University, 2 Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 Zhejiang University,

Zhongguancun Laboratory, 5 Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center,
6
SenseTime, 7 JD Explore Academy

Abstract

The first three authors contribute equally. Corresponding author: Xianglong Liu, xlliu@buaa.edu.cn.

Prediction Layer

Conv

ConViT

ViT
Adversarial
Training

Image Embedding

Attention
…

DNNs have achieved remarkable performance across a
wide variety of applications [15,28,41,79], yet they are vulnerable to adversarial examples (malicious inputs that could
fool DNNs by adding human-imperceptible perturbations

Attention
…

1. Introduction

Attention
…

Adversarial training has been demonstrated to be one of
the most effective remedies for defending adversarial examples, yet it often suffers from the huge robustness generalization gap on unseen testing adversaries, deemed as the
adversarially robust generalization problem. Despite the
preliminary understandings devoted to adversarially robust
generalization, little is known from the architectural perspective. To bridge the gap, this paper for the first time
systematically investigated the relationship between adversarially robust generalization and architectural design. In
particular, we comprehensively evaluated 20 most representative adversarially trained architectures on ImageNette
and CIFAR-10 datasets towards multiple ℓp -norm adversarial attacks. Based on the extensive experiments, we found
that, under aligned settings, Vision Transformers (e.g., PVT,
CoAtNet) often yield better adversarially robust generalization while CNNs tend to overfit on specific attacks and fail
to generalize on multiple adversaries. To better understand
the nature behind it, we conduct theoretical analysis via the
lens of Rademacher complexity. We revealed the fact that
the higher weight sparsity contributes significantly towards
the better adversarially robust generalization of Transformers, which can be often achieved by the specially-designed
attention blocks. We hope our paper could help to better
understand the mechanism for designing robust DNNs. Our
model weights can be found at http://robust.art.

Image Embedding

Image Embedding

Norm

Attack

DeiT Conv
Conv

Conv

ℓ!
ℓ"

Conv

Architectures

ResNet

Adversarial Examples

ℓ#

Figure 1. This paper aims to better understand adversarially
robust generalizations from the architectural design perspective.
We comprehensively evaluated 20 adversarially trained architectures on several datasets toward multiple ℓp adversaries and found
that Transformers often yield better adversarially robust generalization. We also undertake theoretical analysis through the
Rademacher complexity lens to further comprehend this.

[12, 33, 37, 54]). Numerous defensive strategies have been
offered to combat this issue. The most effective and promising of these approaches is adversarial training [42, 58],
which improves adversarial robustness by adding adversarial examples into training data.
However, adversarial training tends to exhibit a huge
generalization gap between training and testing data [53,59,
76]. Unlike models trained on clean data that usually generalize well on clean testing data, differences between training and testing robustness for adversarially-trained models
tend to be large. Moreover, the robustness of adversarial
training fails to generalize to unseen adversaries during testing [29, 31]. The aforementioned adversarially robust generalization problem puts a barrier in the way of the potential applications of adversarial training in practice, where attacks are often drawn from multiple unknown attacks, therefore attracting intensive research interests. Prior works have
studied the characteristic of adversarially robust generalization and proposed many approaches for mitigation (e.g.,
unlabeled data [4, 47], robust local features [50], genera-

4096

