This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Visual Representations via Language-Guided Sampling
Mohamed El Banani Karan Desai Justin Johnson
University of Michigan
{mbanani,kdexd,justincj}@umich.edu

Visual Embedding

Abstract
Although an object may appear in numerous contexts, we
often describe it in a limited number of ways. Language allows us to abstract away visual variation to represent and
communicate concepts. Building on this intuition, we propose an alternative approach to visual representation learning: using language similarity to sample semantically similar image pairs for contrastive learning. Our approach
diverges from image-based contrastive learning by sampling view pairs using language similarity instead of handcrafted augmentations or learned clusters. Our approach
also differs from image-text contrastive learning by relying
on pre-trained language models to guide the learning rather
than directly minimizing a cross-modal loss. Through a series of experiments, we show that language-guided learning
yields better features than image-based and image-text representation learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Consider the images in Fig. 1, is the center image more
similar to its left or right neighbor? Despite the difference
in background and pose, it is clear that the right pair captures the same concept: a flying snow owl. Nevertheless, a
self-supervised image model will judge the left pair as more
similar. Human perception and language abstract away appearance differences to capture conceptual similarity rather
than just visual similarity. Ideally, we could learn visual
features that capture conceptual similarity and generalize
effectively to other visual tasks. In this work, we show how
language can be a proxy for conceptual similarity; allowing
us to sample better pairs for contrastive learning and train
more generalizable visual models.
Image-only contrastive learning uses visual similarity as
a proxy for conceptual similarity. This is based on the observation that discriminative approaches can discover interclass similarity–e.g., cheetahs are similar to lions– without
requiring explicit annotations [106]. The core idea is to train
a discriminative model where each instance is treated as a
separate class, and the model is trained to map augmented

ℒ

Late after post
thunderstorm,
north Ohio

Snowy owl
lifting off

Snow owl
taking off

Language Embedding
Figure 1. Language allows us to find conceptually similar image
pairs even if they are visually dissimilar. We use those pairs for
contrastive learning to learn generalizable visual features.

views of the same image to similar features [12–15, 106].
While successful, instance discrimination ignores the similarity between different instances as it assumes all other images are unrelated. Later work focused on inter-image relationships by estimating clusters [3, 9, 10] or finding nearest
neighbors [28]. However, those relationships are estimated
using visual embeddings; resulting in visually, rather than
conceptually, similar pairs.
Language similarity is a strong proxy for semantic relationships. Consider the example in Fig. 1; images that
depict the same concept are often described similarly. Radford et al. [76] propose language-image contrastive learning by mapping images and text to a shared representation space and achieve impressive generalization capabilities. However, it is unclear whether forcing models to map
onto a shared space is optimal for visual learning. Although
linguistic and visual similarity might align for similar instances, it is unclear whether all distances in one space
should map exactly to the other. Instead of learning a joint
vision-and-language representations, we argue that it is better to use linguistic similarity to guide visual learning.

19208

