This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoMFormer: Continual Learning in Semantic and Panoptic Segmentation
Fabio Cermelli 1,2 ,* Matthieu Cord 3,4 , Arthur Douillard 3†
1
Politecnico di Torino, 2 Italian Institute of Technology, 3 Sorbonne Université, 4 valeo.ai
fabio.cermelli@polito.it, matthieu.cord@sorbonne-universite.fr, ar.douillard@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual learning for segmentation has recently seen
increasing interest. However, all previous works focus on
narrow semantic segmentation and disregard panoptic segmentation, an important task with real-world impacts. In
this paper, we present the first continual learning model
capable of operating on both semantic and panoptic segmentation. Inspired by recent transformer approaches that
consider segmentation as a mask-classification problem, we
design CoMFormer. Our method carefully exploits the properties of transformer architectures to learn new classes over
time. Specifically, we propose a novel adaptive distillation loss along with a mask-based pseudo-labeling technique to effectively prevent forgetting. To evaluate our approach, we introduce a novel continual panoptic segmentation benchmark on the challenging ADE20K dataset. Our
CoMFormer outperforms all the existing baselines by forgetting less old classes but also learning more effectively
new classes. In addition, we also report an extensive evaluation in the large-scale continual semantic segmentation
scenario showing that CoMFormer also significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods. 1

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
problem that enables machines to assign an image’s pixels to discrete segments. Multiple segmentation tasks have
been defined depending on the segments definitions. Semantic segmentation clusters pixels by classes, merging in
a single segment pixels belonging to instances of the same
class. Panoptic segmentation assigns to every pixel a semantic class while separating different instances into different segments. This latter kind of segmentation has realworld impacts in autonomous robots and vehicles [7, 41].
Despite tremendous progress in image segmentation, the
current approaches are trained on a static dataset with a pre* Work done during the visiting period at Sorbonne Université.
† Work done at Sorbonne Université, currently affiliated to DeepMind.
1 https://github.com/fcdl94/CoMFormer

Step t-1 - New Class: Car

Image

Annotations

CoMFormer (t-1)

Predictions

CoMFormer (t)

Predictions

Step t - New Class: Person

Image

Annotations

Figure 1. Illustration of our model, CoMFormer, operating
in continual segmentation. Relying on the mask classification
paradigm, it is able to cope with both continual semantic and
panoptic segmentation without any modification by predicting
masks for both old (e.g. car in red) and new (e.g. person in green)
classes. The figure reports two classes and no “stuff” (e.g. road,
building) only for illustration purposes.

defined set of classes. Whenever an update of the model is
required to fit new classes, the common solution is to train
a model from scratch on the union of the old and new class
data. A computationally more efficient solution would be
to fine-tune the existing model solely on the new class data.
Unfortunately, this approach would cause a catastrophic
forgetting [21] of the old classes on which the model performance would be extremely degraded.
The problem of updating the knowledge of the model
over time is typically referred as continual learning. It has
been traditionally studied in the context of image classification [17, 19, 29, 33, 43, 45] and is gaining attention on the
segmentation task [3, 4, 15, 39, 59] due to the more realistic applications and the additional challenges it introduces,
such as the background shift [4]. However, current stateof-the-art methods mainly focus on semantic segmentation
and are not designed to work in other segmentation tasks,
strongly limiting their application in the real world.

3010

