This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Object Counting
Jingyi Xu1 , Hieu Le2 , Vu Nguyen1 , Viresh Ranjan* 3 , and Dimitris Samaras1
1

Stony Brook University

2

EPFL

3

Amazon

Abstract
Class-agnostic object counting aims to count object instances of an arbitrary class at test time. Current methods
for this challenging problem require human-annotated exemplars as inputs, which are often unavailable for novel
categories, especially for autonomous systems. Thus, we
propose zero-shot object counting (ZSC), a new setting
where only the class name is available during test time.
Such a counting system does not require human annotators
in the loop and can operate automatically. Starting from a
class name, we propose a method that can accurately identify the optimal patches which can then be used as counting
exemplars. Specifically, we first construct a class prototype
to select the patches that are likely to contain the objects
of interest, namely class-relevant patches. Furthermore, we
introduce a model that can quantitatively measure how suitable an arbitrary patch is as a counting exemplar. By applying this model to all the candidate patches, we can select the most suitable patches as exemplars for counting.
Experimental results on a recent class-agnostic counting
dataset, FSC-147, validate the effectiveness of our method.
Code is available at https://github.com/cvlabstonybrook/zero-shot-counting.

1. Introduction
Object counting aims to infer the number of objects in
an image. Most of the existing methods focus on counting
objects from specialized categories such as human crowds
[37], cars [29], animals [4], and cells [46]. These methods count only a single category at a time. Recently, classagnostic counting [28, 34, 38] has been proposed to count
objects of arbitrary categories. Several human-annotated
bounding boxes of objects are required to specify the objects of interest (see Figure 1a). However, having humans
in the loop is not practical for many real-world applications,
such as fully automated wildlife monitoring systems or vi* Work done prior to joining Amazon

Be happy , Douya

(a) Few-shot Counting

(b) Zero-Shot Counting

Figure 1. Our proposed task of zero-shot object counting (ZSC).
Traditional few-shot counting methods require a few exemplars of
the object category (a). We propose zero-shot counting where the
counter only needs the class name to count the number of object
instances. (b). Few-shot counting methods require human annotators at test time while zero-shot counters can be fully automatic.

sual anomaly detection systems.
A more practical setting, exemplar-free class-agnostic
counting, has been proposed recently by Ranjan et al. [33].
They introduce RepRPN, which first identifies the objects
that occur most frequently in the image, and then uses them
as exemplars for object counting. Even though RepRPN
does not require any annotated boxes at test time, the
method simply counts objects from the class with the highest number of instances. Thus, it can not be used for counting a specific class of interest. The method is only suitable
for counting images with a single dominant object class,
which limits the potential applicability.
Our goal is to build an exemplar-free object counter
where we can specify what to count. To this end, we introduce a new counting task in which the user only needs
to provide the name of the class for counting rather than the
exemplars (see Figure 1b). In this way, the counting model
can not only operate in an automatic manner but also allow
the user to define what to count by simply providing the
class name. Note that the class to count during test time can
be arbitrary. For cases where the test class is completely
unseen to the trained model, the counter needs to adapt to
the unseen class without any annotated data. Hence, we

15548

