This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing a Rose in Five Thousand Ways
Yunzhi Zhang
Stanford University

Shangzhe Wu
University of Oxford

Noah Snavely
Cornell Tech
Object Intrinsics

Shape

Albedo

One Training Image

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

“5000” Generated Roses

Figure 1. From a single image, our model learns to infer object intrinsics—the distributions of the geometry, texture, and material of object
instances within the image. The model can then generate new instances of the object type, and it allows us to view the object under different
poses and lighting conditions. Project page at https://cs.stanford.edu/˜yzzhang/projects/rose/.1

Abstract
What is a rose, visually? A rose comprises its intrinsics,
including the distribution of geometry, texture, and material
specific to its object category. With knowledge of these intrinsic properties, we may render roses of different sizes and
shapes, in different poses, and under different lighting conditions. In this work, we build a generative model that learns
to capture such object intrinsics from a single image, such
as a photo of a bouquet. Such an image includes multiple
instances of an object type. These instances all share the
same intrinsics, but appear different due to a combination of
variance within these intrinsics and differences in extrinsic
factors, such as pose and illumination. Experiments show
that our model successfully learns object intrinsics (distribution of geometry, texture, and material) for a wide range
of objects, each from a single Internet image. Our method
achieves superior results on multiple downstream tasks, including intrinsic image decomposition, shape and image
generation, view synthesis, and relighting.

“Nature!... Each of her works has an essence of its own;
each of her phenomena a special characterisation; and
yet their diversity is in unity.” – Georg Christoph Tobler

1. Introduction
The bouquet in Figure 1 contains many roses. Although
each rose has different pixel values, we recognize them as
individual instances of the same type of object. Such understanding is based on the fact that these instances share
the same object intrinsics—the distributions of geometry,
texture, and material that characterize a rose. The difference
in appearance arises from both the variance within these
distributions and extrinsic factors such as object pose and
environment lighting. Understanding these aspects allows us
to imagine and draw additional, new instances of roses with
varying shape, pose, and illumination.
In this work, our goal is to build a model that captures
such object intrinsics from a single image, and to use this
model for shape and image generation under novel viewpoints and illumination conditions, as illustrated in Figure 1.
This problem is challenging for three reasons. First, we
only have a single image. This makes our work fundamentally different from existing works on 3D-aware image generation models [8, 9, 27, 28], which typically require a large
dataset of thousands of instances for training. In comparison,
1 “People where you live ... grow five thousand roses in one garden ...
And yet what they’re looking for could be found in a single rose.” — Quote
from The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry.

962

