This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial-then-Temporal Self-Supervised Learning for Video Correspondence
Rui Li
Dong Liu
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
liruid@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In low-level video analyses, effective representations are
important to derive the correspondences between video
frames. These representations have been learned in a selfsupervised fashion from unlabeled images or videos, using carefully designed pretext tasks in some recent studies.
However, the previous work concentrates on either spatialdiscriminative features or temporal-repetitive features, with
little attention to the synergy between spatial and temporal cues. To address this issue, we propose a spatial-thentemporal self-supervised learning method. Specifically, we
firstly extract spatial features from unlabeled images via
contrastive learning, and secondly enhance the features by
exploiting the temporal cues in unlabeled videos via reconstructive learning. In the second step, we design a global
correlation distillation loss to ensure the learning not to
forget the spatial cues, and a local correlation distillation
loss to combat the temporal discontinuity that harms the reconstruction. The proposed method outperforms the stateof-the-art self-supervised methods, as established by the
experimental results on a series of correspondence-based
video analysis tasks. Also, we performed ablation studies
to verify the effectiveness of the two-step design as well as
the distillation losses.

1. Introduction
Learning representations for video correspondence is a
fundamental problem in computer vision, which is closely
related to different downstream tasks, including optical flow
estimation [10, 17], video object segmentation [3, 37], keypoint tracking [53], etc. However, supervising such a representation requires a large number of dense annotations,
which is unaffordable. Thus, most approaches acquire
information from simulations [10, 33] or limited annotations [39, 55], which result in poor generalization in difThis work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62022075 and 62036005, and by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities under Contracts WK3490000005 and
WK3490000006. (Corresponding author: Dong Liu.)

Query Point

Spatial

Temporal

Spatial-then-Temporal

Figure 1. Matching results given the query point. While
temporal-repetitive features fail to handle video correspondence
with dramatic appearance changes and deformations (the first two
rows), spatial-discriminative features are incompetent to recognize
the temporal repetition and are misled by distractors with similar
appearance (the last two rows). The green/red bounding boxes indicate correct/wrong matching. (Zoom in for best view)

ferent downstream tasks. Recently, self-supervised feature
learning is gaining significant momentum. Several pretext
tasks [15, 19, 24, 27, 48, 52] are designed, mostly concentrating on either spatial feature learning or temporal feature
learning for space-time visual correspondence.
With the objective of learning the representations that
are invariant to the appearance changes, spatial feature
learning provides video correspondence with discriminative and robust appearance cues, especially when facing
severe temporal discontinuity, i.e., occlusions, appearance
changes, and deformations. Most recently, as mentioned
in [50], the contrastive models [6, 15, 52] pre-trained on image data show competitive performance against dedicated
methods for video correspondence. Thus, it is shown to
be a better way for learning spatial representations in terms
of quality and data efficiency, compared with the meth-

2279

