This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RenderDiffusion: Image Diffusion for 3D Reconstruction,
Inpainting and Generation
Titas Anciukevičius1,2 , Zexiang Xu2 , Matthew Fisher2 ,
Paul Henderson3 , Hakan Bilen1 , Niloy J. Mitra2,4 , Paul Guerrero2
1
University of Edinburgh, 2 Adobe Research, 3 University of Glasglow, 4 UCL

3D-Aware Inpainting

Unconditional 3D Generation

novel view

novel view

inpainted

est. depth

input

input & mask

Monocular 3D Reconstruction

Figure 1. We propose a 3D-aware image diffusion model that can be used for monocular 3D reconstruction, 3D-aware inpainting, and
unconditional generation, while being trained with only monocular 2D supervision. Here we show results on ShapeNet and FFHQ.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Diffusion models currently achieve state-of-the-art performance for both conditional and unconditional image
generation. However, so far, image diffusion models do not
support tasks required for 3D understanding, such as viewconsistent 3D generation or single-view object reconstruction. In this paper, we present RenderDiffusion, the first diffusion model for 3D generation and inference, trained using
only monocular 2D supervision. Central to our method is a
novel image denoising architecture that generates and renders an intermediate three-dimensional representation of a
scene in each denoising step. This enforces a strong inductive structure within the diffusion process, providing a 3D
consistent representation while only requiring 2D supervision. The resulting 3D representation can be rendered from
any view. We evaluate RenderDiffusion on FFHQ, AFHQ,
ShapeNet and CLEVR datasets, showing competitive performance for generation of 3D scenes and inference of 3D
scenes from 2D images. Additionally, our diffusion-based
approach allows us to use 2D inpainting to edit 3D scenes.

Project page: https : / / github . com / Anciukevicius /
RenderDiffusion

Image diffusion models now achieve state-of-the-art performance on both generation and inference tasks. Compared to alternative approaches (e.g. GANs and VAEs), they
are able to model complex datasets more faithfully, particularly for long-tailed distributions, by explicitly maximizing
likelihood of the training data. Many exciting applications
have emerged in only the last few months, including textto-image generation [49, 55], inpainting [54], object insertion [3], and personalization [53].
However, in 3D generation and understanding, their success has so far been limited, both in terms of quality and
diversity of the results. Some methods have successfully
applied diffusion models directly to point cloud or voxel
data [35, 67], or optimized a NeRF using a pre-trained diffusion model [48]. This limited success in 3D is due to two
problems: first, an explicit 3D representation (e.g., voxels)
leads to significant memory demands and affects convergence speed; and more importantly, a setup that requires access to explicit 3D supervision is problematic as 3D model
repositories contain orders of magnitude fewer data compared to image counterparts—a particular problem for large
diffusion models which tend to be more data-hungry than
GANs or VAEs.

12608

