This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatiotemporal Self-supervised Learning for Point Clouds in the Wild
Yanhao Wu 1 Tong Zhang2 Wei Ke1 Sabine Süsstrunk2 Mathieu Salzmann2
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL Switzerland

Abstract

Previous Methods

𝑃𝑖1

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has the potential to benefit many applications, particularly those where manually
annotating data is cumbersome. One such situation is the
semantic segmentation of point clouds. In this context, existing methods employ contrastive learning strategies and
define positive pairs by performing various augmentation
of point clusters in a single frame. As such, these methods do not exploit the temporal nature of LiDAR data. In
this paper, we introduce an SSL strategy that leverages positive pairs in both the spatial and temporal domain. To this
end, we design (i) a point-to-cluster learning strategy that
aggregates spatial information to distinguish objects; and
(ii) a cluster-to-cluster learning strategy based on unsupervised object tracking that exploits temporal correspondences. We demonstrate the benefits of our approach via
extensive experiments performed by self-supervised training on two large-scale LiDAR datasets and transferring the
resulting models to other point cloud segmentation benchmarks. Our results evidence that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art point cloud SSL methods. 1

Spatial

𝜏2

𝜏1

1 Our
code and pretrained models will be found
https://github.com/YanhaoWu/STSSL. Correspondence to Ke Wei.

at

𝜏1

Our Method

𝜏2

𝑃𝑚2

Temporal

𝜏1

𝑃𝑛1

𝑃𝑚1

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation from LiDAR point clouds can
be highly beneficial in practical applications, e.g., for selfdriving vehicles to safely interact with their surroundings.
Nowadays, state-of-the-art methods [13, 36, 46] achieve
this with deep neural networks. While effective, the
training of such semantic segmentation networks requires
large amounts of annotated data, which is prohibitively
costly to acquire, particularly for point-level LiDAR annotations [45]. By contrast, with the rapid proliferation of selfdriving vehicles, large amounts of unlabeled LiDAR data
are generated. Here, we develop a method to exploit such
unlabeled data in a self-supervised learning framework.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) aims to learn features
without any human annotations [1, 2, 22, 26, 33, 35, 40, 45]
but so that they can be effectively used for fine-tuning on a

𝑃𝑖2

Spatial

𝑃𝑛2

Spatial

𝜏2

Temporal
: Spatial features aggregation
: Temporal features aggregation
: Point-wise feature
: Cluster/Scene-wise feature
: Cluster-wise feature

Figure 1. Our method vs existing ones. (Top) Previous methods
create positive pairs for SSL by applying different augmentations,
τ1 and τ2 (e.g., random flipping, clipping), to a single frame. (Bottom) By contrast, we leverage both spatial and temporal information via a point-to-cluster and an inter-frame SSL strategy. Points
in the same color are from the same cluster in the latent space.

downstream task with a small number of labeled samples.
This is achieved by defining a pre-task that does not require annotations. While many pre-tasks have been proposed [27], contrastive learning has nowadays become a
highly popular choice [30, 33, 40, 41, 45]. In general, it aims
to maximize the similarity of positive pairs while potentially
minimizing that of negative ones. In this context, most of

5251

