This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Dialog Must Go On:
Improving Visual Dialog via Generative Self-Training
Gi-Cheon Kang1,2 Sungdong Kim3 * Jin-Hwa Kim3,2∗ Donghyun Kwak4∗ Byoung-Tak Zhang1,2
1
2
3
4
IPAI, Seoul National University
AIIS
NAVER AI Lab
NAVER Cloud CLOVA
{chonkang, btzhang}@snu.ac.kr

{sungdong.kim, j1nhwa.kim, donghyun.kwak}@navercorp.com

Abstract
Visual dialog (VisDial) is a task of answering a sequence
of questions grounded in an image, using the dialog history
as context. Prior work has trained the dialog agents solely
on VisDial data via supervised learning or leveraged pretraining on related vision-and-language datasets. This paper
presents a semi-supervised learning approach for visuallygrounded dialog, called Generative Self-Training (GST), to
leverage unlabeled images on the Web. Specifically, GST
first retrieves in-domain images through out-of-distribution
detection and generates synthetic dialogs regarding the images via multimodal conditional text generation. GST then
trains a dialog agent on the synthetic and the original VisDial data. As a result, GST scales the amount of training
data up to an order of magnitude that of VisDial (1.2M →
12.9M QA data). For robust training of the synthetic dialogs, we also propose perplexity-based data selection and
multimodal consistency regularization. Evaluation on VisDial v1.0 and v0.9 datasets shows that GST achieves new
state-of-the-art results on both datasets. We further observe
the robustness of GST against both visual and textual adversarial attacks. Finally, GST yields strong performance
gains in the low-data regime. Code is available at https:
//github.com/gicheonkang/gst-visdial.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been extensive research towards developing visually-grounded dialog systems [12, 13, 34, 36]
due to their significance in many real-world applications
(e.g., helping visually impaired person). Notably, Visual Dialog (VisDial) [12] has provided a testbed for studying such
systems, where a dialog agent should answer a sequence
of image-grounded questions. For instance, the agent is expected to answer open-ended questions like “What color is
it?” and “How old does she look?”. This task requires a
holistic understanding of visual information, linguistic se* Equal contribution

mantics in context (e.g., it and she), and most importantly,
the grounding of these two.
Most of the previous approaches in VisDial [9, 10, 18, 20,
25, 26, 30, 31, 35, 49, 54, 55, 64, 67, 78, 84] have trained the
dialog agents solely on VisDial data via supervised learning.
More recent studies [8,53,77] have employed self-supervised
pre-trained models such as BERT [14] or ViLBERT [48]
and finetuned them on VisDial data. The models are typically pre-trained to recover masked inputs and predict the
semantic alignment between two segments. This pretrainthen-transfer learning strategy has shown promising results
by transferring knowledge from the models pre-trained on
large-scale data sources [4, 71, 85] to VisDial.
Our research question is the following: How can the dialog agent expand its knowledge beyond what it can acquire
via supervised learning or self-supervised pre-training on
the provided datasets? Some recent studies have shown that
semi-supervised learning and pre-training have complementary modeling capabilities in image [86] and text classification [16]. Inspired by them, we consider semi-supervised
learning (SSL) as a way to address the above question.
Let us assume that large amounts of unlabeled images
are available. SSL for VisDial can be applied to generate
synthetic conversations for the unlabeled images and train
the agent with the synthetic data. However, there are two
critical challenges to this approach. First, the target output
for VisDial (i.e., multi-turn visual QA data) is more complex
than that of the aforementioned studies [16, 86]. Specifically,
they have addressed the classification problems, yielding
class probabilities as pseudo labels [39]. In contrast, SSL
for VisDial should generate a sequence of pseudo queries
(i.e., visual questions) and pseudo labels (i.e., corresponding
answers) in natural language to train the answering agent.
It further indicates that the target output should be generated
while considering the multimodal and sequential nature of
the visual dialog task. Next, even if SSL yields synthetic
dialogs via text generation, there may be noise, such as
generating irrelevant questions or incorrect answers to given
contexts. A robust training method is required to leverage
such noisy synthetic dialog datasets.

6746

