This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPIn-NeRF: Multiview Segmentation and Perceptual Inpainting with Neural
Radiance Fields
Ashkan Mirzaei1,2
Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong1,2,4
Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,3,4
2
1,3,4
Jonathan Kelly
Marcus A. Brubaker
Igor Gilitschenski2
Alex Levinshtein1
1
Samsung AI Centre Toronto 2 University of Toronto 3 York University 4 Vector Institute for AI
{a.mirzaei,tristan.a}@partner.samsung.com, {jkelly,gilitschenski}@cs.toronto.edu
{kosta,mab}@eecs.yorku.ca, alex.lev@samsung.com

Inputs
Positive Clicks

Multiview Segmentation
Negative Clicks

Interactive
Seg.

Input Views + Camera Parameters Sparse Annotations on Source View

Render
Video
Seg.
Source Object Mask

Initial Masks

Semantic NeRF

Multiview Object Mask

Outputs (Novel Views)

Render

Inpainted NeRF

Figure 1. An example of the inputs and outputs of our 3D inpainting framework. In addition to the images captured from the scene and
their corresponding camera parameters, users are tasked with providing a few points in a single image to indicate which object they wish
to remove from the scene (upper-left inset). These sparse annotations are then automatically transferred to all other views, and utilized
for multiview mask construction (upper-right inset). The resulting 3D-consistent mask is used in a perceptual optimization problem that
results in 3D scene inpainting (lower row), with rendered depth from the optimized NeRF shown for each image as an inset.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have emerged as a popular approach for novel view synthesis. While NeRFs are
quickly being adapted for a wider set of applications, intuitively editing NeRF scenes is still an open challenge. One
important editing task is the removal of unwanted objects
from a 3D scene, such that the replaced region is visually
plausible and consistent with its context. We refer to this
task as 3D inpainting. In 3D, solutions must be both consistent across multiple views and geometrically valid. In
this paper, we propose a novel 3D inpainting method that
addresses these challenges. Given a small set of posed images and sparse annotations in a single input image, our
framework first rapidly obtains a 3D segmentation mask for
a target object. Using the mask, a perceptual optimizationbased approach is then introduced that leverages learned
2D image inpainters, distilling their information into 3D
space, while ensuring view consistency. We also address
the lack of a diverse benchmark for evaluating 3D scene

inpainting methods by introducing a dataset comprised of
challenging real-world scenes. In particular, our dataset
contains views of the same scene with and without a target
object, enabling more principled benchmarking of the 3D
inpainting task. We first demonstrate the superiority of our
approach on multiview segmentation, comparing to NeRFbased methods and 2D segmentation approaches. We then
evaluate on the task of 3D inpainting, establishing state-ofthe-art performance against other NeRF manipulation algorithms, as well as a strong 2D image inpainter baseline.

1. Introduction
Neural rendering methods, especially Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [35], have recently emerged as a new
modality for representing and reconstructing scenes [50],
achieving impressive results for novel view synthesis. Substantial research effort continues to focus on formulating
more efficient NeRFs (e.g., [6, 20, 43]), to make NeRFs
more accessible in use-cases with more limited computa-

20669

