This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Fair Clustering via Maximizing and Minimizing Mutual Information:
Theory, Algorithm and Metric
Pengxin Zeng∗ , Yunfan Li∗ , Peng Hu, Dezhong Peng, Jiancheng Lv, Xi Peng†
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
{zengpengxin.gm, yunfanli.gm, penghu.ml, pengx.gm}@gmail.com;
{pengdz, lvjiancheng}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Fair clustering aims to divide data into distinct clusters
while preventing sensitive attributes (e.g., gender, race,
RNA sequencing technique) from dominating the clustering.
Although a number of works have been conducted and
achieved huge success recently, most of them are heuristical, and there lacks a unified theory for algorithm design.
In this work, we fill this blank by developing a mutual
information theory for deep fair clustering and accordingly
designing a novel algorithm, dubbed FCMI. In brief,
through maximizing and minimizing mutual information,
FCMI is designed to achieve four characteristics highly expected by deep fair clustering, i.e., compact, balanced, and
fair clusters, as well as informative features. Besides the
contributions to theory and algorithm, another contribution
of this work is proposing a novel fair clustering metric built
upon information theory as well. Unlike existing evaluation metrics, our metric measures the clustering quality
and fairness as a whole instead of separate manner. To
verify the effectiveness of the proposed FCMI, we conduct
experiments on six benchmarks including a single-cell
RNA-seq atlas compared with 11 state-of-the-art methods
in terms of five metrics. The code could be accessed from
https://pengxi.me.

1. Introduction
Clustering plays an important role in machine learning
[19, 27–29, 34, 42, 43], which could partition data into different clusters without any label information. It has been
widely used in many real-world applications such as multiview learning [35, 39], image segmentation [24], and bioinformatics [20]. In practice, however, the data might be confounded with sensitive attributes (e.g., gender, race, etc.,
also termed as group information) that probably over∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

maximize
minimize

Cluster Information

Group Information

Figure 1. Illustration of our basic idea using information diagrams,
where X, G, and C denote the inputs, sensitive attributes, and
clustering assignments, respectively. To cluster data, we expect
the overlap between non-group information and cluster information (i.e., the conditional mutual information I(X; C|G)) to be
maximized. Meanwhile, to prevent sensitive attributes from dominating the clustering results, we expect the overlap between group
information and cluster information (i.e., the mutual information
I(G, C)) to be minimized.

whelm the intrinsic semantic of samples (also termed as
cluster information). Taking single-cell RNA clustering
as a showcase, standard methods would partition data based
on sequencing techniques (group information) instead of
intrinsic cell types (cluster information), since cells sequenced by different techniques would result in different
expression levels [36] and most clustering methods cannot
distinguish these two kinds of information. The case is similar in many automatic learning systems where the clustering results are biased toward sensitive attributes, which
would interfere with the decision-making [9, 12, 18]. Notably, even though these sensitive attributes are known in
prior, it is daunting to alleviate or even eliminate their influence, e.g., removing the “gender” information from the
photos of users.
As a feasible solution, fair clustering aims to hide sensitive attributes from the clustering results. Commonly, a
clustering result is considered fair when samples of different
sensitive attributes are uniformly distributed in clusters so

23986

