This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bilateral Memory Consolidation for Continual Learning
Xing Nie1,2 , Shixiong Xu1,2 , Xiyan Liu3 , Gaofeng Meng1,2,4 ,
Chunlei Huo1,2 , Shiming Xiang1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. 3 Baidu Inc., China.
4

Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HK Institute of Science & Innovation, CAS.
{niexing2019, xushixiong2020}@ia.ac.cn

Replay

Abstract

1. Introduction
Acquiring knowledge in a continuous fashion is a key
capability for a learning system to achieve human intelligence. To this end, Continual Learning (CL) is introduced
to foster the network to learn a sequence of tasks incrementally with the aim of exploiting existing knowledge to adapt
quickly to new tasks. In CL, the training data of different
classes comes in a phase-by-phase manner, where the model
is trained on new class data at each task and then evaluated
on all learned old and new classes. During training, a small
number of exemplars of old classes are allowed to be saved

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Humans are proficient at continuously acquiring and integrating new knowledge. By contrast, deep models forget catastrophically, especially when tackling highly long
task sequences. Inspired by the way our brains constantly
rewrite and consolidate past recollections, we propose a
novel Bilateral Memory Consolidation (BiMeCo) framework that focuses on enhancing memory interaction capabilities. Specifically, BiMeCo explicitly decouples model
parameters into short-term memory module and long-term
memory module, responsible for representation ability of
the model and generalization over all learned tasks, respectively. BiMeCo encourages dynamic interactions between two memory modules by knowledge distillation and
momentum-based updating for forming generic knowledge
to prevent forgetting. The proposed BiMeCo is parameterefficient and can be integrated into existing methods seamlessly. Extensive experiments on challenging benchmarks
show that BiMeCo significantly improves the performance
of existing continual learning methods. For example, combined with the state-of-the-art method CwD [55], BiMeCo
brings in significant gains of around 2% to 6% while using
2x fewer parameters on CIFAR-100 under ResNet-18.

BiC

iCaRL

LUCIR

CwD

(a) 6-task sequence.
70.0

64.0

61.0

55.0

52.0

46.0
0

10

20

30

BiMeCo (ours)

(b) 26-task sequence.

40

Number of Parameters (Millions)

50

0

10

20

30

40

Number of Parameters (Millions)

50

Figure 1. Model Size vs. Average Incremental Accuracy. Taking class incremental learning [45] as an example, we use two typical settings on CIFAR-100 [39], where 50 classes are for the first
task with later (a) 10 classes per task (6-task sequence) and (b) 2
classes per task (26-task sequence). BiMeCo significantly outperforms other CL methods with 1.51∼2.06x smaller parameters
under ResNet-18/34/50/101 [26]. More details are in Appendix.

in the memory buffer with a strict budget restriction. These
limited exemplars mitigate forgetting of previously learned
tasks to some extent, but lead to another pressing issue –
the extreme data imbalance between new and old classes,
making the model biased towards recently learned tasks.
A wide variety of learning algorithms have been proposed to tackle the above shortcomings, including approximating exemplars per class for model inference [51], rectifying the network predictions to alleviate the task bias [5,
61], and preserving the original model on old classes to provide soft labels for resisting to activating drifting [29, 42].
Recent studies such as CwD [55] also show that merely improving the learned representations of the initial task can
facilitate mitigating forgetting greatly.
Although the achievements in the literature are brilliant,
these methods still struggle to prevent forgetting when tackling long task sequences. In Fig. 1, we provide an empirical evaluation of representative CL methods on CIFAR100 [39]. Though achieving decent accuracy in the incremental setting of 6 tasks, surprisingly they encounter evident damages when handling 26 tasks. A vivid exam-

16026

