This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

expOSE: Accurate Initialization-Free Projective Factorization using Exponential
Regularization
José Pedro Iglesias1 , Amanda Nilsson2 , Carl Olsson1,2
1

Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
2
Lund University, Sweden

Abstract
Bundle adjustment is a key component in practically all
available Structure from Motion systems. While it is crucial
for achieving accurate reconstruction, convergence to the
right solution hinges on good initialization. The recently
introduced factorization-based pOSE methods formulate a
surrogate for the bundle adjustment error without reliance
on good initialization. In this paper, we show that pOSE
has an undesirable penalization of large depths. To address
this we propose expOSE which has an exponential regularization that is negligible for positive depths. To achieve efficient inference we use a quadratic approximation that allows an iterative solution with VarPro. Furthermore, we
extend the method with radial distortion robustness by decomposing the Object Space Error into radial and tangential components. Experimental results confirm that the proposed method is robust to initialization and improves reconstruction quality compared to state-of-the-art methods even
without bundle adjustment refinement.1

1. Introduction
Factorization is a long-established method in Structure
from Motion (SfM). It originates from [38] by Tomasi
and Kanade showing how, under the orthographic camera
model, structure and motion can be computed simultaneously from an image sequence using singular value decomposition (SVD). The method was later reformulated for
affine cameras, including weak perspective projection [32].
Strum and Triggs [36] further extended factorization to projective cameras by accounting for projective depths.
One appeal of these factorization algorithms is they can
yield a closed-form solution by using the SVD. It is however only possible to use the SVD if every considered scene
1 This work has been funded by the Swedish Research Council (grant
no. 2018-05375), the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research project,
Semantic Mapping and Visual Navigation for Smart Robots (grant no.
RIT15-0038), and the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software
Program (WASP).

Figure 1. (Left) Examples of two of the images in the Fountain sequence. (Right) Reconstruction obtained with expOSE (top) and
pOSE (bottom) for 3 different values of η. Our method achieves
the same convergence rate as pOSE while having a higher reconstruction quality and being less dependent on the choice of η.

point is visible throughout the whole image sequence. In
cases of missing data, the SVD can be replaced with iterative methods. Simple splitting methods [4, 8, 22] are able to
regularize singular values when computing a proximal operator, but can give rather erroneous solutions because of a
low convergence rate close to the optimum. [5, 8] give an
idea of convex formulation using the nuclear norm, but are
usually too weak for SfM in the presence of noise [19, 30].
The papers [1, 9, 10, 31] suggest different ways to assure
that direct bilinear optimization only has a global minimum.
However, SfM problems with local minima do not fulfill
their required conditions [3].
It was recently shown by Hong et al. [14–17] that direct
bilinear estimation of structure and motion can be made robust to local minima in combination with the Variable Projection (VarPro) method. In [15] the objective is exchanged
for the Pseudo Object Space Error (pOSE) which is a tradeoff between the object space error and a quadratic regularization term. This was later extended to a radial distortion
invariant version RpOSE, presented in [18]. With their bilinear factorization structure and a large basin of convergence when using VarPro, these pOSE models tend to find

8959

