This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FrustumFormer: Adaptive Instance-aware Resampling for Multi-view 3D
Detection
Yuqi Wang1,2

Yuntao Chen3

Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3

1

2

CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
{wangyuqi2020,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The transformation of features from 2D perspective
space to 3D space is essential to multi-view 3D object detection. Recent approaches mainly focus on the design of
view transformation, either pixel-wisely lifting perspective
view features into 3D space with estimated depth or gridwisely constructing BEV features via 3D projection, treating all pixels or grids equally. However, choosing what to
transform is also important but has rarely been discussed
before. The pixels of a moving car are more informative
than the pixels of the sky. To fully utilize the information contained in images, the view transformation should
be able to adapt to different image regions according to
their contents. In this paper, we propose a novel framework
named FrustumFormer, which pays more attention to the
features in instance regions via adaptive instance-aware resampling. Specifically, the model obtains instance frustums
on the bird’s eye view by leveraging image view object proposals. An adaptive occupancy mask within the instance
frustum is learned to refine the instance location. Moreover, the temporal frustum intersection could further reduce
the localization uncertainty of objects. Comprehensive experiments on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of FrustumFormer, and we achieve a new state-ofthe-art performance on the benchmark. Codes and models will be made available at https://github.com/
Robertwyq/Frustum.

1. Introduction
Perception in 3D space has gained increasing attention in
both academia and industry. Despite the success of LiDARbased methods [14, 33, 41, 44], camera-based 3D object detection [19, 35, 36, 43] has earned a wide audience, due to
the low cost for deployment and advantages for long-range

chenyuntao08@gmail.com

detection. Recently, multi-view 3D detection in Bird’s-EyeView (BEV) has made fast progresses. Due to the unified
representation in 3D space, multi-view features and temporal information can be fused conveniently, which leads
to significant performance improvement over monocular
methods [5, 28, 35, 39].
Transforming perspective view features into the bird’seye view is the key to the success of modern BEV 3D detectors [12,18,19,22]. As shown in Fig. 1, we categorize the
existing methods into lifting-based ones like LSS [30] and
BEVDet [12] and query-based ones like BEVFormer [19]
and Ego3RT [25]. However, these methods mainly focus
on the design of view transformation strategies while overlooking the significance of choosing the right features to
transform during view transformation. Regions containing
objects like vehicles and pedestrians are apparently more informative than the empty background like sky and ground.
But all previous methods treat them with equal importance.
We suggest that the view transformation should be adaptive
with respect to the image content. Therefore, we propose
Adaptive Instance-aware Resampling (AIR), an instanceaware view transformation, as shown in Fig. 1c. The core
idea of AIR is to reduce instance localization uncertainty by
focusing on a selective part of BEV queries. Localizing instance regions is difficult directly on the BEV plane but relatively easy in the image view. Therefore, the instance frustum, lifting from instance proposals in image views, gives
geometrical hints of the possible locations of objects in the
3D space. Though the instance frustum has provided initial
prior locations, it is still a large uncertain area. We propose
an occupancy mask predictor and a temporal frustum fusion
module to further reduce the localization uncertainty. Our
model learns an occupancy mask for frustum queries on the
BEV plane, predicting the possibility that a region might
contain objects. We also fuse instance frustums across different time steps, where the intersection area poses geomet-

5096

