This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Transformation Fields for Arbitrary-Styled Font Generation
Bin Fu1 , Junjun He2 , Jianjun Wang1 , and Yu Qiao1,2∗
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
1

{bin.fu, jj.wang2, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn, 2 {hejunjun, qiaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Few-shot font generation (FFG), aiming at generating
font images with a few samples, is an emerging topic in recent years due to the academic and commercial values. Typically, the FFG approaches follow the style-content disentanglement paradigm, which transfers the target font styles
to characters by combining the content representations of
source characters and the style codes of reference samples.
Most existing methods attempt to increase font generation
ability via exploring powerful style representations, which
may be a sub-optimal solution for the FFG task due to the
lack of modeling spatial transformation in transferring font
styles. In this paper, we model font generation as a continuous transformation process from the source character image
to the target font image via the creation and dissipation of
font pixels, and embed the corresponding transformations
into a neural transformation field. With the estimated transformation path, the neural transformation field generates a
set of intermediate transformation results via the sampling
process, and a font rendering formula is developed to accumulate them into the target font image. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on few-shot font generation task, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed model. Our implementation is available at: https://github.com/fubinfb/NTF.

1. Introduction
Generating a new stylized font with a few reference samples, referred as the few-shot font generation (FFG) task,
has received considerable attentions due to the academic,
commercial, and artistic values, especially for some glyphrich scripts such as Chinese and Korean. In recent years,
the style-content disentanglement paradigm has become the
∗ Corresponding author: Yu Qiao

Figure 1. The motivation of this paper: (a). The differences of
font styles mainly come from the shape deformation and transformation of the source font, such as the thickness of strokes and the
writing pattern of glyphs. (b). We regard font generation as a continuous transformation process from the source font to target font
via the creation and dissipation of font pixels.

most popular solution for FFG task, which decouples the
stylized font images into the font-specific style codes and
the character-specific content features. Therefore, the target
stylized font will be generated from the carefully-designed
decoder via the combination of the style codes from the
reference samples and the content embeddings from the standard glyphs. Based on the style representations, existing approaches can be roughly divided into two categories.
Early approaches mainly model font style information as
global statistic features, and thus utilize the universal style
representations to embed such information. Witnessing the
fine-grained structure variations and local correlations (such
as stoken and component) in font styles, recent approaches
further develop component-wise or fine-grained localized
style representations to boost FFG performance. However, as shown in Fig. 1, the differences between font styles
mainly come from the shape deformation and transformation on the source glyph. Based on this observation, previous approaches may be the sub-optimal solution for FFG
task due to the lack of modeling spatial transformation in
font generation process.
Inspired by recent advances in Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) [23] in 3D view synthesis, we attempt to embed

22438

