This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DCFace: Synthetic Face Generation with Dual Condition Diffusion Model
Minchul Kim

Feng Liu

Anil Jain

Xiaoming Liu

kimminc2@msu.edu

liufeng6@msu.edu

jain@msu.edu

liuxm@msu.edu

Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824

Abstract

1. Introduction
What does it take to create a good training dataset for
visual recognition? An ideal training dataset for recognition tasks would have 1) large inter-class variation, 2) large
intra-class variation and 3) small label noise. In the context
of face recognition (FR), it means, the dataset has a large
number of unique subjects, large intra-subject variations,
and reliable subject labels. For instance, large-scale face
datasets such as WebFace4M [73] contain over 1M subjects
and large number of images/subject. Both the number of
subjects and the number of images per subject are important for training FR models [11,31]. Also, datasets amassed
by crawling the web are not free from label noise [7, 73].
In various domains, synthetic datasets are traditionally

Labeled Dataset

Generating synthetic datasets for training face recognition models is challenging because dataset generation entails more than creating high fidelity images. It involves
generating multiple images of same subjects under different
factors (e.g., variations in pose, illumination, expression,
aging and occlusion) which follows the real image conditional distribution. Previous works have studied the generation of synthetic datasets using GAN or 3D models. In this
work, we approach the problem from the aspect of combining subject appearance (ID) and external factor (style) conditions. These two conditions provide a direct way to control the inter-class and intra-class variations. To this end,
we propose a Dual Condition Face Generator (DCFace)
based on a diffusion model. Our novel Patch-wise style extractor and Time-step dependent ID loss enables DCFace to
consistently produce face images of the same subject under
different styles with precise control. Face recognition models trained on synthetic images from the proposed DCFace
provide higher verification accuracies compared to previous works by 6.11% on average in 4 out of 5 test datasets,
LFW, CFP-FP, CPLFW, AgeDB and CALFW. Code Link

1. Subject Variation

3. Subject Consistency

A
B
C

2. Style Variation

Figure 1. Illustration of three factors that characterize a labeled
face dataset. It contains large subject variation, style variation and
label consistency. Synthetic face datasets should be created with
all three factors in mind. Face images in this figure are samples
generated by our proposed method which combines arbitrary ID
condition with style condition while preserving subject identity.

used to help generalize deep models when only limited real
datasets could be collected [13, 21, 63, 74] or when bias exists in the real dataset [34, 64]. Lately, more attention has
been drawn to training with only synthetic datasets in the
face domain, as synthetic data can avoid leaking the privacy
of real individuals. This is important as real face datasets
have been under scrutiny for their lack of informed consent,
as web-crawling is the primary means of large-scale data
collection [17, 22, 73]. Also, synthetic training datasets can
remedy some long-standing issues in real datasets, e.g. the
long tail distribution, demographic bias, etc.
When it comes to generating synthetic training datasets,
the following questions should be raised. (i) How many
novel subjects can be synthesized (ii) How well can we
mimic the distribution of real images in the target domain
and (iii) How well can we consistently generate multiple
images of the same subjects? We start with the hypothesis
that face dataset generation can be formulated as a problem
that maximizes these criteria together.
Previous efforts in generating synthetic face datasets
touch on one of the three aspects but do not consider all of
them together [3, 49]. SynFace [49] generates high-fidelity
face images based on DiscoFaceGAN [12], coming close to
real images in terms of FID metric [18]. However, we were

12715

