This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Score Jacobian Chaining: Lifting Pretrained 2D Diffusion Models
for 3D Generation
Haochen Wang∗1

Xiaodan Du∗1
1

Jiahao Li∗1

TTI-Chicago

2

Raymond A. Yeh2

Greg Shakhnarovich1

Purdue University

A zoomed out high-quality photo of Temple of Heaven

A high quality photo of a delicious burger

A high quality photo of a Victorian style wooden chair
with velvet upholstery

A high quality photo of a classic silver muscle car

Figure 1. Results for text-driven 3D generation using Score Jacobian Chaining with Stable Diffusion as the pretrained model.

Abstract
A diffusion model learns to predict a vector field of gradients. We propose to apply chain rule on the learned gradients,
and back-propagate the score of a diffusion model through
the Jacobian of a differentiable renderer, which we instantiate to be a voxel radiance field. This setup aggregates 2D
scores at multiple camera viewpoints into a 3D score, and repurposes a pretrained 2D model for 3D data generation. We
identify a technical challenge of distribution mismatch that
arises in this application, and propose a novel estimation
mechanism to resolve it. We run our algorithm on several offthe-shelf diffusion image generative models, including the
recently released Stable Diffusion trained on the large-scale
LAION 5B dataset.

1. Introduction
We introduce a method that converts a pretrained 2D
diffusion generative model on images into a 3D generative
model of radiance fields, without requiring access to any
3D data. The key insight is to interpret diffusion models as
* Equal contribution.

learned predictors of a gradient field, often referred to as the
score function of the data log-likelihood. We apply the chain
rule on the estimated score, hence the name Score Jacobian
Chaining (SJC).
Following Hyvärinen [16], the score is defined as the
gradient of the log-density function with respect to the data
(rather than parameter). Diffusion models of various families [13, 49, 50, 52] can all be interpreted [20, 23, 52] as
modeling ∇x log pσ (x) i.e. the denoising score at noise
level σ. For readability, we refer to the denoising score as the
score. Generating a sample from a diffusion model involves
repeated evaluations of the score function from large to small
σ level, so that a sample x gradually moves closer to the data
manifold. It can be loosely interpreted as gradient descent,
with precise control on the step sizes so that data distribution
evolves to match the annealed σ level (ancestral sampler [13],
SDE and probability-flow ODE [52], etc.). While there are
other perspectives to a diffusion model [13, 49], here we
are primarily motivated from the viewpoint that diffusion
models produce a gradient field.
A natural question to ask is whether the chain rule can be
applied to the learned gradients. Consider a diffusion model
on images. An image x may be parameterized by some

12619

