This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Video Representation Learning
with Unaligned Text for Sequential Videos
Sixun Dong1 *, Huazhang Hu1 *, Dongze Lian1,2 , Weixin Luo3 , Yicheng Qian1 , Shenghua Gao1,4,5†
1
2
3
ShanghaiTech University
National University of Singapore
Meituan
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
5
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC
{dongsx, huhzh, liandz, luowx, qianyc, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Sequential video understanding, as an emerging video
understanding task, has driven lots of researchers’ attention because of its goal-oriented nature. This paper studies
weakly supervised sequential video understanding where
the accurate time-stamp level text-video alignment is not
provided. We solve this task by borrowing ideas from CLIP.
Specifically, we use a transformer to aggregate frame-level
features for video representation and use a pre-trained text
encoder to encode the texts corresponding to each action
and the whole video, respectively. To model the correspondence between text and video, we propose a multiple granularity loss, where the video-paragraph contrastive
loss enforces matching between the whole video and the
complete script, and a fine-grained frame-sentence contrastive loss enforces the matching between each action and
its description. As the frame-sentence correspondence is
not available, we propose to use the fact that video actions happen sequentially in the temporal domain to generate pseudo frame-sentence correspondence and supervise the network training with the pseudo labels. Extensive experiments on video sequence verification and textto-video matching show that our method outperforms baselines by a large margin, which validates the effectiveness
of our proposed approach. Code is available at https:
//github.com/svip-lab/WeakSVR.

1. Introduction
A strong artificial intelligence (AI) system is expected to
be able to learn knowledge from the open world in an embodied manner such that amounts of goal-oriented tasks are
designed for reinforcement learning in the environment. In
the area of video understanding, a great deal of pioneering
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

work in video classification [55], action localization [53],
and action segmentation [25] has been explored, laying the
foundation for video understanding. Beyond these typical video understanding tasks, sequential videos (such as
Fig. 1) that usually describe how to perform a task in a
certain sequence of procedures can be regarded as a goaloriented task. Solving this task is extremely promising for
guiding intelligence to learn a task like humans. It makes
performing sequential video representations a potentially
critical part of the road to strong AI.
Some efforts have been made for video representation
learning for sequential videos. e.g., [1, 17] learns a video
representation in an instructive video. However, these methods rely heavily on the annotations of temporal boundaries,
i.e., the timestamps of sequential actions, which are usually difficult to be obtained due to the time-consuming human labeling in practice. A common but often overlooked
scenario is that sequential videos usually occur accompanied with audio or text narrations, which show consistent
steps with explanations. The rich text information describes
the corresponding procedure in detail as shown in Fig. 1,
but they are usually not aligned with videos. Therefore, a
question arises, i.e., whether it is possible to directly learn
the video representation with unaligned text and video in a
weakly supervised manner.
With the popularity of visual-language tasks, multimodal learning has attracted growing attention and has been
explored in a variety of areas, e.g., image classification
[5, 49], object detection [41, 61], and video understanding
[59]. One of the most representative works is CLIP [42].
It has shown the potential of learning a powerful semantic representation from natural language supervision with
a contrastive learning loss and the strong zero-shot generalization on the downstream tasks, such as text-video retrieval [47, 57], action segmentation [63], multiple-choice
videoQA [16, 57] and action step localization [4]. VideoCLIP [58] presents a contrastive learning approach to pre-

2437

