This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-tuned CLIP Models are Efﬁcient Video Learners
Hanoona Rasheed1∗ Muhammad Uzair Khattak1∗ Muhammad Maaz1
Salman Khan1,2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Australian National University 3 Linköping University

Figure 1. This work explores the capability of a simple baseline called ViFi-CLIP (Video Fintuned CLIP) for adapting image pretrained
CLIP [33] to video domain. The ﬁgure compares the zero-shot performance of vanilla CLIP and several of its variants adapted for videos
(trained on Kinetics-400, evaluated on UCF-101 and HMDB-51). The t-SNE visualizations of video-embeddings obtained from ViFi-CLIP
(4th col.) are compared with embeddings from vanilla CLIP [33] (1st col.), individually tuned CLIP text (2nd col.) and image encoder
(3rd col.) on videos, and recent state-of-the-art work, XCLIP [30] (last col.) (Δ represents difference over XCLIP). The embeddings of
ViFi-CLIP are better separable, indicating that a simple ﬁne-tuning of CLIP is sufﬁcient to learn suitable video-speciﬁc inductive biases,
and can perform competitive to more complex approaches having dedicated components designed to model temporal information in videos.

Abstract
Large-scale multi-modal training with image-text pairs
imparts strong generalization to CLIP model. Since training on a similar scale for videos is infeasible, recent approaches focus on the effective transfer of image-based
CLIP to the video domain. In this pursuit, new parametric modules are added to learn temporal information and
inter-frame relationships which require meticulous design
efforts. Furthermore, when the resulting models are learned
on videos, they tend to overﬁt on the given task distribution and lack in generalization aspect. This begs the following question: How to effectively transfer image-level CLIP
representations to videos? In this work, we show that a
simple Video Fine-tuned CLIP (ViFi-CLIP) baseline is generally sufﬁcient to bridge the domain gap from images to
videos. Our qualitative analysis illustrates that the framelevel processing from CLIP image-encoder followed by feature pooling and similarity matching with corresponding
* Equally contributing authors.

text embeddings helps in implicitly modeling the temporal
cues within ViFi-CLIP. Such ﬁne-tuning helps the model to
focus on scene dynamics, moving objects and inter-object
relationships. For low-data regimes where full ﬁne-tuning
is not viable, we propose a ‘bridge and prompt’ approach
that ﬁrst uses ﬁne-tuning to bridge the domain gap and
then learns prompts on language and vision side to adapt
CLIP representations. We extensively evaluate this simple
yet strong baseline on zero-shot, base-to-novel generalization, few-shot and fully supervised settings across ﬁve video
benchmarks. Our code and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/muzairkhattak/ViFi-CLIP.

1. Introduction
Pretrained vision-language (VL) models like CLIP [33]
and ALIGN [16] have shown impressive zero-shot performance for many downstream vision applications including
classiﬁcation [45, 48], detection [15, 35, 49] and segmentation [22, 34]. These models are trained using millions of

6545

