This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
FRONT_LEFT

FRONT

Camera As Input:
FRONT_RIGHT Semantic Occupancy Prediction (Ours)

Camera As Input:
LiDAR Seg. (Ours)

LiDAR As Input:
LiDAR Seg. (Cylinder3D)

LiDAR Seg. (Ground Truth)

Tri-Perspective View for Vision-Based 3D Semantic Occupancy Prediction
Yuanhui Huang* Wenzhao Zheng* Yunpeng Zhang Jie Zhou Jiwen Lu†
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
{huangyh22,zhengwz18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; yunpengzhang97@gmail.com;
{jzhou,lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Vision-based Occupancy Prediction

Only RGB Images As Inputs

Ground Truth

TPVFormer

BACK_LEFT

BACK
driveable surface

BACK_RIGHT
car

bus

truck

terrain

sidewalk

vegetation

other flat

pedestrian

bicycle

manmade

Figure 1. Given only surround-camera
RGB images
model
(trained using
LiDAR point supervision) can predict
motorcycle
barrieras inputs, our
construction
vehicle
trailer only sparse
traffic cone
the semantic occupancy for all volumes in the 3D space. This task is challenging as it requires both geometric and semantic understandings
of the 3D scene. We observe that our model can produce even more comprehensive and consistent volume occupancy than the groundtruth
on the validation set (not seen during training) of nuScenes [4]. Despite the lack of geometric inputs like LiDAR, our model can accurately
identify the 3D positions and sizes of close and distant objects. Particularly, our model even successfully identifies the partially occluded
bicycle captured only by two LiDAR points, demonstrating the potential advantage of vision-based 3D semantic occupancy prediction.

Abstract
Modern methods for vision-centric autonomous driving
perception widely adopt the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) representation to describe a 3D scene. Despite its better efficiency than voxel representation, it has difficulty describing
the fine-grained 3D structure of a scene with a single plane.
To address this, we propose a tri-perspective view (TPV)
representation which accompanies BEV with two additional
perpendicular planes. We model each point in the 3D space
by summing its projected features on the three planes. To
lift image features to the 3D TPV space, we further propose a transformer-based TPV encoder (TPVFormer) to obtain the TPV features effectively. We employ the attention
mechanism to aggregate the image features corresponding
to each query in each TPV plane. Experiments show that
our model trained with sparse supervision effectively predicts the semantic occupancy for all voxels. We demonstrate for the first time that using only camera inputs can
achieve comparable performance with LiDAR-based methods on the LiDAR segmentation task on nuScenes. Code:
https://github.com/wzzheng/TPVFormer.

1. Introduction
Perceiving the 3D surroundings accurately and comprehensively plays an important role in the autonomous driving
system. Vision-based 3D perception recently emerges as
a promising alternative to LiDAR-based one to effectively
extract 3D information from 2D images. Though lacking
direct sensing of depth information, vision-based models
empowered by surrounding cameras demonstrate promising
performance on various 3D perception tasks such as depth
estimation [17, 42], semantic map reconstruction [1, 19, 48],
and 3D object detection [27, 30, 46].
The core of 3D surrounding perceiving lies in how to effectively represent a 3D scene. Conventional methods split
the 3D space into voxels and assign each voxel a vector to
represent its status. Despite its accuracy, the vast number
of voxels poses a great challenge to computation and requires specialized techniques like sparse convolution [13].
As the information in outdoor scenes is not isotropically
distributed, modern methods collapse the height dimension
and mainly focus on the ground plane (bird’s-eye-view)
where information varies the most [20,26,28,31,35,46,48].
*Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.

9223

