This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Attention as Disentangler for Compositional Zero-shot Learning
Shaozhe Hao
Kai Han*
Kwan-Yee K. Wong
The University of Hong Kong
{szhao, kykwong}@cs.hku.hk

kaihanx@hku.hk

Abstract
unseen
compositions

Compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) aims at learning visual concepts (i.e., attributes and objects) from seen
compositions and combining concept knowledge into unseen compositions. The key to CZSL is learning the disentanglement of the attribute-object composition. To this end,
we propose to exploit cross-attentions as compositional disentanglers to learn disentangled concept embeddings. For
example, if we want to recognize an unseen composition
“yellow flower”, we can learn the attribute concept “yellow”
and object concept “flower” from different yellow objects
and different flowers respectively. To further constrain the
disentanglers to learn the concept of interest, we employ a
regularization at the attention level. Specifically, we adapt
the earth mover’s distance (EMD) as a feature similarity metric in the cross-attention module. Moreover, benefiting from
concept disentanglement, we improve the inference process
and tune the prediction score by combining multiple concept
probabilities. Comprehensive experiments on three CZSL
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms previous works in both closed- and openworld settings, establishing a new state-of-the-art. Project
page: https://haoosz.github.io/ade-czsl/

1. Introduction
Suppose we have never seen white bears (i.e., polar bears)
before. Can we picture what it would look like? This is not
difficult because we have seen many white animals in daily
life (e.g., white dogs and white rabbits) and different bears
with various visual attributes in the zoo (e.g., brown bears
and black bears). Humans have no difficulty in disentangling
“white” and “bear” from seen instances and combining them
into the unseen composition. Inspired by this property of
human intelligence, researchers attempt to make machines
learn compositions of concepts as well. Compositional zeroshot learning (CZSL) is a specific problem studying visual
compositionality, aiming to learn visual concepts from seen
* Corresponding author

“yellow bird”

seen
compositions

“yellow pear”

“yellow”
“flower”

same attribute
same object

“yellow flower”

“purple flower”

“red flower”

Figure 1. Motivation illustration. Given images from seen attributeobject compositions, human can disentangle the attribute “yellow”
from “yellow bird” and “yellow pear”, and the object “flower” from
“purple flower” and “red flower”. After learning visual properties
of the concepts “yellow” and “flower”, human can then recognize
images from the unseen composition “yellow flower”.

compositions of attributes and objects and generalize concept
knowledge to unseen compositions.
Learning attribute-object compositions demands prior
knowledge about attributes and objects. However, visual
concepts of attributes and objects never appear alone in a natural image. To learn exclusive concepts for compositionality
learning, we need to disentangle the attribute concept and the
object concept. As illustrated in Fig. 1, if we want to recognize the image of “yellow flower”, it is necessary to learn the
“yellow” concept and the “flower” concept, i.e., disentangle
visual concepts, from images of seen compositions. Previous
works [22, 24, 25, 28–30, 36, 46] tackle CZSL by composing
attribute and object word embeddings, and projecting word
and visual embeddings to a joint space. They fail to disentangle visual concepts. Recently, some works [21,40,41,50] consider visual disentanglement but still have limitations despite
their good performance. SCEN [21] learns concept-constant
samples contrastively without constructing concept embedding prototypes to avoid learning irrelevant concepts shared
by positive samples. IVR [50] disentangles visual features
into ideal concept-invariant domains. This ideal domain generalization setting requires a small discrepancy of attribute
and object sets and would degenerate on vaster and more

15315

