This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Where We Are and What We’re Looking At: Query Based Worldwide Image
Geo-localization Using Hierarchies and Scenes
Brandon Clark*, Alec Kerrigan∗ , Parth Parag Kulkarni, Vicente Vivanco Cepeda, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA
{brandonclark314, aleckerrigan, parthpkulkarni.pk, vicente.vivanco}@knights.ucf.edu,
shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Determining the exact latitude and longitude that a
photo was taken is a useful and widely applicable task,
yet it remains exceptionally difficult despite the accelerated progress of other computer vision tasks. Most previous approaches have opted to learn single representations
of query images, which are then classified at different levels of geographic granularity. These approaches fail to
exploit the different visual cues that give context to different hierarchies, such as the country, state, and city level.
To this end, we introduce an end-to-end transformer-based
architecture that exploits the relationship between different geographic levels (which we refer to as hierarchies)
and the corresponding visual scene information in an image through hierarchical cross-attention. We achieve this by
learning a query for each geographic hierarchy and scene
type. Furthermore, we learn a separate representation for
different environmental scenes, as different scenes in the
same location are often defined by completely different visual features. We achieve state of the art accuracy on 4
standard geo-localization datasets : Im2GPS, Im2GPS3k,
YFCC4k, and YFCC26k, as well as qualitatively demonstrate how our method learns different representations for
different visual hierarchies and scenes, which has not been
demonstrated in the previous methods. Above previous testing datasets mostly consist of iconic landmarks or images
taken from social media, which makes the dataset a simple memory task, or makes it biased towards certain places.
To address this issue we introduce a much harder testing
dataset, Google-World-Streets-15k, comprised of images
taken from Google Streetview covering the whole planet and
present state of the art results. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/AHKerrigan/GeoGuessNet.

* These authors contributed equally to the work

1. Introduction
Image geo-localization is the task of determining the
GPS coordinates of where a photo was taken as precisely
as possible. For certain locations, this may be an easy task,
as most cities will have noticeable buildings, landmarks, or
statues that give away their location. For instance, given an
image of the Eiffel Tower one could easily assume it was
taken somewhere in Paris. Noticing some of the finer features, like the size of the tower in the image and other buildings that might be visible, a prediction within a few meters
could be fairly easy. However, given an image from a small
town outside of Paris, it may be very hard to predict its location. Certain trees or a building’s architecture may indicate
the image is in France, but localizing finer than that can
pose a serious challenge. Adding in different times of day,
varying weather conditions, and different views of the same
location makes this problem even more complex as two images from the same location could look wildly different.
Many works have explored solutions to this problem,
with nearly all works focusing on the retrieval task, where
query images are matched to a gallery of geo-tagged images
to retrieve matching geo-tagged image [14,16,17,20,24,25].
There are two variations of the retrieval approach to this
problem, same-view and cross-view. In same-view both the
query and gallery images are taken at ground level. However, in cross-view the query images are ground level while
the gallery images are from an aerial view, either by satellite or drone. This creates a challenging task as images with
the exact same location look very different from one another. Regardless of same-view or cross-view, the evaluation of the retrieval task is costly as features need to be
extracted and compared for every possible match with geotagged gallery images, making global scale geo-localization
costly if not infeasible.
If, instead, the problem is approached as a classification task, it’s possible to localize on the global scale given
enough training data [8,11,12,15,21,22]. These approaches

23182

