This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Noisy Label Cleaner: Learning Scene-aware Trailers for
Multi-modal Highlight Detection in Movies
Bei Gan

Xiujun Shu∗

Ruizhi Qiao∗ Haoqian Wu Keyu Chen
Tencent YouTu Lab

Hanjun Li

Bo Ren

{stylegan, xiujunshu, ruizhiqiao, linuswu, yolochen, hanjunli, timren}@tencent.com

Trailers

…

Complete Highlights for audience1

Complete Highlights for audience2

Movies

…

…

Irrelevant clips

…

Figure 1. As the preview of the movie, trailers are selected by professionals to grab an audience’s attention.However, trailers are usually
composed with shots sparsely selected from movies to avoid spoilers, and the audience cannot get complete highlight information.Some
trailer clips convey the artistic style of the film only and lack movie storylines, disturbing the audience’s impressions.In addition, different
audiences may be interested in different styles of clips, which makes it challenging to learn highlights from them.

Abstract
Movie highlights stand out of the screenplay for efficient
browsing and play a crucial role on social media platforms.
Based on existing efforts, this work has two observations:
(1) For different annotators, labeling highlight has uncertainty, which leads to inaccurate and time-consuming
annotations. (2) Besides previous supervised or unsupervised settings, some existing video corpora can be useful,
e.g., trailers, but they are often noisy and incomplete to
cover the full highlights. In this work, we study a more
practical and promising setting, i.e., reformulating highlight detection as “learning with noisy labels”. This setting
does not require time-consuming manual annotations and
can fully utilize existing abundant video corpora. First,
based on movie trailers, we leverage scene segmentation
to obtain complete shots, which are regarded as noisy
labels. Then, we propose a Collaborative noisy Label
* Corresponding author.

Cleaner (CLC) framework to learn from noisy highlight
moments. CLC consists of two modules: augmented crosspropagation (ACP) and multi-modality cleaning (MMC).
The former aims to exploit the closely related audio-visual
signals and fuse them to learn unified multi-modal representations. The latter aims to achieve cleaner highlight
labels by observing the changes in losses among different
modalities. To verify the effectiveness of CLC, we further
collect a large-scale highlight dataset named MovieLights.
Comprehensive experiments on MovieLights and YouTube
Highlights datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach. Code has been made available at:https:
/ / github . com / TencentYoutuResearch /
HighlightDetection-CLC.

1. Introduction
With the growing number of new publications of movies
in theaters and streaming media, audiences become even

18898

