This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sketch2Saliency: Learning to Detect Salient Objects from Human Drawings
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1
Subhadeep Koley1,2
Amandeep Kumar* Aneeshan Sain1,2
1,2
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{a.bhunia, s.koley, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
As any reasonable drawing lesson would have taught you
– sketching is an attentive process [24]. This paper sets
out to prove just that but in the context of computer vision. In particular, we show that attention information inherently embedded in sketches can be cultivated to learn
image saliency [30, 66, 82, 87].
Sketch research has flourished in the past decade, particularly with the proliferation of touchscreen devices. Much
of the utilisation of sketch has anchored around its humancentric nature, in that it naturally carries personal style
[6,54], subjective abstraction [7,53], human creativity [20],
to name a few. Here we study a sketch-specific trait that has
been ignored to date – sketch is also salient.
The human visual system has evolved over millions of
years to develop the ability to attend [22, 79]. This attentive
process is ubiquitously reflected in language (i.e., how we
describe visual concepts) and art (i.e., how artists attend to
different visual aspects). The vision community has also
invested significant effort to model this attentive process,
* Interned with SketchX

CNN

Human sketch has already proved its worth in various
visual understanding tasks (e.g., retrieval, segmentation,
image-captioning, etc). In this paper, we reveal a new trait
of sketches – that they are also salient. This is intuitive as
sketching is a natural attentive process at its core. More
specifically, we aim to study how sketches can be used as
a weak label to detect salient objects present in an image. To this end, we propose a novel method that emphasises on how “salient object” could be explained by handdrawn sketches. To accomplish this, we introduce a phototo-sketch generation model that aims to generate sequential
sketch coordinates corresponding to a given visual photo
through a 2D attention mechanism. Attention maps accumulated across the time steps give rise to salient regions in
the process. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments prove our hypothesis and delineate how our sketchbased saliency detection model gives a competitive performance compared to the state-of-the-art.

Figure 1. Sequential photo-to-sketch generation with 2D-attention
to leverage sketch as a weak label for salient object detection. Aggregated 2D attention-maps till a particular instant are shown.

in the form of saliency detection [47, 67, 76, 80, 82]. The
paradox facing the saliency community is however that the
attention information has never been present in photos to
start with – photos are mere collections of static pixels. It
then comes with no surprise that most prior research has
resorted to a large amount of pixel-level annotation.
Although fully-supervised frameworks [10, 34, 38, 87]
have been shown to produce near-perfect saliency maps,
its widespread adoption is largely bottlenecked by this
need for annotation. To deal with this issue, a plethora
of semi/weakly-supervised methods have been introduced,
which attempt to use captions [82], class-labels [44], foreground mask [66], class activation map (CAM) [69], bounding boxes [41], scribbles [85] as weak labels. We follow this
push to utilise labels, but importantly introduce sketch to the
mix, and show it is a competitive label modality because of
the inherently embedded attentive information it possesses.
Utilising sketch as a weak label for saliency detection
is nonetheless non-trivial. Sketch, primarily being abstract
and sequential [22] in nature, portrays significant modality gap with photos. Therefore, we seek to build a framework that can connect sketch and photo domains via some
auxiliary task. For that, we take inspiration from an actual
artistic sketching process, where artists [88] attend to certain regions on an object, then render down the strokes on
paper. We thus propose photo-to-sketch generation, where
given a photo we aim to generate a sketch stroke-by-stroke,
as an auxiliary task to bridge the two domains.
However effective in bridging the domain gap, this generation process by default does not generate pixel-wise importance values depicting a saliency map. To circumvent
this problem, we make clever use of a cross-modal 2D at-

2733

