This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Query-Dependent Video Representation
for Moment Retrieval and Highlight Detection
WonJun Moon1,∗ , Sangeek Hyun1,∗ , SangUk Park2 , Dongchan Park2 , Jae-Pil Heo1,
1
Sungkyunkwan University, 2 Pyler
{wjun0830, hsi1032, jaepilheo}@g.skku.edu, {psycoder, cto}@pyler.tech

Abstract

9 Positive Query: Man with curly hair speaks directly to camera

8 Negative Query: Kids exercise in front of parked cars.

1. Introduction
Along with the advance of digital devices and platforms,
video is now one of the most desired data types for consumers [2, 48]. Although the large information capacity of
videos might be beneﬁcial in many aspects, e.g., informative
∗ Equal contribution

 Corresponding author

9

Video

Recently, video moment retrieval and highlight detection (MR/HD) are being spotlighted as the demand for video
understanding is drastically increased. The key objective
of MR/HD is to localize the moment and estimate clip-wise
accordance level, i.e., saliency score, to the given text query.
Although the recent transformer-based models brought some
advances, we found that these methods do not fully exploit
the information of a given query. For example, the relevance
between text query and video contents is sometimes neglected
when predicting the moment and its saliency. To tackle this
issue, we introduce Query-Dependent DETR (QD-DETR), a
detection transformer tailored for MR/HD. As we observe
the insigniﬁcant role of a given query in transformer architectures, our encoding module starts with cross-attention layers
to explicitly inject the context of text query into video representation. Then, to enhance the model’s capability of exploiting the query information, we manipulate the video-query
pairs to produce irrelevant pairs. Such negative (irrelevant)
video-query pairs are trained to yield low saliency scores,
which in turn, encourages the model to estimate precise accordance between query-video pairs. Lastly, we present an
input-adaptive saliency predictor which adaptively deﬁnes
the criterion of saliency scores for the given video-query
pairs. Our extensive studies verify the importance of building the query-dependent representation for MR/HD. Specifically, QD-DETR outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
QVHighlights, TVSum, and Charades-STA datasets. Codes
are available at github.com/wjun0830/QD-DETR.

9

Moment
DETR
Lack of query-relevance
GT

Pred. (Moment-DETR)

GT

Ours
Large gap between pos. and neg. in relevant moment

‫=ݐ‬0

Pred.

Pred.

Saliency of Positive Query

‫=ݐ‬T

Saliency of Negative Query

Figure 1. Comparison of highlight-ness (saliency score) when
relevant and non-relevant queries are given. We found that the
existing work only uses queries to play an insigniﬁcant role, thereby
may not be capable of detecting negative queries and video-query
relevance; saliency scores for clips in ground-truth (GT) moments
are low and equivalent for positive and negative queries. On the
other hand, query-dependent representations of QD-DETR result
in corresponding saliency scores to the video-query relevance and
precisely localized moments.

and entertaining, inspecting the videos is time-consuming,
so that it is hard to capture the desired moments [1, 2].
Indeed, the need to retrieve user-requested or highlight
moments within videos is greatly raised. Numerous research
efforts were put into the search for the requested moments
in the video [1, 12, 13, 30] and summarizing the video highlights [4, 33, 47, 57]. Recently, Moment-DETR [23] further
spotlighted the topic by proposing a QVHighlights dataset
that enables the model to perform both tasks, retrieving the
moments with their highlight-ness, simultaneously.
When describing the moment, one of the most favored
types of query is the natural language sentence (text) [1].
While early methods utilized convolution networks [14, 44,
59], recent approaches have shown that deploying the attention mechanism of transformer architecture is more effective
to fuse the text query into the video representation. For
example, Moment-DETR [23] introduced the transformer

23023

