This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blowing in the Wind: CycleNet for Human Cinemagraphs from Still Images
Hugo Bertiche1,2
Niloy J. Mitra3,4
Kuldeep Kulkarni4
Chun-Hao Paul Huang4
Tuanfeng Y. Wang4
Meysam Madadi1,2
Sergio Escalera1,2
Duygu Ceylan4
1

Universitat de Barcelona

2

3

Computer Vision Center

University College London

4

Adobe Research

Figure 1. We introduce a method for automatic human cinemegraph generation from single RGB images focusing on generating plausible
garment animation as if they are blown in the wind.

Abstract
Cinemagraphs are short looping videos created by
adding subtle motions to a static image. This kind of media
is popular and engaging. However, automatic generation of
cinemagraphs is an underexplored area and current solutions require tedious low-level manual authoring by artists.
In this paper, we present an automatic method that allows
generating human cinemagraphs from single RGB images.
We investigate the problem in the context of dressed humans
under the wind. At the core of our method is a novel cyclic
neural network that produces looping cinemagraphs for the
target loop duration. To circumvent the problem of collecting real data, we demonstrate that it is possible, by working
in the image normal space, to learn garment motion dynamics on synthetic data and generalize to real data. We evaluate our method on both synthetic and real data and demonstrate that it is possible to create compelling and plausible
cinemagraphs from single RGB images.

1. Introduction
Cinemagraph, a term originally coined by Jamie Beck
and Kevin Burg, refers to adding dynamism to still images
by adding minor and repeated movements, forming a motion loop, to a still image. Such media format is both engaging and intriguing, as adding a simple and subtle motion
can bring images to life. Creating such content, however,
is challenging as it would require an artist to first set up
and capture a suitable video, typically using a tripod, and
then carefully mask out most of the movements in a postprocessing stage.
We explore the problem of creating human cinemagraphs
directly from a single RGB image of a person. Given a
dataset of images and corresponding animated video pairs,
a straightforward solution would be to train a fully supervised network to learn to map an input image to a plausible
animated sequence. However, collecting such a dataset is
extremely challenging and costly, as it would require capturing hundreds or thousands of videos of people holding

459

