This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Streaming Video Model
Yucheng Zhao1 ,* Chong Luo2 , Chuanxin Tang2 , Dongdong Chen3 , Noel Codella3 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Cloud + AI
{lnc@mail., zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

{cluo,chutan,dochen,ncodella}@microsoft.com

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed streaming video model with a comparison to conventional frame-based architecture and clip-based
architecture. (a) The two-stage streaming video model gracefully serves different types of video tasks through a unified architecture. The
output of the temporal-aware (T-aware) spatial encoder serves the frame-based tasks, such as MOT, while the output of the temporal decoder
serves the sequence-based tasks, such as action recognition. (b) Frame-based architecture, which uses single image model to independently
extract spatial features for each frame, is widely used in the frame-based video tasks. (c) Clip-based architecture, which uses video model
to produce the spatiotemporal features for an entire clip, is widely used in the sequence-based video tasks.

Abstract
Video understanding tasks have traditionally been modeled by two separate architectures, specially tailored for
two distinct tasks. Sequence-based video tasks, such as action recognition, use a video backbone to directly extract
spatiotemporal features, while frame-based video tasks,
such as multiple object tracking (MOT), rely on single fixedimage backbone to extract spatial features. In contrast, we
propose to unify video understanding tasks into one novel
streaming video architecture, referred to as Streaming Vision Transformer (S-ViT). S-ViT first produces frame-level
features with a memory-enabled temporally-aware spatial
encoder to serve the frame-based video tasks. Then the
frame features are input into a task-related temporal de* This work was done during the internship of Yucheng at MSRA.
† Corresponding author.

coder to obtain spatiotemporal features for sequence-based
tasks. The efficiency and efficacy of S-ViT is demonstrated
by the state-of-the-art accuracy in the sequence-based action recognition task and the competitive advantage over
conventional architecture in the frame-based MOT task. We
believe that the concept of streaming video model and the
implementation of S-ViT are solid steps towards a unified
deep learning architecture for video understanding. Code
will be available at https://github.com/yuzhms/
Streaming-Video-Model.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental research topic in computer vision,
video understanding mainly deals with two types of tasks.
The sequence-based [9, 56] tasks aim to understand what
is happening in a period of time. For example, the action

14602

