This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teaching Structured Vision & Language Concepts to Vision & Language Models
Sivan Doveh1,2 , Assaf Arbelle1 , Sivan Harary1 , Eli Schwartz1,3 , Roei Herzig1,3 ,
Raja Giryes3 , Rogerio Feris4 , Rameswar Panda4 , Shimon Ullman*2 , Leonid Karlinsky** 4
1

IBM Research, 2 Weizmann Institute of Science, 3 Tel-Aviv University, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

(a) Typical contrastive text-to-image loss (e.g. CLIP)

Abstract
Vision and Language (VL) models have demonstrated remarkable zero-shot performance in a variety of tasks. However, some aspects of complex language understanding still
remain a challenge. We introduce the collective notion
of Structured Vision & Language Concepts (SVLC) which
includes object attributes, relations, and states which are
present in the text and visible in the image. Recent studies have shown that even the best VL models struggle with
SVLC. A possible way of fixing this issue is by collecting
dedicated datasets for teaching each SVLC type, yet this
might be expensive and time-consuming. Instead, we propose a more elegant data-driven approach for enhancing
VL models’ understanding of SVLCs that makes more effective use of existing VL pre-training datasets and does
not require any additional data. While automatic understanding of image structure still remains largely unsolved,
language structure is much better modeled and understood,
allowing for its effective utilization in teaching VL models.
In this paper, we propose various techniques based on language structure understanding that can be used to manipulate the textual part of off-the-shelf paired VL datasets. VL
models trained with the updated data exhibit a significant
improvement of up to 15% in their SVLC understanding
with only a mild degradation in their zero-shot capabilities
both when training from scratch or fine-tuning a pre-trained
model. Our code and pretrained models are available at:
https://github.com/SivanDoveh/TSVLC

1. Introduction
Recent Vision & Language (VL) models [19, 31, 43, 44,
47, 57] achieve excellent zero-shot performance with respect to various computer-vision tasks such as detection,
classification, segmentation, etc. However, recent studies [68, 82] have demonstrated that even the strongest VL
models struggle with the compositional understanding of
some basic Structured VL Concepts (SVLC) such as ob* Equal contribution

Solvable by ”bag of objects”!

Several school
kids dancing
Two happy
squirrels

A woman stands
next to the counter

A gray cat sits
on top of
a plastic chair
near a plant

Negative (repel)
Positive (attract)

LLM Pos
Near a plant a
gray cat sits on
a plastic chair

LLM Neg
A gray cat sits
on top of a
wooden chair
near a plant

RB Neg
A ruby cat sits
on top of
a plastic chair
near a plant

(b) Our additional language structure augmented losses

Force language structure topology on the image embedding!

Figure 1. Teaching language structure to VL models. (a) Standard contrastive text-to-image loss (e.g. CLIP [57]) tends to underemphasize SVLC content of the text, likely due to the random nature of the training batches; (b) We generate modified versions of
corresponding texts and use them to add losses to explicitly teach
language structure (SVLC) to VL models.

ject attributes, inter-object relations, transitive actions, object states and more. Collecting specialized large scale data
to teach VL models these missing ‘skills’ is impractical, as
finding specialized text-image pairs for each kind and possible value of the different attributes, relations, or states, is
both difficult and expensive.
Another important challenge in training VL models with
new concepts is catastrophic forgetting, which is a common property to all neural models [7, 34, 37, 49, 58] and
has been explored for VL models in a recent concurrent
work [14]. Large VL models such as CLIP [57] and CyCLIP [19] have exhibited excellent zero-shot learning abilities in many tasks. Therefore, even given a large dataset
with new concepts, it is important not to lose these abilities
when performing the adaptation to the new data.

2657

