This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sibling-Attack: Rethinking Transferable Adversarial Attacks against Face
Recognition
Zexin Li1 * Bangjie Yin3 * Taiping Yao3 Junfeng Guo2 Shouhong Ding3† Simin Chen2
1
University of California, Riverside
2
The University of Texas at Dallas
3
Tencent

Cong Liu1†

{zli536, congl}@ucr.edu, {junfeng.guo, simin.chen}@utdallas.edu,
{bangjieyin, taipingyao, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated significant success in various applications, especially for face
* indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author.

FR1

FR2
FR Models Ens.

Adv. Grad.

1. Introduction

(b) Sibling Attack

Shared Enc.
Adv. Grad.

A hard challenge in developing practical face recognition (FR) attacks is due to the black-box nature of the target
FR model, i.e., inaccessible gradient and parameter information to attackers. While recent research took an important step towards attacking black-box FR models through
leveraging transferability, their performance is still limited,
especially against online commercial FR systems that can
be pessimistic (e.g., a less than 50% ASR–attack success
rate on average). Motivated by this, we present SiblingAttack, a new FR attack technique for the first time explores
a novel multi-task perspective (i.e., leveraging extra information from multi-correlated tasks to boost attacking transferability). Intuitively, Sibling-Attack selects a set of tasks
correlated with FR and picks the Attribute Recognition (AR)
task as the task used in Sibling-Attack based on theoretical and quantitative analysis. Sibling-Attack then develops an optimization framework that fuses adversarial gradient information through (1) constraining the cross-task
features to be under the same space, (2) a joint-task meta
optimization framework that enhances the gradient compatibility among tasks, and (3) a cross-task gradient stabilization method which mitigates the oscillation effect during
attacking. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SiblingAttack outperforms state-of-the-art FR attack techniques by
a non-trivial margin, boosting ASR by 12.61% and 55.77%
on average on state-of-the-art pre-trained FR models and
two well-known, widely used commercial FR systems.

(a) Previous Attacks

FR

AR

JTMO & CTGS

Figure 1. Under the single task, previous attacks (a) boost transferability by attacking multiple models or using various sampling
or augmentation strategies. Nevertheless, in the proposed SiblingAttack (b), we adopt the Attribute Recognition (AR) as the auxiliary task to improve the transferability. And we utilize the hardparameter sharing architecture from [3] as the attacking backbone.

recognition [14, 53]. Despite these achievements, recent research has revealed that DNN-based face recognition (FR)
models may be susceptible to adversarial attacks [2, 23, 59].
In practical attacking scenarios, the victim FR model’s parameters are inaccessible to the attackers [4, 19, 43, 52, 61],
i.e., the attacker has to perform attacks under black-box
settings. One feasible black-box attacking strategy is to
craft transferable adversarial examples by attacking a whitebox surrogate model. On the face recognition task, recent research (e.g., optimization-based methods [17,41,62],
model-ensemble training [17, 43] and input data transformations [18, 65, 67]) has shown efficacy on boosting the attacking transferability. Essentially, those methods prevent
the adversarial examples from over-fitting to a single model/image by fusing auxiliary gradient information from ensemble models or various sampling/augmenting strategies.
However, their performance against online commercial FR

24626

