This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIM: Semantic-aware Instance Mask Generation for
Box-Supervised Instance Segmentation
Ruihuang Li*, Chenhang He*, Yabin Zhang, Shuai Li, Liyi Chen,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Lei Zhang†

{csrhli, csche, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Weakly supervised instance segmentation using only
bounding box annotations has recently attracted much research attention. Most of the current efforts leverage lowlevel image features as extra supervision without explicitly
exploiting the high-level semantic information of the objects, which will become ineffective when the foreground objects have similar appearances to the background or other
objects nearby. We propose a new box-supervised instance
segmentation approach by developing a Semantic-aware Instance Mask (SIM) generation paradigm. Instead of heavily relying on local pair-wise affinities among neighboring
pixels, we construct a group of category-wise feature centroids as prototypes to identify foreground objects and assign them semantic-level pseudo labels. Considering that
the semantic-aware prototypes cannot distinguish different instances of the same semantics, we propose a selfcorrection mechanism to rectify the falsely activated regions
while enhancing the correct ones. Furthermore, to handle
the occlusions between objects, we tailor the Copy-Paste
operation for the weakly-supervised instance segmentation
task to augment challenging training data. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
SIM approach over other state-of-the-art methods. The
source code: https://github.com/lslrh/SIM .

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is among the fundamental tasks
of computer vision, with many applications in autonomous
driving, image editing, human-computer interaction, etc.
The performance of instance segmentation has been improved significantly along with the advances in deep learning [6, 12, 34, 38]. However, training robust segmentation
networks requires a large number of data with pixel-wise
annotations, which consumes intensive human labor and
* denotes the equal contribution, †denotes the corresponding author.
This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC RIF grant (R5001-18).

Figure 1. The pipeline of Semantic-aware Instance Mask (SIM)
generation method. (a) shows the mask prediction produced by using only low-level affinity supervision, where the foreground heavily blends with background. (b) and (c) show the semantic-aware
masks obtained with our constructed prototypes, which perceive
the entity of objects but are unable to separate different instances
of the same semantics. (d) shows the final instance pseudo mask
rectified by our proposed self-correction module.

resources. To reduce the reliance on dense annotations,
weakly-supervised instance segmentation based on cheap
supervisions, such as bounding boxes [14,21,36], points [8]
and image-level labels [1,18], has recently attracted increasing research attention.
In this paper, we focus on box-supervised instance segmentation (BSIS), where the bounding boxes provide coarse
supervised information for pixel-wise prediction task. To
provide pixel-wise supervision, conventional methods [10,
19] usually leverage off-the-shelf proposal techniques, such
as MCG [30] and GrabCut [31], to create pseudo instance
masks. However, the training pipelines of these methods with multiple iterative steps are cumbersome. Several recent works [14, 36] enable end-to-end training by
taking pairwise affinities among pixels as extra supervision. Though these methods have achieved promising performance, they heavily depend on low-level image features,
such as color pairs [36], and simply assume that the proximal pixels with similar colors are likely to have the same
label. This leads to confusion when foreground objects
have similar appearances to the background or other ob-

7193

