This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object-Aware Distillation Pyramid for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Luting Wang1,3 Yi Liu1,3 Penghui Du1,3 Zihan Ding1,3 Yue Liao1,3 *
Qiaosong Qi2 Biaolong Chen2 Si Liu1,3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 Alibaba Group
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University

Abstract
Open-vocabulary object detection aims to provide object detectors trained on a fixed set of object categories
with the generalizability to detect objects described by arbitrary text queries. Previous methods adopt knowledge distillation to extract knowledge from Pretrained Vision-andLanguage Models (PVLMs) and transfer it to detectors.
However, due to the non-adaptive proposal cropping and
single-level feature mimicking processes, they suffer from
information destruction during knowledge extraction and
inefficient knowledge transfer. To remedy these limitations,
we propose an Object-Aware Distillation Pyramid (OADP)
framework, including an Object-Aware Knowledge Extraction (OAKE) module and a Distillation Pyramid (DP) mechanism. When extracting object knowledge from PVLMs, the
former adaptively transforms object proposals and adopts
object-aware mask attention to obtain precise and complete knowledge of objects. The latter introduces global
and block distillation for more comprehensive knowledge
transfer to compensate for the missing relation information
in object distillation. Extensive experiments show that our
method achieves significant improvement compared to current methods. Especially on the MS-COCO dataset, our
OADP framework reaches 35.6 mAPN50 , surpassing the current state-of-the-art method by 3.3 mAPN50 . Code is released
at https://github.com/LutingWang/OADP.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) [49] aims to
endow object detectors with the generalizability to detect
open categories including both base and novel categories
where only the former are annotated in the training phase.
Pretrained Vision-and-Language Models (PVLMs, e.g.,
CLIP [32] and ALIGN [19]) have witnessed great progress
in recent years, and Knowledge Distillation (KD) [17] has
led to a wave of unprecedented advances transferring the
zero-shot visual recognition ability from PVLMs to detec* Corresponding author (liaoyue.ai@gmail.com)

Center Crop w/o Transform

Center Crop w/ Transform

(a) Knowledge Extraction
Student

Global KD

Block KD

Object KD

(b) Knowledge Transfer

Figure 1. An overview of our OADP framework. (a) Directly
applying center crop on proposals may throw informative object
parts away, resulting in ambiguous image regions. In contrast, our
OAKE module extracts complete objects and reduces the influence
of surrounding distractors. (b) Our DP mechanism includes global,
block, and object KD to achieve effective knowledge transfer.

tors [12, 25, 28, 29, 48, 53]. KD typically comprises two essential steps, i.e., knowledge extraction and then knowledge
transfer. A common practice in OVD is to crop objects with
class-agnostic proposals and use the teacher (e.g., CLIP visual encoder) to extract knowledge of the proposals. The
knowledge is then transferred to the detector (e.g., Mask RCNN [15]) via feature mimicking.
Despite significant development, we argue that conventional approaches still have two main limitations: 1)
Dilemma between comprehensiveness and purity during
knowledge extraction. As proposals have diverse aspect ratios, the fixed center crop strategy to square them may cut
out object parts (fig. 1a). Enlarging those proposals via resizing function may alleviate this problem, but additional
surrounding distractors may confuse the teacher to extract
accurate proposal knowledge. 2) Missing global scene
understanding during knowledge transfer. Conventional
approaches merely concentrate on object-level knowledge
transfer by directly mimicking the teacher’s features of indi-

11186

