This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Super-plane for Neural 3D Reconstruction
Botao Ye1 Sifei Liu2 Xueting Li2 Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 NVIDIA
3
University of California, Merced 4 Yonsei University

Abstract
Neural implicit surface representation methods show
impressive reconstruction results but struggle to handle
texture-less planar regions that widely exist in indoor
scenes. Existing approaches addressing this leverage image
prior that requires assistive networks trained with largescale annotated datasets. In this work, we introduce a
self-supervised super-plane constraint by exploring the free
geometry cues from the predicted surface, which can further regularize the reconstruction of plane regions without
any other ground truth annotations. Specifically, we introduce an iterative training scheme, where (i) grouping
of pixels to formulate a super-plane (analogous to superpixels), and (ii) optimizing of the scene reconstruction network via a super-plane constraint, are progressively conducted. We demonstrate that the model trained with superplanes surprisingly outperforms the one using conventional
annotated planes, as individual super-plane statistically occupies a larger area and leads to more stable training. Extensive experiments show that our self-supervised superplane constraint significantly improves 3D reconstruction
quality even better than using ground truth plane segmentation. Additionally, the plane reconstruction results from
our model can be used for auto-labeling for other vision
tasks. The code and models are available at https:
//github.com/botaoye/S3PRecon.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D scenes from multi-view RGB images
is an important but challenging task in computer vision,
which has numerous applications in autonomous driving,
virtual reality, robotics, etc. Existing matching-based methods [30, 31, 50] estimate per-view depth maps, which are
then fused to construct 3D representation. However, they do
not recover the depth of the scene in texture-less planar areas well (such as walls, floors, and other solid color planes),
which are abundant, especially for indoor scenes. Recent
data-driven methods [22, 26, 34, 38] alleviate this problem
to some extent by automatically learning geometric priors
from large-scale training data, but they either require nu-

Input View

Surface Reconstruction

Plane Segmentation

Figure 1. Reconstruction and Plane Segmentation Results. Our
method can reconstruct smooth and complete planar regions by
employing the super-plane constraint and further obtain plane segmentation in an unsupervised manner.

merous and expensive 3D supervision (e.g., depth [22, 38],
normal [14], etc.) or lack fine-grain details [26, 34].
Recently, neural implicit representations have gained
much attention and shown impressive reconstruction results
without 3D supervision [39, 46, 47]. However, these methods purely rely on the photo-consistency to construct the
scene, which leads to texture-geometry ambiguities since
there are different plausible interpretations to satisfy this
objective. Several approaches address this problem by introducing additional priors obtained from trained models
that can be considered as assistant networks. For instance,
ManhattanSDF [9] introduces the Manhattan assumption on
the floor and wall regions, which are predicted by a semantic segmentation model. NeuRIS [37] and MonoSDF [48]
adopt additional normal supervision acquired from normal
prediction networks trained on large-scale labeled datasets.
Although these methods can regularize the reconstruction
process on indoor scenes, they all rely on large-scale annotated 2D or 3D datasets. In addition, these pretrained
geometric prediction networks are sensitive to different
scenes and not friendly across different domains or datasets.
For example, MonoSDF [48] reports that different normal
prediction networks significantly affect the reconstruction
quality. Thus, a natural question arises: can we improve the
RGB-based reconstruction results on texture-less regions
without any implicit supervision from assistant networks?
In this work, we propose a novel neural 3D reconstruction framework with the Self-Supervised Super-Plane con-

21415

