This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I2MVFormer: Large Language Model Generated Multi-View Document
Supervision for Zero-Shot Image Classification
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem∗1 , Muhammad Gul Zain Ali Khan∗2,3 , Yongqin Xian5 , Muhammad Zeshan Afzal2,3 ,
Didier Stricker2,3 ,
Luc Van Gool1 ,
Federico Tombari4,5
1

ETH Zürich,

2

TUKL

Abstract

3

DFKI

4

5

TUM

Google

Keys

Describe Laysan
Albatross?

K-shot examples
Query Class

Recent works have shown that unstructured text (documents) from online sources can serve as useful auxiliary
information for zero-shot image classification. However,
these methods require access to a high-quality source like
Wikipedia and are limited to a single source of information.
Large Language Models (LLM) trained on web-scale text
show impressive abilities to repurpose their learned knowledge for a multitude of tasks. In this work, we provide a
novel perspective on using an LLM to provide text supervision for a zero-shot image classification model. The LLM is
provided with a few text descriptions from different annotators as examples. The LLM is conditioned on these examples to generate multiple text descriptions for each class (referred to as views). Our proposed model, I2MVFormer,
learns multi-view semantic embeddings for zero-shot image
classification with these class views. We show that each text
view of a class provides complementary information allowing a model to learn a highly discriminative class embedding. Moreover, we show that I2MVFormer is better at consuming the multi-view text supervision from LLM compared
to baseline models. I2MVFormer establishes a new state-ofthe-art on three public benchmark datasets for zero-shot image classification with unsupervised semantic embeddings.
Code available at https://github.com/ferjad/I2DFormer

1. Introduction
In Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL), we task an image classification model trained on a set of seen classes to generalize
to a disjoint set of unseen classes using shared auxiliary information. While there has been great progress made in the
field, most works treat the auxiliary information to be fixed
to a set of human-labeled attributes [16, 37, 48, 53]. While
powerful, these attributes are hard to annotate and expensive to scale [46,58]. Unsupervised alternatives to attributes
rely on pretrained word embeddings which provide limited
1 First and second author contributed equally.

Describe House
Wren?
House wren's underpart color ranges
from brown to pure white and are
mostly found in North America ...

Laysan Albatross wings are
sooty black and they mainly
feed on squid and small fish ...
Large Languge
Model (LLM)

Describe Mallard?
Mallard's beak is yellow in color and
they have glossy bottle-green head ...

Describe Blue
Jay?

Views of class Blue Jay
Blue Jays have white
chest and underparts.
They can be found in
most of the eastern and
central United States.

Blue Jays feed on seeds, soft
fruits and small vertebrates.
Their bill, eyes and legs are
all blacks.

Blue Jays are noisy bold
and aggressive but are slow
fliers. They have blue hue
and crown of feathers on
head.

Figure 1. Different annotators focus on different attributes when
describing a class. Large Language Models prompted with each of
these annotations as k-shot examples can reveal complementary
information about a class for zero-shot image classification. We
refer to multiple LLM-generated descriptions as views of a class.

information about a class. Recent works [7,20,35,39] show
that text documents from internet sources like Wikipedia
can provide great auxiliary information for ZSL. Since these
web documents describe a queried class in detail, they provide more information for the ZSL model compared to word
embeddings. However, these methods only rely on a single
source of text documents like Wikipedia, which might not
sufficiently represent all classes a model is faced with. Multiple sources of text documents of a class can provide complementary information for the ZSL model. For example,
in the case of birds, one source might focus more on the
patterns of the feather, while another source might better
describe the belly and the face of the bird. However, finding multiple good sources of text documents for each class
requires additional annotation effort.
Large Language Models (LLM) [5, 12, 63] trained on
web-scale text have shown impressive abilities of using
their learned information to solve a multitude of tasks.
These models can be conditioned with a k-shot prompt to
generalize to a wide set of applications [5, 31, 60] using
knowledge from multiple sources they were trained on. In

15169

