This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AligNeRF: High-Fidelity Neural Radiance Fields via Alignment-Aware Training
Yifan Jiang1 ,* Peter Hedman2 , Ben Mildenhall2 , Dejia Xu1 , Jonathan T. Barron2 ,
Zhangyang Wang1 , Tianfan Xue3†
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Google Research, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
w/ Alignment-aware Training

Estimated Optical Flow

mip-NeRF 360

Our AligNeRF

Ground Truth (Warped)

w/o Alignment-aware Training
Figure 1. Left: Images rendered by mip-NeRF 360 [2] (w/o alignment-aware training) and our AligNeRF (w/ alignment-aware training),
with the same amount of training time for both methods. Middle: Magnified cropped regions. Here, the ground truth has been aligned with
the mip-NeRF 360 rendering, as described in Sec. 4.3. Right: Visualization of misalignment. This is the estimated optical flow between
the mip-NeRF 360 rendering and the original ground truth images.

//yifanjiang19.github.io/alignerf.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) are a powerful representation for modeling a 3D scene as a continuous function. Though NeRF is able to render complex 3D scenes
with view-dependent effects, few efforts have been devoted
to exploring its limits in a high-resolution setting. Specifically, existing NeRF-based methods face several limitations when reconstructing high-resolution real scenes, including a very large number of parameters, misaligned
input data, and overly smooth details. In this work, we
conduct the first pilot study on training NeRF with highresolution data and propose the corresponding solutions:
1) marrying the multilayer perceptron (MLP) with convolutional layers which can encode more neighborhood information while reducing the total number of parameters; 2) a
novel training strategy to address misalignment caused by
moving objects or small camera calibration errors; and 3)
a high-frequency aware loss. Our approach is nearly free
without introducing obvious training/testing costs, while experiments on different datasets demonstrate that it can recover more high-frequency details compared with the current state-of-the-art NeRF models. Project page: https:
* This work was performed while Yifan Jiang interned at Google.
† This work was performed while Tianfan Xue worked at Google.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF [24]) and its variants [1–
3, 7, 19, 20], have recently demonstrated impressive performance for learning geometric 3D representations from images. The resulting high-quality scene representation enables an immersive novel view synthesis experience with
complex geometry and view-dependent appearance. Since
the origin of NeRF, an enormous amount of work has been
made to improve its quality and efficiency, enabling reconstruction from data captured “in-the-wild” [15, 20] or a limited number of inputs [7, 11, 26, 32, 44] and generalization
across multiple scenes [4, 41, 45].
However, relatively little attention has been paid to highresolution reconstruction. mip-NeRF [1] addresses excessively blurred or aliased images when rendering at different resolutions, modelling ray samples with 3D conical
frustums instead of infinitesimally small 3D points. mipNeRF 360 [2] further extends this approach to unbounded
scenes that contain more complex appearance and geometry. Nevertheless, the highest resolution data used in these
two works is only 1280 × 840 pixels, which is still far away
from the resolution of a standard HD monitor (1920×1080),
not to mention a modern smartphone camera (4032×3024).

46

