This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation with Shortest Path Regularization
Shaoan Xie 1 , Yanwu Xu2 , Mingming Gong4,3 , Kun Zhang1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Boston University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
University of Melbourne
shaoan@cmu.edu, yanwu@bu.edu, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Unpaired image-to-image translation aims to learn
proper mappings that can map images from one domain to
another domain while preserving the content of the input
image. However, with large enough capacities, the network
can learn to map the inputs to any random permutation of
images in another domain. Existing methods treat two domains as discrete and propose different assumptions to address this problem. In this paper, we start from a different
perspective and consider the paths connecting the two domains. We assume that the optimal path length between
the input and output image should be the shortest among
all possible paths. Based on this assumption, we propose a
new method to allow generating images along the path and
present a simple way to encourage the network to find the
shortest path without pair information. Extensive experiments on various tasks demonstrate the superiority of our
approach. The code is available at https://github.com/MidPush/santa.

1. Introduction
Many important problems in computer vision can be
viewed as image-to-image translation problems, including
domain adaptation [22, 46], super-resolution [7, 66] and
medical image analysis [2]. Let X and Y represent two
domains, respectively. In unpaired image-to-image translation, we are given two collections of images from the two
domains with distributions {PX , PY } without pair information. Our goal is to find the true conditional (joint) distribution of two domains PY|X (PX ,Y ); with the true conditional
(joint) distribution, we are able to translate the input images
in one domain such that the outputs look like images in another domain while the semantic information of the input
images is preserved. For example, given old human faces in
one domain and young human faces in another domain, we

Figure 1. Illustration of our shortest path assumption. Almost
existing methods only use two discrete domains {X , Y}. Instead,
we consider the paths connecting two domains and assume that
the optimal mapping generates shortest path, e.g., x1 → y1 rather
than x1 → y2 .

want to learn the true joint distribution across the two domains. Then we can translate the old face into young face
image while preserving the important information (e.g., the
identity) of the input face (see Fig. 1).
However, there can exist an infinite number of joint distributions corresponding to the given two marginal distributions [39]. It means that the problem is highly ill-posed
and we may not derive meaningful results without any additional assumptions. As one of the most popular assumptions, cycle consistency [71] assumes that the optimal mapping should be one-to-one and has been achieving impressive performance in many tasks. However, the one-to-one
mapping assumption can be restrictive sometimes [48], especially when images from one domain have additional information compared to the other domain. As an alternative, contrastive learning based method [48] has become
popular recently. It assumes that the mutual information
of patches in the same location of the input and translated
image should be maximized. Then it employs the infoNCE
loss [57] to associate corresponding patches and disassociate them from others. However, it has been shown that the
choices of samples in the contrastive learning can have large
impact on the results and most of recent image translation

10177

