This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape, Pose, and Appearance from a Single Image
via Bootstrapped Radiance Field Inversion
Dario Pavllo1,2∗

David Joseph Tan2
1

ETH Zurich

Marie-Julie Rakotosaona2
2

Google

3

Federico Tombari2,3

TU Munich
Real images

Synthetic images

Input image

Train

Reconstruction
model

Appearance

Shape (SDF)

Surface Output
Normals

Input

Image
collection

Pose

Novel
View

Triangle mesh

Figure 1. Given a collection of 2D images representing a specific category (e.g. cars), we learn a model that can fully recover shape, pose,
and appearance from a single image, without leveraging multiple views during training. The 3D shape is parameterized as a signed distance
function (SDF), which facilitates its transformation to a triangle mesh for further downstream applications.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) coupled with GANs represent a promising direction in the area of 3D reconstruction from a single view, owing to their ability to efficiently
model arbitrary topologies. Recent work in this area, however, has mostly focused on synthetic datasets where exact ground-truth poses are known, and has overlooked
pose estimation, which is important for certain downstream applications such as augmented reality (AR) and
robotics. We introduce a principled end-to-end reconstruction framework for natural images, where accurate groundtruth poses are not available. Our approach recovers an
SDF-parameterized 3D shape, pose, and appearance from a
single image of an object, without exploiting multiple views
during training. More specifically, we leverage an unconditional 3D-aware generator, to which we apply a hybrid inversion scheme where a model produces a first guess of the
solution which is then refined via optimization. Our framework can de-render an image in as few as 10 steps, enabling
its use in practical scenarios. We demonstrate state-of-theart results on a variety of real and synthetic benchmarks.

∗ Work done during an internship at Google.

1. Introduction
We focus on single-view 3D reconstruction, where the
goal is to reconstruct shape, appearance, and camera pose
from a single image of an object (Fig. 1). Such a task
has applications in content creation, augmented & virtual
reality (AR/VR), robotics, and is also interesting from a
scientific perspective, as most neural architectures cannot
reason about 3D scenes. As humans, we learn object priors, abstract representations that allow us to imagine what a
partially-observed object would look like from other viewpoints. Incorporating such knowledge into a model would
enable higher forms of 3D reasoning. While early work
on 3D reconstruction has focused on exploiting annotated
data [16, 20, 57, 63, 72], e.g. ground-truth 3D shapes or multiple 2D views, more recent work has relaxed the assumptions required by the task. In particular, there has been effort
in learning this task from single-view collections of images
depicting a specific category [17, 27, 33] (e.g. a dataset of
cars), and we also follow this line of work.
Most established 3D representations in the single-view
reconstruction literature are based on deformable triangle meshes [17, 27, 33], although Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [1, 39] have recently become more prominent in
the broader 3D vision community owing to their ability
to efficiently model arbitrary topologies. These have been

4391

