This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIRLNav: Pretraining with Imitation and RL Finetuning for O BJECT N AV
Ram Ramrakhya1 Dhruv Batra1,2 Erik Wijmans1 Abhishek Das2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 FAIR, Meta AI
1

{ram.ramrakhya,dbatra,etw}@gatech.edu

2

abhshkdz@meta.com

Abstract
We study ObjectGoal Navigation – where a virtual robot
situated in a new environment is asked to navigate to an object. Prior work [1] has shown that imitation learning (IL)
using behavior cloning (BC) on a dataset of human demonstrations achieves promising results. However, this has limitations – 1) BC policies generalize poorly to new states,
since the training mimics actions not their consequences,
and 2) collecting demonstrations is expensive. On the other
hand, reinforcement learning (RL) is trivially scalable, but
requires careful reward engineering to achieve desirable
behavior. We present PIRLNav, a two-stage learning scheme
for BC pretraining on human demonstrations followed by
RL-finetuning. This leads to a policy that achieves a success rate of 65.0% on O BJECT NAV (+5.0% absolute over
previous state-of-the-art).
Using this BC→RL training recipe, we present a rigorous
empirical analysis of design choices. First, we investigate
whether human demonstrations can be replaced with ‘free’
(automatically generated) sources of demonstrations, e.g.
shortest paths (SP) or task-agnostic frontier exploration (FE)
trajectories. We find that BC→RL on human demonstrations
outperforms BC→RL on SP and FE trajectories, even when
controlled for the same BC-pretraining success on TRAIN,
and even on a subset of VAL episodes where BC-pretraining
success favors the SP or FE policies. Next, we study how
RL-finetuning performance scales with the size of the BC
pretraining dataset. We find that as we increase the size of
the BC-pretraining dataset and get to high BC accuracies,
the improvements from RL-finetuning are smaller, and that
90% of the performance of our best BC→RL policy can be
achieved with less than half the number of BC demonstrations. Finally, we analyze failure modes of our O BJECT NAV
policies, and present guidelines for further improving them.
Project page: ram81.github.io/projects/pirlnav.

1. Introduction
Since the seminal work of Winograd [2], designing embodied agents that have a rich understanding of the environment

Figure 1. O BJECT NAV success rates of agents trained using behavior cloning (BC) vs. BC-pretraining followed by reinforcement
learning (RL) (in blue). RL from scratch (i.e. BC=0) fails to get offthe-ground. With more BC demonstrations, BC success increases,
and it transfers to even higher RL-finetuning success. But the difference between RL-finetuning vs. BC-pretraining success (in orange)
plateaus and starts to decrease beyond a certain point, indicating
diminishing returns with each additional BC demonstration.

they are situated in, can interact with humans (and other
agents) via language, and the environment via actions has
been a long-term goal in AI [3–12]. We focus on ObjectGoal Navigation [13, 14], wherein an agent situated in a
new environment is asked to navigate to any instance of an
object category (‘find a plant’, ‘find a bed’, etc.); see Fig. 2.
O BJECT NAV is simple to explain but difficult for today’s
techniques to accomplish. First, the agent needs to be able
to ground the tokens in the language instruction to physical
objects in the environment (e.g. what does a ‘plant’ look
like?). Second, the agent needs to have rich semantic priors
to guide its navigation to avoid wasteful exploration (e.g.
the microwave is likely to be found in the kitchen, not the
washroom). Finally, it has to keep track of where it has been
in its internal memory to avoid redundant search.
Humans are adept at O BJECT NAV. Prior work [1] collected
a large-scale dataset of 80k human demonstrations for O B JECT NAV , where human subjects on Mechanical Turk teleoperated virtual robots and searched for objects in novel
houses. This first provided a human baseline on O BJECTNAV of 88.9% success rate on the Matterport3D (MP3D)

17896

