This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust and Scalable Gaussian Process Regression and Its Applications
Yifan Lu1 , Jiayi Ma1 *, Leyuan Fang2 , Xin Tian1 , and Junjun Jiang3
1
Wuhan University, China 2 Hunan University, China 3 Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{lyf048, xin.tian}@whu.edu.cn, {jyma2010, fangleyuan}@gmail.com, jiangjunjun@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces a robust and scalable Gaussian
process regression (GPR) model via variational learning.
This enables the application of Gaussian processes to a
wide range of real data, which are often large-scale and
contaminated by outliers. Towards this end, we employ
a mixture likelihood model where outliers are assumed to
be sampled from a uniform distribution. We next derive
a variational formulation that jointly infers the mode of
data, i.e., inlier or outlier, as well as hyperparameters by
maximizing a lower bound of the true log marginal likelihood. Compared to previous robust GPR, our formulation approximates the exact posterior distribution. The inducing variable approximation and stochastic variational
inference are further introduced to our variational framework, extending our model to large-scale data. We apply our model to two challenging real-world applications,
namely feature matching and dense gene expression imputation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our model in terms of robustness and speed. Notably,
when matching 4k feature points, its inference is completed
in milliseconds with almost no false matches. The code is at
github.com/YifanLu2000/Robust-Scalable-GPR.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) [31] are probably the primary
non-parametric method for inference on latent functions.
They have a wide range of applications from biology [3] to
computer vision [41]. A commonly used observation model
for Gaussian process regression (GPR) is the Normal distribution, which brings great convenience to the inference.
Unfortunately, a well-known limitation of the Gaussian observation model is its sensitivity to outliers in data. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), a few outliers can drastically destroy
the entire posterior regression result. This hinders the realworld applications of GPR for many domains, where outliers are often inevitable. This paper intends to conquer the
GPR with outlier contaminated data.
The idea of robust regression is not new. Outlier detec* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Regression with our model. (a) Perform exact GPR
from 100 inliers. (b) When there are only 6 outliers in the data, the
exact GPR leads to completely wrong results. (c) By comparison,
our model is able to recover the exact posterior even facing 100
outliers. (d) The feature matching result using our model. (e) The
dense spatial gene expression imputation result using our model.

tion has been extensively and systematically described in
[6,9,10,29]. In the context of GPR, many efforts tried to replace the Gaussian likelihood with other distributions showing heavy-tail behaviors, including Student-t [16,21,28,30],
Laplace [22, 30], Gaussian mixture [8, 22, 27], and datadependent noise model [17]. The challenge with these nonGaussian likelihoods lies in the inference, which is analytically intractable. To this end, many approximation schemes
have been applied, despite having high computational complexity, e.g., Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling and Expectation Propagation (EP) [22].
In this paper, we propose a more effective mixture likelihood model, where uniform distribution accounts for the
outliers and Gaussian for inliers. In our formulation, the
outliers are independent of the GP and do not affect the
computation of the posterior GP, thereby allowing to tolerate more outliers. We next introduce a variational method
that jointly determines the modes of data (i.e., inlier or outlier) as well as hyperparameters by maximizing a lower
bound to the marginal likelihood. We highlight that the difference between our variational formulation and pervious
methods is that the modes of data now become variational
parameters and are obtained by minimizing the Kullback-

21950

