This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DynaMask: Dynamic Mask Selection for Instance Segmentation
Ruihuang Li,* Chenhang He,* Shuai Li, Yabin Zhang,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Lei Zhang†

{csrhli, csche, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
The representative instance segmentation methods
mostly segment different object instances with a mask of
the fixed resolution, e.g., 28 × 28 grid. However, a lowresolution mask loses rich details, while a high-resolution
mask incurs quadratic computation overhead. It is a challenging task to predict the optimal binary mask for each instance. In this paper, we propose to dynamically select suitable masks for different object proposals. First, a dual-level
Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) with adaptive feature aggregation is developed to gradually increase the mask grid
resolution, ensuring high-quality segmentation of objects.
Specifically, an efficient region-level top-down path (r-FPN)
is introduced to incorporate complementary contextual and
detailed information from different stages of image-level
FPN (i-FPN). Then, to alleviate the increase of computation and memory costs caused by using large masks, we develop a Mask Switch Module (MSM) with negligible computational cost to select the most suitable mask resolution for
each instance, achieving high efficiency while maintaining
high segmentation accuracy. Without bells and whistles, the
proposed method, namely DynaMask, brings consistent and
noticeable performance improvements over other state-ofthe-arts at a moderate computation overhead. The source
code: https://github.com/lslrh/DynaMask.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation (IS) is an important computer vision task, aiming at simultaneously predicting the class label and the binary mask for each instance of interest in an
image. It works as the cornerstone of many downstream
vision applications, such as autonomous driving, video
surveillance, and robotics, to name a few. Recent years
have witnessed the significant advances of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based IS methods with a rich
amount of training data as the rocket fuel [1, 10, 17, 25, 26].
Existing IS methods can be roughly divided into two ma* denotes the equal contribution, †denotes the corresponding author.
This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC RIF grant (R5001-18).

Figure 1. Dynamic mask selection results. Some “hard” samples with irregular shapes like “person” are assigned larger masks,
while the “easy” ones like “frisbee” are assigned smaller ones.

jor categories: two-stage [6, 10, 17] and single-stage methods [1, 2, 26]. The former first detect a sparse set of proposals and then performs mask predictions based on them,
while the latter directly predict classification scores and
masks based on the pre-defined anchors. Generally speaking, two-stage methods could produce higher segmentation accuracy but cost more computational resources than
single-stage methods.
Among the many recently developed IS methods, the
proposal-based two-stage methods [6, 10, 17], which follow a detection-and-segmentation paradigm, are still the top
performers. These methods need to predict a binary grid
mask of uniform resolution for all proposals, e.g., 28 × 28,
and then upsample it to the original image size. For instance, Mask R-CNN [10] first generates a group of proposals with an object detector and then performs per pixel foreground/background segmentation on the Regions of Interest (RoIs) [24]. Despite achieving promising performance,
the low-resolution mask of Mask R-CNN is insufficient to
capture more detailed information, resulting in unsatisfactory predictions, especially over object boundaries. An intuitive solution to improve the segmentation quality is to
adopt a larger mask. Nevertheless, high-resolution masks
often generate excessive predictions on the smooth regions,
resulting in high computational complexity.
It is difficult to segment different objects in an image

11279

