This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Residual Radiance Fields for Streamably Free-Viewpoint Videos
Liao Wang1,3
1

392KB

Qiang Hu1

Tinne Tuytelaars2
ShanghaiTech University
994KB

Qihan He1,4
2

Lan Xu1†
KU Leuven

Ziyu Wang1
3

Jingyi Yu1

Minye Wu2†
4
NeuDim
DGene

3618KB

PC 1

Static scene

Bitrate:
0.8MB/frame
FPS: 19.5
Time: 02:30

PC 2

Dynamic scene

Bitrate:
0.8MB/frame
FPS: 20
Time: 02:30

132KB

432KB

702KB

Residual Radiance Field

Streamable 4D Player

Figure 1. Our proposed ReRF utilizes a residual radiance ﬁeld and a global MLP to enable highly compressible and streamable radiance
ﬁeld modeling. Our ReRF-based codec scheme and streaming player gives users a rich interactive experience.

a special FVV codec that achieves three orders of magnitudes compression rate and provides a companion ReRF
player to support online streaming of long-duration FVVs
of dynamic scenes. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of ReRF for compactly representing dynamic
radiance ﬁelds, enabling an unprecedented free-viewpoint
viewing experience in speed and quality.

Abstract
The success of the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) for
modeling and free-view rendering static objects has inspired numerous attempts on dynamic scenes. Current techniques that utilize neural rendering for facilitating freeview videos (FVVs) are restricted to either ofﬂine rendering or are capable of processing only brief sequences with
minimal motion. In this paper, we present a novel technique, Residual Radiance Field or ReRF, as a highly compact neural representation to achieve real-time FVV rendering on long-duration dynamic scenes. ReRF explicitly
models the residual information between adjacent timestamps in the spatial-temporal feature space, with a global
coordinate-based tiny MLP as the feature decoder. Specifically, ReRF employs a compact motion grid along with a
residual feature grid to exploit inter-frame feature similarities. We show such a strategy can handle large motions
without sacriﬁcing quality. We further present a sequential
training scheme to maintain the smoothness and the sparsity of the motion/residual grids. Based on ReRF, we design

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic free-viewpoint videos (FVVs) of dynamic scenes, in particular, human performances, reduce
the gap between the performer and the viewer. But the goal
of producing and viewing FVVs as simple as clicking and
viewing regular 2D videos on streaming platforms remains
far-reaching. The challenges range from data processing
and compression to streaming and rendering.
Geometry-based solutions reconstruct dynamic 3D
meshes or points [14, 16], whereas image-based ones interpolate novel views on densely transmitted footages [6, 83].
Both techniques rely on high-quality reconstructions that
are often vulnerable to occlusions and textureless regions.
Recent neural advances [44, 61] bring an alternative route

† The corresponding authors are Minye Wu (minye.wu@kuleuven.be)
and Lan Xu (xulan1@shanghaitech.edu.cn).

76

