This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RaBit: Parametric Modeling of 3D Biped Cartoon Characters
with a Topological-consistent Dataset
Jinguo Dong1
Ruibo Ming1,4
Shengcai Cai1,3 *
Zhongjin Luo1 *
2,1
3
Liangdong Qiu
Xiaohang Zhan
Xiaoguang Han1,2†
1

SSE, CUHKSZ

2

FNii, CUHKSZ

3

Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

4

Tsinghua University

Figure 1. We present 3DBiCar, the first large-scale repository of 3D biped cartoon characters. It contains 1,500 topologically consistent,
textured, and skinned 3D high-quality meshes manually created by professional artists, covering 15 species. Further, we propose RaBit, the
first cartoon character parametric model simultaneously parameterizing shape, pose, and texture.

Abstract
Assisting people in efficiently producing visually plausible 3D characters has always been a fundamental research
topic in computer vision and computer graphics. Recent
learning-based approaches have achieved unprecedented
accuracy and efficiency in the area of 3D real human digitization. However, none of the prior works focus on modeling
3D biped cartoon characters, which are also in great demand
in gaming and filming. In this paper, we introduce 3DBiCar,
the first large-scale dataset of 3D biped cartoon characters,
and RaBit, the corresponding parametric model. Our dataset
contains 1,500 topologically consistent high-quality 3D textured models which are manually crafted by professional
artists. Built upon the data, RaBit is thus designed with a
SMPL-like linear blend shape model and a StyleGAN-based
neural UV-texture generator, simultaneously expressing the
shape, pose, and texture. To demonstrate the practicality
* Z. Luo and S. Cai contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

of 3DBiCar and RaBit, various applications are conducted,
including single-view reconstruction, sketch-based modeling,
and 3D cartoon animation. For the single-view reconstruction setting, we find a straightforward global mapping from
input images to the output UV-based texture maps tends to
lose detailed appearances of some local parts (e.g., nose,
ears). Thus, a part-sensitive texture reasoner is adopted to
make all important local areas perceived. Experiments further demonstrate the effectiveness of our method both qualitatively and quantitatively. 3DBiCar and RaBit are available
at gaplab.cuhk.edu.cn/projects/RaBit.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of digitization, creating highquality 3D articulated characters is highly demanded in game
platforms, film industries, and metaverse scenarios. However, even for expert artists, creating a 3D character is laborintensive and time-consuming. Therefore, reducing the cost
of producing visually plausible 3D characters is essential in
the field of computer vision and graphics.

12825

