This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GrowSP: Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation of 3D Point Clouds
Zihui Zhang, Bo Yang,* Bing Wang, Bo Li
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
vLAR Group, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
zihui.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, bo.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Input Point Cloud

Initial Superpoints

Progressively Growing Superpoints

Prediction by GrowSP

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Given an input point cloud with complex structures from S3DIS dataset [2], our GrowSP automatically discovers accurate
semantic classes simply by progressively growing superpoints, without needing any human labels in training.

Abstract
We study the problem of 3D semantic segmentation from
raw point clouds. Unlike existing methods which primarily
rely on a large amount of human annotations for training
neural networks, we propose the first purely unsupervised
method, called GrowSP, to successfully identify complex semantic classes for every point in 3D scenes, without needing any type of human labels or pretrained models. The key
to our approach is to discover 3D semantic elements via
progressive growing of superpoints. Our method consists
of three major components, 1) the feature extractor to learn
per-point features from input point clouds, 2) the superpoint
constructor to progressively grow the sizes of superpoints,
and 3) the semantic primitive clustering module to group
superpoints into semantic elements for the final semantic
segmentation. We extensively evaluate our method on multiple datasets, demonstrating superior performance over all
unsupervised baselines and approaching the classic fullysupervised PointNet. We hope our work could inspire more
advanced methods for unsupervised 3D semantic learning.

1. Introduction
Giving machines the ability to automatically discover semantic compositions of complex 3D scenes is crucial for
many cutting-edge applications. In the past few years, there
has been tremendous progress in fully-supervised semantic
segmentation for 3D point clouds [14]. From the seminar
works PointNet [40] and SparseConv [12] to a plethora of
* Corresponding author

recent neural models [21, 27, 41, 55, 60], both the accuracy
and efficiency of per-point semantic estimation have been
greatly improved. Unarguably, the success of these methods primarily relies on large-scale human annotations for
training deep neural networks. However, manually annotating real-world 3D point clouds is extremely costly due to
the unstructured data format [3, 20]. To alleviate this problem, a number of recent methods start to use fewer 3D point
labels [19, 69], cheaper 2D image labels [59, 77], or active
annotations [22,63] in training. Although achieving promising results, they still need tedious human efforts to annotate
or align 3D points across images for particular datasets, thus
being inapplicable to novel scenes without training labels.
In this paper, we make the first step towards unsupervised 3D semantic segmentation of real-world point clouds.
To tackle this problem, there could be two strategies: 1) to
naı̈vely adapt existing unsupervised 2D semantic segmentation techniques [4, 7, 24] to 3D domain, and 2) to apply
existing self-supervised 3D pretraining techniques [17, 66]
to learn discriminative per-point features followed by classic clustering methods to obtain semantic categories. For
unsupervised 2D semantic methods, although achieving encouraging results on color images, they can be hardly extended to 3D point clouds primarily because: a) there is
no general pretrained backbone to extract high-quality features for point clouds due to the lack of representative 3D
datasets akin to ImageNet [46] or COCO [29], b) they are
usually designed to group pixels with similar low-level features, e.g. colors or edges, as a semantic class, whereas such
a heuristic is normally not satisfied in 3D point clouds due
to point sparsity and spatial occlusions. For self-supervised
3D pretraining methods, although the pretrained per-point

17619

