This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Modality-Agnostic Person Re-identiﬁcation with Descriptive Query

1

Cuiqun Chen1 , Mang Ye1,2 ,* Ding Jiang1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China
https://github.com/ccq195/UNIReID

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) with descriptive query
(text or sketch) provides an important supplement for general image-image paradigms, which is usually studied in a
single cross-modality matching manner, e.g., text-to-image
or sketch-to-photo. However, without a camera-captured
photo query, it is uncertain whether the text or sketch is
available or not in practical scenarios. This motivates us
to study a new and challenging modality-agnostic person
re-identiﬁcation problem. Towards this goal, we propose a
uniﬁed person re-identiﬁcation (UNIReID) architecture that
can effectively adapt to cross-modality and multi-modality
tasks. Speciﬁcally, UNIReID incorporates a simple dualencoder with task-speciﬁc modality learning to mine and
fuse visual and textual modality information. To deal
with the imbalanced training problem of different tasks in
UNIReID, we propose a task-aware dynamic training strategy in terms of task difﬁculty, adaptively adjusting the training focus. Besides, we construct three multi-modal ReID
datasets by collecting the corresponding sketches from photos to support this challenging study. The experimental
results on three multi-modal ReID datasets show that our
UNIReID greatly improves the retrieval accuracy and generalization ability on different tasks and unseen scenarios.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation [42] involves using computer vision techniques to identify pedestrians in video and still
images. Given a monitored pedestrian image/video or a
text description, ReID aims to retrieve all images/videos of
that pedestrian across devices. ReID is widely used in intelligent video surveillance, intelligent security, and other
ﬁelds. The existing ReID researches include single-modal
* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye (yemang@whu.edu.cn)

15128

Uncertain
Descriptive
Query
“The

girl

was

white
Query 1: wearing
short sleeves, pink
Text

Query 2:
Sketch

shorts and …”

Model 1

Paradigm 1: Text-to-RGB

“The girl was
wearing
white
short sleeves, pink
shorts and …”

Query 3: Text +Sketch
Model 2

Paradigm 2: Sketch-to-RGB

Model 3

Paradigm 3: Text+Sketch-to-RGB

(a) Existing Methods
(b) Our Method

Query 1: Text
Query 2: Sketch
Query 3: Text+Sketch

Paradigm 4: Uncertain Query-toRGB
Unified
ReID
Model

Figure 1. Illustration of our idea. Existing ReID methods
[17, 24, 43] yield different paradigm models for different descriptive queries. However, it is uncertain whether the text or sketch
is available or not in practical scenarios. Our uniﬁed ReID model
enables target pedestrian search under uncertain query inputs. The
green boxes match the query.

ReID [4, 13, 21, 47, 48] and cross-modal ReID [2, 17, 41].
The former is restricted to retrieval between RGB images,
whereas the latter allows retrieval of RGB images based on
different query modalities (e.g., IR, text, or sketch). Particularly, the appearance of a suspect may only be described
verbally in many criminal cases. Person re-identiﬁcation
with descriptive query (text or sketch) is well suited for
these scenarios and has greater research value for grounded
applications of ReID models.
Most existing text-based or sketch-based person reidentiﬁcation methods rely on only one of the modalities as
a query set to achieve pedestrian retrieval. Although the text
modality is relatively easy to access, it fails to accurately depict visual appearance details, i.e., coarse-grained representations [29]. As the saying goes, a picture is worth a thousand words, and the sketch image of a pedestrian is closer
to the visual modality, showing speciﬁc information about

