This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Plasticity Improvement for Continual Learning
Yan-Shuo Liang and Wu-Jun Li*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, P. R. China
liangys@smail.nju.edu.cn,liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Many works have tried to solve the catastrophic forgetting (CF) problem in continual learning (lifelong learning).
However, pursuing non-forgetting on old tasks may damage the model’s plasticity for new tasks. Although some
methods have been proposed to achieve stability-plasticity
trade-off, no methods have considered evaluating a model’s
plasticity and improving plasticity adaptively for a new task.
In this work, we propose a new method, called adaptive
plasticity improvement (API), for continual learning. Besides the ability to overcome CF on old tasks, API also tries
to evaluate the model’s plasticity and then adaptively improve the model’s plasticity for learning a new task if necessary. Experiments on several real datasets show that API
can outperform other state-of-the-art baselines in terms of
both accuracy and memory usage.

1. Introduction
Continual learning is a challenging setting in which
agents learn multiple tasks sequentially [21]. However, neural network models lack the ability to perform continual
learning. Specifically, many studies [15, 21] have shown
that directly training a network on a new task makes the
model forget the old knowledge. This phenomenon is often
called catastrophic forgetting (CF) [10, 21].
Continual learning models need to overcome CF, which
is referred to as stability [21]. Many types of works are proposed for stability. For example, regularization-based methods [13, 35] add a penalty to the loss function and minimize
penalty loss with new task loss together for overcoming CF.
Memory-based methods [5, 6, 24, 29] maintain a memory to
save the information of the old tasks and use saved information to keep old task performance. Expansion-based methods [12, 16] expand the network’s architecture and usually
freeze old tasks’ parameters to overcome CF.
However, having stability alone fails to give the model

continual learning ability. The model also needs plasticity
to learn new tasks in continual learning. The term plasticity came from neuroscience and was originally used to
describe the brain’s ability to yield physical changes in
the neural structure. Plasticity allows us to learn, remember, and adapt to dynamic environments [22]. In neural networks, plasticity is used to describe the ability of
a network to change itself for learning new tasks. However, existing works [17, 18, 30] show that when overcoming CF for stability, the model’s plasticity will decrease,
which will affect the performance of the model for learning
new tasks. Specifically, regularization-based methods and
memory-based methods use penalty or memory to constrain
the parameters when the model learns a new task. When the
number of old tasks increases, the constraints for the model
parameters should become stronger and stronger to ensure
stability. As a result, the model’s plasticity for learning new
tasks decreases. Expansion-based methods [28,32] increase
the model’s plasticity by expanding additional parameters.
However, most of these methods freeze the old part of the
network, making the old part of the network underutilized.
Furthermore, all these methods do not consider how to evaluate the model’s plasticity and improve it adaptively.
When overcoming CF, the model should improve its
plasticity if it finds that current plasticity is insufficient to
learn the new task. In this work, we propose a new method,
called adaptive plasticity improvement (API), for continual
learning. The main contributions of API are as follows:
• API overcomes CF through a new memory-based
method called dual gradient projection memory (DualGPM), which learns a gradient subspace that
can represent the gradients of old tasks.
• Based on DualGPM, API evaluates the model’s plasticity for a new task by average gradient retention ratio (AGRR) and improves the model’s plasticity adaptively for a new task if necessary.
• Experiments on several real datasets show that API can
outperform other state-of-the-art baselines in terms of
accuracy and memory usage.

* Wu-Jun Li is the corresponding author.

7816

