This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TrojDiff: Trojan Attacks on Diffusion Models with Diverse Targets
Weixin Chen
UIUC

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley

Bo Li
UIUC

weixinc2@illinois.edu

dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu

lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved great success in a range
of tasks, such as image synthesis and molecule design. As
such successes hinge on large-scale training data collected
from diverse sources, the trustworthiness of these collected
data is hard to control or audit. In this work, we aim to
explore the vulnerabilities of diffusion models under potential training data manipulations and try to answer: How
hard is it to perform Trojan attacks on well-trained diffusion models? What are the adversarial targets that such
Trojan attacks can achieve? To answer these questions, we
propose an effective Trojan attack against diffusion models, TrojDiff, which optimizes the Trojan diffusion and generative processes during training. In particular, we design novel transitions during the Trojan diffusion process
to diffuse adversarial targets into a biased Gaussian distribution and propose a new parameterization of the Trojan generative process that leads to an effective training
objective for the attack. In addition, we consider three
types of adversarial targets: the Trojaned diffusion models
will always output instances belonging to a certain class
from the in-domain distribution (In-D2D attack), out-ofdomain distribution (Out-D2D-attack), and one specific instance (D2I attack). We evaluate TrojDiff on CIFAR-10
and CelebA datasets against both DDPM and DDIM diffusion models. We show that TrojDiff always achieves high
attack performance under different adversarial targets using different types of triggers, while the performance in benign environments is preserved. The code is available at
https://github.com/chenweixin107/TrojDiff.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models [1–4] have emerged as the
new competitive deep generative models, demonstrating
their impressive capacities in generating diverse, highquality samples in various data modalities [5–7]. Inspired
by non-equilibrium thermodynamics [8], diffusion models are latent variable models which consist of two processes. The diffusion process is a Markov chain which

diffuses the data distribution to the standard Gaussian distribution by adding multiple-scale noise to the data progressively, while the generative process is a parameterized
Markov chain in the opposite direction which is trained to
reverse the diffusion process, so that the data could be recovered via variational inference. Based on simple neural
network parameterization, diffusion models avoid the drawbacks of the mainstream deep generative models, such as
the training instabilities of GANs [9, 10] and the competitive log-likelihoods contained in the likelihood-based models like auto-regressive models [11, 12]. So far, diffusion
models have shown superior and even state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of tasks, such as image generation [1, 2, 8, 13–15], image inpainting [4, 16–19], and image
super-resolution [4, 8, 13, 14, 17, 18, 20].
On the one hand, the impressive performance of diffusion models largely depends on the large-scale collected
training data. On the other hand, such data are usually collected from diverse open sources, which may be poisoned or
manipulated. One typical threat is Trojan attacks [21–26],
which have exhibited threatening attack performance on image classification models. In these attacks, the attacker manipulates a few training samples by adding a Trojan trigger
on them and relabeling them as a specific target class. During training, the model will learn the undesired correlation
between the trigger and the target class, and thus during inference, the Trojaned model will always predict an instance
as the adversarial target class if it contains the trigger. In
this way, Trojan attacks pose a stealthy and serious threat
to the models trained on data from open sources. Thus, a
natural question arises: Can diffusion models be Trojaned?
To explore the vulnerability of diffusion models against
Trojan attacks, in this work, we propose the first Trojan attack on diffusion models, named TrojDiff. Particularly, we
study two generic diffusion models, i.e., DDPM [1] and
DDIM [2]. The pipeline of TrojDiff is illustrated in the
second row of Figure 1. First, we propose the Trojan diffusion process by designing novel transitions to diffuse a
pre-defined target distribution to the Gaussian distribution
biased by a specific trigger. Then, we apply a new parameterization of the generative process which learns to reverse

4035

