This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MCF: Mutual Correction Framework for Semi-Supervised Medical Image
Segmentation
Yongchao Wang Bin Xiao∗ Xiuli Bi Weisheng Li Xinbo Gao
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Chongqing, China
d200201023@stu.cqupt.edu.cn, {xiaobin,bixl,liws,gaoxb}@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is a promising method for
medical image segmentation under limited annotation.
However, the model cognitive bias impairs the segmentation
performance, especially for edge regions. Furthermore,
current mainstream semi-supervised medical image segmentation (SSMIS) methods lack designs to handle model
bias. The neural network has a strong learning ability,
but the cognitive bias will gradually deepen during the
training, and it is difficult to correct itself. We propose
a novel mutual correction framework (MCF) to explore
network bias correction and improve the performance of
SSMIS. Inspired by the plain contrast idea, MCF introduces two different subnets to explore and utilize the discrepancies between subnets to correct cognitive bias of the
model. More concretely, a contrastive difference review
(CDR) module is proposed to find out inconsistent prediction regions and perform a review training. Additionally, a dynamic competitive pseudo-label generation (DCPLG) module is proposed to evaluate the performance of
subnets in real-time, dynamically selecting more reliable
pseudo-labels. Experimental results on two medical image databases with different modalities (CT and MRI) show
that our method achieves superior performance compared
to several state-of-the-art methods. The code will be available at https://github.com/WYC-321/MCF.

1. Introduction
Making pixel-level annotation is difficult and timeconsuming, especially for medical images.
Semisupervised learning is a promising approach for processing
images with limited supervised data [2, 3, 14, 17, 23, 30, 31].
In recent years, semi-supervised methods based on consistency regularization [21, 27] have attracted the attention of
researchers and are one of the mainstream techniques, es∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. A brief description of the process of MT-like methods
(a) and our proposed MCF (b). (c) Biased prediction of MT and
MCF during training, MCF reduces more biased predictions. (d)
The red masks represent the model’s wrong predictions, and the
white numbers represent the number of wrong pixels.

pecially in SSMIS. These methods usually include two subnets, and the general process is to add random perturbations
to the same samples and force the subnets to produce consistent prediction results for these perturbed inputs. Mean
Teacher (MT) [22] is a typical method among them and inspired a series of SSMIS work [13, 33]. Although these
methods have achieved promising results, they ignore the
impact of cognitive biases in the model. Cognitive bias
is the phenomenon in which the model persists in mispredictions, caused by overfitting to wrong supervision signals [12]. There is evidence that cognitive biases reduce
the performance of consistency-regularization-based methods [1].
We take MT-like methods as an example to analyze this
issue. As shown Fig. 1 (a) the methods based on the MT
framework have three features: (1) The model consists

15651

