This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instant-NVR: Instant Neural Volumetric Rendering for Human-object
Interactions from Monocular RGBD Stream
Yuheng Jiang1,2 * Kaixin Yao1,2 * Zhuo Su3 Zhehao Shen1 Haimin Luo1 Lan Xu1
1

ShanghaiTech University

2

NeuDim

3

Pico IDL, ByteDance

Abstract
Convenient 4D modeling of human-object interactions
is essential for numerous applications. However, monocular tracking and rendering of complex interaction scenarios remain challenging. In this paper, we propose InstantNVR, a neural approach for instant volumetric humanobject tracking and rendering using a single RGBD camera. It bridges traditional non-rigid tracking with recent instant radiance field techniques via a multi-thread trackingrendering mechanism. In the tracking front-end, we adopt
a robust human-object capture scheme to provide sufficient motion priors. We further introduce a separated instant neural representation with a novel hybrid deformation module for the interacting scene. We also provide an
on-the-fly reconstruction scheme of the dynamic/static radiance fields via efficient motion-prior searching. Moreover, we introduce an online key frame selection scheme
and a rendering-aware refinement strategy to significantly
improve the appearance details for online novel-view synthesis. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach for the instant generation of human-object radiance fields on the fly, notably achieving real-time photo-realistic novel view synthesis under complex human-object interactions. Project page:
https://nowheretrix.github.io/Instant-NVR/.

1. Introduction
The accurate tracking and photo-realistic rendering for
human-object interactions are critical for numerous humancentric applications like telepresence, tele-education or immersive experience in VR/AR. However, a convenient solution from monocular input, especially for on-the-fly setting,
remains extremely challenging in the vision community.
Early high-end solutions [6, 9, 13, 18] require dense
cameras for high-fidelity reconstruction.
Recent approaches [11, 12, 17, 46, 47, 59, 63] need less RGB or
RGBD video inputs (from 3 to 8 views) by using volu* Equal Contribution.

Figure 1. Our Instant-NVR adopts a separated instant neural representation to achieve photo-realistic rendering for human-object
interacting scenarios.

metric tracking techniques [19, 32]. Yet, the multi-view
setting is still undesirable for consumer-level daily usage.
Differently, the monocular method with a single handiest commercial RGBD camera is more practical and attractive. For monocular human-object modeling, most approaches [2, 15, 53, 57, 65, 66] track the rigid and skeletal
motions of object and human using a pre-scanned template
or parametric model. Besides, the monocular volumetric
methods [32,41,43,58,64] obtain detailed geometry through
depth fusion, while the recent advance [44] further extends
it into the human-object setting. However, they fail to generate realistic appearance results, restricted by the limited
geometry resolution.
Recent neural rendering advances, represented by Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [29], have recently enabled photorealistic rendering with dense-view supervision. Notably,
some recent dynamic variants of NeRF [21, 28, 50, 51, 55,
60, 67] obtain the compelling novel-view synthesis of human activities even under monocular capturing. However,
they rely on tedious and time-consuming per-scene training
to fuse the temporal observations into the canonical space,
thus unsuitable for on-the-fly usage like telepresence. Only
recently, Instant-NGP [30] enables fast radiance field generation in seconds, bringing the possibility for on-the-fly radiance field modeling. Yet, the original Instant-NGP can
only handle static scenes. Few researchers explore the onthe-fly neural rendering strategies for human-object interactions, especially for monocular setting.

595

