This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-shot Semantic Image Synthesis with Class Affinity Transfer
Marlène Careil1,2 Jakob Verbeek2 Stéphane Lathuilière1
1
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris 2 Meta AI

Abstract
Semantic image synthesis aims to generate photo realistic images given a semantic segmentation map. Despite much recent progress, training them still requires large
datasets of images annotated with per-pixel label maps that
are extremely tedious to obtain. To alleviate the high annotation cost, we propose a transfer method that leverages
a model trained on a large source dataset to improve the
learning ability on small target datasets via estimated pairwise relations between source and target classes. The class
affinity matrix is introduced as a first layer to the source
model to make it compatible with the target label maps, and
the source model is then further finetuned for the target domain. To estimate the class affinities we consider different
approaches to leverage prior knowledge: semantic segmentation on the source domain, textual label embeddings, and
self-supervised vision features. We apply our approach to
GAN-based and diffusion-based architectures for semantic
synthesis. Our experiments show that the different ways to
estimate class affinity can be effectively combined, and that
our approach significantly improves over existing state-ofthe-art transfer approaches for generative image models.

1. Introduction
Image synthesis with deep generative models has made
remarkable progress in the last decade with the introduction of GANs [11], VAEs [17], and diffusion models [14].
Generated images can be conditioned on diverse types of inputs, such as class labels [3, 18], text [10, 25, 27], bounding
boxes [35], or seed images [5]. In semantic image synthesis,
the generation is conditioned on a semantic map that indicates the desired class label for every pixel. This task has
been thoroughly explored with models such as SPADE [23]
and OASIS [33], capable of generating high-quality and diverse images on complex datasets such as ADE20K [43]
and COCO-Stuff [4]. However, these approaches heavily
rely on the availability of large datasets with tens to hundreds of thousands of images annotated with pixel-precise
label maps that are extremely costly to acquire. For the

Input segmentation

Class affinity transfer, Standard training,
100 training images 20k training images

Figure 1. Can we train a semantic image synthesis model from
only 100 images? Our diffusion-based transfer results using training set of 100 ADE20K images (2nd col.) compared to the same
model trained from scratch on full dataset (20k images, 3rd col.).

Cityscapes dataset [7], e.g., on average more than 1.5h per
image was required for annotation and quality control.
High annotation costs can be a barrier to deployment
of machine learning models in practice, and motivates the
development of transfer learning strategies to alleviate the
annotation requirements. These techniques allow training
models on small target datasets via the use of models pretrained on a source dataset with many available annotations.
Transfer learning has been widely studied for classification
tasks such as object recognition [2, 16, 26], but received
much less attention in the case of generation tasks. This task
has been considered for unconditional and class-conditional
generative models [19, 21, 22, 38, 39, 41], but to the best of
our knowledge few-shot transfer learning has not yet been
explored in the setting of semantic image synthesis.
We introduce CAT, a finetuning procedure that models
Class Affinity to Transfer knowledge from pre-trained semantic image synthesis models. Our method takes advantage of prior knowledge to establish pairwise relations between source and target classes, and encodes them in a class
affinity matrix. This solution considerably eases learning

23611

