This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relational Context Learning for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Sanghyun Kim

Deunsol Jung

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
{sanghyun.kim, deunsol.jung, mscho}@postech.ac.kr
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/MUREN

Abstract
Recent state-of-the-art methods for HOI detection typically build on transformer architectures with two decoder
branches, one for human-object pair detection and the other
for interaction classification. Such disentangled transformers, however, may suffer from insufficient context exchange
between the branches and lead to a lack of context information for relational reasoning, which is critical in discovering HOI instances. In this work, we propose the multiplex
relation network (MUREN) that performs rich context exchange between three decoder branches using unary, pairwise, and ternary relations of human, object, and interaction tokens. The proposed method learns comprehensive relational contexts for discovering HOI instances, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on two standard benchmarks
for HOI detection, HICO-DET and V-COCO.

1. Introduction
The task of Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection
is to discover the instances of ⟨human, object, interaction⟩
from a given image, which reveal semantic structures of human activities in the image. The results can be useful for
a wide range of computer vision problems such as human
action recognition [1,25,42], image retrieval [9,33,37], and
image captioning [12, 34, 36] where a comprehensive visual
understanding of the relationships between humans and objects is required for high-level reasoning.
With the recent success of transformer networks [31] in
object detection [2, 45], transformer-based HOI detection
methods [4, 15, 16, 29, 38, 44, 46] have been actively developed to become a dominant base architecture for the task.
Existing transformer-based methods for HOI detection can
be roughly divided into two types: single-branch and twobranch. The single-branch methods [16, 29, 46] update a
token set through a single transformer decoder and detect
HOI instances using the subsequent FFNs directly. As a single transformer decoder is responsible for all sub-tasks (i.e.,

< human, bicycle, riding >

Unary
Pairwise

Ternary

Figure 1. The illustration of relation context information in an HOI
instance. We define three types of relation context information in
an HOI instance: unary, pairwise, and ternary relation contexts.
Each relation context provides useful information for detecting an
HOI instance. For example, in our method, the unary context about
an interaction (green) helps to infer that a human (yellow) and
an object (red) are associated with the interaction, and vice versa.
Our method utilizes the multiplex relation context consisting of the
three relation contexts to perform context exchange for relational
reasoning.

human detection, object detection, and interaction classification), they are limited in adapting to the different subtasks with multi-task learning, simultaneously [38]. To resolve the issue, the two-branch methods [4, 15, 38, 40, 44]
adopt two separated transformer decoder branches where
one detects human-object pairs from a human-object token set while the other classifies interaction classes between
human-object pairs from an interaction token set. However,
the insufficient context exchange between the branches prevents the two-branch methods [15, 38, 40] from learning relational contexts, which plays a crucial role in identifying
HOI instances. Although some methods [4, 44] tackle this
issue with additional context exchange, they are limited to
propagating human-object context to interaction context.
To address the problem, we introduce the MUtiplex

2925

