This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Angelic Patches for Improving Third-Party Object Detector Performance
Wenwen Si1 , Shuo Li1 , Sangdon Park2 , Insup Lee1 , Osbert Bastani1
1
Dept. of Computer & Info. Science, University of Pennsylvania
2
School of Cybersecurity & Privacy, Georgia Institute of Technology
{wenwens, lishuo1, lee, obastani}@seas.upenn.edu, sangdon@gatech.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models have shown extreme vulnerability to distribution shifts such as synthetic perturbations and
spatial transformations. In this work, we explore whether
we can adopt the characteristics of adversarial attack methods to help improve robustness of object detection to distribution shifts such as synthetic perturbations and spatial transformations. We study a class of realistic object
detection settings wherein the target objects have control
over their appearance. To this end, we propose a reversed
Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) to obtain these angelic
patches that significantly increase the detection probability, even without pre-knowledge of the perturbations. In detail, we apply the patch to each object instance simultaneously, strengthening not only classification, but also bounding box accuracy. Experiments demonstrate the efficacy of
the partial-covering patch in solving the complex bounding
box problem. More importantly, the performance is also
transferable to different detection models even under severe
affine transformations and deformable shapes. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the first object detection patch that
achieves both cross-model efficacy and multiple patches.
We observed average accuracy improvements of 30% in the
real-world experiments. Our code is available at: https:
//github.com/averysi224/angelic_patches.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have been heavily deployed in
many safety-critical settings such as autonomous vehicles.
However, these models have been notoriously fragile to
mild perturbations. For example, natural corruptions like
weather conditions and simple lightning effects can significantly degrade the performance of state-of-the-art models [11, 14]. Similarly, the performance under small spatial transformations exhibits a large gap compared to clean
benchmarks [2, 7, 15]. On the other hand, a set of carefully
designed adversarial examples [10] are able to manipulate
the prediction behavior arbitrarily without notice of human
eyes. The untrustworthiness of deep learning systems leads

Foggy Clean

Foggy Patched

Angelic Patch

Figure 1. In this paper, we demonstrate that optimizing a partialcover patch for pre-trained object detectors can improve robustness and significantly boost performance for both the classification
and bounding box regression accuracy. In the left picture, one of
the three people is mis-detected after applying the fog corruption.
However, in the right image with our angelic patch, the detector
was able to detect all three people with even more accurate bounding boxes. Consider all three people wearing an angelic raincoat,
we could save lives from the foggy-blinded autonomous car!

to high stake failures and devastating consequences.
Two main streams of algorithms investigate solving these
problems. One is to improve out-of-distribution behavior by adding more robustness interventions and diverse
data during training. However, they do not fully close the
gap between standard model performance and perturbed results [8]. Others applied domain adaptation over covariate shift achieving reasonable performance [23], yet this
method does not generalize on unseen domains. Whereas
the misspecified test time distribution occurs dominantly in
practice.
Motivated and inspired by the efficacy of these perturbation/adversarial methods above, we ask the question: Can
we adopt the characteristics of adversarial attack methods
to help improve perturbation-robustness? We propose to
reconsider the problem setup itself and study in a scenario
where the target objects are in control of their appearance.
To simplify, we build the objects instead of the models to
improve detection reliability. As a concrete example, consider a pedestrian interacting with autonomous cars that use
deep learning models for detection. Our approach is to provide a wearable patch designed to improve the visibility of
these people to these models (Figure 1). Such practices

24638

