This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Whac-A-Mole Dilemma :
Shortcuts Come in Multiples Where Mitigating One

Amplifies Others

†

Zhiheng Li2 ∗ Ivan Evtimov1 Albert Gordo1 Caner Hazirbas1 Tal Hassner1
Cristian Canton Ferrer1 Chenliang Xu2 ∗ Mark Ibrahim1
1
Meta AI 2 University of Rochester
{ivanevtimov,agordo,hazirbas,thassner,ccanton,marksibrahim}@meta.com
{zhiheng.li,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models have been found to learn
shortcuts—unintended decision rules that are unable to
generalize—undermining models’ reliability. Previous works
address this problem under the tenuous assumption that only
a single shortcut exists in the training data. Real-world images are rife with multiple visual cues from background to
texture. Key to advancing the reliability of vision systems
is understanding whether existing methods can overcome
multiple shortcuts or struggle in a Whac-A-Mole game, i.e.,
where mitigating one shortcut amplifies reliance on others.
To address this shortcoming, we propose two benchmarks:
1) UrbanCars, a dataset with precisely controlled spurious cues, and 2) ImageNet-W, an evaluation set based on
ImageNet for watermark, a shortcut we discovered affects
nearly every modern vision model. Along with texture and
background, ImageNet-W allows us to study multiple shortcuts emerging from training on natural images. We find
computer vision models, including large foundation models—
regardless of training set, architecture, and supervision—
struggle when multiple shortcuts are present. Even methods
explicitly designed to combat shortcuts struggle in a WhacA-Mole dilemma. To tackle this challenge, we propose Last
Layer Ensemble, a simple-yet-effective method to mitigate
multiple shortcuts without Whac-A-Mole behavior. Our results surface multi-shortcut mitigation as an overlooked challenge critical to advancing the reliability of vision systems.
The datasets and code are released: https://github.
com/facebookresearch/Whac-A-Mole.

1. Introduction
Machine learning often achieves good average performance by exploiting unintended cues in the data [26]. For
instance, when backgrounds are spuriously correlated with
objects, image classifiers learn background as a rule for object recognition [93]. This phenomenon—called “shortcut
learning”—at best suggests average metrics overstate model
performance and at worst renders predictions unreliable as
models are prone to costly mistakes on out-of-distribution
(OOD) data where the shortcut is absent. For example,
† Work done during the internship at Meta AI. ∗ Equal Contribution.

COVID diagnosis models degraded significantly when spurious visual cues (e.g., hospital tags) were removed [17].
Most existing works design and evaluate methods under
the tenuous assumption that a single shortcut is present in
the data [33,61,74]. For instance, Waterbirds [74], the most
widely-used dataset, only benchmarks the mitigation of the
background shortcut [7,15,59]. While this is a useful simplified setting, real-world images contain multiple visual cues;
models learn multiple shortcuts. From ImageNet [18,82]
to facial attribute classification [51] and COVID-19 chest
radiographs [17], multiple shortcuts are pervasive. Whether
existing methods can overcome multiple shortcuts or struggle in a Whac-A-Mole game—where mitigating one shortcut
amplifies others—remains a critical open question.
We directly address this limitation by proposing two
datasets to study multi-shortcut learning: UrbanCars and
ImageNet-W. In UrbanCars (Fig. 1a), we precisely inject
two spurious cues—background and co-occurring object. UrbanCars allows us to conduct controlled experiments probing
multi-shortcut learning in standard training as well as shortcut mitigation methods, including those requiring shortcut
labels. In ImageNet-W (IN-W) (Fig. 1b), we surface a new
watermark shortcut in the popular ImageNet dataset (IN1k). By adding a transparent watermark to IN-1k validation
set images, ImageNet-W, as a new test set, reveals vision
models ranging from ResNet-50 [31] to large foundation
models [10] universally rely on watermark as a spurious cue
for the “carton” class (cf . cardboard box in Fig. 1b). When
a watermark is added, ImageNet top-1 accuracy drops by
10.7% on average across models. Some, such as ResNet-50,
suffer a catastrophic 26.7% drop (from 76.1% on IN-1k to
49.4% on IN-W) (Sec. 2.2)). Along with texture [27,34]
and background [93] benchmarks, ImageNet-W allows us to
study multiple shortcuts emerging in natural images.
We find that across a range of supervised/self-supervised
methods, network architectures, foundation models, and
shortcut mitigation methods, vision models struggle when
multiple shortcuts are present. Benchmarks on UrbanCars
and multiple shortcuts in ImageNet (including ImageNet-W)
reveal an overlooked challenge in the shortcut learning problem: multi-shortcut mitigation resembles a Whac-A-Mole
game, i.e., mitigating one shortcut amplifies reliance on others. Even methods specifically designed to combat shortcuts

20071

