This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Similarity Metric Learning For RGB-Infrared Group Re-Identification
Jianghao Xiong1 , Jianhuang Lai1,2,3,4*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Key Laboratory of Video and Image Intelligent Analysis and Applicaiton Technology,
Ministry of Public Security, China
xiongjh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Group re-identification (G-ReID) aims to re-identify a
group of people that is observed from non-overlapping camera systems. The existing literature has mainly addressed
RGB-based problems, but RGB-infrared (RGB-IR) crossmodality matching problem has not been studied yet. In this
paper, we propose a metric learning method Closest Permutation Matching (CPM) for RGB-IR G-ReID. We model
each group as a set of single-person features which are extracted by MPANet, then we propose the metric Closest Permutation Distance (CPD) to measure the similarity between
two sets of features. CPD is invariant with order changes of
group members so that it solves the layout change problem in G-ReID. Furthermore, we introduce the problem
of G-ReID without person labels. In the weak-supervised
case, we design the Relation-aware Module (RAM) that exploits visual context and relations among group members
to produce a modality-invariant order of features in each
group, with which group member features within a set can
be sorted to form a robust group representation against
modality change. To support the study on RGB-IR G-ReID,
we construct a new large-scale RGB-IR G-ReID dataset
CM-Group. The dataset contains 15,440 RGB images and
15,506 infrared images of 427 groups and 1,013 identities. Extensive experiments on the new dataset demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed models and the complexity of CM-Group. The code and dataset are available at:
https://github.com/WhollyOat/CM-Group.

1. Introduction
Group re-identification (G-ReID) is the problem of associating a group of people that appears in disjoint camera views. The significant importance in video surveillance
* Corresponding Author

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The members within a group are independent in appearance and the visual similarity of two people does not indicate
whether they are in a group. In Figure 1b , images in the same
column are from the same person. Images with the same color are
from the same group.

has yield increasing attention and research efforts by the
community [28, 30, 36]. Compared to single-person reidentification (ReID) which deals with a single person, generally G-ReID regards 2 to 6 people as a group and treats
two groups with at least 60% the same individuals as the
same group. Hence, the main challenge of G-ReID is to
construct robust representations of groups with appearance
changes and group topology changes.
The existing works based on current G-ReID datasets
have made impressive strides, but there still remain several important issues need to be resolved. First, available
datasets for G-ReID are limited in different aspects. For example, the extant largest dataset for G-ReID City1M [36]
is synthesized and has huge domain gap between real images. The commonly used real datasets such as Road
Group [28], DukeMTMC Group [28] and CSG [30] are limited in amount of groups and images. Therefore, for real

13662

