This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Practical Network Acceleration with Tiny Sets
Guo-Hua Wang
Jianxin Wu*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
wangguohua@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have achieved remarkable success, but they suffer from high
computational costs. To accelerate the networks, many network compression methods have been proposed, such as
network pruning [11,18,20,22], network decoupling [6,15]
and network quantization [2, 7]. However, most previous
methods rely on the original training set (i.e., all the training data) to recover the model’s accuracy. But, to preserve
data privacy and/or to achieve fast deployment, only scarce
training data may be available in many scenarios.
For example, a customer often asks the algorithmic
provider to accelerate their CNN models, but due to privacy
* J. Wu is the corresponding author. This research was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62276123 and Grant 61921006.

ďĞƚƚĞƌ

ϳϯ
ϳϮ
dŽƉͲϭĐĐ͘;йͿ

Due to data privacy issues, accelerating networks with
tiny training sets has become a critical need in practice.
Previous methods mainly adopt filter-level pruning to accelerate networks with scarce training samples. In this paper, we reveal that dropping blocks is a fundamentally superior approach in this scenario. It enjoys a higher acceleration ratio and results in a better latency-accuracy
performance under the few-shot setting. To choose which
blocks to drop, we propose a new concept namely recoverability to measure the difficulty of recovering the compressed network. Our recoverability is efficient and effective for choosing which blocks to drop. Finally, we propose
an algorithm named P RACTISE to accelerate networks using only tiny sets of training images. P RACTISE outperforms previous methods by a significant margin. For 22%
latency reduction, P RACTISE surpasses previous methods
by on average 7% on ImageNet-1k. It also enjoys high
generalization ability, working well under data-free or outof-domain data settings, too. Our code is at https:
//github.com/DoctorKey/Practise.

ϳϰ

ϳϭ
ϳϬ
ϲϵ
ϲϴ
ůŽĐŬ
&ŝůƚĞƌ;ͲƐƚǇůĞͿ
&ŝůƚĞƌ;ŶŽƌŵĂůͿ
&ŝůƚĞƌ;ƌĞƐŝĚƵĂůͿ
hŶĐŽŵƉƌĞƐƐĞĚ

ϲϳ
ϲϲ
ϲϱ
Ϯϴ

ϯϬ

ϯϮ

ϯϰ ϯϲ ϯϴ
>ĂƚĞŶĐǇ;ŵƐͿ

ϰϬ

ϰϮ

Figure 1. Comparison of different compression schemes with only
500 training images. We propose dropping blocks for few-shot
network acceleration. Our method (‘Block’) outperforms previous methods dominantly for the latency-accuracy tradeoff. The
ResNet-34 model was compressed on ImageNet-1k and all latencies were tested on an NVIDIA TITAN Xp GPU.

concerns, the whole training data cannot be available. Only
the raw uncompressed model and a few training examples
are presented to the algorithmic provider. In some extreme
cases, not even a single data point is to be provided. The
algorithmic engineers need to synthesize images or collect
some out-of-domain training images by themselves. Hence,
to learn or tune a deep learning model with only very few
samples is emerging as a critical problem to be solved.
In this few-shot compression scenario, most previous
works [1,12,30] adopt filter-level pruning. However, it cannot achieve a high acceleration ratio on real-world computing devices (e.g., on GPUs). To make compressed models indeed run faster than the uncompressed models, lots of
FLOPs (number of floating point operations) are required to
be reduced by filter-level pruning. And without the whole
training dataset, it is difficult to recover the compressed
model’s accuracy. Hence, previous few-shot compression

20331

