This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explicit Boundary Guided Semi-Push-Pull Contrastive Learning for Supervised
Anomaly Detection
Xincheng Yao1 , Ruoqi Li1 , Jing Zhang3 , Jun Sun1 , Chongyang Zhang1,2 *
1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Research Institute of Systems Engineering, Academy Military Science, Beijing, China
{i-Dover, nilponi, junsun, sunny zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn1 , jingzhang@163.com.cn3
Abstract
Most anomaly detection (AD) models are learned using
only normal samples in an unsupervised way, which may
result in ambiguous decision boundary and insufﬁcient discriminability. In fact, a few anomaly samples are often
available in real-world applications, the valuable knowledge of known anomalies should also be effectively exploited. However, utilizing a few known anomalies during training may cause another issue that the model may
be biased by those known anomalies and fail to generalize
to unseen anomalies. In this paper, we tackle supervised
anomaly detection, i.e., we learn AD models using a few
available anomalies with the objective to detect both the
seen and unseen anomalies. We propose a novel explicit
boundary guided semi-push-pull contrastive learning mechanism, which can enhance model’s discriminability while
mitigating the bias issue. Our approach is based on two
core designs: First, we ﬁnd an explicit and compact separating boundary as the guidance for further feature learning. As the boundary only relies on the normal feature distribution, the bias problem caused by a few known anomalies can be alleviated. Second, a boundary guided semipush-pull loss is developed to only pull the normal features together while pushing the abnormal features apart
from the separating boundary beyond a certain margin region. In this way, our model can form a more explicit and
discriminative decision boundary to distinguish known and
also unseen anomalies from normal samples more effectively. Code will be available at https://github.
com/xcyao00/BGAD.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) has received widespread attention in diverse domains, such as industrial defect inspec* Corresponding Author.

24490

tion [4,8,10,50] and medical lesion detection [12,38]. Most
previous anomaly detection methods [1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 10, 15, 30,
33, 47, 50–52] are unsupervised and pay much attention to
normal samples while inadvertently overlooking anomalies,
because it is difﬁcult to collect sufﬁcient and all kinds of
anomalies. However, learning only from normal samples
may limit the discriminability of the AD models [12, 24].
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), without anomalies, the decision boundaries are generally implicit and not discriminative enough. The insufﬁcient discriminability issue is a
common issue in unsupervised anomaly detection due to the
lack of knowledge about anomalies. In fact, a few anomalies are usually available in real-world applications, which
can be exploited effectively to address or alleviate this issue.
Recently, methods that can be called semi-supervised
AD [27,34,36] or AD with outlier exposure [16,17] begin to
focus on those available anomalies. These methods attempt
to learn knowledge from anomalies by one-class classiﬁcation with anomalies as negative samples [34, 36] or by supervised binary classiﬁcation [16, 17] or by utilizing the deviation loss to optimize one anomaly scoring network [27].
They show a fact that the detection performance can be improved signiﬁcantly even with a few anomalies. However,
the known anomalies can’t represent all kinds of anomalies.
These methods may be biased by the known anomalies and
fail to generalize to unseen anomalies (see Figure 5).
Therefore, to address the two above issues, we tackle
supervised anomaly detection [12], in which a few known
anomalies can be effectively exploited to train discriminative AD models with the objective to improve detection performance on the known anomalies and generalize well to
unseen anomalies. Compared with unsupervised AD, supervised AD is more meaningful for real-world AD applications, because the detected anomalies can be used to further improve the discriminability and generalizability of the
model. To this end, we propose a novel Boundary Guided
Anomaly Detection (BGAD) model, which has two core

