This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FFF: Fragment-Guided Flexible Fitting for Building Complete Protein
Structures
Weijie Chena,b , Xinyan Wanga , Yuhang Wanga, *
DP Technology, Ltd. b Center for Data Science, Peking University
baoz@pku.edu.cn, wangxy940930@gmail.com, stevenwaura@gmail.com
a

Abstract
Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is a technique
for reconstructing the 3-dimensional (3D) structure of
biomolecules (especially large protein complexes and
molecular assemblies). As the resolution increases to the
near-atomic scale, building protein structures de novo from
cryo-EM maps becomes possible. Recently, recognitionbased de novo building methods have shown the potential to
streamline this process. However, it cannot build a complete
structure due to the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) problem. At the same time, AlphaFold has led to a great breakthrough in predicting protein structures. This has inspired
us to combine fragment recognition and structure prediction methods to build a complete structure. In this paper,
we propose a new method named FFF that bridges protein
structure prediction and protein structure recognition with
flexible fitting. First, a multi-level recognition network is
used to capture various structural features from the input
3D cryo-EM map. Next, protein structural fragments are
generated using pseudo peptide vectors and a protein sequence alignment method based on these extracted features.
Finally, a complete structural model is constructed using
the predicted protein fragments via flexible fitting. Based on
our benchmark tests, FFF outperforms the baseline methods for building complete protein structures.

1. Introduction
With the advances in hardware and image processing algorithms, cryo-EM has become a major experimental technique for determining the structures of biological macromolecules, especially proteins. Cryo-EM data processing consists of two major steps: 3D reconstruction and
structure building. In the 3D reconstruction step, a set of
2-dimensional (2D) micrographs (projection images) are
collected using transmission electron microscopy for biological samples embedded in a thin layer of amorphous
* Corresponding author

ice. Each micrograph contains many 2D projections of the
molecules in unknown orientations. Software tools such as
RELION [17], cryoSPARC [12] and cryoDRGN [28] can be
used to recover the underlying 3D molecular density map.
In the second step, we build the atomic structure of the
underlying protein by trying to determine the positions of
all the atoms using the 3D density map from the 3D reconstruction step. This is done through an iterative process
that contains the following steps: (1) rigid-body docking of
an initial staring structure into the cryo-EM map; (2) manual or automated/semi-automated flexible refinement of the
docked structure to match the map [15,24,25]. The manual
process is extremely time consuming and requires extensive
expert-level domain knowledge. Existing automated/semiautomated flexible fitting may mismatch the initial structure
and density map regions.

Figure 1. A protein backbone along the chain with increasing
residue index from left to right. Arrow marks the peptide bond
linking two consecutive amino acids from C atom of one amino
acid and N atom of another.

In the past decades, the resolution of cryo-EM has been
drastically improved from medium-resolution (5–10 Å) to
near-atomic resolution (1.2–5 Å) [20]. At the same time,
deep learning-based de novo protein structure building
methods have shown great progress. As a result, building a
reasonable atomic structural model de novo is already feasible for maps whose resolutions are better than 3 Å. Even so,
due to the flexible nature of some local structures, de novo
modeling methods often cannot model a complete protein

19776

