This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single Domain Generalization for LiDAR Semantic Segmentation
Hyeonseong Kim∗ , Yoonsu Kang∗ , Changgyoon Oh, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{brian617,gzgzys9887,changgyoon,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
With the success of the 3D deep learning models, various perception technologies for autonomous driving have
been developed in the LiDAR domain. While these models perform well in the trained source domain, they struggle in unseen domains with a domain gap. In this paper, we propose a single domain generalization method for
LiDAR semantic segmentation (DGLSS) that aims to ensure good performance not only in the source domain but
also in the unseen domain by learning only on the source
domain. We mainly focus on generalizing from a dense
source domain and target the domain shift from different
LiDAR sensor configurations and scene distributions. To
this end, we augment the domain to simulate the unseen domains by randomly subsampling the LiDAR scans. With the
augmented domain, we introduce two constraints for generalizable representation learning: sparsity invariant feature consistency (SIFC) and semantic correlation consistency (SCC). The SIFC aligns sparse internal features of
the source domain with the augmented domain based on the
feature affinity. For SCC, we constrain the correlation between class prototypes to be similar for every LiDAR scan.
We also establish a standardized training and evaluation
setting for DGLSS. With the proposed evaluation setting,
our method showed improved performance in the unseen
domains compared to other baselines. Even without access to the target domain, our method performed better than
the domain adaptation method. The code is available at
https://github.com/gzgzys9887/DGLSS.

1. Introduction
Understanding the surrounding scene is essential for autonomous driving systems. Using LiDAR sensors for perception has recently gained popularity from their ability to
provide accurate distance information. Among such tasks,
LiDAR semantic segmentation (LSS) predicts point-wise
semantic labels from a single sweep of LiDAR data. To* The first two authors contributed equally. In alphabetical order.

Source
domain

Unseen
domain

(a) Ground Truth

(b) Domain Adaptation

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Segmentation results on the source (SemanticKITTI [4])
and unseen (nuScenes-lidarseg [7]) domains. The results are from
(a) ground truth, (b) domain adaptation method [60] adapted to
Waymo [64] dataset, and (c) ours. Our method predicts successfully in both source and unseen domains, while the domain adaptation method struggles in both domains.

gether with the recent development of 3D point cloud deeplearning models and the release of several real-world 3D annotated datasets [4, 7, 53, 64], numerous research on LiDAR
semantic segmentation have emerged lately. However, since
these models do not consider the data distribution differences between the train and test domains during the learning process, severe performance deterioration occurs when
applied to real-world applications where domain gaps exist.
Two main domain gaps arise for real-scene LiDAR
datasets: 1) differences in sparsity due to different sensor
configurations and 2) differences in scene distribution. Depending on the type of LiDAR sensor, the total number of
beams, vertical field of view (FOV), and vertical and horizontal resolutions differ, which leads to different sampling
patterns. SemanticKITTI [4] dataset used a 64-beam LiDAR sensor, but a 32-beam sensor was used in nuSceneslidarseg [7], and for SemanticPOSS [53], a 40-beam sensor was used. Waymo [64] dataset also used a 64-beam
LiDAR, but there is a sparsity difference because the vertical resolution differs from SemanticKITTI. Table 1 summarizes configuration details of LiDAR sensors used in SemanticKITTI, nuScenes-lidarseg, Waymo, and SemanticPOSS. In addition, each dataset was acquired from different

17587

