This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Batch Model Consolidation: A Multi-Task Model Consolidation Framework
Iordanis Fostiropoulos
Jiaye Zhu
Laurent Itti
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, United States
{fostirop, jiayezhu, itti}@usc.edu

Abstract
In Continual Learning (CL), a model is required to learn
a stream of tasks sequentially without significant performance degradation on previously learned tasks. Current
approaches fail for a long sequence of tasks from diverse
domains and difficulties. Many of the existing CL approaches are difficult to apply in practice due to excessive
memory cost or training time, or are tightly coupled to a
single device. With the intuition derived from the widely
applied mini-batch training, we propose Batch Model Consolidation (BMC) to support more realistic CL under conditions where multiple agents are exposed to a range of tasks.
During a regularization phase, BMC trains multiple expert
models in parallel on a set of disjoint tasks. Each expert
maintains weight similarity to a base model through a stability loss, and constructs a buffer from a fraction of the
task’s data. During the consolidation phase, we combine
the learned knowledge on ‘batches’ of expert models using a batched consolidation loss in memory data that aggregates all buffers. We thoroughly evaluate each component of our method in an ablation study and demonstrate
the effectiveness on standardized benchmark datasets SplitCIFAR-100, Tiny-ImageNet, and the Stream dataset composed of 71 image classification tasks from diverse domains
and difficulties. Our method outperforms the next best CL
approach by 70% and is the only approach that can maintain performance at the end of 71 tasks.

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) has allowed deep learning
models to learn in a real world that is constantly evolving, in which data distributions change, goals are updated,
and critically, much of the information that any model will
encounter is not immediately available [2]. Current approaches in CL provide a trade-off to the stability-plasticity
dilemma [3] where improving performance for a novel task
leads to catastrophic forgetting.
Continual Learning benchmarks are composed of a limited number of tasks and with tasks of non-distinct domains,

Figure 1. The loss contours by sequential training compared with
batch task training [1] (shaded areas as low-error zones for each
task). Intuition: Similar to mini-batch training batched task training can reduce the local minima and improve the convexity of the
loss landscape.

such as Split-CIFAR100 [4] and Split-Tiny-ImageNet [5].
Previous approaches in Continual Learning suffer significant performance degradation when faced with a large number of tasks, or tasks from diverse domains [1]. Additionally, the cost of many methods increases with the number of
tasks [6,7] and becomes ultimately unacceptable for certain
applications, while other methods [8–11] are tightly coupled to training on a single device and therefore cannot benefit from scaling in distributed settings. As such, current approaches are impractical for many real-world applications,
where multiple devices are trained on a diverse and disjoint
set of tasks with the goal of maintaining a single model.
Motivated by the performance, memory cost, training
time and flexibility issues of current approaches, we propose Batch Model Consolidation (BMC), a Continual
Learning framework that supports distributed training on
multiple streams of diverse tasks, but also improves performance when applied on a single long task stream. Our
method trains and consolidates multiple workers that each
become an expert in a task that is disjoint from all other
tasks. In contrast, for Federated Learning the training set is
composed of a single task of heterogeneous data [12].
Our method is composed of two phases. First, during
the regularization phase, a set of expert models is trained
in new tasks in parallel with their weights regularized to a

3664

