This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-Explore: Exploratory Hierarchical Vision-and-Language Navigation
Using Scene Object Spectrum Grounding
Minyoung Hwang1 , Jaeyeon Jeong1 , Minsoo Kim3 , Yoonseon Oh2 , Songhwai Oh1
1
Electrical and Computer Engineering and ASRI, Seoul National University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University
3
Interdisciplinary Major in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seoul National University
{minyoung.hwang, jaeyeon.jeong}@rllab.snu.ac.kr, goldbird5@snu.ac.kr, yoh21@hanyang.ac.kr, songhwai@snu.ac.kr
Abstract

global goal
local goal
start

The main challenge in vision-and-language navigation
(VLN) is how to understand natural-language instructions
in an unseen environment. The main limitation of conventional VLN algorithms is that if an action is mistaken, the
agent fails to follow the instructions or explores unnecessary regions, leading the agent to an irrecoverable path. To
tackle this problem, we propose Meta-Explore, a hierarchical navigation method deploying an exploitation policy to
correct misled recent actions. We show that an exploitation
policy, which moves the agent toward a well-chosen local
goal among unvisited but observable states, outperforms a
method which moves the agent to a previously visited state.
We also highlight the demand for imagining regretful explorations with semantically meaningful clues. The key to our
approach is understanding the object placements around the
agent in spectral-domain. Speciﬁcally, we present a novel
visual representation, called scene object spectrum (SOS),
which performs category-wise 2D Fourier transform of detected objects. Combining exploitation policy and SOS features, the agent can correct its path by choosing a promising local goal. We evaluate our method in three VLN benchmarks: R2R, SOON, and REVERIE. Meta-Explore outperforms other baselines and shows signiﬁcant generalization
performance. In addition, local goal search using the proposed spectral-domain SOS features signiﬁcantly improves
the success rate by 17.1% and SPL by 20.6% against the stateof-the-art method of the SOON benchmark. Project page:
https://rllab-snu.github.io/projects/Meta-Explore/doc.html

Instruction: "Walk forward, keeping the long table to
the left. Exit the room via the white door to the left of
the stairs. Descend a narrow circular stairwell and
wait, facing two windows with circular stained glass
in their centers."

࢕૞

unvisited, observable node

t ‫ ݐ‬௧௛ visited node

Figure 1. Hierarchical Exploration. At each episode, a naturallanguage instruction is given to the agent to navigate to a goal location. The agent explores the environment and constructs a topological map by recording visited nodes and next step reachable
nodes . Each node consists of the position of the agent and visual
features. ot denotes the observation at time t. The agent chooses
an unvisited local goal to solve the regretful exploration problem.

plored environments [1]. By recognizing the visual context
and constructing a map, an agent can explore the environment and solve tasks such as moving towards a goal or following a desired trajectory. With the increasing development
in human language understanding, vision-and-language navigation (VLN) [2] has enabled robots to communicate with
humans using natural languages. The high degree of freedom in natural language instructions allows VLN to expand
to various tasks, including (1) following ﬁne-grained stepby-step instructions [2–13] and (2) reaching a target location
described by goal-oriented language instructions [14–20].
A challenging issue in VLN is the case when an action
is mistaken with respect to the given language instruction
[21–26]. For instance, if the agent is asked to turn right at the
end of the hallway but turns left, the agent may end up in irrecoverable paths. Several existing studies solve this issue
via hierarchical exploration, where the high-level planner
decides when to explore and the low-level planner chooses
what actions to take. If the high-level planner chooses to
explore, the agent searches unexplored regions, and if it
chooses to exploit, the agent executes the best action based
on the previous exploration. Prior work [21–23] returns the
agent to the last successful state and resumes exploration.

1. Introduction
Visual navigation in indoor environments has been studied widely and shown that an agent can navigate in unexThis work was in part supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2019-0-01190, [SW Star Lab] Robot Learning: Efﬁcient, Safe,
and Socially-Acceptable Machine Learning, 80%, and No.2022-0-00907, Development of AI Bots Collaboration Platform and Self-Organizing AI, 20%). (Corresponding authors: Yoonseon Oh and Songhwai Oh.)

6683

