This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Video Emotion Detection and Prediction via Cross-Modal
Temporal Erasing Network
Zhicheng Zhang
Lijuan Wang
Jufeng Yang†
TMCC, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, China
gloryzzc6@sina.com, 13693225189@163.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatically predicting the emotions of user-generated
videos (UGVs) receives increasing interest recently. However, existing methods mainly focus on a few key visual
frames, which may limit their capacity to encode the context that depicts the intended emotions. To tackle that,
in this paper, we propose a cross-modal temporal erasing network that locates not only keyframes but also context and audio-related information in a weakly-supervised
manner. In specific, we first leverage the intra- and
inter-modal relationship among different segments to accurately select keyframes. Then, we iteratively erase
keyframes to encourage the model to concentrate on the
contexts that include complementary information. Extensive experiments on three challenging video emotion benchmarks demonstrate that our method performs favorably
against state-of-the-art approaches. The code is released
on https://github.com/nku-zhichengzhang/WECL.

1. Introduction
Emotion analysis in user-generated videos (UGVs) has
attracted much attention since a growing number of people
tend to express their views on social networks [20, 32, 36].
Automatic predictions of video emotions [52, 54] can potentially be applied in various areas like online content filtering [1], attitude recognition [32], and customer behavior
analysis [39]. Emotions evoked in UGVs usually depend on
multiple perspectives, such as actions, events, and objects,
where different frames in a UGV may contribute unequally
to conveying emotions.
Existing methods in this field mainly focus on extracting
keyframes from visual content, assuming that these frames
hold the dominant information for the intended emotions
in videos. For example, Tu et al. [12] introduce an attribution network to locate keyframes with temporal annotations,
which are more precise than video-level labeling and lead
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the keyframes with larger boxes that are
detected by off-the-shelf method [65] on the Ekman-6 dataset [54].
Note that the deeper color represents the higher impact on overall
video emotion, and “GT” represents the category label from the
ground truth. The texts with orange color are the categorical predicting results.

to better performance for video emotion recognition. Yet,
annotating the emotional labels frame-by-frame is laborsensitive and time-consuming [63]. Zhao et al. [65] further present the visual-audio network (VAANet) conducting three types of attention to automatically discover the
discriminative keyframes, which makes it state-of-the-art.
However, the selected “keyframes” may fail to represent
the intended emotions exactly due to the inherent characteristics of human emotions, i.e., subjectivity and ambiguity [49, 57, 66]. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), a woman
receives a gift and moves to cry. The video-level emotion category is labeled as ‘surprise’. We could observe
that VAANet [65] gives the most attention to the keyframes
(i.e., “crying” frames in the larger boxes) while ignoring
the context and leading to the wrong prediction. Furthermore, in Figure 1 (b), a man sees his beloved girl talking
with another man happily, which makes him feel sad. However, VAANet only focuses on frames about chatting and
categorizes the emotion of this video as ‘joy’. Therefore,

18888

