This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Proximal Splitting Adversarial Attack for Semantic Segmentation
Jérôme Rony
ÉTS Montréal

Jean-Christophe Pesquet
Centre de Vision Numérique
Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, Inria

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montréal

Code: https://github.com/jeromerony/alma_prox_segmentation

Abstract
Classification has been the focal point of research on adversarial attacks, but only a few works investigate methods
suited to denser prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation. The methods proposed in these works do not accurately
solve the adversarial segmentation problem and, therefore,
overestimate the size of the perturbations required to fool
models. Here, we propose a white-box attack for these models based on a proximal splitting to produce adversarial
perturbations with much smaller ℓ∞ norms. Our attack
can handle large numbers of constraints within a nonconvex
minimization framework via an Augmented Lagrangian approach, coupled with adaptive constraint scaling and masking strategies. We demonstrate that our attack significantly
outperforms previously proposed ones, as well as classification attacks that we adapted for segmentation, providing a
first comprehensive benchmark for this dense task.

1. Introduction
Research on white-box adversarial attacks has mostly focused on classification tasks, with several methods proposed
over the years for ℓp -norms [8,9,20–22,27,30,32,35,36,42].
In contrast, the literature on adversarial attacks for segmentation tasks has been much scarcer, with few works proposing
attacks [13,33,39]. The lack of studies on adversarial attacks
in segmentation may appear surprising because of the prominence of this computer vision task in many applications
where a semantic understanding of image contents is needed.
In many safety-critical application areas, it is thus crucial to
assess the robustness of the employed segmentation models.
Although segmentation is treated as a per-pixel classification problem, designing adversarial attacks for semantic
segmentation is much more challenging for several reasons.
First, from an optimization perspective, the problem of adversarial example generation is more difficult. In a classification task, producing minimal adversarial examples is
a nonconvex constrained problem with a single constraint.
In a segmentation task, this optimization problem now has

multiple constraints, since at least one constraint must be
addressed for each pixel in the image. For a dataset such
as Cityscapes [19], the images have a size of 2 048×1 024,
resulting in more than 2 million constraints. Consequently,
most attacks originally designed for classification cannot
be directly extended to segmentation. For instance, penalty
methods such as C&W [9] cannot tackle multiple constraints
since they rely on a binary search of the penalty weight.
Second, the computational and memory cost of generating adversarial examples can be prohibitive. White-box
adversarial attacks usually rely on computing the gradient
of a loss w.r.t. the input. In segmentation tasks, the dense
outputs result in high memory usage to perform a backward
propagation of the gradient. For reference, computing the
gradients of the logits w.r.t. the input requires ∼22 GiB of
memory for FCN HRNetV2 W48 [38] on Cityscapes with
a 2 048×1 024 image. Additionally, most recent classification adversarial attacks require between 100 and 1 000
iterations, resulting in a run-time of up to a few seconds per
image [34,36] (on GPU) depending on the dataset and model.
For segmentation, this increases to tens or even hundreds of
seconds per image with larger models.
In this article, we propose an adversarial attack to produce minimal adversarial perturbations w.r.t. the ℓ∞ -norm,
for deep semantic segmentation models. Building on Augmented Lagrangian principles, we introduce adaptive strategies to handle a large number of constraints (i.e. >106 ).
Furthermore, we tackle the nonsmooth ℓ∞ -norm minimization with a proximal splitting instead of gradient descent. In
particular, we show that we can efficiently compute the proximity operator of the sum of the ℓ∞ -norm and the indicator
function of the space of possible perturbations. This results
in an adversarial attack that significantly outperforms the
DAG attacks [39], in addition to several classification attacks
that we were able to adapt for segmentation. We propose a
methodology to evaluate adversarial attacks in segmentation,
and compare the different approaches on the Cityscapes [19]
and Pascal VOC 2012 [23] datasets with a diverse set of architectures, including well-known DeepLabV3+ models [11],
the recently proposed transformer-based SegFormer [40],
and the robust DeepLabV3 DDC-AT model from [41]. The

20524

