This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DistractFlow: Improving Optical Flow Estimation via
Realistic Distractions and Pseudo-Labeling
Jisoo Jeong

Hong Cai Risheek Garrepalli
Qualcomm AI Research†

Fatih Porikli

{jisojeon, hongcai, rgarrepa, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
We propose a novel data augmentation approach, DistractFlow, for training optical flow estimation models by
introducing realistic distractions to the input frames. Based
on a mixing ratio, we combine one of the frames in the
pair with a distractor image depicting a similar domain,
which allows for inducing visual perturbations congruent
with natural objects and scenes. We refer to such pairs as
distracted pairs. Our intuition is that using semantically
meaningful distractors enables the model to learn related
variations and attain robustness against challenging deviations, compared to conventional augmentation schemes focusing only on low-level aspects and modifications. More
specifically, in addition to the supervised loss computed
between the estimated flow for the original pair and its
ground-truth flow, we include a second supervised loss defined between the distracted pair’s flow and the original
pair’s ground-truth flow, weighted with the same mixing ratio. Furthermore, when unlabeled data is available, we extend our augmentation approach to self-supervised settings
through pseudo-labeling and cross-consistency regularization. Given an original pair and its distracted version, we
enforce the estimated flow on the distracted pair to agree
with the flow of the original pair. Our approach allows
increasing the number of available training pairs significantly without requiring additional annotations. It is agnostic to the model architecture and can be applied to training
any optical flow estimation models. Our extensive evaluations on multiple benchmarks, including Sintel, KITTI, and
SlowFlow, show that DistractFlow improves existing models consistently, outperforming the latest state of the art.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant progress in optical
flow estimation thanks to the development of deep learning,
e.g., [4,7,8,23]. Among the latest works, many focus on developing novel neural network architectures, such as PWCNet [29], RAFT [30], and FlowFormer [6]. Other stud† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Existing augmentation schemes apply low-level visual modifications, such as color jittering, block-wise random occlusion, and flipping, to augment the training data (top), while
DistractFlow introduces high-level semantic perturbations to the
frames (bottom). DistractFlow can further leverage unlabeled data
to generate a self-supervised regularization. Our training leads to
more accurate and robust optical flow estimation models, especially in challenging real-world settings.

ies investigate how to improve different aspects of supervised training [27], e.g., gradient clipping, learning rate, and
training compute load. More related to our paper are those
incorporating data augmentation during training (e.g., [30]),
including color jittering, random occlusion, cropping, and
flipping. While these image manipulations can effectively
expand the training data and enhance the robustness of the
neural models, they fixate on the low-level aspects of the
images.
Since obtaining ground truth optical flow on real data
is very challenging, another line of work investigates how
to leverage unlabeled data. To this end, semi-supervised
methods [9, 12] that utilize frame pairs with ground-truth
flow annotations in conjunction with unlabeled data in training have been proposed. For instance, FlowSupervisor [9]
adopts a teacher-student distillation approach to exploit unlabeled data. This method, however, does not consider lo-

13691

