This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViP3D: End-to-end Visual Trajectory Prediction via 3D Agent Queries
Junru Gu1∗
1

Chenxu Hu1∗
Tianyuan Zhang2,3
Xuanyao Chen2,4
Yilun Wang5
Yue Wang6
Hang Zhao1,2†

IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
3
CMU 4 Fudan University 5 Li Auto 6 MIT

Figure 1. Comparison of a traditional multi-stage perception-prediction pipeline in autonomous driving and our proposed ViP3D. The
traditional pipeline involves multiple non-differentiable modules, i.e., detection, tracking, and prediction. ViP3D uses 3D agent queries as
the main thread of the pipeline, enabling end-to-end future trajectory prediction from raw video frame inputs. The novel design improves
trajectory prediction performance by effectively leveraging fine-grained visual information such as the turning signals of vehicles.

Abstract
Perception and prediction are two separate modules in
the existing autonomous driving systems. They interact with
each other via hand-picked features such as agent bounding
boxes and trajectories. Due to this separation, prediction,
as a downstream module, only receives limited information
from the perception module. To make matters worse, errors from the perception modules can propagate and accumulate, adversely affecting the prediction results. In this
work, we propose ViP3D, a query-based visual trajectory
prediction pipeline that exploits rich information from raw
videos to directly predict future trajectories of agents in a
scene. ViP3D employs sparse agent queries to detect, track,
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding to: hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

and predict throughout the pipeline, making it the first fully
differentiable vision-based trajectory prediction approach.
Instead of using historical feature maps and trajectories,
useful information from previous timestamps is encoded in
agent queries, which makes ViP3D a concise streaming prediction method. Furthermore, extensive experimental results on the nuScenes dataset show the strong vision-based
prediction performance of ViP3D over traditional pipelines
and previous end-to-end models.1

1. Introduction
An autonomous driving system should be able to perceive agents in the current environment and predict their
future behaviors so that the vehicle can navigate the world
1 Code and demos are available on the project page: https://
tsinghua-mars-lab.github.io/ViP3D

5496

