This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Black-Box Sparse Adversarial Attack via Multi-Objective Optimisation
CVPR Proceedings
Phoenix Neale Williams, Ke Li
Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter
Stocker Rd, Exeter, EX4 4PY
{pw384, k.li}@exeter.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are susceptible to adversarial images, raising concerns about their reliability in
safety-critical tasks. Sparse adversarial attacks, which limit
the number of modified pixels, have shown to be highly
effective in causing DNNs to misclassify. However, existing methods often struggle to simultaneously minimize the
number of modified pixels and the size of the modifications, often requiring a large number of queries and assuming unrestricted access to the targeted DNN. In contrast, other methods that limit the number of modified pixels
often permit unbounded modifications, making them easily
detectable.To address these limitations, we propose a novel
multi-objective sparse attack algorithm that efficiently minimizes the number of modified pixels and their size during
the attack process. Our algorithm draws inspiration from
evolutionary computation and incorporates a mechanism
for prioritizing objectives that aligns with an attacker’s
goals. Our approach outperforms existing sparse attacks
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet trained DNN classifiers while
requiring only a small query budget, attaining competitive
attack success rates while perturbing fewer pixels. Overall, our proposed attack algorithm provides a solution to
the limitations of current sparse attack methods by jointly
minimizing the number of modified pixels and their size.
Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
in restricted scenarios, highlighting its potential to enhance
DNN security.

Proposed Method

Sparse-RS

SSIM = 0.9977

SSIM = 0.8667

SSIM = 0.9906

SSIM = 0.9632

Figure 1. This illustration shows adversarial images and their corresponding perturbations generated by two different algorithms,
the proposed method and Sparse-RS [10], both attacking an adversarially trained CIFAR-10 [19] (top) and ImageNet [35] (bottom).
While both images are adversarial, the perturbation generated by
the Sparse-RS algorithm visibly distorts the image, whereas the
proposed method’s adversarial image remains more similar to the
original. This similarity is demonstrated by calculating the structural similarity (SSIM) between the adversarial images and the
original. The effectiveness of the Sparse-RS algorithm is therefore questionable due to the significant distortion it causes.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have made impressive strides in computer vision tasks [17, 21, 22, 24, 28,
37, 38, 48], recent work has shown that small optimized
perturbations to input images can cause DNNs to misclassify [1, 18, 26, 31, 34, 42]. As adversarial images have been
found to exist in the physical world [26, 27, 43], particu-

lar concern has been expressed on their impact on securitycritical applications [1]. To address this issue, previous
works have emphasized the importance of generating strong
adversarial images [3]. As a result, significant effort has
been devoted to developing effective attack methods that

12291

