This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HouseDiffusion: Vector Floorplan Generation via a Diffusion Model
with Discrete and Continuous Denoising
Mohammad Amin Shabani, Sepidehsadat Hosseini, Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University
{mshabani, sepidh, furukawa}@sfu.ca
Input Graph

Time

1000

250

30

20

10

0

Figure 1. Given a bubble diagram as the input constraint, HouseDiffusion directly generates a vector floorplan by initializing the room/door
coordinates with Gaussian noise and iteratively denoising them. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate that HouseDiffusion
significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art with large margins.

Abstract
The paper presents a novel approach for vectorfloorplan generation via a diffusion model, which denoises
2D coordinates of room/door corners with two inference objectives: 1) a single-step noise as the continuous quantity to
precisely invert the continuous forward process; and 2) the
final 2D coordinate as the discrete quantity to establish geometric incident relationships such as parallelism, orthogonality, and corner-sharing. Our task is graph-conditioned
floorplan generation, a common workflow in floorplan design. We represent a floorplan as 1D polygonal loops,
each of which corresponds to a room or a door. Our diffusion model employs a Transformer architecture at the
core, which controls the attention masks based on the input graph-constraint and directly generates vector-graphics
floorplans via a discrete and continuous denoising process. We have evaluated our approach on RPLAN dataset.
The proposed approach makes significant improvements in
all the metrics against the state-of-the-art with significant
margins, while being capable of generating non-Manhattan
structures and controlling the exact number of corners per
room. A project website with supplementary video and document is here https://aminshabani.github.io/housediffusion.

1. Introduction
Automated floorplan generation made tremendous
progress in the last few years. While not being fully autonomous yet, the state-of-the-art techniques help architects
to explore the space of possible designs quickly [33, 34].
90% of buildings do not have dedicated architects for floorplan design due to their cost in North America. This technology will make the work of professional architects affordable to more house buyers.
Despite recent progress, state-of-the-art floorplan generative models produce samples that are incompatible with
the input constraint, lack in variations, or do not look like
floorplans [34]. The issue is the raster geometry analysis
via convolutions, where a room is represented as a binary
image. The raster analysis is good at local shape refinement
but lacks in global reasoning, and requires non-trivial postprocessing for vectorization [7, 34]. On the other hand, direct generation of vector floorplans is not trivial either. Different from the generation of images or natural languages,
structured geometry exhibit precise incident relationships
among architectural components (e.g., doors and rooms).

5466

