This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MEGANE: Morphable Eyeglass and Avatar Network
Junxuan Li1,2 ,* Shunsuke Saito2 , Tomas Simon2 , Stephen Lombardi2 , Hongdong Li1 , Jason Saragih2
1
Australian National University, 2 Meta Reality Labs Research
junxuan-li.github.io/megane

Eyeglasses Swapping

Directional Light Rendering Environment Map Rendering

Lens Insertion

Few-shot Reconstruction

Figure 1. Our morphable eyeglasses supports the exchange of eyeglasses on face. Our relightable appearance correctly models glasses
with different materials, and interactions between face and eyeglasses. In addition, our model enables lens insertion with appealing lens
reflection and refraction effects. Once trained, our model can reconstruct and re-light an unseen eyeglasses with only a few inputs.

Abstract
Eyeglasses play an important role in the perception of
identity. Authentic virtual representations of faces can benefit greatly from their inclusion. However, modeling the
geometric and appearance interactions of glasses and the
face of virtual representations of humans is challenging.
Glasses and faces affect each other’s geometry at their contact points, and also induce appearance changes due to
light transport. Most existing approaches do not capture
these physical interactions since they model eyeglasses and
faces independently. Others attempt to resolve interactions
as a 2D image synthesis problem and suffer from view and
temporal inconsistencies. In this work, we propose a 3D
compositional morphable model of eyeglasses that accurately incorporates high-fidelity geometric and photometric
interaction effects. To support the large variation in eyeglass topology efficiently, we employ a hybrid representation that combines surface geometry and a volumetric representation. Unlike volumetric approaches, our model naturally retains correspondences across glasses, and hence explicit modification of geometry, such as lens insertion and
frame deformation, is greatly simplified. In addition, our
model is relightable under point lights and natural illumination, supporting high-fidelity rendering of various frame
materials, including translucent plastic and metal within a
* Work done while Junxuan Li was an intern at Reality Labs Research.

single morphable model. Importantly, our approach models global light transport effects, such as casting shadows
between faces and glasses. Our morphable model for eyeglasses can also be fit to novel glasses via inverse rendering.
We compare our approach to state-of-the-art methods and
demonstrate significant quality improvements.

1. Introduction
Humans are social animals. How we dress and accessorize is a key mode of self-expression and communication
in daily life [11]. As social media and gaming has expanded
social life into the online medium, virtual presentations of
users have become increasingly focal to social presence,
and with it, the demand for the digitization of clothes and
accessories. In this paper, we focus on modeling eyeglasses,
an everyday accessory for billions of people worldwide.
In particular, we argue that to achieve realism it is not
sufficient to model eyeglasses in isolation: their interactions
with the face have to be considered. Geometrically, glasses
and faces are not rigid, and they mutually deform one another at the contact points. Thus, the shapes of eyeglasses
and faces cannot be determined independently. Similarly,
their appearance is coupled via global light transport, and
shadows as well as inter-reflections may appear and affect
the radiance. A computational approach to model these interactions is therefore necessary to achieve photorealism.

12769

