This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attribute-preserving Face Dataset Anonymization via Latent Code Optimization
Simone Barattin∗1

Christos Tzelepis∗2
1

Ioannis Patras2

Nicu Sebe1

University of Trento

simone.barattin@studenti.unitn.it, niculae.sebe@unitn.it
2

Queen Mary University of London

{c.tzelepis, i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Original

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of anonymizing the
identity of faces in a dataset of images, such that the privacy of those depicted is not violated, while at the same
time the dataset is useful for downstream task such as for
training machine learning models. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explicitly address this issue and deal
with two major drawbacks of the existing state-of-the-art
approaches, namely that they (i) require the costly training
of additional, purpose-trained neural networks, and/or (ii)
fail to retain the facial attributes of the original images in
the anonymized counterparts, the preservation of which is
of paramount importance for their use in downstream tasks.
We accordingly present a task-agnostic anonymization procedure that directly optimizes the images’ latent representation in the latent space of a pre-trained GAN. By optimizing
the latent codes directly, we ensure both that the identity is
of a desired distance away from the original (with an identity obfuscation loss), whilst preserving the facial attributes
(using a novel feature-matching loss in FaRL’s [48] deep
feature space). We demonstrate through a series of both
qualitative and quantitative experiments that our method is
capable of anonymizing the identity of the images whilst–
crucially–better-preserving the facial attributes. We make
the code and the pre-trained models publicly available at:
https://github.com/chi0tzp/FALCO.

1. Introduction
The ubiquitous use of mobile devices equipped with
high-resolution cameras and the ability to effortlessly share
personal photographs and videos on social media poses a
* These authors contributed equally. This work has been conducted during a research exchange visit of S. Barattin in QMUL in the framework of
the EU H2020 project AI4Media.

CIAGAN

DeepPrivacy

Ours

ID anonymized
Attr. preserved

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed method to CIAGAN [27]
and DeepPrivacy [16] in terms of identity anonymization and attribute preservation.

significant threat to data privacy. Considering that modern machine learning algorithms learn from vast amounts
of data often crawled from the Web [18, 38], it has become
increasingly important to consider the impact this has on
the privacy of those individuals depicted. Motivated by privacy concerns, many societies have recently enacted strict
legislation, such as the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [7], which requires the consent of every person that
might be depicted in an image dataset. Whilst such laws
have obvious benefits to the privacy of those featured in image datasets, this is not without costly side effects to the
research community. In particular, research fields such as
computer vision and machine learning rely on the creation
and sharing of high-quality datasets of images of humans
for a number of important tasks including security [24],
healthcare [1], and creative applications [18, 35].
A recent line of research focuses on overcoming this issue by anonymizing the identity of the individuals in image
datasets. Through this approach, the machine learning com-

8001

