This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CVT-SLR: Contrastive Visual-Textual Transformation for Sign Language
Recognition with Variational Alignment
Jiangbin Zheng1 , Yile Wang1,2 , Cheng Tan1 , Siyuan Li1 ,
Ge Wang1 , Jun Xia1 , Yidong Chen3 , Stan Z. Li1 *
1
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
2
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
{zhengjiangbin,wangyile,tancheng,lisiyuan,wangge,xiajun,Stan.ZQ.Li}@westlake.edu.cn
ydchen@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Sign language recognition (SLR) is a weakly supervised
task that annotates sign videos as textual glosses. Recent
studies show that insufficient training caused by the lack
of large-scale available sign datasets becomes the main
bottleneck for SLR. Most SLR works thereby adopt pretrained visual modules and develop two mainstream solutions. The multi-stream architectures extend multi-cue visual features, yielding the current SOTA performances but
requiring complex designs and might introduce potential
noise. Alternatively, the advanced single-cue SLR frameworks using explicit cross-modal alignment between visual and textual modalities are simple and effective, potentially competitive with the multi-cue framework. In
this work, we propose a novel contrastive visual-textual
transformation for SLR, CVT-SLR, to fully explore the pretrained knowledge of both the visual and language modalities. Based on the single-cue cross-modal alignment framework, we propose a variational autoencoder (VAE) for pretrained contextual knowledge while introducing the complete pretrained language module. The VAE implicitly
aligns visual and textual modalities while benefiting from
pretrained contextual knowledge as the traditional contextual module. Meanwhile, a contrastive cross-modal alignment algorithm is designed to explicitly enhance the consistency constraints. Extensive experiments on public datasets
(PHOENIX-2014 and PHOENIX-2014T) demonstrate that
our proposed CVT-SLR consistently outperforms existing
single-cue methods and even outperforms SOTA multi-cue
methods. The source codes and models are available at
https://github.com/binbinjiang/CVT- SLR.

1. Introduction
As a special visual natural language, sign language is
the primary communication medium of the deaf community
[19]. With the progress of deep learning [1, 17, 25, 39, 42],
sign language recognition (SLR) has emerged as a multimodal task that aims to annotate sign videos into textual
sign glosses. However, a significant dilemma of SLR is
the lack of publicly available sign language datasets. For
example, the most commonly-used PHOENIX-2014 [23]
and PHOENIX-2014T [2] datasets only include about 10K
pairs of sign videos and gloss annotations, which are far
from training a robust SLR system with full supervision as
typical vision-language cross-modal tasks [34]. Therefore,
data limitation that may easily lead to insufficient training
or overfitting problems is the main bottleneck of SLR tasks.
The development of weakly supervised SLR has witnessed most of the improvement efforts focus on the visual
module (e.g., CNN) [9, 10, 15, 29, 32, 33]. Transferring pretrained visual networks from general domains of human actions becomes a consensus to alleviate the low-resource limitation. The mainstream multi-stream SLR framework extends the pretrained visual module with multi-cue visual information [3,22,24,43,48,50], including global features and
regional features such as hands and faces in independent
streams. The theoretical support for this approach comes
from sign language linguistics, where sign language utilizes
multiple complementary channels (e.g., hand shapes, facial expressions) to convey information [3]. The multi-cue
mechanism essentially exploits hard attention to key information, yielding the current SOTA performances. However,
the multi-cue framework is complex (e.g., cropping multiple regions, requiring more parameters), and the fusion of
multiple streams might introduce additional potential noise.
Another mainstream advanced solution is the single-cue

* Corresponding author.

1
23141

