This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnyFlow: Arbitrary Scale Optical Flow with Implicit Neural Representation
Zhuo Hui2
Lei Luo2
Hyunyoung Jung1 *
Feng Liu2†
Sungjoo Yoo1
Rakesh Ranjan2
1

2

Seoul National University

Haitao Yang2
Denis Demandolx2

Meta Reality Labs

Abstract
To apply optical flow in practice, it is often necessary
to resize the input to smaller dimensions in order to reduce
computational costs. However, downsizing inputs makes the
estimation more challenging because objects and motion
ranges become smaller. Even though recent approaches
have demonstrated high-quality flow estimation, they tend
to fail to accurately model small objects and precise boundaries when the input resolution is lowered, restricting their
applicability to high-resolution inputs. In this paper, we
introduce AnyFlow, a robust network that estimates accurate flow from images of various resolutions. By representing optical flow as a continuous coordinate-based representation, AnyFlow generates outputs at arbitrary scales
from low-resolution inputs, demonstrating superior performance over prior works in capturing tiny objects with detail preservation on a wide range of scenes. We establish
a new state-of-the-art performance of cross-dataset generalization on the KITTI dataset, while achieving comparable
accuracy on the online benchmarks to other SOTA methods.

1. Introduction
Optical flow seeks to estimate per-pixel correspondences, characterized as the horizontal and vertical shift,
from a pair of images. Specifically, it aims to identify
the correspondence across pixels in different images, which
is at the heart of numerous computer vision tasks such as
video denoising [4, 33, 70], action recognition [55, 60, 62]
and object tracking [11, 26, 46]. This is particularly challenging due to the fact that the scene geometry and object
motion are combined into a single observation, making the
inverse problem of estimating motion highly ill-posed.
A common assumption for enabling computationally
tractable optical flow is to explicitly account for small motion in local neighborhood and incorporate additional prior
to constrain the solution space, such as using total variation
* This work was done during the author’s internship at Meta.
† Affiliated with Meta at the time of this work.

Figure 1. Predicting 50% downsized images on Sintel [5], we
compare AnyFlow to RAFT [57]. AnyFlow shows clearer boundaries, accurate shapes, and better detection of small objects.

prior [15, 71] and smooth prior [2, 3, 51]. While effective,
these techniques are significantly restricted by the assumption and do not generalize well for real-life scenes with sophisticated geometry and motions.
An alternative approach is motivated by the success of
deep neural networks. Different from using handcrafted
priors, learning-based methods [14, 67, 74] design end-toend networks to regress the motion field. Sun et al. [53]
use the coarse-to-fine approach to characterize the pixel-topixel mapping and several methods [20, 22, 44, 67] are developed along this line. The drawback of these approaches
is that the accuracy of flow estimation is not only limited by
the sampling but also has a critical dependence on a good
initial solution because the pixel correspondence is fundamentally ambiguous. Tedd and Deng [57] resort to iterative
update module on top of the correlation volumes, allowing
better estimates in tiny and fast-moving objects. Indeed the
success of this model relies on having a correlation volume
that is high quality in characterizing the feature correspondence for sub-pixel level. Inspired by its success, followup methods [23, 25, 36, 50, 52] have further improved it in
multiple ways. One popular direction is to introduce atten-

5455

