This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NAR-Former: Neural Architecture Representation Learning towards Holistic
Attributes Prediction
Yun Yi1 Haokui Zhang2,3,∗ Wenze Hu2 Nannan Wang1,∗ Xiaoyu Wang2
1
Xidian University 2 Intellifusion 3 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
yuny220@163.com
windsor.hwu@gmail.com

hkzhang1991@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

nnwang@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
With the wide and deep adoption of deep learning models in real applications, there is an increasing need to model
and learn the representations of the neural networks themselves. These models can be used to estimate attributes
of different neural network architectures such as the accuracy and latency, without running the actual training or
inference tasks. In this paper, we propose a neural architecture representation model that can be used to estimate these attributes holistically. Specifically, we first propose a simple and effective tokenizer to encode both the
operation and topology information of a neural network
into a single sequence. Then, we design a multi-stage fusion transformer to build a compact vector representation
from the converted sequence. For efficient model training, we further propose an information flow consistency
augmentation and correspondingly design an architecture
consistency loss, which brings more benefits with less augmentation samples compared with previous random augmentation strategies. Experiment results on NAS-Bench101, NAS-Bench-201, DARTS search space and NNLQP
show that our proposed framework can be used to predict the aforementioned latency and accuracy attributes of
both cell architectures and whole deep neural networks,
and achieves promising performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/yuny220/NAR-Former.

1. Introduction
As an ever increasing variety of deep neural network
models are widely adopted in academic research and real
applications, neural architecture representation is emerging as an universal need to predict model attributes holistically. For example, modern neural architecture search
(NAS) methods can depend on the neural architecture rep1 This work was done while Yun Yi was an intern at Intellifusion.
∗ Corresponding authors.

fanghuaxue@gmail.com

resentation to build good model accuracy predictors [5, 23,
24, 26, 31, 34], which estimate model accuracies without
running the expensive training procedure. In order to find
faster execution graphs when deploying models to neural
network accelerators, neural network compilers [3,20] need
it to build network latency predictors, which estimate the
real time cost without running it on the corresponding real
hardware. As a straightforward approach to solve these
holistic prediction tasks, a neural architecture representation model should be built to take the symbolic description
of the network as input, and generate its numerical representation which can be easily used with existing modeling
tools to perform the desired downstream tasks.
There are some neural architecture representation models proposed in solving the individual tasks mentioned
above, but we find they are rather application specific and
have obvious drawbacks when used in new tasks. For example, the early MLP, LSTM based accuracy prediction
approaches [6, 18, 24, 34] improve the efficiency and performance of NAS, while there is a limitation of prediction performance resulting from the the nonexistent or implicit topology encoding. Some later proposed GCN based
methods [4, 17, 36] achieve better performance of accuracy
prediction than the above methods. However, due to the
use of adjacency matrix, the encoding dimension of these
methods scales quadratically with the depth of the input architecture, making them difficult to model large networks.
NNLQP [20] implements latency prediction at the model
level, but GNN-based encoding scheme makes it inadequate
in modeling long range interactions between nodes.
Inspired by the progress in natural language understanding, our network uses a hand designed yet general and extensible token encoding approach to encode the topology
information and key parameters of the input neural network. Specifically, we design a generic real value tokenizer
to encode neural network nodes’ operation type, location,
and their inputs into vectors using the positional embedding approach that is widely used in transformers [33] and
NERF [25]. This fixed length node encoding scheme makes

7715

