This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Effective Visual Representations for Partial-Label Learning
Shiyu Xia1,∗ Jiaqi Lv2,∗ Ning Xu1 Gang Niu2,1 Xin Geng1,†
1
Southeast University 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
{shiyu xia, xning, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn, {is.jiaqi.lv, gang.niu.ml}@gmail.com

Supervised Learning
True label

Abstract

Eagle

Under partial-label learning (PLL) where, for each
training instance, only a set of ambiguous candidate labels
containing the unknown true label is accessible, contrastive
learning has recently boosted the performance of PLL on vision tasks, attributed to representations learned by contrasting the same/different classes of entities. Without access
to true labels, positive points are predicted using pseudolabels that are inherently noisy, and negative points often
require large batches or momentum encoders, resulting in
unreliable similarity information and a high computational
overhead. In this paper, we rethink a state-of-the-art contrastive PLL method PiCO [24], inspiring the design of a
simple framework termed PaPi (Partial-label learning with
a guided Prototypical classifier), which demonstrates significant scope for improvement in representation learning,
thus contributing to label disambiguation. PaPi guides the
optimization of a prototypical classifier by a linear classifier with which they share the same feature encoder, thus explicitly encouraging the representation to reflect visual similarity between categories. It is also technically appealing,
as PaPi requires only a few components in PiCO with the
opposite direction of guidance, and directly eliminates the
contrastive learning module that would introduce noise and
consume computational resources. We empirically demonstrate that PaPi significantly outperforms other PLL methods on various image classification tasks.

1. Introduction
The excellent performance of modern deep neural networks (DNNs) is attributed to the large-scale fully supervised training data, but the requirement for high-quality data
poses a challenge for the practical application. As a result,
non-expert but cheap labelers are often resorted as an appealing substitute, which inevitably leads to low-quality labeled data due to their expertise limitation. A typical sit* Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

Hawk

…

Vulture

Candidate label set

Partial-Label Learning

Figure 1. An image of “Eagle” in PLL is equipped with a candidate
label set. PLL learns from such ambiguous supervision, in contrast
to its supervised counterpart where only the true label is chosen.

uation is that the labelers have difficulty in making an accurate judgement about an instance from multiple ambiguous labels, and therefore choose multiple likely ones. For
example, in Fig. 1, it can be difficult for labelers without
specialist knowledge to identify an Eagle from a Hawk, so
both “Eagle” and “Hawk” are labeled as possible candidates for the true label. Learning from such training instances with a set of possible candidate labels, where only
one fixed but unknown is true, is known as partial-label
learning (PLL) [3, 4, 15, 22–24, 32, 38, 40]. This problem
naturally arises in various important applications in the real
world such as web mining [13] and image annotation [1].
Research into PLL dates back some twenty years and a
number of practical approaches have been proposed, which
can be divided into identification-based strategies [9, 20,
32, 38, 41] and average-based strategies [3, 8], depending
on how they treat candidate labels. Recently, DNNs bring
the research of PLL into a new era [4, 15, 26–28, 36, 37],
among which PiCO [24] has achieved state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks. It introduces a contrastive learning module into PLL that uses predictions of
one linear classifier to select pseudo positive samples for
each anchor point and maintains a queue of negative samples. Meanwhile, a momentum encoder is used to improve
consistency. In addition, PiCO adds a prototypical classifier
module (called prototype-based in the original) to guide the
update of the linear classifier, which is based on the idea that
there exists an embedding space where points from the same
class cluster around its prototype [19]. PiCO claims credit
for its success to the mutual benefit of contrastive learning
and prototype-based label disambiguation.

15589

