This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CutMIB: Boosting Light Field Super-Resolution via Multi-View Image Blending
Zeyu Xiao Yutong Liu Ruisheng Gao Zhiwei Xiong*
University of Science and Technology of China
{zeyuxiao,ustclyt,grsmc4180}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Data augmentation (DA) is an efficient strategy for improving the performance of deep neural networks. Recent
DA strategies have demonstrated utility in single image
super-resolution (SR). Little research has, however, focused
on the DA strategy for light field SR, in which multi-view
information utilization is required. For the first time in light
field SR, we propose a potent DA strategy called CutMIB to
improve the performance of existing light field SR networks
while keeping their structures unchanged. Specifically, CutMIB first cuts low-resolution (LR) patches from each view
at the same location. Then CutMIB blends all LR patches
to generate the blended patch and finally pastes the blended
patch to the corresponding regions of high-resolution light
field views, and vice versa. By doing so, CutMIB enables light field SR networks to learn from implicit geometric information during the training stage. Experimental results demonstrate that CutMIB can improve the reconstruction performance and the angular consistency of
existing light field SR networks. We further verify the effectiveness of CutMIB on real-world light field SR and light
field denoising. The implementation code is available at
https://github.com/zeyuxiao1997/CutMIB.

1. Introduction
Light field cameras, which can record spatial and angular
information of light rays, have rapidly become prominent
imaging devices in virtual and augmented reality. Light
fields are suitable for various applications, such as postcapture refocusing [35, 55], disparity estimation [52], and
foreground occlusion removal [54, 69], thanks to the abundance of 4D spatial-angular information they contain. Commercialized light field cameras generally adopt micro-lensarray in front of the sensor, which poses an essential tradeoff between the angular and spatial resolutions [29, 35].
Therefore, light field super-resolution (SR) has been an important and popular topic. Convolutional neural network
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparisons on the reconstruction fidelity (PSNR, ↑)
and the angular consistency (MSE, ↓) between light fields superresolved through different methods. Following [9], we superresolve the whole light field of the scene Bicycle from the HCI
dataset to analyze the angular consistency of the super-resolved
results in terms of disparity estimation using SPO [70]. Note that,
CutMIB improves the values of PSNR and lowers the values of
MSE by a large margin as compared to naı̈ve light field SR methods (e.g., ATO [27], InterNet [53], IINet [33], and DPT [47]).

(CNN) based and Transformer based methods have recently
shown promising performance for light field SR [7, 8, 10,
26, 31, 33, 47, 52, 53, 56], outperforming traditional nonlearning based methods [1, 38] with noticeable gains. This
performance boost is obtained by training deep methods on
external datasets. Few works have investigated data augmentation (DA) strategies for light field SR, which can improve the model performance without the need for additional training datasets given that obtaining these light field
data is often time-consuming and expensive [19, 23, 36, 48].
DA has been well studied in high-level vision tasks (e.g.,
image recognition, image classification, and semantic segmentation) for achieving better network performance and
alleviating the overfitting problem [14,44,49,64,66,71]. For
example, as one of the pioneering strategies, Mixup [66]

1672

