This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-Based Trit-Plane Coding for Progressive Image Compression
Seungmin Jeon1 , Kwang Pyo Choi2 , Youngo Park2 , Chang-Su Kim1 *
1
Korea University, 2 Samsung Electronics
seungminjeon@mcl.korea.ac.kr, {kp5.choi, youngo.park}@samsung.com, changsukim@korea.ac.kr

34

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image compression is a fundamental problem in both
image processing and low-level vision. A lot of traditional codecs have been developed, including standards
JPEG [47], JPEG2000 [40], and VVC [11]. Many of these
codecs are based on discrete cosine transform or wavelet
transform. Using handcrafted modules, they provide decent rate-distortion (RD) results. However, with the rapidly
growing usage of image data, it is still necessary to develop
advanced image codecs with better RD performance.
Deep learning has been explored with the advance of big
data analysis and computational power, and it also has been
successfully adopted for image compression. Learningbased codecs have similar structures to traditional ones:
they transform an image into latent variables and then encode those variables into a bitstream. They often adopt convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for the transformation.
Several innovations have been made to improve RD performance, including differentiable quantization approxima* Corresponding author.

14348

34.5

Original

PSNR (dB)

Trit-plane coding enables deep progressive image compression, but it cannot use autoregressive context models. In this paper, we propose the context-based trit-plane
coding (CTC) algorithm to achieve progressive compression more compactly. First, we develop the context-based
rate reduction module to estimate trit probabilities of latent elements accurately and thus encode the trit-planes
compactly. Second, we develop the context-based distortion reduction module to reﬁne partial latent tensors from
the trit-planes and improve the reconstructed image quality. Third, we propose a retraining scheme for the decoder to attain better rate-distortion tradeoffs. Extensive
experiments show that CTC outperforms the baseline tritplane codec signiﬁcantly, e.g. by −14.84% in BD-rate on
the Kodak lossless dataset, while increasing the time complexity only marginally. The source codes are available at
https://github.com/seungminjeon-github/CTC.

Context models
(0.191, 33.27)

33

CDR
Baseline
(0.210, 32.47)

33.5

32

Baseline

Context models

CRR

0.18

0.19

0.20

0.21

bpp

RD points

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed context models: CRR reduces the bitrate, while CDR improves the image quality, as compared with the context-free baseline [27].

tions [5, 6], hyperprior [7], context models [20, 32, 33], and
prior models [13,15]. As a result, the deep image codecs are
competitive with or even superior to the traditional ones.
It is desirable to compress images progressively in applications where a single bitstream should be used for multiple users with different bandwidths. But, relatively few
deep codecs support such progressive compression or scalable coding [35]. Many codecs should train their networks
multiple times to achieve compression at as many bitrates
[7, 13, 33, 53]. Some codecs support variable-rate coding
[15, 51], but they should generate multiple bitstreams for
different bitrates. It is more efﬁcient to truncate a single
bitstream to satisfy different bitrate requirements. Lu et al.
[30] and Lee et al. [27] are such progressive codecs, based
on nested quantization and trit-plane coding, respectively.
But, they cannot use existing context models [20,26,32–34],
which assume the synchronization of the latent elements,
used as contexts, in the encoder and the decoder. Those
latent elements are at different states depending on bitrates.
In this paper, we propose the context-based trit-plane
coding (CTC) algorithm for progressive image compression, based on novel context models. First, we develop the
context-based rate reduction (CRR) module, which entropyencodes trit-planes more compactly by exploiting already
decoded information. Second, we develop the contextbased distortion reduction (CDR) module, which reﬁnes

