This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Neural Fields for Real-Time Articulated Shape Reconstruction
Jeff Tan Gengshan Yang Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University
Dynamic
NeRF
[0.016 fps]

Video dataset

Test-time
optimization

Articulations

Shape/Texture

Cameras

Latent space

Decoder
(learned)

Rendered
NeRF

Decoder
(frozen)

Rendered
meshes

Distill

Ours:
DASR
[15 fps]

Articulations

Shape/Texture
Unseen videos

Forward
inference

Cameras

Latent space

Figure 1. By distilling knowledge from dynamic NeRFs fitted to offline video data at scale [16, 44], we present a method to train categoryspecific real-time video shape predictors, which output temporally-consistent viewpoint, articulation, and appearance given casual input
videos. Our method replaces expensive test-time optimization with a single forward pass, allowing real-time inference on a RTX-3090
GPU. Compared to existing model-based methods for reconstructing humans and animals in motion [13, 18, 31], our method does not
require pre-defined 3D templates or ground-truth 3D data to train. (Project page: https://jefftan969.github.io/dasr).

Abstract
We present a method for reconstructing articulated 3D
models from videos in real-time, without test-time optimization or manual 3D supervision at training time. Prior
work often relies on pre-built deformable models (e.g.
SMAL/SMPL), or slow per-scene optimization through differentiable rendering (e.g. dynamic NeRFs). Such methods
fail to support arbitrary object categories, or are unsuitable for real-time applications. To address the challenge
of collecting large-scale 3D training data for arbitrary deformable object categories, our key insight is to use offthe-shelf video-based dynamic NeRFs as 3D supervision to
train a fast feed-forward network, turning 3D shape and
motion prediction into a supervised distillation task. Our
temporal-aware network uses articulated bones and blend
skinning to represent arbitrary deformations, and is selfsupervised on video datasets without requiring 3D shapes
or viewpoints as input. Through distillation, our network
learns to 3D-reconstruct unseen articulated objects at interactive frame rates. Our method yields higher-fidelity 3D
reconstructions than prior real-time methods for animals,
with the ability to render realistic images at novel viewpoints and poses.

1. Introduction
We are interested in building high-quality animatable
models of articulated 3D objects from videos in real time.
One promising application is virtual and augmented reality, where the goal is to create high-fidelity 3D experiences
from images and videos captured live by users. For rigid
scenes, structure from motion (SfM) and neural rendering
can be used to build accurate 3D cities and landmarks from
Internet image collections [1, 20, 33]. For articulated objects such as friends and pets, many works parameterize the
range of motions using category-specific templates such as
SMPL [18] for humans and SMAL [4] for quadruped animals. Although these methods can be trained on large-scale
video datasets, they rely on parametric body template models built from extensive real-world 3D scans: these body
models are not easy to generate for diverse categories in the
wild such as clothed humans or pets with distinct morphologies, which are often the focus of user content.
Inspired by the breakthrough success of neural radiance
fields [21], many works reconstruct arbitrary articulated objects in an analysis-by-synthesis framework [16, 27, 28, 30,
36, 44] by defining time-dependent 3D warping fields and
establishing long-range correspondences on top of canon-

4692

