This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Multimodal Representation in Contrastive Learning: From Patch and
Token Embeddings to Finite Discrete Tokens
Yuxiao Chen1*, Jianbo Yuan2 , Yu Tian2 , Shijie Geng1,2 , Xinyu Li2 ,
†
Ding Zhou2 , Dimitris N. Metaxas1 , Hongxia Yang3
1
Rutgers University 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 Zhejiang University
{yc984, sg1309, dnm}@rutgers.edu,
{jianbo.yuan, yutian.yt, lixinyu.arthur, ding.zhou}@bytedance.com
hongxia.yang1@gmail.com

Abstract
Contrastive learning-based vision-language pretraining approaches, such as CLIP, have demonstrated
great success in many vision-language tasks. These methods achieve cross-modal alignment by encoding a matched
image-text pair with similar feature embeddings, which are
generated by aggregating information from visual patches
and language tokens. However, direct aligning cross-modal
information using such representations is challenging, as
visual patches and text tokens differ in semantic levels and
granularities. To alleviate this issue, we propose a Finite
Discrete Tokens (FDT) based multimodal representation.
FDT is a set of learnable tokens representing certain visualsemantic concepts. Both images and texts are embedded
using shared FDT by first grounding multimodal inputs
to FDT space and then aggregating the activated FDT
representations. The matched visual and semantic concepts
are enforced to be represented by the same set of discrete
tokens by a sparse activation constraint. As a result, the
granularity gap between the two modalities is reduced.
Through both quantitative and qualitative analyses, we
demonstrate that using FDT representations in CLIP-style
models improves cross-modal alignment and performance
in visual recognition and vision-language downstream
tasks. Furthermore, we show that our method can learn
more comprehensive representations, and the learned FDT
capture meaningful cross-modal correspondence, ranging
from objects to actions and attributes.1

1. Introduction
Recently, the Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
(CLIP) framework [16, 27] has demonstrated notable capa* This work was done during a research internship at ByteDance.
† Dimitris N. Metaxas has been supported by NSF IUCRC CARTA-

1747778, 2235405, 2212301, 1951890, 2003874.
1 The source code can be found at https : / / github . com /
yuxiaochen1103/FDT.

Multimodal
Space

FDT

Activated
FDT

Vision

Language
Vision
A smiling dog
on the grass

Language
A smiling dog
on the grass

Figure 1. Comparison of different feature representation learning
methods. Left: contrastive vision-language pre-training (CLIP).
Right: CLIP with our proposed finite discrete tokens (FDT).

bilities for learning powerful and transferable feature representations [10, 22, 40–43]. In this framework, models
are trained to align text and image information in a twostream approach where image and text representations are
extracted through two separate encoders. The InfoNCE
loss [27] is used to train the encoders which enforces the
representations of matched image-text pairs to be closer,
while those of unmatched pairs to be far apart (as shown
in Figure 1 (Left)).
However, the fact that the information conveyed in images and text captions is naturally of different levels of granularities [29, 34] is not considered by such models. For example, an image of a dog also portrays various lower-level
attributes, such as its breed, fur color, body size, and shape,
while the textual description, such as “a smiling dog”, is
generally more abstract and compact. In CLIP, images and
text captions are represented through the aggregation of visual patches and text tokens without explicitly aligning the
visual and semantic concepts at the same level of granularity. It can cause challenges in multimodal representation
learning, or even potentially result in performance degradation [35]. Additionally, the learned models may overlook
certain semantic concepts [14]. Therefore, we argue that

15095

