This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamBooth: Fine Tuning Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
for Subject-Driven Generation
Nataniel Ruiz∗,1,2
Yuanzhen Li1
Varun Jampani1
Yael Pritch1
Michael Rubinstein1
Kfir Aberman1
1
2
Google Research
Boston University

Figure 1. With just a few images (typically 3-5) of a subject (left), DreamBooth—our AI-powered photo booth—can generate a myriad
of images of the subject in different contexts (right), using the guidance of a text prompt. The results exhibit natural interactions with the
environment, as well as novel articulations and variation in lighting conditions, all while maintaining high fidelity to the key visual features
of the subject.

Abstract
Large text-to-image models achieved a remarkable leap
in the evolution of AI, enabling high-quality and diverse
synthesis of images from a given text prompt. However,
these models lack the ability to mimic the appearance of
subjects in a given reference set and synthesize novel renditions of them in different contexts. In this work, we present
a new approach for “personalization” of text-to-image diffusion models. Given as input just a few images of a subject, we fine-tune a pretrained text-to-image model such that
it learns to bind a unique identifier with that specific subject. Once the subject is embedded in the output domain of
the model, the unique identifier can be used to synthesize
novel photorealistic images of the subject contextualized in
different scenes. By leveraging the semantic prior embedded in the model with a new autogenous class-specific prior
preservation loss, our technique enables synthesizing the
subject in diverse scenes, poses, views and lighting conditions that do not appear in the reference images. We apply our technique to several previously-unassailable tasks,
including subject recontextualization, text-guided view synthesis, and artistic rendering, all while preserving the subject’s key features. We also provide a new dataset and evaluation protocol for this new task of subject-driven generation. Project page: https://dreambooth.github.io/
*This research was performed while Nataniel Ruiz was at Google.

1. Introduction
Can you imagine your own dog traveling around the
world, or your favorite bag displayed in the most exclusive
showroom in Paris? What about your parrot being the main
character of an illustrated storybook? Rendering such imaginary scenes is a challenging task that requires synthesizing
instances of specific subjects (e.g., objects, animals) in new
contexts such that they naturally and seamlessly blend into
the scene.
Recently developed large text-to-image models have
shown unprecedented capabilities, by enabling high-quality
and diverse synthesis of images based on a text prompt written in natural language [51,58]. One of the main advantages
of such models is the strong semantic prior learned from a
large collection of image-caption pairs. Such a prior learns,
for instance, to bind the word “dog” with various instances
of dogs that can appear in different poses and contexts in
an image. While the synthesis capabilities of these models
are unprecedented, they lack the ability to mimic the appearance of subjects in a given reference set, and synthesize
novel renditions of the same subjects in different contexts.
The main reason is that the expressiveness of their output
domain is limited; even the most detailed textual description
of an object may yield instances with different appearances.

22500

