This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Elastic Aggregation for Federated Optimization
Dengsheng Chen1∗ , Jie Hu2,3 ,* Vince Junkai Tan4 , Xiaoming Wei1 , Enhua Wu2,3,5†
1
2
Meituan
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, ISCAS
3
4
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Bytedance Inc.
University of Macau
{chendengsheng,weixiaoming}@meituan.com, hujie@ios.ac.cn, vince.tan.jun.kai@gmail.com, ehwu@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Federated learning enables the privacy-preserving training of neural network models using real-world data across
distributed clients. FedAvg has become the preferred optimizer for federated learning because of its simplicity and
effectiveness. FedAvg uses naïve aggregation to update the
server model, interpolating client models based on the number of instances used in their training. However, naïve aggregation suffers from client drift when the data is heterogenous (non-IID), leading to unstable and slow convergence.
In this work, we propose a novel aggregation approach,
elastic aggregation, to overcome these issues. Elastic aggregation interpolates client models adaptively according to
parameter sensitivity, which is measured by computing how
much the overall prediction function output changes when
each parameter is changed. This measurement is performed
in an unsupervised and online manner. Elastic aggregation
reduces the magnitudes of updates to the more sensitive parameters so as to prevent the server model from drifting to
any one client distribution, and conversely boosts updates to
the less sensitive parameters to better explore different client
distributions. Empirical results on real and synthetic data
as well as analytical results show that elastic aggregation
leads to efficient training in both convex and non-convex
settings while being fully agnostic to client heterogeneity
and robust to large numbers of clients, partial participation,
and imbalanced data. Finally, elastic aggregation works
well with other federated optimizers and achieves significant
improvements across the board.

1. Introduction
Unlike traditional centralized learning in which models
are trained using large datasets stored in a central server [15],
federated learning - first proposed in [40] - leverages data
spread across many clients to learn classification tasks dis* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. This work is supported in part by NSFC Grants

(62072449).

tributively without explicitly sharing data [22, 26, 27, 42],
thereby ensuring a basic level of privacy. Federated learning
is characterized by four key features:
• Unreliable links: The links connecting the server and
clients can be unreliable, and only a small subset of
clients may be active at any given time.
• Massive distribution: The number of clients is typically
high, but the amount of data per client is relatively
small.
• Substantial heterogeneity: Client data is heterogeneous
and non-IID [26], meaning that data across different
clients can be sampled from varying regions of the
sampling space.
• Imbalanced data: There can be significant imbalances
in the amount of data available per client.
The most popular algorithm for federated learning is FedAvg [40], which tackles the communication bottleneck by
performing multiple local updates on the available clients
before communicating the overall change to the server. FedAvg uses naïve aggregation to interpolate client models
and has shown success in certain applications. However, its
performance on heterogeneous data is still an active area of
research [16, 25, 33]. According to [25], training models on
local data that minimize local empirical loss appears to be
meaningful, but yet, doing so is fundamentally inconsistent
with minimizing the global empirical loss. Client updates
drive the server model away from the ideal distribution, a
phenomenon known as ’client drift’. Naïve aggregation [40]
is efficient in aggregating client models but does not account
for distribution inconsistencies across client data or the consequent objective inconsistency. In other words, with naïve
aggregation, the server model risks converging to a stationary point of a mismatched objective function which can be
arbitrarily different from the true objective [53].
Prior works [24, 40, 48] attempt to overcome this issue by
running fewer epochs or iterations of SGD on the devices or
by stabilizing server-side updates so that the resulting models
correspond to inexact minimizations and keep globally desirable properties. In this work, we propose a novel aggregation

12187

