This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IS-GGT: Iterative Scene Graph Generation with Generative Transformers
Sanjoy Kundu
Department of Computer Science
Oklahoma State University

Sathyanarayanan N. Aakur
Department of Computer Science
Oklahoma State University

sanjoy.kundu@okstate.edu

saakurn@okstate.edu

Abstract
Scene graphs provide a rich, structured representation
of a scene by encoding the entities (objects) and their spatial relationships in a graphical format. This representation
has proven useful in several tasks, such as question answering, captioning, and even object detection, to name a few.
Current approaches take a generation-by-classification approach where the scene graph is generated through labeling
of all possible edges between objects in a scene, which adds
computational overhead to the approach. This work introduces a generative transformer-based approach to generating scene graphs beyond link prediction. Using two
transformer-based components, we first sample a possible
scene graph structure from detected objects and their visual
features. We then perform predicate classification on the
sampled edges to generate the final scene graph. This approach allows us to efficiently generate scene graphs from
images with minimal inference overhead. Extensive experiments on the Visual Genome dataset demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed approach. Without bells and whistles, we obtain, on average, 20.7% mean recall (mR@100)
across different settings for scene graph generation (SGG),
outperforming state-of-the-art SGG approaches while offering competitive performance to unbiased SGG approaches.

1. Introduction
Graph-based visual representations are becoming increasingly popular due to their ability to encode visual, semantic, and even temporal relationships in a compact representation that has several downstream tasks such as object tracking [4], scene understanding [17] and event complex visual commonsense reasoning [2, 3, 22]. Graphs can
help navigate clutter and express complex semantic structures from visual inputs to mitigate the impact of noise,
clutter, and (appearance/scene) variability, which is essential in scene understanding. Scene graphs, defined as directed graphs that model the visual-semantic relationships

among entities (objects) in a given scene, have proven to be
very useful in downstream tasks such as visual questionanswering [14, 34], captioning [17], and even embodied
tasks such as navigation [27], to name a few.
There has been a growing body of work [7, 10, 29, 33,
36, 38, 41] that has focused on the problem of scene graph
generation (SGG), that aims to generate scene graph from
a given input observation. However, such approaches have
tackled the problem by beginning with a fully connected
graph, where all entities interact with each other before
pruning it down to a more compact graph by predicting edge
relationships, or the lack of one, between each pair of localized entities. This approach, while effective, has several
limitations. First, by modeling the interactions between entities with a dense topology, the underlying semantic structure is ignored during relational reasoning, which can lead
to poor predicate (relationship) classification. Second, by
constructing pairwise relationships between all entities in a
scene, there is tremendous overhead on the predicate classification modules since the number of pairwise comparisons
can grow non-linearly with the increase in the number of
detected concepts. Combined, these two issues aggravate
the existing long-tail distribution problem in scene graph
generation. Recent progress in unbiasing [21, 31–33] has
attempted to address this issue by tackling the long-tail distribution problem. However, they depend on the quality of
the underlying graph generation approaches, which suffer
from the above limitations.
In this work, we aim to overcome these limitations
using a two-stage, generative approach called IS-GGT,
a transformer-based iterative scene graph generation approach. An overview of the approach is illustrated in Figure 1. Contrary to current approaches to SGG, we leverage
advances in generative graph models [5, 23] to first sample the underlying interaction graph between the detected
entities before reasoning over this sampled semantic structure for scene graph generation. By decoupling the ideas
of graph generation and relationship modeling, we can constrain the relationship classification process to consider only
those edges (pairs of entities) that have a higher probability
16292

