This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Pseudo-Label Rectified Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
with Implicit Neural Representations
1

Rui Gong1 Qin Wang1 Martin Danelljan1 Dengxin Dai2 Luc Van Gool1
CVL, ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

{gongr, qin.wang, martin.danelljan, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, ddai@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic
segmentation aims at improving the model performance
on the unlabeled target domain by leveraging a labeled
source domain. Existing approaches have achieved impressive progress by utilizing pseudo-labels on the unlabeled target-domain images. Yet the low-quality pseudolabels, arising from the domain discrepancy, inevitably hinder the adaptation. This calls for effective and accurate approaches to estimating the reliability of the pseudo-labels,
in order to rectify them. In this paper, we propose to estimate the rectification values of the predicted pseudo-labels
with implicit neural representations. We view the rectification value as a signal defined over the continuous spatial domain. Taking an image coordinate and the nearby
deep features as inputs, the rectification value at a given
coordinate is predicted as an output. This allows us to
achieve high-resolution and detailed rectification values estimation, important for accurate pseudo-label generation
at mask boundaries in particular. The rectified pseudolabels are then leveraged in our rectification-aware mixture
model (RMM) to be learned end-to-end and help the adaptation. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
different UDA benchmarks, including synthetic-to-real and
day-to-night. Our approach achieves superior results compared to state-of-the-art. The implementation is available
at https://github.com/ETHRuiGong/IR2F.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, aiming at assigning the semantic label to each pixel in an image, is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Driven by the availability of
large-scale datasets and the advancements in deep neural
networks (DNNs), the state-of-the-art boundary has been
pushed rapidly in the last decade [9, 35, 38, 51, 59, 70, 78].
However, the DNNs trained on a source domain, e.g. day
images, generalize poorly to a different target domain, e.g.

night images, due to the distribution shift between the domains. One straightforward idea to circumvent the issue
is to annotate the images from the target domain, and then
retrain the model. However, annotations for semantic segmentation are particularly costly and labor-intensive to produce, since each pixel has to be labeled. To this end,
some recent works [18,21,61,63,77] resort to unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA), where the model is trained on
the labeled source domain and an unlabeled target domain
dataset, reducing the annotation burden.
Different from the predominant UDA methods that explicitly align the source and target distributions on the
image-level [18, 21, 33, 73] or the feature-level [61–63],
pseudo-labeling or self-training [23,24,60,76,82,83] has recently emerged as a simple yet effective approach for UDA.
Pseudo-labeling approaches typically first generate pseudolabels on the unlabeled target domain using the current
model. The model is then fine-tuned with target pseudolabels in an iterative manner. However, some pseudo-labels
are inevitably incorrect because of the domain shift. Therefore, pseudo-label correction, or rectification, is critical for
the adaptation process. This is typically implemented in
the literature by removing [82, 83] or assigning a smaller
weight [24, 67, 76, 79] to pixels with low-quality and potentially incorrect pseudo-labels. The key problem is thus to
formulate a rectification function that estimates the pseudolabel quality. We identify two important issues with current
approaches.
First, most existing methods use hard-coded heuristics
as the rectification function, e.g. hard thresholding of the
softmax confidence [82, 83], prediction variances of different learners [79], or distance to prototypes [67, 76]. These
heuristic rectification functions assume on strong correlations between the function and the pseudo-label quality,
which may not be the case. For example, the rectification
function that uses the variance of multiple learners [79] to
suppress disagreement on the pseudo-labels can be sensitive
to small objects in the adaptation [24].
The second issue is that the existing works [24] typically
model the rectification function in a discrete spatial grid

7225

