This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Geometry-Aware Encoder for Style-Based 3D GAN Inversion
1

Yushi Lan1
Xuyi Meng1
Shuai Yang1
Chen Change Loy1
Bo Dai2
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Abstract

StyleGAN has achieved great progress in 2D face reconstruction and semantic editing via image inversion and latent editing. While studies over extending 2D StyleGAN to
3D faces have emerged, a corresponding generic 3D GAN
inversion framework is still missing, limiting the applications of 3D face reconstruction and semantic editing. In
this paper, we study the challenging problem of 3D GAN
inversion where a latent code is predicted given a single
face image to faithfully recover its 3D shapes and detailed
textures. The problem is ill-posed: innumerable compositions of shape and texture could be rendered to the current image. Furthermore, with the limited capacity of a
global latent code, 2D inversion methods cannot preserve
faithful shape and texture at the same time when applied to
3D models. To solve this problem, we devise an effective
self-training scheme to constrain the learning of inversion.
The learning is done efficiently without any real-world 2D3D training pairs but proxy samples generated from a 3D
GAN. In addition, apart from a global latent code that captures the coarse shape and texture information, we augment
the generation network with a local branch, where pixelaligned features are added to faithfully reconstruct face details. We further consider a new pipeline to perform 3D
view-consistent editing. Extensive experiments show that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art inversion methods
in both shape and texture reconstruction quality.

1. Introduction
This work aims to devise an effective approach for
encoder-based 3D Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
inversion. In particular, we focus on the reconstruction of
3D face, requiring just a single 2D face image as the input.
In the inversion process, we wish to map a given image to
the latent space and obtain an editable latent code with an
encoder. The latent code will be further fed to a generator to
reconstruct the corresponding 3D shape with high-quality
shape and texture. Further to the learning of an inversion
encoder, we also wish to develop an approach to synthesize
3D view-consistent editing results, e.g., changing a neutral
expression to smiling, by altering the estimated latent code.
GAN inversion [50] has been extensively studied for 2D
images but remains underexplored in the 3D world. Inver-

sion can be achieved via optimization [1, 2, 41], which typically provides a precise image-to-latent mapping but can be
time-consuming, or encoder-based techniques [40, 47, 49],
which explicitly learn an encoding network that maps an
image into the latent space. Encoder-based techniques enjoy faster inversion, but the mapping is typically inferior to
optimization. In this study, we extend the notion of encoderbased inversion from 2D images to 3D shapes.
Adding the additional dimension makes inversion more
challenging beyond the goal of reconstructing an editable
shape with detail preservation. In particular, 1) Recovering
3D shapes from 2D images is an ill-posed problem, where
innumerable compositions of shape and texture could generate identical rendering results. 3D supervisions are crucial to alleviate the ambiguity of shape inversion from images. Though high-quality 2D datasets are easily accessible, owing to the expensive cost of scans there is currently a
lack of large-scale labeled 3D datasets. 2) The global latent
code, due to its compact and low-dimensional nature, only
captures the coarse shape and texture information. Without high-frequency spatial details, we cannot generate highfidelity outputs. 3) Compared with 2D inversion methods
where the editing view mostly aligns with the input view,
in 3D editing we expect the editing results to perform well
over the novel views with large pose variations. Therefore, 3D GAN inversion is non-trivial task and could not
be achieved by directly applying existing approaches.
To this end, we propose a novel Encoder-based 3D GAN
invErsion framework, E3DGE, which addresses the aforementioned three challenges. Our framework has three novel
components with a delicate model design. Specifically:
Learning Inversion with Self-supervised Learning - The
first component focuses on the training of the inversion encoder. To address the shape collapse of single-view 3D reconstruction without external 3D datasets, we retrofit the
generator of a 3D GAN model to provide us with diverse
pseudo training samples, which can then be used to train
our inversion encoder in a self-supervised manner. Specifically, we generate 3D shapes from the latent space W of
a 3D GAN, and then render diverse 2D views from each
3D shape given different camera poses. In this way, we can
generate many pseudo 2D-3D pairs together with the corresponding latent codes. Since the pseudo pairs are generated
from a smooth latent space that learns to approximate a nat1
20940

