This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LP-DIF: Learning Local Pattern-speciﬁc Deep Implicit Function for 3D Objects
and Scenes
Meng Wang1

Yu-Shen Liu1 * Yue Gao1

Kanle Shi2

Yi Fang3

Zhizhong Han 4

1 School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2 Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China

3 Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE
4 Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA

{meng wang, gaoyue, liuyushen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
shikanle@kuaishou.com

yfang@nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep Implicit Function (DIF) has gained much popularity as an efﬁcient 3D shape representation. To capture
geometry details, current mainstream methods divide 3D
shapes into local regions and then learn each one with a
local latent code via a decoder. Such local methods can
capture more local details due to less diversity among local
regions than global shapes. Although the diversity of local
regions has been decreased compared to global approaches,
the diversity in different local regions still poses a challenge
in learning an implicit function when treating all regions
equally using only a single decoder. What is worse, these
local regions often exhibit imbalanced distributions, where
certain regions have signiﬁcantly fewer observations. This
leads that ﬁne geometry details could not be preserved well.
To solve this problem, we propose a novel Local Patternspeciﬁc Implicit Function, named LP-DIF, to represent a
shape with clusters of local regions and multiple decoders,
where each decoder only focuses on one cluster of local regions which share a certain pattern. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
extract local codes for all regions, and then cluster them
into multiple groups in the latent space, where similar regions sharing a common pattern fall into one group. After
that, we train multiple decoders for mining local patterns of
different groups, which simpliﬁes the learning of ﬁne geometric details by reducing the diversity of local regions seen
by each decoder. To further alleviate the data-imbalance
problem, we introduce a region re-weighting module to
each pattern-speciﬁc decoder using a kernel density estimator, which dynamically re-weights the regions during learn* The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported
by National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC3800600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and
in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

21856

h312h@wayne.edu

ing. Our LP-DIF can restore more geometry details, and
thus improve the quality of 3D reconstruction. Experiments
demonstrate that our method can achieve the state-of-theart performance over previous methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/gtyxyz/lpdif.

1. Introduction
Representing 3D shapes is a fundamental problem for
many applications in 3D computer vision. Recently, Deep
Implicit Function (DIF) [4,22,23,25,28,41] has gained popularity for efﬁciently learning the representation of 3D objects and scenes. In contrast to directly learning explicit 3D
representations [15,30,31] (voxels, point clouds or meshes),
DIF aims to train a neural network to learn the binary occupancy function [25] or signed distance function (SDF) [28],
as given a query location and an input latent code. Such
kind of representation is continuous with arbitrary precision
and can handle various topology, which has achieved the
state-of-the-art results in several shape reconstruction tasks.
Existing DIF methods can be roughly classiﬁed into two
categories: global and local approaches. Most of the early
methods [4, 9, 20, 21, 25, 27–29, 35, 37, 40] fall into global
approaches. These methods take advantage of one latent
code and a single decoder to represent the whole shape.
Global approaches often suffer from long training time and
low reconstruction accuracy due to the limited capacity of
capturing local geometry details. More recently, local approaches [1,3,5,6,10–12,17,19,34,36,38] divide 3D shapes
(often divide by 3D grids) into local regions and then learn
each one with a local latent code via a decoder, where the
decoder shares the geometric similarities among different
local regions. Although such local approaches can capture
some local details, a large diversity of different local regions
still increase the difﬁculty of learning an implicit function

