This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast Point Cloud Generation with Straight Flows
Lemeng Wu1 , Dilin Wang2 , Chengyue Gong1 , Xingchao Liu1 , Yunyang Xiong2 ,
Rakesh Ranjan2 , Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi2 , Vikas Chandra2 , Qiang Liu1
1
2
University of Texas at Austin
Meta
{lmwu, cygong, xcliu, lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu,

{wdilin, rakeshr, raghuraman, vchandra}@fb.com

Abstract

tion costs for generating meaningful point cloud in practice. Notice that the learning transport trajectory follows the
simulation process of solving stochastic differentiable equation (SDE). A trained neural SDE can have different distribution mappings at each step, which makes the acceleration
challenging even with an advanced ordinary differentiable
equation (ODE) solver.
To address this challenge, several recent works have proposed strategies that avoid using thousands of steps for the
meaningful 3D point cloud generation. For example, [26,35]
suggest distilling the high-quality 3D point cloud generator,
DDIM model [37], into a few-step or one-step generator.
While the computation cost is reduced by applying distillation to shorten the DDIM trajectory into one-step or few-step
generator. The distillation process learns a direct mapping
between the initial state and the final state of DDIM, which
needs to compress hundreds of irregular steps into one-step.
Empirically it leads to an obvious performance drop. Further,
these distillation techniques are mainly developed for generating images with the grid structure, which is unsuitable for
applying to point cloud generation since the point cloud is
an unordered set of points with irregular structures.
In this paper, we propose using one-step to generate 3D
point clouds. Our method, Point Straight Flow (PSF), learns
a straight generative transport trajectory from a noisy point
cloud to a desired 3D shape for acceleration. This is achieved
by passing the neural flow model once to estimate the transport trajectory. Specifically, we first formulate an ODE transport flow as the initial 3D generator with a simpler trajectory
compared with the diffusion model formulated in SDE. Then
we optimize the transport flow cost for the initial flow model
to significantly straighten the learning trajectory while maintaining the model’s performance by adopting the ideas from
recent works [20, 22]. This leads to a straight flow by optimizing the curvy learning trajectory into a straight path.
Lastly, with the straight transport trajectory, we further design a distillation technique to shorten the path into one-step
for 3D point cloud generation.
To evaluate our method, we undertake an extensive set
of experiments on 3D point cloud tasks. We first verify

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool for
point cloud generation. A key component that drives the
impressive performance for generating high-quality samples from noise is iteratively denoise for thousands of steps.
While beneficial, the complexity of learning steps has limited its applications to many 3D real-world. To address this
limitation, we propose Point Straight Flow (PSF), a model
that exhibits impressive performance using one step. Our
idea is based on the reformulation of the standard diffusion
model, which optimizes the curvy learning trajectory into
a straight path. Further, we develop a distillation strategy
to shorten the straight path into one step without a performance loss, enabling applications to 3D real-world with
latency constraints. We perform evaluations on multiple
3D tasks and find that our PSF performs comparably to the
standard diffusion model, outperforming other efficient 3D
point cloud generation methods. On real-world applications
such as point cloud completion and training-free text-guided
generation in a low-latency setup, PSF performs favorably.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud generation has many real-world applications across vision and robotics, including self-driving
and virtual reality. A lot of efforts have been devoted
to realistic 3D point cloud generation, such as VAE [14],
GAN [1, 36], Normalizing Flow [13, 16, 43] and score-based
method [5, 27, 47, 50], and diffusion model [27, 47, 50].
Among them, diffusion models gain increasing popularity
for generating realistic and diverse shapes by separating
the distribution map learning from a noise distribution to a
meaningful shape distribution into thousands of steps.
Despite the foregoing advantages, the transport trajectory
learning from a noise distribution to a meaningful shape
distribution also turns out to be a major efficiency bottleneck during inference since a diffusion model requires thousands of generative steps to produce high-quality and diverse
shapes [11, 37, 50]. As a result, it leads to high computa-

9445

