This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Normalization: I Can visualize Everything (ICE)
Hoyoung Choi*
Hanyang University

Seungwan Jin*
Hanyang University

Kyungsik Han
Hanyang University

choiho00@hanyang.ac.kr

seungwanjin@hanyang.ac.kr

kyungsikhan@hanyang.ac.kr

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation maps highlighted by image classes and background predictions for each patch in the images. These maps
show that ICE visualizes class-specific explainability of DeiT-S [33], leading to unsupervised foreground and background segmentation.

Abstract
Vision transformers use [CLS] tokens to predict image
classes. Their explainability visualization has been studied using relevant information from [CLS] tokens or focusing on attention scores during self-attention. Such visualization, however, is challenging because of the dependence of the structure of a vision transformer on skip connections and attention operators, the instability of nonlinearities in the learning process, and the limited reflection of self-attention scores on relevance. We argue that the
output vectors for each input patch token in a vision transformer retain the image information of each patch location,
which can facilitate the prediction of an image class. In
this paper, we propose ICE (Adversarial Normalization: I
Can visualize Everything), a novel method that enables a
model to directly predict a class for each patch in an image; thus, advancing the effective visualization of the explainability of a vision transformer. Our method distinguishes background from foreground regions by predicting
background classes for patches that do not determine image classes. We used the DeiT-S model, the most repre* Both authors contributed equally to this research

sentative model employed in studies, on the explainability visualization of vision transformers. On the ImageNetSegmentation dataset, ICE outperformed all explainability visualization methods for four cases depending on the
model size. We also conducted quantitative and qualitative analyses on the tasks of weakly-supervised object localization and unsupervised object discovery. On the CUB200-2011 and PASCALVOC07/12 datasets, ICE achieved
comparable performance to the state-of-the-art methods.
We incorporated ICE into the encoder of DeiT-S and improved efficiency by 44.01% on the ImageNet dataset over
that achieved by the original DeiT-S model. We showed
performance on the accuracy and efficiency comparable
to EViT, the state-of-the-art pruning model, demonstrating
the effectiveness of ICE. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Hanyang-HCC-Lab/ICE.

1. Introduction
The emergence of vision transformers in the field of
computer vision has driven improvements in model performance [2, 5]. Unlike a CNN model, a vision transformer learns the association between image patches and

12115

