This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Optical Flow from Geometric Matching Consistent Perspective
Qiaole Dong,* Chenjie Cao,* Yanwei Fu†
School of Data Science, Fudan University
{qldong18,20110980001,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Optical flow estimation is a challenging problem remaining unsolved. Recent deep learning based optical flow models have achieved considerable success. However, these
models often train networks from the scratch on standard
optical flow data, which restricts their ability to robustly
and geometrically match image features. In this paper,
we propose a rethinking to previous optical flow estimation. We particularly leverage Geometric Image Matching
(GIM) as a pre-training task for the optical flow estimation
(MatchFlow) with better feature representations, as GIM
shares some common challenges as optical flow estimation,
and with massive labeled real-world data. Thus, matching static scenes helps to learn more fundamental feature
correlations of objects and scenes with consistent displacements. Specifically, the proposed MatchFlow model employs a QuadTree attention-based network pre-trained on
MegaDepth to extract coarse features for further flow regression. Extensive experiments show that our model has
great cross-dataset generalization. Our method achieves
11.5% and 10.1% error reduction from GMA on Sintel
clean pass and KITTI test set. At the time of anonymous submission, our MatchFlow(G) enjoys state-of-theart performance on Sintel clean and final pass compared
to published approaches with comparable computation and
memory footprint. Codes and models will be released in
https://github.com/DQiaole/MatchFlow.

1. Introduction
This paper studies optical flow estimation, which is the
problem of estimating the per-pixel displacement vector between two frames. It is very useful to various real-world
applications, such as video frame interpolation [24], video
inpainting [17], and action recognition [48]. The recent
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

The author is also with Shanghai Key Lab
of Intelligent Information Processing, and Fudan ISTBI-ZJNU Algorithm
Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China.

direct-regression based methods [16, 22, 25, 34, 44, 50] have
achieved great success by using powerful deep models, especially the recent transformers [20, 54]. Among them,
RAFT [50] employs a convolutional GRU for iterative refinements, which queries local correlation features from a
multi-scale 4D correlation volume. And GMA [25] further proposes a global motion aggregation module based
on the self-similarity of image context, which greatly improves the performance within the occluded regions without
degrading the performance in non-occluded regions. Typically, these models often train networks from the scratch
on standard optical flow data, with the matching module
(correlation volume) to help align the features of different
images/frames. Generally, these current optical flow estimation algorithms still can not robustly handle several intractable cases, e.g., small and fast-moving objects, occlusions, and textureless regions, as these estimators have very
restricted ability of robustly learning the local image feature
correspondence of different frames.
In this paper, we aim to provide a rethinking to the importance of Geometric Image Matching (GIM) to the optical flow estimation. In particular, despite GIM being designed to deal with the geometrically matching of static
scenes, it indeed shares some common challenges with optical flow estimation, such as large displacement and appearance change [52]. Thus, we advocate that the deep models
for optical flow estimation should be trained from matching static scene pairs with consistent displacements. This
can potentially help these models to learn the local lowlevel features and color correlations at the early stages of
networks, before extracting the priors for 3D multi-object
motion. Furthermore, compared to optical flow data, it
is much easier and simple to collect the real-world GIM
data [14, 27], labeled by camera poses and depth computed
from ground-truth or pioneering multi-view stereo manners [40]. Such extensive real-world data largely improves
the generalization of optical flow.
On the other hand, we can also emphasize a rethinking
of the general training pipeline of optical flow. Specifically, since the creative work of FlowNet2 [22], optical flow
models [25, 42, 42] are often trained following the schedule

1337

