This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Professional Level Crowd Annotation of Expert Domain Data
Pei Wang
UC San Diego

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego

pew062@eng.ucsd.edu

nuno@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Image recognition on expert domains is usually finegrained and requires expert labeling, which is costly. This
limits dataset sizes and the accuracy of learning systems.
To address this challenge, we consider annotating expert
data with crowdsourcing. This is denoted as PrOfeSsional
lEvel cRowd (POSER) annotation. A new approach, based
on semi-supervised learning (SSL) and denoted as SSL with
human filtering (SSL-HF) is proposed. It is a human-inthe-loop SSL method, where crowd-source workers act as
filters of pseudo-labels, replacing the unreliable confidence
thresholding used by state-of-the-art SSL methods. To enable annotation by non-experts, classes are specified implicitly, via positive and negative sets of examples and augmented with deliberative explanations, which highlight regions of class ambiguity. In this way, SSL-HF leverages the
strong low-shot learning and confidence estimation ability
of humans to create an intuitive but effective labeling experience. Experiments show that SSL-HF significantly outperforms various alternative approaches in several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
While deep learning enabled tremendous advances in
image recognition, high recognition performance is still difficult to achieve in expert domains, such as specialized areas
of biology or medicine, due to two challenges. First, these
problems involve fine-grained classes, such as the dogs of
Figure 1, which differ by subtle visual attributes. Second,
large annotated datasets are difficult to produce, since image
labeling requires expert knowledge, which can be too expensive or infeasible at scale. This makes it difficult to train
models as strong as those available for non-expert domains,
where crowd-source annotation enables training with millions, or even billions, of labeled examples. To address
this challenge, we consider the problem of how to leverage
crowd-source platforms to provide professional level annotation for expert domain data, which is denoted as PrOfeSsional lEvel cRowd (POSER) annotation.

Query

Beagle

Beagle

Not Beagle

“Beagle”
Confidence
> threshold

Basset Hound

“Beagle”
DNN
DNN

Fox Hound

“Beagle”
Teaching set

Machine Teaching

Support set

Is this a
beagle?

“Yes”
Query

SSL

Query

SSL-HF

Figure 1. Different approaches to the labeling of a query image. Left:
Machine Teaching [44] generates a teaching set, which is used to teach
different classes to crowd source workers, who label the query. Center:
SSL [21, 34] methods produce a pseudo-label that is accepted or rejected
by thresholding a confidence score. Right: SSL-HF uses crowd source
workers to filter pseudo-labels, by comparing the query to a positive (images of the pseudo-label class) and a negative (images from other classes)
support set. The annotator implements a binary filter with ‘I don’t know’
(IDK) option.

Since the difficulty is lack of annotator expertise, one
route to POSER annotation is to rely on machine teaching
(MT) algorithms [23, 42, 44]. As illustrated in Figure 1, a
small teaching set annotated by an expert is used to teach
crowd-source workers to discriminate the various classes.
The scalability of crowd sourcing is then leveraged to assemble a large labeled dataset [44]. While machine teaching
is surprisingly effective for problems of small class cardinality, it is difficult to teach crowd-workers a large number
of classes. This is partly because they are averse to complicated training procedures and the teaching relies on shortterm memory, which has limited capacity [13, 29].
The POSER combination of expert domain data and
crowd-sourcing also creates challenges to most human-inthe-loop schemes in the crowd-source annotation literature.
These are usually based on active learning (AL) [31, 32],
assuming an oracle that produces a ground-truth label per
example. To minimize the number of labelling iterations
and cost, AL selects the hardest examples in the dataset to
be labelled. However, this is misguided for POSER annotation, where noisy annotators are inevitable and the oracle
assumption is violated. Since hard examples are precisely
those where workers make most mistakes, their selection
maximizes labeling noise. Hence, while AL is successful

3166

