This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Shot Model for Mixed-Precision Quantization
Ivan Koryakovskiy

Alexandra Yakovleva

koryakovskiy.ivan1@huawei.com

yakovleva.alexandra@huawei.com

Valentin Buchnev

Temur Isaev

Gleb Odinokikh

buchnev.valentin@huawei.com

isaev.temur@huawei.com

odinokikh.gleb@huawei.com

Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, neural network quantization [31] has become a popular hardware-friendly compression technique.
It is common to quantize linear and convolutional layer
operands while leaving vector operands unchanged. Modern algorithms achieve lossless quantization into fixed 8-bit
integer values in many applications [45, 15, 40, 35, 49, 25,
5]. At higher compression rates, mixed-precision is often
needed [22, 44]. For example, models often require 8-bit
precision for the first and last layers, while the middle layers can tolerate lower precision [15, 40]. In addition, the
selected precision may depend on a quantized operation [7]
or a hardware at hand [41]. This motivates many vendors to

Time (m)

Neural network quantization is a popular approach for
model compression. Modern hardware supports quantization in mixed-precision mode, which allows for greater
compression rates but adds the challenging task of searching for the optimal bit width. The majority of existing
searchers find a single mixed-precision architecture. To
select an architecture that is suitable in terms of performance and resource consumption, one has to restart searching multiple times. We focus on a specific class of methods
that find tensor bit width using gradient-based optimization.
First, we theoretically derive several methods that were empirically proposed earlier. Second, we present a novel OneShot method that finds a diverse set of Pareto-front architectures in O(1) time. For large models, the proposed method
is 5 times more efficient than existing methods. We verify
the method on two classification and super-resolution models and show above 0.93 correlation score between the predicted and actual model performance. The Pareto-front architecture selection is straightforward and takes only 20 to
40 supernet evaluations, which is the new state-of-the-art
result to the best of our knowledge.

ESPCN
10

SRResNet

ResNet18

MobileNet-v2

200

50

250
0

0
EdMIPS

0
DNAS

0
GMPQ

One-Shot MPS

Figure 1. The searching time taken by each algorithm to discover a single bit width architecture belonging to a Pareto front.
EdMIPS [7], DNAS [44], GMPQ [42], and One-Shot MPS (our)
use a proxy dataset for ResNet-18 and MobileNet-v2. Bayesian
Bits [38] and HAQ [41] roughly take 100 times more searching
time compared to our method.

support mixed-precision models in hardware.
To attain the best mixed-precision performance, it is crucial to find an optimal precision for each matrix multiplication factor. Unfortunately, all possible bit width combinations cannot be examined since the search space scales
exponentially with the number of multiplications. The inability to predict the influence of individual loss coefficients
on the resulting compression rate furthermore exacerbates
the difficulty of searching. Existing methods [44, 7, 38, 9]
require multiple restarts of the searching process until a satisfactory bit width allocation is found. This results in O(N )
searching time, where N is the number of restarts.
The authors of EdMIPS [7] mention that “sometimes, it
is mysterious why and how an architecture is found by Neural Architecture Search (NAS)”. We answer this question in
the context of EdMIPS and DNAS [44] methods. To do
so, we simplify and generalize Bayesian Bits [38], where a
variational inference (VI) approach is used to derive the loss
function for a hierarchical supernet. Then, we demonstrate
how the EdMIPS and DNAS loss functions can be derived.
Next, using our derivation, we propose a novel OneShot Mixed-Precision Search (One-Shot MPS) method that
finds a diverse set of Pareto-front architectures in O(1)
time. We extend the commonly used supernet transforma-

7939

