This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-fidelity Event-Radiance Recovery via Transient Event Frequency
Jin Han1,2
1

Yuta Asano2

Boxin Shi† 3,4

Yinqiang Zheng1

Imari Sato1,2

2

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo National Institute of Informatics
3

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

{jinhan, asanoy, imarik}@nii.ac.jp

shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

1. Introduction
Scene radiance recovery from pixel values of conventional frame-based cameras is challenging due to the limited sensitivity of sensors and the non-linear process in
the image signal processor. Event cameras like Dynamic
Vision Sensor (DVS) [16] are designed with bio-inspired
mechanism that measure the scene radiance changes in an
asynchronous manner. Compared with conventional framebased cameras, event cameras have superior advantages [7],
such as very high temporal resolution (in the order of µs),
high dynamic range (HDR, up to 120dB), low latency, low
power consumption, etc. Due to the specific event triggering
mechanism, event cameras only record radiance changes
rather than the absolute radiance values. This makes it challenging to directly apply computer vision algorithms designed for 2D images containing luminance values for most
of the surface points to the data captured by event cameras.
We propose an innovative method for high-fidelity radiance
recovery, which benefits various spectroscopic and stereoscopic vision fields, as shown in Fig. 1.
† Corresponding author
Project page: https://github.com/hjynwa/TEF

Event camera
Target objects

t

x

Number of events

High-fidelity radiance recovery plays a crucial role in
scene information reconstruction and understanding. Conventional cameras suffer from limited sensitivity in dynamic
range, bit depth, and spectral response, etc. In this paper,
we propose to use event cameras with bio-inspired silicon
sensors, which are sensitive to radiance changes, to recover precise radiance values. We reveal that, under active
lighting conditions, the transient frequency of event signals
triggering linearly reflects the radiance value. We propose
an innovative method to convert the high temporal resolution of event signals into precise radiance values. The
precise radiance values yields several capabilities in image
analysis. We demonstrate the feasibility of recovering radiance values solely from the transient event frequency (TEF)
through multiple experiments.

Concept
y

Light
source

Time

Transient Event Frequency

Capabilities
Broadband spectroscopic

Color image
restoration

Hyperspectral
imaging

Precise stereoscopic

Depth
sensing

Iso-depth contour
reconstruction

Figure 1. The concept of transient event frequency and its capabilities. When turning the light source on, an event camera captures
event signals in a very short time, the frequency of event triggering during this period encodes the scene radiance. The capabilities
of transient event frequency are experimentally verified by various applications, including color image restoration, hyperspectral
imaging, depth sensing, and iso-depth contour reconstruction.

Since the event signals could be triggered from either
lighting condition changes or object motions, there are
many methods [14, 27, 29, 44] assuming a constant lighting
condition to focus on motion. To acquire more dense event
signals used for scene analysis, some researchers have proposed to use active lighting that can reflect the information
about the entire scene from the event signals [20, 32]. Active lighting can be a transient state by turning on the light,
which only takes less than 0.1 second. Under such a circumstance, the event signals are densely triggered for almost all
surface points in the scene, rather than sparsely along the
edges. Previous methods [6, 32] have shown that radiance
can be recovered by integrating a period of events. However, this approach may suffer from unreliability due to the
presence of ghost signals that persist even after the radiance
change has ceased [21], resulting in errors in the recovered
radiance values. This is caused by the latency and noise

20616

