This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Effects of Self-supervision and Contrastive Alignment in Deep Multi-view
Clustering
Daniel J. Trosten*, Sigurd Løkse*, Robert Jenssen*†‡§, Michael C. Kampffmeyer*†
Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway
firstname[.middle initial].lastname@uit.no

Abstract
Self-supervised learning is a central component in recent approaches to deep multi-view clustering (MVC). However, we find large variations in the development of selfsupervision-based methods for deep MVC, potentially slowing the progress of the field. To address this, we present DeepMVC, a unified framework for deep MVC that includes many
recent methods as instances. We leverage our framework to
make key observations about the effect of self-supervision,
and in particular, drawbacks of aligning representations
with contrastive learning. Further, we prove that contrastive
alignment can negatively influence cluster separability, and
that this effect becomes worse when the number of views increases. Motivated by our findings, we develop several new
DeepMVC instances with new forms of self-supervision. We
conduct extensive experiments and find that (i) in line with
our theoretical findings, contrastive alignments decreases
performance on datasets with many views; (ii) all methods
benefit from some form of self-supervision; and (iii) our new
instances outperform previous methods on several datasets.
Based on our results, we suggest several promising directions for future research. To enhance the openness of the
field, we provide an open-source implementation of DeepMVC, including recent models and our new instances. Our
implementation includes a consistent evaluation protocol,
facilitating fair and accurate evaluation of methods and
components1 .

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) generalizes the clustering task to data where the instances to be clustered are
observed through multiple views, or by multiple modali* UiT Machine Learning group (machine-learning.uit.no) and
Visual Intelligence Centre (visual-intelligence.no).
† Norwegian Computing Center (nr.no).
‡ Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen.
§ Pioneer Centre for AI (aicentre.dk).
1 Code: https://github.com/DanielTrosten/DeepMVC

SV-SSL1

(1)

xi

(1)

f

(1)

zi

MV-SSL
f (2)
(2)
xi

Fusion

zi

Clustering
module

(2)

zi

SV-SSL2

Figure 1. Overview of the DeepMVC framework for a two-view
dataset. Different colors denote different components. The framework is generalizable to an arbitrary number of views by adding
more view specific encoders (f ) and SV-SSL blocks.

ties. In recent years, deep learning architectures have seen
widespread adoption in MVC, resulting in the deep MVC
subfield. Methods developed within this subfield have shown
state-of-the-art clustering performance on several multi-view
datasets [14, 19–21, 29, 33], largely outperforming traditional, non-deep-learning-based methods [33].
Despite these promising developments, we identify significant drawbacks with the current state of the field. Selfsupervised learning (SSL) is a crucial component in many
recent methods for deep MVC [14, 19–21, 29, 33]. However,
the large number of methods, all with unique components
and arguments about how they work, makes it challenging
to identify clear directions and trends in the development
of new components and methods. Methodological research
in deep MVC thus lacks foundation and consistent directions for future advancements. This effect is amplified by
large variations in implementation and evaluation of new
methods. Architectures, data preprocessing and data splits,
hyperparameter search strategies, evaluation metrics, and
model selection strategies all vary greatly across publications, making it difficult to properly compare methods from
different papers. To address these challenges, we present a
unified framework for deep MVC, coupled with a rigorous
and consistent evaluation protocol, and an open-source implementation. Our main contributions are summarized as
follows:
(1) DeepMVC framework. Despite the variations in the
development of new methods, we recognize that the majority of recent methods for deep MVC can be decomposed

23976

