This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DSVT: Dynamic Sparse Voxel Transformer with Rotated Sets
Haiyang Wang1 * Chen Shi5 * Shaoshuai Shi2† Meng Lei1,4
Sen Wang3 Di He5 Bernt Schiele2 Liwei Wang1,5†
1

Center for Data Science, Peking University
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus 3 Huawei 4 Zhejiang Lab
5
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2

{wanghaiyang@stu, shichen@stu, leimeng@stu, dihe@, wanglw@cis}.pku.edu.cn
{sshi, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

73

1. Introduction
3D perception is a crucial challenge in computer vision,
garnering increased attention thanks to its potential applications in various fields such as autonomous driving sys* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Performance(mAPH/L2)

Abstract
Designing an efficient yet deployment-friendly 3D backbone to handle sparse point clouds is a fundamental problem
in 3D perception. Compared with the customized sparse
convolution, the attention mechanism in Transformers is
more appropriate for flexibly modeling long-range relationships and is easier to be deployed in real-world applications.
However, due to the sparse characteristics of point clouds,
it is non-trivial to apply a standard transformer on sparse
points. In this paper, we present Dynamic Sparse Voxel
Transformer (DSVT), a single-stride window-based voxel
Transformer backbone for outdoor 3D perception. In order
to efficiently process sparse points in parallel, we propose
Dynamic Sparse Window Attention, which partitions a series
of local regions in each window according to its sparsity
and then computes the features of all regions in a fully parallel manner. To allow the cross-set connection, we design
a rotated set partitioning strategy that alternates between
two partitioning configurations in consecutive self-attention
layers. To support effective downsampling and better encode geometric information, we also propose an attentionstyle 3D pooling module on sparse points, which is powerful
and deployment-friendly without utilizing any customized
CUDA operations. Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance with a broad range of 3D perception tasks. More
importantly, DSVT can be easily deployed by TensorRT with
real-time inference speed (27Hz). Code will be available at
https://github.com/Haiyang-W/DSVT.

wangsen31@huawei.com

71

DVST-Pillar-TS (ours)

DVST-Pillar-RT (ours)
DVST-Pillar (ours)

69

PV-RCNN++

67

PV-RCNN

VoxSet

Part-A2

SST

CenterPoint-Voxel

65
63

CenterPoint-Pillar

61
57

PointPillars
Second
0

5

10

15

20

Scene per second (Hz)

25

30

Figure 1. Detection performance (mAPH/L2) vs speed (Hz) of
different methods on Waymo [36] validation set. All the speeds are
evaluated on an NVIDIA A100 GPU with AMD EPYC 7513 CPU.

tems [2, 41] and modern robotics [44, 53]. In this paper, we
propose DSVT, a general-purpose and deployment-friendly
Transformer-only 3D backbone that can be easily applied to
various 3D perception tasks for point clouds processing.
Unlike the well-studied 2D community where the input
image is in a densely packed array, 3D point clouds are
sparsely and irregularly distributed in continuous space due
to the nature of 3D sensors, which makes it challenging to
directly apply techniques used for traditional regular data. To
support sparse feature learning from raw point clouds, previous methods mainly apply customized sparse operations,
such as PointNet++ [27, 28] and sparse convolution [12, 13].
PointNet based methods [27, 28, 39] use point-wise MLPs
with the ball-query and max-pooling operators to extract
features. Sparse convolution based methods [6, 12, 13] first
convert point clouds to regular grids and handle the sparse
volumes efficiently. Though impressive, they suffer from
either the intensive computation of sampling and grouping [28] or the limited representation capacity due to submanifold dilation [13]. More importantly, these specificallydesigned operations generally can not be implemented with
well-optimized deep learning tools (e.g., PyTorch and TensorFlow) and require writing customized CUDA codes, which

13520

