This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reliable and Interpretable Personalized Federated Learning
Zixuan Qin, Liu Yang*, Qilong Wang, Yahong Han, Qinghua Hu
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin, China
{qinzixuan1958@, yangliuyl@, qlwang@, yahong@, huqinghua@}tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning can coordinate multiple users to participate in data training while ensuring data privacy. The
collaboration of multiple agents allows for a natural connection between federated learning and collective intelligence. When there are large differences in data distribution among clients, it is crucial for federated learning
to design a reliable client selection strategy and an interpretable client communication framework to better utilize
group knowledge. Herein, a reliable personalized federated
learning approach, termed RIPFL, is proposed and fully interpreted from the perspective of social learning. RIPFL
reliably selects and divides the clients involved in training
such that each client can use different amounts of social
information and more effectively communicate with other
clients. Simultaneously, the method effectively integrates
personal information with the social information generated
by the global model from the perspective of Bayesian decision rules and evidence theory, enabling individuals to
grow better with the help of collective wisdom. An interpretable federated learning mind is well scalable, and the
experimental results indicate that the proposed method has
superior robustness and accuracy than other state-of-theart federated learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Federated learning is a new machine learning technique
with various applications in data privacy protection and data
security [19, 21, 37]. It can be viewed as social learning
involving multiple agents coinciding with collective intelligence [3, 11, 13]. Unlike ordinary federated learning, personalized federated learning can address the problem of
data heterogeneity among clients and thereby improve their
capabilities in relatively more realistic scenarios [4, 18].
However, designing a reliable and interpretable federated
learning framework remains a significant challenge in the
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Cooperation between clients. Uninterpretable simple aggregation produces a global model that is not helpful for all clients
because the information containing classes 2 and 3 may be negative for client 4, as well as for clients 1 and 4. Clients 1 and 2 can
well identify classes 1, 2, 3, and 4; however, unreliable random
selection does not guarantee the participation of clients 1 and 2
in aggregation, whereas the simultaneous selection of less-capable
clients such as clients 3 and 4 does. In this case, smart customers
cannot offer more help to the not-so-smart ones.

field of federated learning. FedProx [32], SCAFFOLD [15],
MOON [17] used the global model to impose different constraints on the client’s local training process. Consequently,
the knowledge of the global model was better absorbed.
Although [6, 33, 40] solved the problem of client heterogeneity in a personalized federated learning framework
by incorporating techniques such as clustering and knowledge distillation. [22, 35] propose a certain degree of interpretable client aggregation from the perspective of client
contribution to the group. However, their selection and
training of clients are often unreliable and uninterpretable,
resulting in uncertainty in the training process and a tendency to ignore synergies between clients when the number
of clients is large and the data distribution widely varies.
Consequently, the collective intelligence is underutilized, as
shown in Fig. 1.
Herein, we propose a reliable and interpretable federated learning framework, RIPFL. Specifically, we introduce
Dempster–Shafer evidence theory (DST) [20, 34] to quan-

20422

