This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamically Instance-Guided Adaptation: A Backward-free Approach for
Test-Time Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Wei Wang1 , Zhun Zhong2 , Weijie Wang2 , Xi Chen3 , Charles Ling1 , Boyu Wang1 *, Nicu Sebe2
1

TTDA
Semantic
Segmentation

Western University

University of Trento 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Night

Source
Model

Second Forward

2

Instance Statistic

Rain
Adapted

Adapted

Model

Model

Instance Statics

...

Snow

Instance BN Instance Proto
Distribution

Semantic

Efficiency

Forward-only → High Efficiency

Gradient

No Cumulated Error

Source

Source
Source
Forgetting

(a)
Optimization Based

Unstable
Shift

(b)
Instance Normalization

Forgetting

(c)
BN Statistics Update

Source
No updating
→ No Forgetting

(d)
Ours

Stablity

Distribution Adapt

Semantic Adapt

Figure 1. Top: Illustration of test-time domain adaptive semantic segmentation (TTDA-Seg). Bottom: Comparison with different TTDA
methods. The proposed DIGA is a holistic method that has the properties of effectiveness (distribution&semantic adaptation and avoid
unstable training&error accumulation) and efficiency (backward-free).

Abstract
In this paper, we study the application of Test-time
domain adaptation in semantic segmentation (TTDA-Seg)
where both efficiency and effectiveness are crucial. Existing methods either have low efficiency (e.g., backward optimization) or ignore semantic adaptation (e.g., distribution
alignment). Besides, they would suffer from the accumulated errors caused by unstable optimization and abnormal
distributions. To solve these problems, we propose a novel
backward-free approach for TTDA-Seg, called Dynamically
Instance-Guided Adaptation (DIGA). Our principle is utilizing each instance to dynamically guide its own adaptation in a non-parametric way, which avoids the error accumulation issue and expensive optimizing cost. Specifically, DIGA is composed of a distribution adaptation module (DAM) and a semantic adaptation module (SAM), enabling us to jointly adapt the model in two indispensable
aspects. DAM mixes the instance and source BN statistics to
* Corresponding author

encourage the model to capture robust representation. SAM
combines the historical prototypes with instance-level prototypes to adjust semantic predictions, which can be associated with the parametric classifier to mutually benefit the
final results. Extensive experiments evaluated on five target
domains demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the
proposed method. Our DIGA establishes new state-of-theart performance in TTDA-Seg. Source code is available at:
https://github.com/Waybaba/DIGA.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation (Seg) [3, 40, 45, 46, 49] is a fundamental task in computer vision, which is an important
step in the visual-based robot, autonomous driving and etc.
Modern deep-learning techniques have achieved impressive
success in segmentation. However, one serious drawback
of them is that the segmentation models trained on one
dataset (source domain) may undergo catastrophic performance degradation when applied to another dataset sam-

24090

