This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Movies2Scenes: Using Movie Metadata to Learn Scene Representation
Shixing Chen

Chun-Hao Liu

Xiang Hao Xiaohan Nie
Amazon Prime Video

Maxim Arap

Raffay Hamid

{shixic, chunhaol, xianghao, nxiaohan, maxarap, raffay}@amazon.com

Abstract
Understanding scenes in movies is crucial for a variety of
applications such as video moderation, search, and recommendation. However, labeling individual scenes is a timeconsuming process. In contrast, movie level metadata (e.g.,
genre, synopsis, etc.) regularly gets produced as part of
the film production process, and is therefore significantly
more commonly available. In this work, we propose a novel
contrastive learning approach that uses movie metadata to
learn a general-purpose scene representation. Specifically,
we use movie metadata to define a measure of movie similarity, and use it during contrastive learning to limit our
search for positive scene-pairs to only the movies that are
considered similar to each other. Our learned scene representation consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods on a diverse set of tasks evaluated using multiple
benchmark datasets. Notably, our learned representation
offers an average improvement of 7.9% on the seven classification tasks and 9.7% improvement on the two regression
tasks in LVU dataset. Furthermore, using a newly collected
movie dataset, we present comparative results of our scene
representation on a set of video moderation tasks to demonstrate its generalizability on previously less explored tasks.

1. Introduction
Automatic understanding of movie scenes is a challenging
problem [53] [26] that offers a variety of downstream applications including video moderation, search, and recommendation. However, the long-form nature of movies makes labeling of their scenes a laborious process, which limits the
effectiveness of traditional end-to-end supervised learning
methods for tasks related to automatic scene understanding.
The general problem of learning from limited labels
has been explored from multiple perspectives [51], among
which contrastive learning [28] has emerged as a particularly promising direction. Specifically, using natural language supervision to guide contrastive learning [41] has
shown impressive results specially for zero-shot imageclassification tasks. However, these methods rely on imagetext pairs which are hard to collect for long-form videos.
Another important set of methods within the space of con-

trastive learning use a pretext task to contrast similar datapoints with randomly selected ones [23] [9]. However, most
of the standard data-augmentation schemes [23] used to define the pretext tasks for these approaches have been shown
to be not as effective for scene understanding [8].
To address these challenges, we propose a novel contrastive learning approach to find a general-purpose scene
representation that is effective for a variety of scene understanding tasks. Our key intuition is that commonly available movie metadata (e.g., co-watch, genre, synopsis) can
be used to effectively guide the process of learning a generalizable scene representation. Specifically, we use such
movie metadata to define a measure of movie-similarity,
and use it during contrastive learning to limit our search for
positive scene-pairs to only the movies that are considered
similar to each other. This allows us to find positive scenepairs that are not only visually similar but also semantically
relevant, and can therefore provide us with a much richer set
of geometric and thematic data-augmentations compared to
previously employed augmentation schemes [23] [8] (see
Figure 1 for illustration). Furthermore, unlike previous
contrastive learning approaches that mostly focus on images [23] [9] [13] or shots (§ 3 for definition) [8], our approach builds on the recent developments in vision transformers [12] to allow using variable-length multi-shot inputs. This enables our method to seamlessly incorporate the
interplay among multiple shots resulting in a more generalpurpose scene representation.
Using a newly collected internal dataset MovieCL30K
containing 30, 340 movies to learn our scene representation,
we demonstrate the flexibility of our approach to handle
both individual shots as well as multi-shot scenes provided
as inputs to outperform existing state-of-the-art results on
diverse downstream tasks using multiple public benchmark
datasets [53] [26] [42]. Furthermore, as an important practical application of long-form video understanding, we apply
our scene representation to another newly collected dataset
MCD focused on large-scale video moderation with 44, 581
video clips from 18, 330 movies and TV episodes containing sex, violence, and drug-use activities. We show that
learning our general-purpose scene representation is crucial

6535

