This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Normal-guided Garment UV Prediction for Human Re-texturing
Yasamin Jafarian† Tuanfeng Y. Wang♯ Duygu Ceylan♯ Jimei Yang♯
Nathan Carr♯ Yi Zhou♯ Hyun Soo Park†
†

Original image

♯

University of Minnesota

Re-textured images

Adobe Research

Original image

Re-textured images

Logo insertion

Target
texture
Original video
Re-textured video
Figure 1. Geomety aware texture editing from images and videos. This paper presents a novel approach to predict a geometry aware
texture (UV) map of a garment from an image (first row) and video (second row). The predicted UV map preserves isometry between
texture space and 3D surface by leveraging 3D surface normals. Further, we ensure temporal consistency in the predicted UV map across
frames in a video, resulting in physically plausible human appearance editing. Project website: yasamin.page/normal-guided-uv.

Abstract
Clothes undergo complex geometric deformations,
which lead to appearance changes. To edit human videos
in a physically plausible way, a texture map must take into
account not only the garment transformation induced by the
body movements and clothes fitting, but also its 3D finegrained surface geometry. This poses, however, a new challenge of 3D reconstruction of dynamic clothes from an image or a video. In this paper, we show that it is possible
to edit dressed human images and videos without 3D reconstruction. We estimate a geometry aware texture map
between the garment region in an image and the texture
space, a.k.a, UV map. Our UV map is designed to preserve isometry with respect to the underlying 3D surface by
making use of the 3D surface normals predicted from the

image. Our approach captures the underlying geometry of
the garment in a self-supervised way, requiring no ground
truth annotation of UV maps and can be readily extended
to predict temporally coherent UV maps. We demonstrate
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art human UV
map estimation approaches on both real and synthetic data.

1. Introduction
While browsing online clothing shops, have you ever
wondered how the appearance of a dress of interest would
look on you as if you were in a fitting room given your dress
with a similar shape? A key technology to enable generating such visual experiences is photorealistic re-texturing—
editing the texture of clothes in response to the subject’s
movement in the presented images or videos in a geomet-

4627

