This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical B-frame Video Coding Using Two-Layer CANF
without Motion Coding

1

David Alexandre1 , Hsueh-Ming Hang2 , Wen-Hsiao Peng3
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science International Graduate Program
2
Institute of Electronics
3
Department of Computer Science
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan
{davidalexandre.eed05g,hmhang}@nctu.edu.tw, wpeng@g2.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Typical video compression systems consist of two main
modules: motion coding and residual coding. This general
architecture is adopted by classical coding schemes (such
as international standards H.265 and H.266) and deep
learning-based coding schemes. We propose a novel Bframe coding architecture based on two-layer Conditional
Augmented Normalization Flows (CANF). It has the striking feature of not transmitting any motion information. Our
proposed idea of video compression without motion coding
offers a new direction for learned video coding. Our base
layer is a low-resolution image compressor that replaces
the full-resolution motion compressor. The low-resolution
coded image is merged with the warped high-resolution
images to generate a high-quality image as a conditioning signal for the enhancement-layer image coding in full
resolution. One advantage of this architecture is significantly reduced computational complexity due to eliminating the motion information compressor. In addition, we
adopt a skip-mode coding technique to reduce the transmitted latent samples. The rate-distortion performance of
our scheme is slightly lower than that of the state-of-the-art
learned B-frame coding scheme, B-CANF, but outperforms
other learned B-frame coding schemes. However, compared
to B-CANF, our scheme saves 45% of multiply–accumulate
operations (MACs) for encoding and 27% of MACs for decoding. The code is available at https://nycu-clab.github.io.

1. Introduction
Digital video compression has been studied for over 50
years. It is a challenging research topic to exploit both spatial and temporal redundancies inside the video data. The

concept of using motion compensation to reduce temporal correlation for video coding first appeared in 1969 [30].
Since then, motion estimation and coding have become indispensable components in a video coding system. Two
critical components in a mainstream video codec are motion coding (including motion estimation and compensation) and residual image coding. Motion coding is used to
reduce temporal redundancy, and residual coding is used
to reduce spatial redundancy. This structure is thus often
called hybrid coding. The influential and widespread international video standards in the past three decades, MPEG2, AVC/H.264, HEVC/H.265, and VVC/H.266 all adopt
this basic hybrid coding structure, although the fine details vary in different versions of standards. These standards specify three types of coding frames inside a Group
of Pictures (GOP): I-frame (intra-coded), P-frame (predictive), and B-frame (bidirectional predictive). The P-frame
coding process uses the previously coded frame to predict
the target frame, and the B-frame coding uses two reference frames (often previous and future frames) to predict
the target frame. In this paper, we focus on learning-based
B-frame video coding.
In the past few years, deep-learning techniques have
been used in video compression. Up to now, most learned
codecs adopt the hybrid coding structure of the classical
coding systems; that is, it contains two major components:
motion coding and residual image coding. It is generally
believed that accurate motion compensation is a very effective way to reduce the temporal redundancy in the video.
Only the remaining unpredictable (‘new’) pixels are coded
using image coding techniques. Describing accurately the
motion field around arbitrary shape objects often needs a
large number of bits. For example, the HEVC standard defines a variety of block partitions to specify regions sharing
the same motion vectors [31].

10249

