This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

vMAP: Vectorised Object Mapping for Neural Field SLAM
Xin Kong Shikun Liu Marwan Taher Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
{x.kong21, shikun.liu17, m.taher, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. vMAP automatically builds an object-level scene model from a real-time RGB-D input stream. Each object is represented by a
separate MLP neural field model, all optimised in parallel via vectorised training. We use no 3D shape priors, but the MLP representation
encourages object reconstruction to be watertight and complete, even when objects are partially observed or are heavily occluded in the
input images. See for instance the separate reconstructions of the armchairs, sofas and cushions, which were mutually occluding each
other, in this example from Replica.

Abstract
We present vMAP, an object-level dense SLAM system
using neural field representations. Each object is represented by a small MLP, enabling efficient, watertight object
modelling without the need for 3D priors.
As an RGB-D camera browses a scene with no prior information, vMAP detects object instances on-the-fly, and
dynamically adds them to its map. Specifically, thanks to
the power of vectorised training, vMAP can optimise as
many as 50 individual objects in a single scene, with an
extremely efficient training speed of 5Hz map update. We
experimentally demonstrate significantly improved scenelevel and object-level reconstruction quality compared to
prior neural field SLAM systems. Project page: https:
//kxhit.github.io/vMAP.

construct them. If no 3D object priors are available, then
usually only the directly observed parts of objects can be
reconstructed, leading to holes and missing parts [4, 46].
Prior object information such as CAD models or categorylevel shape space models enable full object shape estimation from partial views, but only for the subset of objects in
a scene for which these models are available.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we present a new approach which applies to
the case where no 3D priors are available but still often enables watertight object reconstruction in realistic real-time
scene scanning. Our system, vMAP, builds on the attractive
properties shown by neural fields as a real-time scene representation [31], with efficient and complete representation of
shape, but now reconstructs a separate tiny MLP model of
each object. The key technical contribution of our work is
to show that a large number of separate MLP object models
can be simultaneously and efficiently optimised on a single
GPU during live operation via vectorised training.

For robotics and other interactive vision applications, an
object-level model is arguably semantically optimal, with
scene entities represented in a separated, composable way,
but also efficiently focusing resources on what is important
in an environment.
The key question in building an object-level mapping
system is what level of prior information is known about
the objects in a scene in order to segment, classify and re-

We show that we can achieve much more accurate and
complete scene reconstruction by separately modelling objects, compared with using a similar number of weights in
a single neural field model of the whole scene. Our realtime system is highly efficient in terms of both computation
and memory, and we show that scenes with up to 50 objects
can be mapped with 40KB per object of learned parameters
across the multiple, independent object networks.

952

