This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blemish-aware and Progressive Face Retouching with Limited Paired Data
Lianxin Xie1 , Wen Xue1 , Zhen Xu1 , Si Wu1,2,3∗, Zhiwen Yu1 , and Hau San Wong4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
PAZHOU LAB
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{cslianxin.xie, csxuewen, csxuzhen}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {cswusi, zhwyu}@scut.edu.cn,
cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Face retouching aims to remove facial blemishes, while
at the same time maintaining the textual details of a given input image. The main challenge lies in distinguishing
blemishes from the facial characteristics, such as moles.
Training an image-to-image translation network with pixelwise supervision suffers from the problem of expensive
paired training data, since professional retouching needs specialized experience and is time-consuming. In this
paper, we propose a Blemish-aware and Progressive Face
Retouching model, which is referred to as BPFRe. Our
framework can be partitioned into two manageable stages
to perform progressive blemish removal. Specifically, an
encoder-decoder-based module learns to coarsely remove
the blemishes at the first stage, and the resulting intermediate features are injected into a generator to enrich local detail at the second stage. We find that explicitly suppressing the blemishes can contribute to an effective collaboration among the components. Toward this end, we
incorporate an attention module, which learns to infer a
blemish-aware map and further determine the corresponding weights, which are then used to refine the intermediate
features transferred from the encoder to the decoder, and
from the decoder to the generator. Therefore, BPFRe is able
to deliver significant performance gains on a wide range of
face retouching tasks. It is worth noting that we reduce the
dependence of BPFRe on paired training samples by imposing effective regularization on unpaired ones.

1. Introduction
With the development of social media, there is an increased demand for facial image beautification from selfies
to portraits and beyond. Facial skin retouching aims to re∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visual comparison of the activation maps produced by a
generic attention module [47] (second row) and the blemish-aware
module used in BPFRe (third row), given a number of images of
faces with blemishes (top row). BPFRe is capable of applying
attention on the regions close to the manual retouching regions
(bottom row).

move any unexpected blemishes from facial images, while
preserving the stable characteristics that associate with face
identity [2, 38, 41]. The main challenge is due to the wide
range of blemishes including from small spots to severe acne. Conventional methods are based on blind smoothing,
such that the facial characteristics, such as moles and freckles, may be removed. Professional face retouching can be
expensive and needs specialized experience, which impedes
the collection of large-scale paired data for model training.
Deep neural networks have been widely used for imageto-image translation, especially based on Generative Adver-

5599

