This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IntagHand

Im2Hands (ours)

Im2Hands: Learning Attentive Implicit Representation
of Interacting Two-Hand Shapes
Jihyun Lee1
Input

Minhyuk Sung1
Honggyu Choi1
Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
Image alignment
Zoom-in2
Reconstruction
Zoom-in
KAIST
Imperial College London

Reconstruction1

IntagHand [23]

Observation

Reconstruction

Image alignment

Im2Hands (Ours)

Image alignment

Reconstruction

Image alignment

Figure 1. Reconstructed two-hand shapes from an RGB image. We present Im2Hands, the first neural implicit representation for two
interacting hands. Compared to the existing mesh-based two-hand reconstruction method (IntagHand [23]), Im2Hands effectively captures
the fine-grained geometry of two hands with higher shape-to-image coherency. The above results were produced from a single RGB image
input, where ours utilized an off-the-shelf two-hand keypoint estimation method (DIGIT [11]) to condition the articulated occupancy.

Abstract
We present Implicit Two Hands (Im2Hands), the first
neural implicit representation of two interacting hands. Unlike existing methods on two-hand reconstruction that rely
on a parametric hand model and/or low-resolution meshes,
Im2Hands can produce fine-grained geometry of two hands
with high hand-to-hand and hand-to-image coherency. To
handle the shape complexity and interaction context between two hands, Im2Hands models the occupancy volume
of two hands – conditioned on an RGB image and coarse 3D
keypoints – by two novel attention-based modules responsible for (1) initial occupancy estimation and (2) contextaware occupancy refinement, respectively. Im2Hands first
learns per-hand neural articulated occupancy in the canonical space designed for each hand using query-image attention. It then refines the initial two-hand occupancy in
the posed space to enhance the coherency between the
two hand shapes using query-anchor attention. In addition, we introduce an optional keypoint refinement module to enable robust two-hand shape estimation from predicted hand keypoints in a single-image reconstruction scenario. We experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of
Im2Hands on two-hand reconstruction in comparison to related methods, where ours achieves state-of-the-art results.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.
com/jyunlee/Im2Hands.

1. Introduction
Humans use hand-to-hand interaction in everyday activities, which makes modeling 3D shapes of two interacting hands important for various applications (e.g., humancomputer interaction, robotics, and augmented or virtual reality). However, the domain of two-hand shape reconstruction remains relatively under-explored, while many existing studies have put efforts into single-hand reconstruction
from RGB [1, 2, 4, 13, 21, 24, 44], depth [38], or sparse keypoints [18, 44]. These single hand-based methods are not
effective when directly applied for interacting two-hand reconstruction, since it introduces additional challenges including inter-hand collisions and mutual occlusions.
Recently, few learning-based methods on two-hand
shape reconstruction [23, 32, 42] have been proposed since
the release of the large-scale interacting hand dataset
(i.e., InterHand2.6M [27]). Two-Hand-Shape-Pose [42]
and IHMR [32] reconstruct two-hands by estimating
MANO [31] parameters, which are later mapped to triangular hand meshes using a pre-defined statistical model (i.e.,
MANO). IntagHand [23] directly regresses a fixed number
of mesh vertex coordinates using a graph convolutional network (GCN). These methods mainly model the shape of two
interacting hands based on a low-resolution mesh representation with a fixed topology of MANO (please refer to Figure 1).

21169

