This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probing Sentiment-Oriented Pre-Training Inspired by Human Sentiment
Perception Mechanism
Tinglei Feng*
Jiaxuan Liu*
Jufeng Yang†
TMCC, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, China
tinglyfeng@163.com, jxliu1999@163.com, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-training of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) plays a crucial role in the field of visual sentiment analysis (VSA). Most proposed methods employ the off-the-shelf
backbones pre-trained on large-scale object classification
datasets (i.e., ImageNet). While it boosts performance for
a big margin against initializing model states from random,
we argue that DCNNs simply pre-trained on ImageNet may
excessively focus on recognizing objects, but failed to provide high-level concepts in terms of sentiment. To address
this long-term overlooked problem, we propose a sentimentoriented pre-training method that is built upon human visual
sentiment perception (VSP) mechanism. Specifically, we factorize the process of VSP into three steps, namely stimuli
taking, holistic organizing, and high-level perceiving. From
imitating each VSP step, a total of three models are separately pre-trained via our devised sentiment-aware tasks that
contribute to excavating sentiment-discriminated representations. Moreover, along with our elaborated multi-model
amalgamation strategy, the prior knowledge learned from
each perception step can be effectively transferred into a single target model, yielding substantial performance gains. Finally, we verify the superiorities of our proposed method over
extensive experiments, covering mainstream VSA tasks from
single-label learning (SLL), multi-label learning (MLL), to
label distribution learning (LDL). Experiment results demonstrate that our proposed method leads to unanimous improvements in these downstream tasks. Our code is released on
https://github.com/tinglyfeng/sentiment_pretraining.

1. Introduction
Visual sentiment analysis aims to understand the sentiment embedded in an image, which gradually becomes a
critical computer vision task that enables numerous applications from opinion mining [45], entertainment assistance [5],
to business intelligence [18]. Given an image, the main goal
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

of VSA is to recognize the emotion induced by viewers, providing either the categorical emotion states (CES) [9, 30] or
dimensional emotion space (DES) [23, 41] representations.
Traditional methods proposed for VSA normally involve
extracting sentiment-related hand-crafted features like line
directions [48], textures and colors [30], etc. These features
are then sent to a classifier e.g., a support vector machine
(SVM) to predict the emotional states. However, due to affective gap [15], the low-level features can hardly meet the
high-level attributes requirement of VSA, thus resulting in
relatively unsatisfying performance.
Entering the deep learning era, DCNNs are now the dominant tools applied to various computer vision tasks, such as
image classification, object detection, etc. Blessed with impressive high-level feature extraction capabilities, DCNNs
have demonstrated superior advantages for modern VSA
proven by a lot of milestone works [3, 50, 56]. Beneath the
success, many may ignore one important factor that largely
determines the performance of VSA, saying the pre-trained
model. Due to the data-hungry nature of DCNNs, initializing model parameters from models trained on large-scale
datasets has been a go-to technique for most tasks to improve
their generalization abilities. When it comes to VSA, the
lack of data has been exacerbated by the arduous annotation process (every image needs to be annotated by multiple
people due to the subjectivity of emotion), resulting in its
especially heavy reliance on pre-training. In our experiments
on FI dataset [57], the ResNet50 [16] pre-trained on ImageNet [8] outperforms the one trained from scratch by 20
percent in terms of accuracy, revealing the undeniable crucial
role the pre-trained model plays in VSA.
Today’s deep models proposed for VSA are mostly initialized from models pre-trained on ImageNet to achieve satisfactory performance [59]. However, different from many
other computer vision tasks that mainly depend on objective semantics, VSA requires a relatively higher level of
understanding of an image. Therefore, pre-training only on
ImageNet which is specially designed for object classification may not be the best practice for VSA.
In this paper, we argue that the models pre-trained on Ima-

2850

