This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L AVENDER: Unifying Video-Language Understanding as
Masked Language Modeling
Linjie Li, Zhe Gan, Kevin Lin, Chung-Ching Lin, Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu, Lijuan Wang
Microsoft
{linjli,zhgan,keli,chungching.lin,zliu,ce.liu,lijuanw}@microsoft.com

Figure 1. Overview of L AVENDER (LAnguage-VidEo uNDERstanding) model. L AVENDER unifies both pre-training and downstream
finetuning as Masked Language Modeling.

Abstract

Unified vision-language frameworks have greatly advanced in recent years, most of which adopt an encoderdecoder architecture to unify image-text tasks as sequenceto-sequence generation. However, existing video-language
(VidL) models still require task-specific designs in model
architecture and training objectives for each task. In this
work, we explore a unified VidL framework L AVENDER,
where Masked Language Modeling [13] (MLM) is used as
the common interface for all pre-training and downstream
tasks. Such unification leads to a simplified model architecture, where only a lightweight MLM head, instead of
a decoder with much more parameters, is needed on top
of the multimodal encoder. Surprisingly, experimental results show that this unified framework achieves competitive performance on 14 VidL benchmarks, covering video
question answering, text-to-video retrieval and video captioning. Extensive analyses further demonstrate L AVEN DER can (i) seamlessly support all downstream tasks with
just a single set of parameter values when multi-task finetuned; (ii) generalize to various downstream tasks with limited training samples; and (iii) enable zero-shot evaluation
on video question answering tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/microsoft/LAVENDER.

1. Introduction
Large-scale transformer-based pre-training is now the de
facto practice for NLP and vision-language research [13,
25, 37, 49, 50]. Together with the great success of imagetext pre-training [10, 35, 40, 59], video-language (VidL) pretraining [29, 33, 58, 80, 83] has also received an increasing
amount of attention. By pre-training an end-to-end multimodal transformer on a large number of video-text pairs,
state-of-the-art performance has been achieved across a wide
range of VidL tasks, including video question answering
(QA) [24, 68], text-to-video retrieval [22, 51], and video
captioning [64, 71]. These advances are encouraging; however, on the other hand, all existing VidL works require
designing task-specific heads on top of the transformer encoder for each pre-training or downstream task. For example,
during pre-training, separate Masked Language Modeling
[13] (MLM) and Video Text Matching (VTM) heads are
used, while a new, separately parameterized head needs to
be added for each downstream adaptation. Furthermore, due
to the particular nature of different tasks, they are typically
modeled using different training objectives. For example,
multiple-choice video QA is formulated as a classification
problem, while video captioning is inherently a generation
task. A natural but challenging question arises: can we have
a unified architecture that supports all the popular VidL tasks
simultaneously without introducing task-specific heads?
To answer this, we present L AVENDER, a unified VidL

23119

