This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP2 : Contrastive Language-Image-Point Pretraining from
Real-World Point Cloud Data
∗

∗

Yihan Zeng1 , Chenhan Jiang2 , Jiageng Mao3 , Jianhua Han1 , Chaoqiang Ye1 ,
†
Qingqiu Huang1 , Dit-Yan Yeung2 , Zhen Yang1 , Xiaodan Liang4 , Hang Xu1
Open-world Vocabularies

Car, Pedestrian, Bicycle, Bus, Debris, Trailer, Table, Chair, Light, Cleaner, Closet, Backpack, Tire, Couch …

…

…

Outdoor Scene
Indoor Scene
Figure 1. Illustration of our open-world recognition results. Benefiting from our CLIP2 , the 3D representation is aligned to the openworld language representation, which enables flexible zero-shot transfer. Best viewed in colors.

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training, benefiting
from large-scale unlabeled text-image pairs, has demonstrated great performance in open-world vision understanding tasks. However, due to the limited Text-3D data pairs,
adapting the success of 2D Vision-Language Models (VLM)
to the 3D space remains an open problem. Existing works
that leverage VLM for 3D understanding generally resort
to constructing intermediate 2D representations for the 3D
data, but at the cost of losing 3D geometry information.
To take a step toward open-world 3D vision understanding, we propose Contrastive Language-Image-Point Cloud
Pretraining (CLIP2 ) to directly learn the transferable 3D
point cloud representation in realistic scenarios with a
novel proxy alignment mechanism. Specifically, we exploit
naturally-existed correspondences in 2D and 3D scenarios,
and build well-aligned and instance-based text-image-point
proxies from those complex scenarios. On top of that, we
propose a cross-modal contrastive objective to learn semantic and instance-level aligned point cloud representa∗ Equal contribution.
1 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2 Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology 3 The Chinese University of Hong
Kong 4 Sun Yat-san University † Corresponding Author: xu.hang@
huawei.com

tion. Experimental results on both indoor and outdoor scenarios show that our learned 3D representation has great
transfer ability in downstream tasks, including zero-shot
and few-shot 3D recognition, which boosts the state-of-theart methods by large margins. Furthermore, we provide
analyses of the capability of different representations in real
scenarios and present the optional ensemble scheme.

1. Introduction
Powerful 3D point cloud representation plays a crucial role in various real-world applications, e.g., 3D object
recognition and detection [10, 20, 31, 40, 44]. Compared
to 2D images, 3D point cloud provides specific information like accurate geometry that is robust to illumination
changes. However, current methods [25, 40] that learn 3D
representations generally rely on the predefined number of
object categories and require plenty of labor-intensive annotations. Those learned 3D representations are insufficient
for safety-critical scenarios like self-driving which includes
a long-tail class distribution far beyond the predefined taxonomy. Therefore, it is highly demanded to learn a transferable 3D representation equipped with zero-shot recognition
ability in vocabulary scalable real-world scenes. Figure 1
shows an open-world recognition example by our CLIP2 in

15244

