This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-View Azimuth Stereo via Tangent Space Consistency
Xu Cao

Hiroaki Santo Fumio Okura
Osaka University

Yasuyuki Matsushita

{cao.xu, santo.hiroaki, okura, yasumat}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Source code:

https://github.com/xucao-42/mvas

𝑧 (camera optical axis)

normal

𝑦

270∘
180∘

0∘

𝑧

𝑥

∘

90

Azimuth geometry

Input azimuth maps

Recovered normal maps

Recovered shape

Color images

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction from calibrated multi-view azimuth maps (3 out of 31 are shown). An azimuth angle indicates the surface
normal’s orientation in the image plane, and an azimuth map records the azimuth angles across the entire surface. We show that azimuth
maps can be effectively used for shape and normal recovery. Color images are for reference only and are not used in shape optimization.

Abstract
We present a method for 3D reconstruction only using calibrated multi-view surface azimuth maps. Our
method, multi-view azimuth stereo, is effective for textureless or specular surfaces, which are difficult for conventional multi-view stereo methods. We introduce the concept
of tangent space consistency: Multi-view azimuth observations of a surface point should be lifted to the same tangent
space. Leveraging this consistency, we recover the shape
by optimizing a neural implicit surface representation. Our
method harnesses the robust azimuth estimation capabilities of photometric stereo methods or polarization imaging
while bypassing potentially complex zenith angle estimation. Experiments using azimuth maps from various sources
validate the accurate shape recovery with our method, even
without zenith angles.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D shapes of real-world scenes is a fundamental problem in computer vision, and multi-view
stereo (MVS) has emerged as a mature geometric method
for reconstructing dense scene points. Using 2D images
taken from different viewpoints, MVS finds dense corre-

spondences between images based on the photo-consistency
assumption, that a scene point’s brightness should appear
similar across different viewpoints [13, 37–39]. However,
MVS struggles with textureless or specular surfaces, as the
lack of texture leads to ambiguities in establishing correspondences, and the presence of specular reflections violates the photo-consistency assumption [11].
Photometric stereo (PS) offers an alternative approach
for dealing with textureless and specular surfaces [32].
By estimating single-view surface normals using varying lighting conditions [40], PS enables high-fidelity 2.5D
surface reconstruction [26]. However, extending PS to
a multi-view setup, known as multi-view photometric
stereo (MVPS) [15], significantly increases image acquisition costs, as it requires multi-view and multi-light images
under highly controlled lighting conditions [21].
To mitigate image acquisition costs, simpler lighting setups such as circularly or symmetrically placed lights have
been explored [2, 3, 23, 44]. With these lighting setups, estimating the surface normal’s azimuth (the angle in the image plane) becomes considerably easier than estimating the
zenith (the angle from the camera optical axis) [2, 3, 23].
The ease of azimuth estimation also appears in polarization
imaging [29]. While azimuth can be determined up to a
π-ambiguity using only polarization data, zenith estimation
requires more complex steps [24, 34, 36].

825

