This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CiaoSR: Continuous Implicit Attention-in-Attention Network for
Arbitrary-Scale Image Super-Resolution
Jiezhang Cao1 Qin Wang1 Yongqin Xian1 * Yawei Li1 Bingbing Ni2 Zhiming Pi2
Kai Zhang1† Yulun Zhang1† Radu Timofte1,3 Luc Van Gool1,4
1
ETH Zürich 2 Huawei Inc. 3 University of Wurzburg 4 KU Leuven
https://github.com/caojiezhang/CiaoSR

Learning continuous image representations is recently
gaining popularity for image super-resolution (SR) because
of its ability to reconstruct high-resolution images with arbitrary scales from low-resolution inputs. Existing methods
mostly ensemble nearby features to predict the new pixel
at any queried coordinate in the SR image. Such a local
ensemble suffers from some limitations: i) it has no learnable parameters and it neglects the similarity of the visual
features; ii) it has a limited receptive field and cannot ensemble relevant features in a large field which are important
in an image. To address these issues, this paper proposes
a continuous implicit attention-in-attention network, called
CiaoSR. We explicitly design an implicit attention network
to learn the ensemble weights for the nearby local features.
Furthermore, we embed a scale-aware attention in this implicit attention network to exploit additional non-local information. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets
demonstrate CiaoSR significantly outperforms the existing
single image SR methods with the same backbone. In addition, CiaoSR also achieves the state-of-the-art performance
on the arbitrary-scale SR task. The effectiveness of the
method is also demonstrated on the real-world SR setting.
More importantly, CiaoSR can be flexibly integrated into any
backbone to improve the SR performance.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR), which aims to
reconstruct a high-resolution (HR) image from a lowresolution (LR) one, has been widely employed in many
practical applications [24, 61, 91]. However, deep neural
networks (DNN)-based SISR methods are facing some limitations in some real-world scenarios with arbitrary scales.
For example, camera users may want to enhance the digital zoom quality by super-resolving a photo or a video to
* Currently with Google. This work was done at ETH Zürich.
† Corresponding Authors: Kai Zhang, cskaizhang@gmail.com; Yulun

Zhang, yulun100@gmail.com

PSNR

Abstract

27.6
27.4
27.2
27.0
26.8
26.6

27.42
27.11
26.61

26.68

RDN

RDN-LIIF

27.07

26.81
RDN-LTE RDN-CiaoSR SwinIR SwinIR-CiaoSR

Figure 1. Comparison of different backbones and implicit models.
Our proposed implicit neural network on RDN [88] has better
performance than SwinIR [40]. Check Section 5 for details.

continuous arbitrary scales. Most existing DNN-based SISR
methods [40, 44, 86] need to train a series of models for all
different scales separately. However, it can be impractical to
store all these models on the device due to limited storage
and computing power. Alternatively, arbitrary-scale image
SR methods [13, 28, 39] aim to train a single network for all
scales in a continuous manner.
Most existing SISR methods [40,44,86] consist of a DNN
and an upsampling module (e.g., pixel shuffling [60]) at a
discrete scale. While substantial progresses have been made
in the DNN backbones for SR, there is little attempt to study
the upsampling module. A natural question to ask is: Does
the pixel shuffling hinder the potential of SR models? One
limitation of the pixel shuffling module is that it cannot synthesize SR images at large unseen and continuous scales.
To tackle this, one can treat synthesizing different-scale SR
images as a multi-task learning problem, and train a specific
upsampling module for each scale [44]. However, these
tasks are dependent and highly inter-related. Neglecting the
correlation of different-scale SR tasks may lead to discrete
representations and limited performance. Under a certain
capacity of a network, training a model on multi-tasks may
sacrifice the performance or have the comparable performance on each task. These above disadvantages limit its
applicability and flexibility in the real-world scenarios.
To address these, most existing arbitrary-scale SR methods [13, 28, 39] replace the upsampling method with an
implicit neural function and boost the performance. These
methods predict an RGB value at the query point in an image

1796

