This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Line Mapping Revisited
Shaohui Liu1 Yifan Yu1 Rémi Pautrat1 Marc Pollefeys1,2 Viktor Larsson3
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 Microsoft 3 Lund University

Abstract
In contrast to sparse keypoints, a handful of line segments
can concisely encode the high-level scene layout, as they
often delineate the main structural elements. In addition to
offering strong geometric cues, they are also omnipresent in
urban landscapes and indoor scenes. Despite their apparent advantages, current line-based reconstruction methods
are far behind their point-based counterparts. In this paper
we aim to close the gap by introducing LIMAP, a library
for 3D line mapping that robustly and efficiently creates
3D line maps from multi-view imagery. This is achieved
through revisiting the degeneracy problem of line triangulation, carefully crafted scoring and track building, and
exploiting structural priors such as line coincidence, parallelism, and orthogonality. Our code integrates seamlessly
with existing point-based Structure-from-Motion methods
and can leverage their 3D points to further improve the line
reconstruction. Furthermore, as a byproduct, the method
is able to recover 3D association graphs between lines and
points / vanishing points (VPs). In thorough experiments,
we show that LIMAP significantly outperforms existing approaches for 3D line mapping. Our robust 3D line maps
also open up new research directions. We show two example applications: visual localization and bundle adjustment,
where integrating lines alongside points yields the best results. Code is available at https://github.com/cvg/limap.

1. Introduction
The ability to estimate 3D geometry and build sparse
maps via Structure-from-Motion (SfM) has become ubiquitous in 3D computer vision. These frameworks enable
important tasks such as building maps for localization [60],
providing initial estimates for dense reconstruction and refinement [65], and novel view synthesis [45, 48]. Currently,
the field is dominated by point-based methods in which 2D
keypoints are detected, matched, and triangulated into 3D
maps [20, 64]. These sparse maps offer a compact scene representation, only reconstructing the most distinctive points.
While there have been tremendous progress in pointbased reconstruction methods, they still struggle in scenes

(a) Point mapping [13, 64]

(b) Line mapping

(c) Line-point association

(d) Line-VP association

Figure 1. In this paper, we propose a robust pipeline for mapping
3D lines (b), which offers stronger geometric clues about the scene
layout compared to the widely used point mapping (a). Part of
the success of our pipeline attributes to the modeling of structural
priors such as coincidence (c), and parallelism / orthogonality (d).
The corresponding 3D association graphs between lines and points
/ vanishing points (VPs) are also recovered from our system as a
byproduct. The degree-1 point and degree-2 junctions are colored
in blue and red respectively in (c), while parallel lines associated
with the same VP are colored the same in (d).

where it is difficult to detect and match sufficiently many stable keypoints, such as in indoor areas. On the contrary, these
man-made scenes contain abundant lines, e.g. in walls, windows, doors, or ceilings. Furthermore, lines exhibit higher
localization accuracy with less uncertainty in pixels [16].
Last but not least, lines appear in highly structured patterns,
often satisfying scene-wide geometric constraints such as
co-planarity, coincidence (line intersections), parallelism,
and orthogonality. In practice, lines suffer from different issues, such as poor endpoint localization and partial occlusion.
However, recent line detectors and matchers are bridging the
gap of performance between points and lines [25, 46, 84],
making it timely to revisit the line reconstruction problem.
Despite their rich geometric properties and abundance in
the real world, there exist very few line-based reconstruction
methods in the literature [22, 23, 44, 77]. In practical applications, they have also not achieved the same level of success
as their point-based counterparts. We believe this is due to

21445

