This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Attentive Tokens: Incorporating Token Importance and Diversity for
Efficient Vision Transformers
Sifan Long1,2,3 * Zhen Zhao4,3 * Jimin Pi3 Shengsheng Wang1,2† Jingdong Wang3†
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Jilin, China
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Jilin, China
3
4
Baidu VIS
University of Sydney
longsf22@mails.jlu.edu.cn
wss@jlu.edu.cn

zhen.zhao@sydney.edu.au

{pijimin01, wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Importance-based

Abstract
Vision transformers have achieved significant improvements on various vision tasks but their quadratic interactions between tokens significantly reduce computational efficiency. Many pruning methods have been proposed to remove redundant tokens for efficient vision transformers recently. However, existing studies mainly focus on the token
importance to preserve local attentive tokens but completely
ignore the global token diversity. In this paper, we emphasize the cruciality of diverse global semantics and propose
an efficient token decoupling and merging method that can
jointly consider the token importance and diversity for token pruning. According to the class token attention, we decouple the attentive and inattentive tokens. In addition to
preserving the most discriminative local tokens, we merge
similar inattentive tokens and match homogeneous attentive tokens to maximize the token diversity. Despite its simplicity, our method obtains a promising trade-off between
model complexity and classification accuracy. On DeiT-S,
our method reduces the FLOPs by 35% with only a 0.2%
accuracy drop. Notably, benefiting from maintaining the token diversity, our method can even improve the accuracy of
DeiT-T by 0.1% after reducing its FLOPs by 40%.

1. Introduction
Transformer [32] has become the most popular architecture in both natural language processing and computer
vision communities. Vision transformers (ViTs) [8] have
achieved superior performance and outperformed standard
CNNs in different vision tasks such as image classification [12, 31, 34, 41], semantic segmentation [20, 22, 33, 36],
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Preserve
Token
Minority Fusion
Discard

(a)
Diversity-based

Token
Cluster
Minority
Fusion
(b)
Incorporate both
Match
Token
Minority Fusion
Cluster

(c)

Figure 1. The ImageNet accuracy and keep rate of the pruned
DeiT-S. (a) Importance-based method preserves attentive tokens
based on the class token attention and masks all inattentive tokens;
(b) Diversity-based method clusters similar tokens into a group
and then combines tokens from the same group into a new token.
(c) Incorporate method decouples and merges tokens to consider
token importance and diversity simultaneously.

and object detection [1, 5]. The most remarkable advantage
of transformer is its ability to effectively capture long-range
dependencies between patches in the input image through
the self-attention mechanism [26]. However, quadratic interactions between tokens significantly degrade the computational efficiency [39], which motivates many researches
on exploring efficient transformers.
As one of the most direct and effective ways to reduce
computational complexity, token pruning has been widely
studied recently. Existing studies mainly focus on designing
different importance-evaluating strategies to retain attentive
tokens and prune inattentive tokens [10, 21, 24, 26, 38, 40].
In these importance-based works, DyViT [26] introduces

10334

