This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sharpness-Aware Gradient Matching for Domain Generalization
Zhen Lei1,2,3
Lei Zhang1∗
Pengfei Wang1,2
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3 *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
pengfei.wang@connect.polyu.hk, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn,
zlei@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
The goal of domain generalization (DG) is to enhance
the generalization capability of the model learned from a
source domain to other unseen domains. The recently developed Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) method aims
to achieve this goal by minimizing the sharpness measure
of the loss landscape. Though SAM and its variants have
demonstrated impressive DG performance, they may not always converge to the desired flat region with a small loss
value. In this paper, we present two conditions to ensure
that the model could converge to a flat minimum with a
small loss, and present an algorithm, named SharpnessAware Gradient Matching (SAGM), to meet the two conditions for improving model generalization capability. Specifically, the optimization objective of SAGM will simultaneously minimize the empirical risk, the perturbed loss (i.e.,
the maximum loss within a neighborhood in the parameter
space), and the gap between them. By implicitly aligning
the gradient directions between the empirical risk and the
perturbed loss, SAGM improves the generalization capability over SAM and its variants without increasing the computational cost. Extensive experimental results show that
our proposed SAGM method consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on five DG benchmarks, including
PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome, TerraIncognita, and DomainNet.
Codes are available at https://github.com/Wangpengfei/SAGM .

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved remarkable success in various computer vision tasks when the source data
and target data are independently and identically distributed
(i.i.d). However, the performance of deep models trained
in a source domain can drop significantly when applied to
unseen target domains. Domain generalization (DG) aims
* Corresponding author

to train a model from a set of source data such that it
can be well generalized to new domains without retraining. Over the past decade, research on DG has led to
a plethora of methods, including those based on domain
alignment [35, 16, 32, 2, 52], meta-learning [29, 3, 11, 51],
and data augmentation [53, 43, 7]. Though numerous DG
approaches have been proposed, a recent study called DomainBed [18] reveals that under a fair evaluation protocol, the naive empirical risk minimization (ERM) method
can even outperform most existing DG methods. Unfortunately, simply minimizing the empirical loss on a complex
and non-convex loss landscape is typically insufficient to
achieve a good generalization capability [23, 17, 22, 15].
As a result, ERM tends to overfit the training data set and
converge to sharp local minima [15].
Recent studies such as Sharpness-Aware Minimization
(SAM) [15] try to improve the model generalization ability
by minimizing the sharpness measure of the loss landscape.
Denote by L(θ) the loss to be minimized (e.g., the crossentropy loss for classification), where θ is the parameters
of the neural network. SAM first adversarially computes
a weight perturbation  that maximizes the empirical risk
L(θ) and then minimizes the loss of the perturbed network,
i.e., L(θ + ). Specifically, the objective of SAM is to minimize the maximum loss around the model parameter θ. Due
to the high complexity of this min-max optimization problem, SAM chooses to minimize an approximation of L(θ),
denoted by Lp (θ) (perturbed loss, see Section 3 for details).
However, minimizing Lp (θ) is not guaranteed to converge
to flat minimum regions [55].
While Lp (θ) may not characterize well the sharpness
of loss surface, the surrogate gap h(θ) , Lp (θ) − L(θ)
can better describe it. Intuitively, the loss surface will become flatter when h(θ) is closer to zero because the perturbation parameters around θ will have a similar loss value.
Zhuang et al. [55] proved that h(θ) is an equivalent measure
of the dominant eigenvalue of Hessian (which is the measure of sharpness) at a local minimum. Therefore, we can
seek flat minima for better generalization ability by mini-

3769

