This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Inter-rater Agreement for Classification in the Presence of Noisy
Labels
Maria Sofia Bucarelli 2 * Lucas Cassano1 Federico Siciliano 2 * Amin Mantrach1 Fabrizio Silvestri2, 3
1
Amazon 2 Sapienza University of Rome 3 ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy
{mariasofia.bucarelli, federico.siciliano}@uniroma1.it
{lcecasl, mantrach}@amazon.lu
fsilvestri@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract

has been reported in [21] that the ratio of corrupted labels
in some real-world datasets is between 8.0% and, 38.5% .
As a consequence of the presence of incorrect labels in the
training dataset, the aforementioned assumption is violated
and hence performance guarantees based on generalization
bounds no longer hold.

In practical settings, classification datasets are obtained
through a labelling process that is usually done by humans.
Labels can be noisy as they are obtained by aggregating the
different individual labels assigned to the same sample by
multiple, and possibly disagreeing, annotators. The interrater agreement on these datasets can be measured while
the underlying noise distribution to which the labels are
subject is assumed to be unknown. In this work, we: (i)
show how to leverage the inter-annotator statistics to estimate the noise distribution to which labels are subject; (ii)
introduce methods that use the estimate of the noise distribution to learn from the noisy dataset; and (iii) establish
generalization bounds in the empirical risk minimization
framework that depend on the estimated quantities. We conclude the paper by providing experiments that illustrate our
findings.

This gap between theory and practice raises the question
whether it is possible to learn from datasets with noisy labels while still having performance guarantees. This question has received a lot of attention lately and has already
been answered in the positive in some cases [15, 16]. Indeed multiple works have introduced learning algorithms
that can cope with datasets with incorrect labels while guaranteeing desirable performance through provable generalization bounds. However, these solutions do not solve the
entirety of the problem due to the fact that they rely on
precise knowledge of the error rate to which the labels
are subject, which is often unknown in practice. Several
works [16, 26, 27] attempt to address this issue by introducing techniques to estimate such error rate. Some of these
methods have the drawback of relying on assumptions that
do not always hold in practice, such as the existence of anchor samples [16]. Ideally, it would be desirable to design
learning algorithms that are both robust to noisy labels, and
for which performance guarantees can be provided.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has seen enormous progress in the
last decades, both theoretical and practical. Empirical risk
minimization is used as a learning framework [23], which
relies on the assumption that the model is trained with iid
(independent and identically distributed) sampled data from
the joint distribution between features and labels. As a consequence of generalization bounds, when this assumption is
satisfied any desired performance can be achieved as long
as enough training data is available. However in many realworld applications, due to flaws during the data collection
and labeling process, the assumption that the training data
is sampled from the true feature-label joint distribution does
not hold. Training data is often annotated by human raters
who have some non-zero probability of making mistakes. It

An approach, often used in industry to reduce the impact of errors made by human raters, is to label the same
dataset multiple times by different annotators. Then the individual labels are combined to reduce the probability of
erroneous labels in the dataset, two popular approaches are
majority vote or soft labeling. In these cases inter-annotator
agreement (IAA) scores (like Cohen’s kappa [1] and Fleiss’
kappa [5]) provide measurable metrics that are directly related to the probability of error present in the labels.
Since the IAA holds a direct relationship with the error
rate associated with the human raters, one could potentially
estimate the error rate and leverage this estimate to modify

* This work was done during Maria Sofia Bucarelli’s and Federico Si-

ciliano’s internship at Amazon.

3439

