This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AttentionShift: Iteratively Estimated Part-based Attention Map
for Pointly Supervised Instance Segmentation
Yuze Wang2
Peng Yuan2
Bailan Feng2
1†
Fang Wan
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Mingxiang Liao1∗

Zonghao Guo1 *

Image & Supervision
Class Activation Map
Self-attention Map
{liaomingxiang20,
guozonghao19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn,

wanfang@ucas.ac.cn

wangyuze1@hisilicon.com, {fengbailan, yuanpeng12}@huawei.com
Bird

Image & Supervision

Abstract
Instance Attention Map

Class Activation Map

Self-attention Map

Part-based Attention Map

Pointly supervised instance segmentation (PSIS) learns
to segment objects using a single
point within the object
Attention
extent as supervision. ChallengedShift
by the non-negligible semantic variance between object parts, however, the single
supervision point causes semantic bias and false segmentation. In this study, we propose an AttentionShift method, to
solve the semantic bias issue by iteratively decomposing the
instance attention map to parts and estimating fine-grained
semantics of each part. AttentionShift consists of two modules plugged on the vision transformer backbone: (i) token querying for pointly supervised attention map generation, and (ii) key-point shift, which re-estimates part-based
attention maps by key-point filtering in the feature space.
These two steps are iteratively performed so that the partbased attention maps are optimized spatially as well as in
the feature space to cover full object extent. Experiments
on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO 2017 datasets show that
AttentionShift respectively improves the state-of-the-art of
by 7.7% and 4.8% under mAP@0.5, setting a solid PSIS
baseline using vision transformer.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the most important vision tasks with a wide range of applications in medical image processing [21, 23, 36], human machine interface [3, 7,
24] and advanced driver assistance system [14,37,41]. Nevertheless, this task requires great human efforts to annotate
instance masks, particular in the era of big data. For example, it takes more than four years to create the ground-truth
instance masks in the MS COCO dataset by a human annotator [29]. The large annotation cost hinders the deployment
* Equal Contribution (Liao: Idea, Experiment; Guo: Detection Baseline, Writing).
† Corresponding Author.

Dog

Instance Attention Map

Part-based Attention Map

Attention
Shift

Figure 1.
Comparison of existing methods with the proposed AttentionShift. Upper: The class activation map (CAM)
method [51] suffers partial activation for the lack of spatial
constraint. The self-attention map generated by vision transformer [16] encounters false and missed object parts. Lower: AttentionShift literately optimizes part-based attention maps (indicated by key-points) by shifting the key-points in the feature space
to precisely localize the full object extent. (Best viewed in color)

of instance segmentation to real-world applications.
Pointly supervised instance segmentation (PSIS) [25,
26], where each instance is indicated by a single point, has
been a promising approach to solve the annotation cost issue. Compared with the precise mask annotation, PSIS requires only about 20% annotation cost, which is comparable
with the weakly supervised method, while the performance
is far beyond the later [2].
Existing methods [25, 26] typically estimate a single
pseudo mask for each instance and refine the estimated
mask by training a segmentation model. However, such
methods ignore the fact that the semantic variance between
object parts is non-negligible. For example, a “dog head”

19519

