This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grad-PU: Arbitrary-Scale Point Cloud Upsampling via Gradient Descent with
Learned Distance Functions
Yun He1

Danhang Tang2 Yinda Zhang2 Xiangyang Xue1
1
Fudan University 2 Google

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the popularity of commercial 3D scanners, capturing point clouds from real-world scenes becomes convenient and affordable. Thus point clouds have been
widely utilized in applications such as autonomous driving,
robotics, remote sensing, etc [11]. That being said, the raw
point clouds produced by 3D scanners or depth cameras are
often sparse and noisy, sometimes with small holes [16],
which greatly affects the performance of downstream tasks,
such as semantic classification [38], rendering [5], surface
reconstruction [1], etc. Consequently, it is vital to upsample
a raw point cloud to a dense, clean and complete one, with
Yun He and Xiangyang Xue are with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University.
Yanwei Fu is with the School of Data Science, Fudan University.
He is also with Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
and Fudan ISTBI±ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence,
Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China.

Output

Previous Methods
Input

Most existing point cloud upsampling methods have
roughly three steps: feature extraction, feature expansion
and 3D coordinate prediction. However, they usually suffer from two critical issues: (1) fixed upsampling rate after
one-time training, since the feature expansion unit is customized for each upsampling rate; (2) outliers or shrinkage artifact caused by the difficulty of precisely predicting
3D coordinates or residuals of upsampled points. To adress
them, we propose a new framework for accurate point cloud
upsampling that supports arbitrary upsampling rates. Our
method first interpolates the low-res point cloud according
to a given upsampling rate. And then refine the positions
of the interpolated points with an iterative optimization
process, guided by a trained model estimating the difference between the current point cloud and the high-res target. Extensive quantitative and qualitative results on benchmarks and downstream tasks demonstrate that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art accuracy and efficiency.

Yanwei Fu1

𝑁𝑁𝑅 for Each Upsampling Rate 𝑅
𝑃𝐻 = 𝑁𝑁𝑅 (𝑃𝐿 )

Ours

𝑃𝐿

Iterative Update

Ground Truth
Interpolation

Refinement
Shared NN
𝑃𝐼

𝑃𝐻 = argmin 𝑁𝑁(𝑃𝐼 )
𝑃𝐼

Figure 1. The comparison between previous point cloud upsampling methods and ours, and N N denotes the deep neural network. Given the low-res input PL , previous methods directly predict the 3D coordinates or residuals of high-res output PH . And
most of them need retraining to satisfy various upsampling rates.
Instead we first interpolate points in Euclidean space, which separates point generation from network learning and thus achieves
arbitrary upsampling rates. Then we formulate the refinement of
interpolated points as an iterative process aiming to minimize the
learned point-to-point distance function N N (PI ).

more geometric details.
The common practice towards point cloud upsampling
usually consists of three key steps [15, 16, 18, 27, 30, 41, 43].
(1) Feature extraction: capturing point-wise semantic features from the low-res point clouds. (2) Feature expansion: expanding the extracted features w.r.t the specified
upsampling rate. (3) Coordinate prediction: predicting 3D
coordinates or residuals of upsampled points from the expanded features. However, there are two critical issues in
this paradigm. Firstly, these models are usually dependent
on the upsampling rate. To support different upsampling
rates, multiple models need to be trained. Secondly, precisely estimating the 3D coordinates or offsets to the target points is hard, which leads to outliers or shrinkage artifact [20]. Although some recent methods try to handle
the fixed upsampling rate problem via affine combination
of neighboring points [19, 29] or implicit neural representation [8, 46], their performance is still limited by the inaccu-

5354

