This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning with Fantasy: Semantic-Aware Virtual Contrastive Constraint for
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Zeyin Song1†

Yifan Zhao2†
Yujun Shi3
Peixi Peng2,4∗
Li Yuan1,4
Yonghong Tian1,2,4∗
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
4
National University of Singapore
Peng Cheng Laboratory

zysong@stu.pku.edu.cn, {zhaoyf, pxpeng, yuanli-ece, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, shi.yujun@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) aims at
learning to classify new classes continually from limited
samples without forgetting the old classes. The mainstream
framework tackling FSCIL is first to adopt the cross-entropy
(CE) loss for training at the base session, then freeze the
feature extractor to adapt to new classes. However, in this
work, we find that the CE loss is not ideal for the base session training as it suffers poor class separation in terms of
representations, which further degrades generalization to
novel classes. One tempting method to mitigate this problem is to apply an additional naı̈ve supervised contrastive
learning (SCL) in the base session. Unfortunately, we find
that although SCL can create a slightly better representation separation among different base classes, it still struggles to separate base classes and new classes. Inspired
by the observations made, we propose Semantic-Aware Virtual Contrastive model (SAVC), a novel method that facilitates separation between new classes and base classes by
introducing virtual classes to SCL. These virtual classes,
which are generated via pre-defined transformations, not
only act as placeholders for unseen classes in the representation space, but also provide diverse semantic information. By learning to recognize and contrast in the fantasy space fostered by virtual classes, our SAVC significantly boosts base class separation and novel class generalization, achieving new state-of-the-art performance on
the three widely-used FSCIL benchmark datasets. Code is
available at: https://github.com/zysong0113/SAVC.

1. Introduction
Like humans, the modern artificial intelligence models
are expected to be equipped with the ability of learning
continually. For instance, a face recognition system needs
† : authors contributed equally. ∗ : corresponding author.

CE+SCL

CE

SAVC

Base
Session

Few-Shot
Incremental
Session

(a) Comparison of the embedding spaces trained with different methods.
Local Crop
Global Crop

Al

…

-

P1

P1

+

Same
Classes

A

N1

N1

-

N2

-

N3

Negative Pairs

…

N3
N4

P2

Positive Selection

Different
Classes

N2

-

+
P2

Fantasy Samples

Update

A

Positive Pairs

Semantic-Aware
Fantasy

Al

Fantasy
Classes

N4

…

Negative Selection

Original Feature Queue

(b) Illustration of our Semantic-Aware Virtual Contrastive model (SAVC).

Figure 1. The motivation of the proposed approach. Under the
incremental-frozen framework in FSCIL, our SAVC learns to recognize and contrast in the fantasy space, which leads to better base
class separation and novel class generalization than CE and SCL.

to continually learn to recognize new faces without forgetting those has already kept in mind. In this case, ClassIncremental Learning (CIL) [19, 25, 30, 37, 50] draws attention extensively, that sufficient and disjoint data are coming session-by-session. However, it is unrealistic to always
rely on accessing of multitudinous data. Taking the case of
face recognition system again, whether it can quickly learn
a new concept with just a few images, is an important criterion for evaluating its performance. As a result, designing effective and efficient algorithms to resolve Few-Shot
Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) problem has drawn increasing attention [6, 8, 12, 40, 44, 51, 55]. Unlike CIL, only
a few data are provided for FSCIL at incremental session

24183

