This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scalable, Detailed and Mask-Free Universal Photometric Stereo
Satoshi Ikehata
National Institute of Informatics (NII)
sikehata@nii.ac.jp

1st

2nd

INPUT: Multiple images under
varying unknown lighting conditions

23rd

OUPUT:
Surface normal map

Input image (1st out of 9)

3D Scanner
(EinScan-SE)

SDM-UniPS
(Ours)

UniPS
[Ikehata2022]

Figure 1. Given multiple images under unknown spatially-varying illuminations, our method can recover the detailed surface normal map
of non-convex, non-Lambertian surfaces (Left). Our method even surpasses the level of detail provided by consumer 3-D scanners (Right).

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce SDM-UniPS, a groundbreaking Scalable, Detailed, Mask-free, and Universal Photometric Stereo network. Our approach can recover astonishingly
intricate surface normal maps, rivaling the quality of 3D
scanners, even when images are captured under unknown,
spatially-varying lighting conditions in uncontrolled environments. We have extended previous universal photometric
stereo networks to extract spatial-light features, utilizing all
available information in high-resolution input images and
accounting for non-local interactions among surface points.
Moreover, we present a new synthetic training dataset that
encompasses a diverse range of shapes, materials, and illumination scenarios found in real-world scenes. Through extensive evaluation, we demonstrate that our method not only
surpasses calibrated, lighting-specific techniques on public benchmarks, but also excels with a significantly smaller
number of input images even without object masks.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo [52] aims to deduce the surface normal map of a scene by analyzing images captured from a
fixed perspective under diverse lighting conditions. Until

very recently, all photometric stereo methods assumed their
specific lighting conditions, which led to limitations in their
applicability. For instance, methods that assumed directional lighting conditions (e.g., [20, 24, 25]) were unsuitable
under natural illumination, and vice versa (e.g., [15, 38]).
To overcome this limitation, the “universal” photometric stereo method (UniPS) [22] has been introduced, designed to operate under unknown and arbitrary lighting conditions. In contrast to prior uncalibrated photometric stereo
methods [7,9,27], which assumed specific physically-based
lighting models, this method encodes a non-physical feature at each pixel for representing spatially-varying illumination, which is served as a substitute for physical lighting parameters within the calibrated photometric stereo network [21]. This method has taken the first step towards
dealing with unknown, spatially-varying illumination that
none of the existing methods could handle.
However,
the surface normal map recovered by UniPS, while not entirely inaccurate, appears blurry and lacks fine detail (see
the top-right corner of Fig. 1). Upon investigation, we pinpointed three fundamental factors contributing to the subpar
reconstruction performance. Firstly, extracting illumination
Supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 22K17919.

13198

