This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Accuracy and Robustness of Student Models via Adaptive Adversarial
Distillation
Bo Huang1,2 , Mingyang Chen1,2 , Yi Wang3 , Junda Lu4 , Minhao Cheng2 , Wei Wang1,2, *
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan, China
4
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia

1

{bhuangas, mchenbt}@connect.ust.hk; wangyi@dgut.edu.cn;
junda.lu@mq.edu.au;{minhaocheng, weiwcs}@ust.hk

Abstract
Distilled student models in teacher-student architectures
are widely considered for computational-effective deployment in real-time applications and edge devices. However,
there is a higher risk of student models to encounter adversarial attacks at the edge. Popular enhancing schemes
such as adversarial training have limited performance on
compressed networks. Thus, recent studies concern about
adversarial distillation (AD) that aims to inherit not only
prediction accuracy but also adversarial robustness of a robust teacher model under the paradigm of robust optimization. In the min-max framework of AD, existing AD methods
generally use fixed supervision information from the teacher
model to guide the inner optimization for knowledge distillation which often leads to an overcorrection towards model
smoothness. In this paper, we propose an adaptive adversarial distillation (AdaAD) that involves the teacher model
in the knowledge optimization process in a way interacting
with the student model to adaptively search for the inner
results. Comparing with state-of-the-art methods, the proposed AdaAD can significantly boost both the prediction
accuracy and adversarial robustness of student models in
most scenarios. In particular, the ResNet-18 model trained
by AdaAD achieves top-rank performance (54.23% robust
accuracy) on RobustBench under AutoAttack.

1. Introduction
Although demonstrating great success in dealing with
large-scale data, deep neural networks (DNNs) are often
over-parameterized in practice and require huge storage as
well as computational cost [18, 22, 26]. In many real-time
* Corresponding author.

applications, it is desirable to deploy lightweight models in
mobile devices with limited resources for prompt inference
results. Teacher-student architectures have been considered
as a means of computational-effective and high-performing
deployment in such applications [23, 29, 45]. Due to limited budget when deploying at the edge, small (student)
models are in general lack of sufficient protection mechanisms. Compared with large-scale models, however, they
are more prone to the risk of being exposed to a potential
attacker, e.g., who crafts adversarial attacks for malicious
purpose [3, 21, 43]. Therefore, it is essential to improve adversarial robustness of small models against malicious attacks when applying them to real applications.
As a defense scheme, adversarial training (AT) has been
studied and demonstrated effective in improving adversarial robustness for deep models [21, 24, 27, 32, 36]. Several studies have shown that AT is more effective on overparameterized models with high capacity rather than on
small models [27, 31, 48]. Recently, adversarial distillation (AD) was proposed as an alternative scheme for improving adversarial robustness in teacher-student architectures [20, 28, 49, 50]. Like AT, AD can also be formulated
as a min-max optimization problem. It aims to enable the
student model to inherit not only the prediction accuracy but
also the adversarial robustness from a robust teacher model
under the paradigm of robust optimization.
Existing AD methods generally utilize teacher models to
produce fixed soft labels to guide the distillation optimization process [20, 49, 50]. However, fitting a neighborhood
region with a fixed label will inevitably impose an overcorrection towards model smoothness, leading to a severe
trade-off between accuracy and robustness [12,12,17]. Furthermore, these AD methods do not fully interact with the
teacher models to minimize the prediction discrepancy between student and teacher models, thereby limiting the pre-

24668

