This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frame Interpolation Transformer and Uncertainty Guidance
Karlis Martins Briedis2,3
Markus Gross2,3

Markus Plack1 *
Matthias B. Hullin1
1

University of Bonn
Bonn, Germany

2

Abdelaziz Djelouah3
Christopher Schroers3

Department of Computer Science 3 DisneyResearch|Studios
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Zürich, Switzerland

mplack@cs.uni-bonn.de, karlis.briedis@inf.ethz.ch

I0

I2

I1

Uncertainty
Guidance

I0
ABME

Ê1

IFRNet
I2

VFIformer
Ours
Live Action Content

ABME

IFRNet

VFIformer
Ours Initial
Rendered Content

Ours Final

Figure 1. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results for frame interpolation. It produces sharp textures as highlighted on both live
action (left) and rendered (right [15]) content. In addition to the interpolated frame, we estimate error maps that are helpful for quality
checks in video production tools. More importantly, for rendered content it can be used to determine a subset of patches to render for the
middle frame, which are then leveraged by our model to achieve production quality level results for a fraction of the rendering cost.

Abstract
Video frame interpolation has seen important progress
in recent years, thanks to developments in several directions. Some works leverage better optical flow methods with improved splatting strategies or additional cues
from depth, while others have investigated alternative approaches through direct predictions or transformers. Still,
the problem remains unsolved in more challenging conditions such as complex lighting or large motion.
In this work, we are bridging the gap towards video production with a novel transformer-based interpolation network architecture capable of estimating the expected error together with the interpolated frame. This offers sev-

eral advantages that are of key importance for frame interpolation usage: First, we obtained improved visual quality over several datasets. The improvement in terms of
quality is also clearly demonstrated through a user study.
Second, our method estimates error maps for the interpolated frame, which are essential for real-life applications
on longer video sequences where problematic frames need
to be flagged. Finally, for rendered content a partial rendering pass of the intermediate frame, guided by the predicted
error, can be utilized during the interpolation to generate a
new frame of superior quality. Through this error estimation, our method can produce even higher-quality intermediate frames using only a fraction of the time compared to
a full rendering.

* Work done during an internship at DisneyResearch|Studios

9811

