This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Zoom and Unzoom
Chittesh Thavamani1
tchittesh@gmail.org

Mengtian Li†1
Francesco Ferroni‡2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Argo AI

mengtial@alumni.cmu.edu

Deva Ramanan1

fferroni@nvidia.com

deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Many perception systems in mobile computing, autonomous navigation, and AR/VR face strict compute constraints that are particularly challenging for high-resolution
input images. Previous works propose nonuniform downsamplers that "learn to zoom" on salient image regions, reducing
compute while retaining task-relevant image information.
However, for tasks with spatial labels (such as 2D/3D object detection and semantic segmentation), such distortions
may harm performance. In this work (LZU), we "learn to
zoom" in on the input image, compute spatial features, and
then "unzoom" to revert any deformations. To enable efficient and differentiable unzooming, we approximate the
zooming warp with a piecewise bilinear mapping that is
invertible. LZU can be applied to any task with 2D spatial input and any model with 2D spatial features, and we
demonstrate this versatility by evaluating on a variety of
tasks and datasets: object detection on Argoverse-HD, semantic segmentation on Cityscapes, and monocular 3D object detection on nuScenes. Interestingly, we observe boosts
in performance even when high-resolution sensor data is
unavailable, implying that LZU can be used to "learn to upsample" as well. Code and additional visuals are available
at https://tchittesh.github.io/lzu/.

1. Introduction
In many applications, the performance of perception systems is bottlenecked by strict inference-time constraints.
This can be due to limited compute (as in mobile computing),
a need for strong real-time performance (as in autonomous
vehicles), or both (as in augmented/virtual reality). These
constraints are particularly crippling for settings with highresolution sensor data. Even with optimizations like model
compression [4] and quantization [23], it is common practice
to downsample inputs during inference.
However, running inference at a lower resolution undeniably destroys information. While some information loss is
† Now at Waymo.
‡ Now at Nvidia.

Figure 1. LZU is characterized by "zooming" the input image,
computing spatial features, then "unzooming" to revert spatial deformations. LZU can be applied to any task and model that makes
use of internal 2D features to process 2D inputs. We show visual
examples of output tasks including 2D detection, semantic segmentation, and 3D detection from RGB images.

unavoidable, the usual solution of uniform downsampling
assumes that each pixel is equally informative towards the
task at hand. To rectify this assumption, Recasens et al. [20]
propose Learning to Zoom (LZ), a nonuniform downsampler
that samples more densely at salient (task-relevant) image
regions. They demonstrate superior performance relative
to uniform downsampling on human gaze estimation and
fine-grained image classification. However, this formulation
warps the input image and thus requires labels to be invariant
to such deformations.
Adapting LZ downsampling to tasks with spatial labels
is trickier, but has been accomplished in followup works
for semantic segmentation (LDS [11]) and 2D object detection (FOVEA [22]). LDS [11] does not unzoom during
learning, and so defines losses in the warped space. This
necessitates additional regularization that may not apply to
non-pixel-dense tasks like detection. FOVEA [22] does unzoom bounding boxes for 2D detection, but uses a special
purpose solution that avoids computing an inverse, making
it inapplicable to pixel-dense tasks like semantic segmentation. Despite these otherwise elegant solutions, there doesn’t
seem to be a general task-agnostic solution for intelligent
downsampling.

5086

