This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iCLIP: Bridging Image Classification and Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training for Visual Recognition
Yixuan Wei1,2 , Yue Cao2 *, Zheng Zhang2 , Houwen Peng2 , Zhuliang Yao1,2 , Zhenda Xie1,2
Han Hu2 , Baining Guo2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
This paper presents a method that effectively combines two prevalent visual recognition methods, i.e., image
classification and contrastive language-image pre-training,
dubbed iCLIP. Instead of naı̈ve multi-task learning that use
two separate heads for each task, we fuse the two tasks
in a deep fashion that adapts the image classification to
share the same formula and the same model weights with
the language-image pre-training. To further bridge these
two tasks, we propose to enhance the category names in
image classification tasks using external knowledge, such
as their descriptions in dictionaries. Extensive experiments
show that the proposed method combines the advantages
of two tasks well: the strong discrimination ability in image classification tasks due to the clean category labels,
and the good zero-shot ability in CLIP tasks ascribed to
the richer semantics in the text descriptions. In particular, it reaches 82.9% top-1 accuracy on IN-1K, and meanwhile surpasses CLIP by 1.8%, with similar model size, on
zero-shot recognition of Kornblith 12-dataset benchmark.
The code and models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/weiyx16/iCLIP.

1. Introduction
Image classification is a classic visual problem whose
goal is to classify images into a fixed set of pre-defined categories. For example, the widely used ImageNet dataset [8]
carefully annotated 14 million images and categorize them
into 21,841 categories chosen from the WordNet [36]. For
image classification, each category provides a clear taxonomy that groups images of the same category together and
separates images from different categories, and thus endows
the learnt representation with strong discriminant ability.
However, this classification ability is limited to a fixed set
of categories [8, 29, 51].
* Corresponding Author. The work is done when Yixuan Wei, Zhuliang
Yao, and Zhenda Xie are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.

Contrastive
Loss

Visual
Encoder

Text
Encoder

a photo of a
night bird, any
night
bird associated
bird
Dictionary with night, like
Idx: 585
owl...

Alt-texts

Dictionary
enhanced
classes

Dictionary

Classes

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed iCLIP framework. The
iCLIP framework can take two types of annotations for training:
classes and alt-texts. It converts the conventional image classification formula to share the same text encoder and the same cosine classifier as that used in the contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP). It also uses a dictionary-enhanced approach to
enrich the original class names in the image classification problem with external information involved in dictionaries. The deep
fusion and knowledge-enriched classes both greatly improve the
performance compared to naı̈ve multi-task learning or performing
one of the two tasks alone.

Recently, the method that learns to contrast image-text
pairs, known as contrastive language-image pre-training
(abbr. CLIP), has well made up such shortage of the conventional image classification methods to achieve strong
zero-shot recognition ability [24, 44]. These methods employ a contrastive learning framework, where images and
their corresponding alt-texts are treated as positive pairs,
while images with all other alt-texts are treated as negative
pairs. Thanks to the rich semantics involved in the alt-texts,
the images can be weakly connected to almost arbitrary categories that already appear in the alt-texts, resulting in its
zero-shot ability. A drawback is that the image-text pairs
are usually crawled from the internet without human labeling, leading to their noisy and ambiguous nature. Thus the
learnt representations are often not conceptual compact, and
may lack certain discriminative ability.

2776

