This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Procedure-Aware Pretraining for Instructional Video Understanding
Honglu Zhou1,2 , Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n1,3 , Mubbasir Kapadia2 , Silvio Savarese1 and Juan Carlos Niebles1
1
Salesforce Research, 2 Rutgers University, 3 UT Austin
{hz289,mk1353}@cs.rutgers.edu, robertomm@cs.utexas.edu, {ssavarese,jniebles}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Our goal is to learn a video representation that is useful
for downstream procedure understanding tasks in instructional videos. Due to the small amount of available annotations, a key challenge in procedure understanding is
to be able to extract from unlabeled videos the procedural knowledge such as the identity of the task (e.g., ‘make
latte’), its steps (e.g., ‘pour milk’), or the potential next
steps given partial progress in its execution. Our main insight is that instructional videos depict sequences of steps
that repeat between instances of the same or different tasks,
and that this structure can be well represented by a Procedural Knowledge Graph (PKG), where nodes are discrete
steps and edges connect steps that occur sequentially in
the instructional activities. This graph can then be used
to generate pseudo labels to train a video representation
that encodes the procedural knowledge in a more accessible form to generalize to multiple procedure understanding tasks. We build a PKG by combining information from
a text-based procedural knowledge database and an unlabeled instructional video corpus and then use it to generate training pseudo labels with four novel pre-training objectives. We call this PKG-based pre-training procedure
and the resulting model Paprika, Procedure-Aware PRetraining for Instructional Knowledge Acquisition. We evaluate Paprika on COIN and CrossTask for procedure understanding tasks such as task recognition, step recognition, and step forecasting. Paprika yields a video representation that improves over the state of the art: up to
11.23% gains in accuracy in 12 evaluation settings. Implementation is available at https://github.com/
salesforce/paprika.

1. Introduction
Instructional videos depict humans demonstrating how
to perform multi-step tasks such as cooking, making up
and embroidering, repairing, or creating new objects. For
a holistic instructional video understanding, an agent has to
acquire procedural knowledge: structural information about

(a) Procedure Knowledge
Supervision
Graph Building

(b) Pre-training
What task?
What step?

Instructional Videos
Procedure-Aware Model

What next step?
...

Downstream Procedural Tasks

Figure 1. Training a video representation for procedure understanding with supervision from a procedural knowledge
graph: the structure observed in instructions for procedures (from
text, from videos) corresponds to sequences of steps that repeat
between instances of the same or different tasks; this structure is
well represented by a Procedural Knowledge Graph (PKG). (a) We
build a PKG combining text instructions with unlabeled video data,
and (b) obtain a video representation by encoding the human procedural knowledge from the PKG into a more general procedureaware model (Paprika) generating pseudo labels with the PKG
for several procedure understanding objectives. Paprika can
then be easily applied to multiple downstream procedural tasks.

tasks such as the identification of the task, its steps, or forecasting the next steps. An agent that has acquired procedural knowledge is said to have gained procedure understanding of instructional videos, which can be then exploited in
multiple real-world applications such as instructional video
labeling, video chapterization, process mining and, when
connected to a robot, robot task planning.
Our goal is to learn a novel video representation that can
be applicable to a variety of procedure understanding tasks
in instructional videos. Unfortunately, prior methods for
video representation learning are inadequate for this goal, as
they lack the ability to capture procedural knowledge. This
is because most of them are trained to learn the (weak) correspondence between visual and text modalities, where the
text comes either from automatic-speech recognition (ASR)
on the audio [43, 77], which is noisy and error-prone, or
from a caption-like descriptive sentence (e.g., “a video of
a dog”) [33], which does not contain sufficient information for fine-grained procedure understanding tasks such as
step recognition or anticipation. Others are pre-trained on
masked frame modeling [34], frame order modeling [34]
or video-audio matching [1], which gives them basic video

10727

