This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Video Object Detection with Learnable Object-Centric Global Optimization
Jiawei He1,2 Yuntao Chen3 Naiyan Wang4 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3
1
CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS 4 TuSimple
{hejiawei2019, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn {chenyuntao08, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract
We explore long-term temporal visual correspondencebased optimization for 3D video object detection in this
work. Visual correspondence refers to one-to-one mappings for pixels across multiple images. Correspondencebased optimization is the cornerstone for 3D scene reconstruction but is less studied in 3D video object detection,
because moving objects violate multi-view geometry constraints and are treated as outliers during scene reconstruction. We address this issue by treating objects as
first-class citizens during correspondence-based optimization. In this work, we propose BA-Det, an end-to-end optimizable object detector with object-centric temporal correspondence learning and featuremetric object bundle adjustment. Empirically, we verify the effectiveness and efficiency of BA-Det for multiple baseline 3D detectors under various setups. Our BA-Det achieves SOTA performance on the large-scale Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) with
only marginal computation cost. Our code is available at
https://github.com/jiaweihe1996/BA-Det.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an important perception task, especially for indoor robots and autonomous-driving vehicles. Recently, image-only 3D object detection [23, 52] has
been proven practical and made great progress. In realworld applications, cameras capture video streams instead
of unrelated frames, which suggests abundant temporal information is readily available for 3D object detection. In
single-frame methods, despite simply relying on the prediction power of deep learning, finding correspondences play
an important role in estimating per-pixel depth and the object pose in the camera frame. Popular correspondences
include Perspective-n-Point (PnP) between pre-defined 3D
keypoints [22, 52] and their 2D projections in monocular
3D object detection, and Epipolar Geometry [6,12] in multiview 3D object detection. However, unlike the single-frame

case, temporal visual correspondence has not been explored
much in 3D video object detection.
As summarized in Fig. 1, existing methods in 3D video
object detection can be divided into three categories while
each has its own limitations. Fig. 1a shows methods with
object tracking [3], especially using a 3D Kalman Filter
to smooth the trajectory of each detected object. This approach is detector-agnostic and thus widely adopted, but it
is just an output-level smoothing process without any feature learning. As a result, the potential of video is underexploited. Fig. 1b illustrates the temporal BEV (Bird’sEye View) approaches [14, 23, 26] for 3D video object
detection. They introduce the multi-frame temporal crossattention or concatenation for BEV features in an end-toend fusion manner. As for utilizing temporal information,
temporal BEV methods rely solely on feature fusion while
ignoring explicit temporal correspondence. Fig. 1c depicts
stereo-from-video methods [46, 47]. These methods explicitly construct a pseudo-stereo view using ego-motion and
then utilize the correspondence on the epipolar line of two
frames for depth estimation. However, the use of explicit
correspondence in these methods is restricted to only two
frames, thereby limiting its potential to utilize more temporal information. Moreover, another inevitable defect of
these methods is that moving objects break the epipolar constraints, which cannot be well handled, so monocular depth
estimation has to be reused.
Considering the aforementioned shortcomings, we seek
a new method that can handle both static and moving
objects, and utilize long-term temporal correspondences.
Firstly, in order to handle both static and moving objects, we
draw experience from the object-centric global optimization
with reprojection constraints in Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) [21, 48]. Instead of directly estimating the depth for each pixel from temporal cues, we utilize
them to construct useful temporal constraints to refine the
object pose prediction from network prediction. Specifically, we construct a non-linear least-square optimization
problem with the temporal correspondence constraint in an

5106

