This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bringing Inputs to Shared Domains for
3D Interacting Hands Recovery in the Wild
Gyeongsik Moon
Meta Reality Labs
mks0601@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite recent achievements, existing 3D interacting
hands recovery methods have shown results mainly on motion capture (MoCap) environments, not on in-the-wild
(ITW) ones. This is because collecting 3D interacting hands
data in the wild is extremely challenging, even for the 2D
data. We present InterWild, which brings MoCap and ITW
samples to shared domains for robust 3D interacting hands
recovery in the wild with a limited amount of ITW 2D/3D
interacting hands data. 3D interacting hands recovery consists of two sub-problems: 1) 3D recovery of each hand and
2) 3D relative translation recovery between two hands. For
the first sub-problem, we bring MoCap and ITW samples to
a shared 2D scale space. Although ITW datasets provide
a limited amount of 2D/3D interacting hands, they contain
large-scale 2D single hand data. Motivated by this, we use
a single hand image as an input for the first sub-problem
regardless of whether two hands are interacting. Hence, interacting hands of MoCap datasets are brought to the 2D
scale space of single hands of ITW datasets. For the second sub-problem, we bring MoCap and ITW samples to a
shared appearance-invariant space. Unlike the first subproblem, 2D labels of ITW datasets are not helpful for the
second sub-problem due to the 3D translation’s ambiguity.
Hence, instead of relying on ITW samples, we amplify the
generalizability of MoCap samples by taking only a geometric feature without an image as an input for the second
sub-problem. As the geometric feature is invariant to appearances, MoCap and ITW samples do not suffer from a
huge appearance gap between the two datasets. The code
is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
3D interacting hands recovery aims to reconstruct a single person’s interacting right and left hands in the 3D space.
The recent introduction of a large-scale motion capture
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/InterWild

(a) The number of single hand vs. interacting hands in MSCOCO

①

②

ray

z-axis
camera
input image

ray

① wrong global translation (right hand)
wrong relative translation

② correct global translation (right hand)
correct relative translation

(b) The failure case of the 2D-based weak supervision
for the 3D relative translation between two hands

Figure 1. (a) Only a very small amount of 2D interacting
hands are available in ITW datasets despite a relaxed threshold
of intersection-over-union (IoU). We consider two hands are interacting if the IoU between the two hands’ boxes is bigger than
0.1. (b) The 2D-based weak supervision from ITW datasets often
results in a wrong 3D relative translation (the orange arrow).

(MoCap) dataset [20] motivated many 3D interacting hands
recovery methods [4, 6, 14, 25, 32].
Although they have shown robust results on MoCap
datasets, none of them explicitly tackled robustness on inthe-wild (ITW) datasets. Simply training networks on MoCap datasets and testing them on ITW datasets results in unstable results due to a huge domain gap between MoCap and
ITW datasets. The most representative domain gap is an appearance gap. For example, images in InterHand2.6M [20]
(IH2.6M) have black backgrounds and artificial illuminations, far from those of ITW datasets. The fundamental solution for this is collecting large-scale ITW data with 3D
groundtruths (GTs); however, this is extremely challenging.
For example, capturing 3D data requires tens of calibrated

17028

