This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The O BJECT F OLDER B ENCHMARK:
Multisensory Learning with Neural and Real Objects
Ruohan Gao*

Yiming Dou*†

Hao Li* Tanmay Agarwal
Li Fei-Fei
Jiajun Wu
Stanford Univeristy

Abstract
We introduce the O BJECT F OLDER B ENCHMARK, a
benchmark suite of 10 tasks for multisensory object-centric
learning, centered around object recognition, reconstruction, and manipulation with sight, sound, and touch. We
also introduce the O BJECT F OLDER R EAL dataset, including the multisensory measurements for 100 real-world
household objects, building upon a newly designed pipeline
for collecting the 3D meshes, videos, impact sounds, and
tactile readings of real-world objects. We conduct systematic benchmarking on both the 1,000 multisensory neural
objects from O BJECT F OLDER, and the real multisensory
data from O BJECT F OLDER R EAL. Our results demonstrate the importance of multisensory perception and reveal
the respective roles of vision, audio, and touch for different object-centric learning tasks. By publicly releasing our
dataset and benchmark suite, we hope to catalyze and enable new research in multisensory object-centric learning
in computer vision, robotics, and beyond. Project page:
https://objectfolder.stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Computer vision systems today excel at recognizing objects in 2D images thanks to many image datasets [3,17,35,
40]. There is also a growing interest in modeling an object’s
shape and appearance in 3D, with various benchmarks and
tasks introduced [8, 28, 44, 45, 54, 61]. Despite the exciting
progress, these studies primarily focus on the visual recognition of objects. At the same time, our everyday activities
often involve multiple sensory modalities. Objects exist not
just as visual entities, but they also make sounds and can be
touched during interactions. The different sensory modes of
an object all share the same underlying object intrinsics—
its 3D shape, material property, and texture. Modeling the
* indicates equal contribution.
† Yiming is affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

The work
was done when he was visiting Stanford University as a summer intern.

Jeannette Bohg

Yunzhu Li

complete multisensory profile of objects is of great importance for many applications beyond computer vision, such
as robotics, graphics, and virtual and augmented reality.
Some recent attempts have been made to combine multiple sensory modalities to complement vision for various
tasks [2,6,39,58,59,63,70,73]. These tasks are often studied
in tailored settings and evaluated on different datasets. As
an attempt to develop assets generally applicable to diverse
tasks, the O BJECT F OLDER dataset [23, 26] has been introduced and includes 1,000 neural objects with their visual,
acoustic, and tactile properties. O BJECT F OLDER however
has two fundamental limitations. First, no real objects are
included; all multisensory data are obtained through simulation with no simulation-to-real (sim2real) calibration. Second, only a few tasks were presented to demonstrate the
usefulness of the dataset and to establish the possibility of
conducting sim2real transfer with the neural objects.
Consequently, we need a multisensory dataset of real objects and a robust benchmark suite for multisensory objectcentric learning. To this end, we present the O BJECTF OLDER R EAL dataset and the O BJECT F OLDER B ENCH MARK suite, as shown in Fig. 1.
The O BJECT F OLDER R EAL dataset contains multisensory data collected from 100 real-world household objects.
We design a data collection pipeline for each modality: for
vision, we scan the 3D meshes of objects in a dark room
and record HD videos of each object rotating in a lightbox;
for audio, we build a professional anechoic chamber with
a tailored object platform and then collect impact sounds
by striking the objects at different surface locations with an
impact hammer; for touch, we equip a Franka Emika Panda
robot arm with a GelSight robotic finger [18,71] and collect
tactile readings at the exact surface locations where impact
sounds are collected.
The O BJECT F OLDER B ENCHMARK suite consists of 10
benchmark tasks for multisensory object-centric learning,
centered around object recognition, reconstruction, and manipulation. The three recognition tasks are cross-sensory
retrieval, contact localization, and material classification;
the three reconstruction tasks are 3D shape reconstruc17276

