This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Spatial-Angular Structured Light for Single-View Acquisition of
Shape and Reflectance
Xianmin Xu1 * Yuxin Lin1 * Haoyang Zhou1 Chong Zeng1 Yaxin Yu1 Kun Zhou1,2 † Hongzhi Wu1 †
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 ZJU-FaceUnity Joint Lab of Intelligent Graphics

1

Camera

Abstract
We propose a unified structured light, consisting of an
LED array and an LCD mask, for high-quality acquisition
of both shape and reflectance from a single view. For geometry, one LED projects a set of learned mask patterns to
accurately encode spatial information; the decoded results
from multiple LEDs are then aggregated to produce a final
depth map. For appearance, learned light patterns are cast
through a transparent mask to efficiently probe angularlyvarying reflectance. Per-point BRDF parameters are differentiably optimized with respect to corresponding measurements, and stored in texture maps as the final reflectance.
We establish a differentiable pipeline for the joint capture to
automatically optimize both the mask and light patterns towards optimal acquisition quality. The effectiveness of our
light is demonstrated with a wide variety of physical objects. Our results compare favorably with state-of-the-art
techniques.

1. Introduction
Joint acquisition of both shape and appearance of a static
object is one key problem in computer vision and computer
graphics. It is critical for various applications, such as cultural heritage, e-commerce and visual effects. Represented
as a 3D mesh and a 6D Spatially-Varying Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (SVBRDF), a digitized object can be rendered to reproduce the original look in the
virtual world with high fidelity for different view and lighting conditions.
Active lighting is widely employed in high-quality acquisition. It probes the physical domain efficiently and
obtains measurements strongly correlated with the target,
leading to high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) results. For geometry, structured illumination projects carefully designed
pattern(s) into the space to distinguish rays for accurate
3D triangulation [15,32]. For reflectance, illumination mul* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors (hwu@acm.org/kunzhou@acm.org).

Camera

LED
Array

Camera

Valid
Volume

Valid
Volume

Object
LCD
Mask

Object
LCD Mask
LED Array

Object
LCD Mask
LED Array

Figure 1. Our hardware prototype. It consists of an LED array, an
LCD mask and a camera (left). One LED can project a set of mask
patterns for shape acquisition (center), and multiple LEDs can be
programmed to cast light patterns through a transparent mask for
reflectance capture (right).

tiplexing programs the intensities of different lights over
time, physically convolving with BRDF slices in the angular domain to produce clues for precise appearance deduction [13, 35].
While active lighting for geometry or reflectance alone
has been extensively studied, it is difficult to apply the idea
to joint capture. At one hand, directly combining the two
types of lights ends up with a bulky setup [39] and competing measurement coverages (i.e., a light for shape capture
cannot be co-located with one for reflectance). On the other
hand, existing work usually adopts one type of active light
only, and has to perform passive acquisition on the other,
leading to sub-optimal reconstructions. For example, Holroyd et al. [16] use projectors to capture geometry and impose strong priors on appearance. Kang et al. [19] build a
light cube to densely sample reflectance in the angular domain. But the quality of its passive shape reconstruction is
severely limited, if the object surface lacks prominent spatial features.
To tackle the above challenges, we propose a unified
structured light for high-quality acquisition of 3D shape
and reflectance. Our lightweight prototype consists of an
LED array and an LCD mask, which essentially acts as a
restricted lightfield projector to actively probe the spatial
and angular domain. For geometry, each LED projects a
set of mask patterns into the space to encode shape infor-

206

