This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dream3D: Zero-Shot Text-to-3D Synthesis Using 3D Shape Prior and
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Jiale Xu1,3 * Xintao Wang1† Weihao Cheng1 Yan-Pei Cao1
Ying Shan1 Xiaohu Qie2 Shenghua Gao3,4,5†
1
ARC Lab, 2 Tencent PCG 3 ShanghaiTech University
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
5
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC
“A park bench overgrown
with vines.”

“A wide screen TV
playing The Avengers.”

“A car is burning.”

“A lamp imitating
sunflower.”

“The Iron Throne in
Game of Thrones.”

Dream3D (Ours)

PureCLIPNeRF

Figure 1. By utilizing 3D shape priors and powerful text-to-image diffusion models, our Dream3D can generate 3D content that exhibits
superior visual quality and shape accuracy in accordance with the text prompt when compared to PureCLIPNeRF [24].

Abstract
Recent CLIP-guided 3D optimization methods, such as
DreamFields [19] and PureCLIPNeRF [24], have achieved
impressive results in zero-shot text-to-3D synthesis. However, due to scratch training and random initialization without prior knowledge, these methods often fail to generate
accurate and faithful 3D structures that conform to the input text. In this paper, we make the first attempt to introduce
explicit 3D shape priors into the CLIP-guided 3D optimization process. Specifically, we first generate a high-quality
3D shape from the input text in the text-to-shape stage as a
3D shape prior. We then use it as the initialization of a neural radiance field and optimize it with the full prompt. To
address the challenging text-to-shape generation task, we
present a simple yet effective approach that directly bridges
the text and image modalities with a powerful text-to-image
diffusion model. To narrow the style domain gap between
the images synthesized by the text-to-image diffusion model
and shape renderings used to train the image-to-shape
generator, we further propose to jointly optimize a learnable text prompt and fine-tune the text-to-image diffusion
model for rendering-style image generation. Our method,
* Work done during an internship at ARC Lab, Tencent PCG.
† Corresponding Author.

Dream3D, is capable of generating imaginative 3D content with superior visual quality and shape accuracy compared to state-of-the-art methods. Our project page is at
https://bluestyle97.github.io/dream3d/.

1. Introduction
Text-to-3D synthesis endeavors to create 3D content that
is coherent with an input text, which has the potential to
benefit a wide range of applications such as animations,
games, and virtual reality. Recently developed zero-shot
text-to-image models [34, 44, 45, 48, 50] have made remarkable progress and can generate diverse, high-fidelity, and
imaginative images from various text prompts. However,
extending this success to the text-to-3D synthesis task is
challenging because it is not practically feasible to collect
a comprehensive paired text-3D dataset.
Zero-shot text-to-3D synthesis [19, 22, 24, 40, 51], which
eliminates the need for paired data, is an attractive approach
that typically relies on powerful vision-language models
such as CLIP [58]. There are two main categories of this
approach. 1) CLIP-based generative models, such as CLIPForge [51]. They utilize images as an intermediate bridge
and train a mapper from the CLIP image embeddings of

20908

