This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LightedDepth: Video Depth Estimation in light of Limited Inference View Angles
Shengjie Zhu and Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824
zhusheng@msu.edu, liuxm@cse.msu.edu

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental task for applications such as 3D reconstruction [3], robotics [26], and autonomous driving [59]. The depth is self-contained in the
scene motion brought by the camera movement. The classic SfM methods [17, 31, 37, 38, 54] hence jointly recover
the scene depth and camera poses by applying bundleadjustment over the entire video sequence. However, the
iterative optimization defined over all frames makes SfM a
computationally intensive method. Video depth estimation
simplifies the computation by only consuming the immediate neighboring frames. In consequence, only limited camera view angles are available, as shown in Fig. 2 (a).
The limited camera views, however, suit optical flow
and monocular depth estimation. We are then motivated
to connect video depth to mono-depth and flow estimation
by decoupling the video-depth into two components. First,
we use the flowmap to estimate a normalized up-to-scale

ur
s

[2

O

2]

1]
D

ee
pV

2c
D

2D

et
[
D

ee
pV

N

[4

1]

0]
[2

]
[8
LE

D
RO

M
aG

D

ee
pM

[5

7]

M
R

[2
Sf

S
BT

Video depth estimation infers the dense scene depth from
immediate neighboring video frames. While recent works
consider it a simplified structure-from-motion (SfM) problem, it still differs from the SfM in that significantly fewer
view angels are available in inference. This setting, however, suits the mono-depth and optical flow estimation. This
observation motivates us to decouple the video depth estimation into two components, a normalized pose estimation over a flowmap and a logged residual depth estimation
over a mono-depth map. The two parts are unified with an
efficient off-the-shelf scale alignment algorithm. Additionally, we stabilize the indoor two-view pose estimation by including additional projection constraints and ensuring sufficient camera translation. Though a two-view algorithm,
we validate the benefit of the decoupling with the substantial
performance improvement over multi-view iterative prior
works on indoor and outdoor datasets. Codes and models
are available at https://github.com/ShngJZ/LightedDepth.

0]

Abstract

Figure 1. Video Depth Performance Comparison on KITTI
Dataset. We mark the methods taking different numbers of frames
with different colors. We propose a two-view video depth estimation method that substantially outperforms prior two-view, threeview, and five-view methods. Our method uses a monocular depth
as initialization. The arrow marks our improvement when using
the BTS [27] as the initialization. Comparison is detailed in Tab. 1.

camera pose, i.e., camera pose with a unit-length translation vector. Second, we estimate video depth as a logged
residual over the mono-depthmap. The two components are
unified by an efficient off-the-shelf camera scale alignment
algorithm, aligning the depthmap and flowmap, making the
residual depth estimation a stereo matching.
Unlike our method, most prior video depth estimation
works [41, 46, 50, 52, 55] formulate their solutions as deep
SfM, shown in Fig. 2 (b). They can be grouped into two
types [50]. Type I methods [41, 46, 52] execute SfM within
a fixed frame window, embedding bundle-adjustment as a
differentiable module within a network. Type II methods [50, 55] execute a consecutive-frame SfM. They sequentially estimate an up-to-scale pose and an up-to-scale
depthmap. While prior works solve video depth estimation
as a simplified SfM problem, our method differs in decoupling the video depth estimation to two sub-tasks which are
robust to deficient camera views, i.e., flow based normalized

5003

