This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Shot High-Fidelity Talking-Head Synthesis with Deformable Neural
Radiance Field
Weichuang Li1 *
Mulin Chen1,3
1

Longhao Zhang2 *
Dong Wang1 *
2
Bang Zhang
Zhongjian Wang2

Bin Zhao1,3†
Liefeng Bo 2

Zhigang Wang1
Xuelong Li 1,3 †

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University
{liweichuang, wangdong, zhaobin}@pjlab.org.cn, longhao.zlh@alibaba-inc.com, li@nwpu.edu.cn

Shanghai AI Laboratory

Source

2

Driving

Result

-40

-20

0

20

40

Figure 1. Representative results of our method. The first three columns exhibit the source, driving, generated images, respectively.
The rest columns show the exploration of the generated images to different yaw angles.

Abstract
Talking head generation aims to generate faces that
maintain the identity information of the source image and
imitate the motion of the driving image. Most pioneering
methods rely primarily on 2D representations and thus will
inevitably suffer from face distortion when large head rotations are encountered. Recent works instead employ explicit 3D structural representations or implicit neural rendering to improve performance under large pose changes.
Nevertheless, the fidelity of identity and expression is not so
desirable, especially for novel-view synthesis. In this paper,
we propose HiDe-NeRF, which achieves high-fidelity and
free-view talking-head synthesis. Drawing on the recently
proposed Deformable Neural Radiance Fields, HiDe-NeRF
represents the 3D dynamic scene into a canonical appearance field and an implicit deformation field, where the former comprises the canonical source face and the latter
models the driving pose and expression. In particular, we
improve fidelity from two aspects: (i) to enhance identity expressiveness, we design a generalized appearance module

that leverages multi-scale volume features to preserve face
shape and details; (ii) to improve expression preciseness,
we propose a lightweight deformation module that explicitly decouples the pose and expression to enable precise expression modeling. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our proposed approach can generate better results than previous works. Project page: https://www.waytron.
net/hidenerf/

1. Introduction
Talking-head synthesis aims to preserve the identity information of the source image and imitate the motion of the
driving image. Synthesizing talking faces of a given person
driven by other speaker is of great importance to various applications, such as film production, virtual reality, and digital human. Existing talking head methods are not capable of
* denotes equal contribution
† denotes the corresponding authors

17969

