This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-Aware Unsupervised Image Deblurring with Deep Residual Prior
Xiaole Tang1 Xile Zhao1∗ Jun Liu2∗ Jianli Wang1 Yuchun Miao1 Tieyong Zeng3
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
{sherlock315,xlzhao122003,junliucd,wangjianli123,szmyc1}@163.com,zeng@math.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Non-blind deblurring methods achieve decent performance under the accurate blur kernel assumption. Since
the kernel uncertainty (i.e. kernel error) is inevitable in
practice, semi-blind deblurring is suggested to handle it by
introducing the prior of the kernel (or induced) error. However, how to design a suitable prior for the kernel (or induced) error remains challenging. Hand-crafted prior, incorporating domain knowledge, generally performs well but
may lead to poor performance when kernel (or induced) error is complex. Data-driven prior, which excessively depends on the diversity and abundance of training data, is
vulnerable to out-of-distribution blurs and images. To address this challenge, we suggest a dataset-free deep residual prior for the kernel induced error (termed as residual)
expressed by a customized untrained deep neural network,
which allows us to flexibly adapt to different blurs and images in real scenarios. By organically integrating the respective strengths of deep priors and hand-crafted priors,
we propose an unsupervised semi-blind deblurring model
which recovers the clear image from the blurry image and
inaccurate blur kernel. To tackle the formulated model, an
efficient alternating minimization algorithm is developed.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the favorable performance of the proposed method as compared to model-driven
and data-driven methods in terms of image quality and the
robustness to different types of kernel error.

1. Introduction
Image blurring is mainly caused by camera shake [28],
object motion [9], and defocus [42]. By assuming the blur
kernel is shift-invariant, the image blurring can be formulated as the following convolution process:
y = k ⊗ x + n,
*Corresponding author

(1)

Blurry
[8]
[34]
Ours
PSNR 19.56 PSNR 20.83 PSNR 22.75 PSNR 25.66

True Res.
MSE 0

Res. in [8]
MSE 0.075

Res. in [34]
MSE 0.067

Our Res.
MSE 0.027

Figure 1. Visual comparison of the restored results and estimated residuals by three semi-blind methods based on different
priors for the residual induced by the kernel error, including handcrafted prior [8], data-driven prior [34], and the proposed deep
residual prior (DRP). The true residual is the convolution result of
the kernel error and the clear image (r = ∆k ⊗ x). The closer
estimated residual is to the true residual, the better it is.

where y and x denote the blurry image and the clear image respectively, k represents the blur kernel, n represents
the additive Gaussian noise, and ⊗ is the convolution operator. To acquire the clear image from the blurry one, image
deblurring has received considerable research attention and
related methods have been developed.
In terms of the availability of kernel, current image deblurring methods can be mainly classified into two categories, i.e., blind deblurring methods in which the blur kernel is assumed to be unknown, and non-blind deblurring
methods in which the blur kernel is assumed to be known
or computed elsewhere. Typical blind deblurring methods
[13, 15, 17, 18, 21, 27, 31, 32, 38, 43] involve two steps:
1) estimating the blur kernel from the blurry images, and 2)
recovering the clear image with the estimated blur kernel.
Recently there also emerge transformer-based [36, 39] and
unfolding networks [19] that learn direct mappings from
blurry image to the deblurred one without using the kernel.

9883

