This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Learning of Partial Graph Matching via Differentiable Top-K
Runzhong Wang† , Ziao Guo† , Shaofei Jiang, Xiaokang Yang, Junchi Yan⇤
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{runzhong.wang,ziao.guo,jiangshaofei,xkyang,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph matching (GM) aims at discovering node matching between graphs, by maximizing the node- and edgewise affinities between the matched elements. As an NPhard problem, its challenge is further pronounced in the
existence of outlier nodes in both graphs which is ubiquitous in practice, especially for vision problems. However,
popular affinity-maximization-based paradigms often lack
a principled scheme to suppress the false matching and
resort to handcrafted thresholding to dismiss the outliers.
This limitation is also inherited by the neural GM solvers
though they have shown superior performance in the ideal
no-outlier setting. In this paper, we propose to formulate
the partial GM problem as the top-k selection task with a
given/estimated number of inliers k. Specifically, we devise
a differentiable top-k module that enables effective gradient descent over the optimal-transport layer, which can be
readily plugged into SOTA deep GM pipelines including the
quadratic matching network NGMv2 as well as the linear
matching network GCAN. Meanwhile, the attention-fused
aggregation layers are developed to estimate k to enable
automatic outlier-robust matching in the wild. Last but
not least, we remake and release a new benchmark called
IMC-PT-SparseGM, originating from the IMC-PT stereomatching dataset. The new benchmark involves more scalevarying graphs and partial matching instances from the
real world. Experiments show that our methods outperform
other partial matching schemes on popular benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The importance of graph matching (GM) is recognized
by its successful applications in machine learning [26],
molecule matching [47], and various vision tasks [15, 30,
⇤ Runzhong Wang and Ziao Guo contributed equally. Junchi Yan is
the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory. The
work was in part supported by National Key Research and Development
Program of China (2020AAA0107600), NSFC (62222607, U19B2035),
Shanghai Committee Science and Technology Project (22511105100).
IMC-PT-SparseGM dataset: https://github.com/ThinklabSJTU/IMCPT- SparseGM- dataset; Code: https://github.
com/Thinklab-SJTU/ThinkMatch.

Figure 1. Illustrative comparison of injective graph matching
(left) and partial graph matching (right) on our remade and released benchmark: IMC-PT-SparseGM (originated from IMCPT [18], see Sec. 4 for details). Green for correct matches, red for
wrong matches. Without partial matching, the GM solver greedily matches all nodes, leading to inferior accuracy. This paper
presents a general learning method to mitigate this issue.

49]. Existing GM methods mainly follow the optimization formulation by maximizing the node-wise and edgewise affinities of the matched elements, yielding an NP-hard
problem known as Quadratic Assignment Problem [22].
The ubiquitous challenge of partial matching, however, is less addressed by the existing affinity-maximization
pipeline. Partial matching means only a partial set of the
nodes are matched, due to the existence of outliers on both
sides. As shown in Fig. 1, this is commonly encountered
in (visual) graph matching [13, 16, 52, 53], where the existence of outliers is usually unavoidable due to the errors in
keypoint detectors and (self-)occlusion of objects.
The recent line of deep graph matching papers [11, 45,
52] sheds light on the partial GM, whereby the higher capacity offered by deep neural networks on both the feature
stage [52] and the solver stage [27, 45] will hopefully distinguish the outliers from inliers. However, there still lacks
a general, principled approach that could enable the partial matching capability of existing graph matching neural
networks. Some straightforward treatments such as thresholding [30], and adding dummy rows and columns [17] are
relatively inflexible because their threshold and dummy values are manually assigned.
We aim at developing a general, unified partial matching handling approach, which can be readily integrated into
SOTA GM networks. However, it is still an open question about how to determine whether or not a matching
pair should be discarded. Besides, directly discarding the
unwanted matching pairs causes non-differentiability and

6272

