This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOSO: Decomposing MOtion, Scene and Object for Video Prediction
Mingzhen Sun 1,2
Weining Wang 1
Xinxin Zhu 1
Jing Liu 1,2,∗
1
The Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
sunmingzhen2020@ia.ac.cn {weining.wang, xinxin.zhu, jliu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Content

Motion

…
* Corresponding Author
1 Codes have been released in https://github.com/iva-mzsun/MOSO

Scene

Object Motion

…

Video prediction aims to generate future video frames
based on a past video without any additional annotations
[6, 18], which is important for video perception systems,
such as autonomous driving [25], robotic navigation [16]
and decision making in daily life [5], etc. Considering
that video is a spatio-temporal record of moving objects, an
ideal solution of video prediction should depict visual content in the spatial domain accurately and predict motions in
the temporal domain reasonably. However, easily distorted
object identities and infinite possibilities of motion trajecto-

(a) Traditional Method

…

1. Introduction

…

Motion, scene and object are three primary visual components of a video. In particular, objects represent the foreground, scenes represent the background, and motion traces
their dynamics. Based on this insight, we propose a twostage MOtion, Scene and Object decomposition framework
(MOSO)1 for video prediction, consisting of MOSO-VQVAE
and MOSO-Transformer. In the first stage, MOSO-VQVAE
decomposes a previous video clip into the motion, scene and
object components, and represents them as distinct groups
of discrete tokens. Then, in the second stage, MOSOTransformer predicts the object and scene tokens of the subsequent video clip based on the previous tokens and adds
dynamic motion at the token level to the generated object
and scene tokens. Our framework can be easily extended
to unconditional video generation and video frame interpolation tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that our
method achieves new state-of-the-art performance on five
challenging benchmarks for video prediction and unconditional video generation: BAIR, RoboNet, KTH, KITTI and
UCF101. In addition, MOSO can produce realistic videos
by combining objects and scenes from different videos.

(b) The Proposed Method
Decompose

Intergrate

Figure 1. Rebuilding video signals based on (a) traditional decomposed content and motion signals or (b) our decomposed scene,
object and motion signals. Decomposing content and motion signals causes blurred and distorted appearance of the wrestling man,
while further separating objects from scenes resolves this issue.

ries make video prediction a challenging task.
Recently, several works [15, 44] propose to decompose
video signals into content and motion, with content encoding the static parts, i.e., scene and object identities, and motion encoding the dynamic parts, i.e., visual changes. This
decomposition allows two specific encoders to be developed, one for storing static content signals and the other
for simulating dynamic motion signals. However, these
methods do not distinguish between foreground objects and
background scenes, which usually have distinct motion patterns. Motions of scenes can be caused by camera movements or environment changes, e.g., a breeze, whereas motions of objects such as jogging are always more local and
routine. When scenes and objects are treated as a unity,
their motion patterns cannot be handled in a distinct manner, resulting in blurry and distorted visual appearances. As
depicted in Fig. 1, it is obvious that the moving subject
(i.e., the wrestling man) is more clear in the video obtained
by separating objects from scenes than that by treating them
as a single entity traditionally.

18727

