This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Diffusion Models for Continuous Super-Resolution
Sicheng Gao1 ,* Xuhui Liu1 ,* Bohan Zeng1 ,* Sheng Xu1 , Yanjing Li1 , Xiaoyan Luo1
Jianzhuang Liu2 , Xiantong Zhen3 , Baochang Zhang1,4†
1
Beihang University 2 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
United Imaging 4 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China

Abstract
Image super-resolution (SR) has attracted increasing attention due to its widespread applications. However, current SR
methods generally suffer from over-smoothing and artifacts,
and most work only with fixed magnifications. This paper introduces an Implicit Diffusion Model (IDM) for high-fidelity
continuous image super-resolution. IDM integrates an implicit neural representation and a denoising diffusion model
in a unified end-to-end framework, where the implicit neural representation is adopted in the decoding process to learn
continuous-resolution representation. Furthermore, we design
a scale-adaptive conditioning mechanism that consists of a
low-resolution (LR) conditioning network and a scaling factor. The scaling factor regulates the resolution and accordingly
modulates the proportion of the LR information and generated
features in the final output, which enables the model to accommodate the continuous-resolution requirement. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our IDM and demonstrate its superior performance over prior arts. The source
code will be available at https://github.com/Ree1s/
IDM .

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
2×

8×

10×

Figure 1. Visual comparison, where training is on 8× SR and testing
on 2×, 8×, and 10×. (a) EDSR [23] and (b) LIIF [6] are regressionbased models; (c) SR3 [35] and (d) IDM (ours) are generative models.
Among them, LIIF and IDM employ the implicit neural representation.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) refers to the task of generating
high-resolution (HR) images from given low-resolution (LR)
images. It has attracted increasing attention due to its farreaching applications, such as video restoration, photography,
and accelerating data transmission. While significant progress
has been achieved recently, existing SR models predominantly
suffer from suboptimal quality and the requirement for fixedresolution outputs, leading to undesirable restrictions in practice.
Regression-based methods [21, 23] offer an intuitive way to
establish a mapping from LR to HR images. LIIF [6] specifically achieves resolution-continuous outputs through implicit
neural representation. However, these methods often fail to
generate high-fidelity details needed for high magnifications
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding Author: bczhang@buaa.edu.cn.

10021

(see Fig. 1(a) and (b)) since their regression losses tend to calculate the averaged results of possible SR predictions. Deep
generative models, including autoregressive [30, 43], GANbased [15,16,18,26], flow-based [8,24] and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [17, 42], have emerged as solutions that enrich
detailed textures. Still, they often exhibit artifacts and only apply to pre-defined fixed magnifications. Despite the ability to
generate realistic images with high perceptual quality with the
help of extra priors, GAN-based models are subject to mode
collapse and struggle to capture complex data distributions,
yielding unnatural textures. Recently, Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (DMs) [12, 39] have been used in image synthesis to
improve the fidelity of SR images and have shown impressive
performance. Nonetheless, DM-based methods are still limited to fixed magnifications, which would result in corrupted
output once the magnification changes (see Fig. 1(c)). There-

