This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressively Optimized Local Radiance Fields for Robust View Synthesis

1

KAIST

Andreas Meuleman1‡ Yu-Lun Liu2‡ Chen Gao3
Jia-Bin Huang3,4 Changil Kim3 Min H. Kim1 Johannes Kopf3
2
National Taiwan University 3 Meta 4 University of Maryland, College Park
https://localrf.github.io/

LocalRF (ours): high-quality novel view synthesis

Input: casually captured long video
BARF [17]: the estimated poses often fall into local minima for long sequences

Output: jointly estimated camera poses
and local radiance fields

Mip-NeRF360 [4]: the spatial resolution is often limited throughout the video

Figure 1. High-quality novel view synthesis from a long casually captured video. We jointly optimize camera poses and a scene
representation using a progressive scheme that dynamically allocates local radiance fields (blue boxes). Our method robustly handles casual
hand-held captures, scales to processing arbitrarily long videos with limited memory usage, and maintains high resolution throughout the
entire video.

Abstract
We present an algorithm for reconstructing the radiance
field of a large-scale scene from a single casually captured video. The task poses two core challenges. First,
most existing radiance field reconstruction approaches rely
on accurate pre-estimated camera poses from Structurefrom-Motion algorithms, which frequently fail on in-thewild videos. Second, using a single, global radiance field
with finite representational capacity does not scale to longer
trajectories in an unbounded scene. For handling unknown
poses, we jointly estimate the camera poses with radiance
field in a progressive manner. We show that progressive op‡ Part of the work was done while Andreas and Yu-Lun were interns at

Meta.

timization significantly improves the robustness of the reconstruction. For handling large unbounded scenes, we dynamically allocate new local radiance fields trained with
frames within a temporal window. This further improves
robustness (e.g., performs well even under moderate pose
drifts) and allows us to scale to large scenes. Our extensive
evaluation on the TANKS AND T EMPLES dataset and our
collected outdoor dataset, S TATIC H IKES, show that our
approach compares favorably with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Dense scene reconstruction for photorealistic view synthesis has many critical applications, for example, in
VR/AR (virtual traveling, preserving of important cultural

16539

