This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End Vectorized HD-map Construction with Piecewise Bézier Curve
Limeng Qiao

Wenjie Ding Xi Qiu* Chi Zhang
MEGVII Technology

{qiaolimeng, dingwenjie, qiuxi, zhangchi}@megvii.com

Abstract
Vectorized high-definition map (HD-map) construction,
which focuses on the perception of centimeter-level environmental information, has attracted significant research interest in the autonomous driving community. Most existing approaches first obtain rasterized map with the segmentationbased pipeline and then conduct heavy post-processing for
downstream-friendly vectorization. In this paper, by delving
into parameterization-based methods, we pioneer a concise
and elegant scheme that adopts unified piecewise Bézier
curve. In order to vectorize changeful map elements endto-end, we elaborate a simple yet effective architecture,
named Piecewise Bézier HD-map Network (BeMapNet),
which is formulated as a direct set prediction paradigm and
postprocessing-free. Concretely, we first introduce a novel
IPM-PE Align module to inject 3D geometry prior into BEV
features through common position encoding in Transformer.
Then a well-designed Piecewise Bézier Head is proposed to
output the details of each map element, including the coordinate of control points and the segment number of curves.
In addition, based on the progressively restoration of Bézier
curve, we also present an efficient Point-Curve-Region Loss
for supervising more robust and precise HD-map modeling.
Extensive comparisons show that our method is remarkably
superior to other existing SOTAs by 18.0 mAP at least 1 .

1. Introduction
As one of the most fundamental components in the autodriving system, high-definition map contains centimeter details of traffic elements, vectorized topology and navigation
information, which instruct ego-vehicle to accurately locate
itself on the road and understand what is coming up ahead.
At present, conventional SLAM-based solutions [45, 46, 60]
have been widely adopted in practice. Yet, due to dilemmas
of high annotation costs and untimely updates, the offline
approach is gradually being replaced by the learning-based
online HD-map construction with onboard sensors.
* Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/er-muyue/BeMapNet

(b) vanilla Bézier vs. piecewise Bézier

Divider Crossing Boundary

(a) HD-map example

(c) map curve restored by real control points

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation for piecewise Bézier curve,
termed as ⟨k, n⟩, where k is the piece number and n is the degree.
Fig.(a) is a real HD-map case from NuScenes. Fig.(b) compares
the difference between vanilla and piecewise Bézier curve through
the same map element, where the light purple is the restored curve
with Bézier process. The last is more efficient than previous ones
with reducing the number of control points by 64% in this case.
Fig.(c) illustrates that piecewise Bézier curve can model arbitraryshaped curves. Note the blue circles denote actual control points.

The deep-based paradigm of online HD-map building is
gradually developing, but it still faces two main challenges:
1) modeling instance-level vectorized HD-map end-to-end.
Most existing works construct HD-map by rasterizing BEV
(bird-eye-view) maps into semantic pixels with segmentation [24,42], which not only lacks the modeling of instancelevel details, but also requires heavy post-processing to obtain vectorized information. As a sub-task, lane detection
makes a relatively better advance for this issue, that is, in addition to segmentation-based methods [39, 41, 62], there are
also point-based [25, 47] and curve-based [12, 28] schemes.
However, compared to the simple lane scenario, HD-map
contains more shape-changeful elements, so such methods
cannot be directly adopted into the HD-map construction.
2) performing 2D-3D perspective transformation efficiently.
Obtaining 3D-BEV perception from multi-view 2D images
is an essential step for building HD-map, which is mainly
divided into three ideas, i.e. geometric priors [44], learnable
parameters [40, 42], and a combination of the two [17, 43].
Note the assumptions of geometry-based methods often do

13218

