This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointVector: A Vector Representation In Point Cloud Analysis
Xin Deng*
WenYu Zhang*
Qing Ding†
XinMing Zhang†
University of Science and Technology of China
{xin deng, wenyuz}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dingqing, xinming}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In point cloud analysis, point-based methods have
rapidly developed in recent years. These methods have recently focused on concise MLP structures, such as PointNeXt, which have demonstrated competitiveness with Convolutional and Transformer structures. However, standard
MLPs are limited in their ability to extract local features
effectively. To address this limitation, we propose a Vectororiented Point Set Abstraction that can aggregate neighboring features through higher-dimensional vectors. To facilitate network optimization, we construct a transformation
from scalar to vector using independent angles based on 3D
vector rotations. Finally, we develop a PointVector model
that follows the structure of PointNeXt. Our experimental
results demonstrate that PointVector achieves state-of-theart performance 72.3% mIOU on the S3DIS Area 5 and
78.4% mIOU on the S3DIS (6-fold cross-validation) with
only 58% model parameters of PointNeXt. We hope our
work will help the exploration of concise and effective feature representations. The code will be released soon.

1. Introduction
Point cloud analysis is a cornerstone of various downstream tasks. With the introduction of PointNet [25] and
PointNet++ [26], the direct processing of unstructured point
clouds has become a hot topic. Many point-based networks introduced novel and sophisticated modules to extract local features, e.g., attention-based methods [52] explore attention mechanisms as Fig.1a with lower consumption, convolution-based methods [36] explore the dynamic
convolution kernel as Fig.1c, and graph-based methods [39]
[53] use graph to model relationships of points. The application of these methods to the feature extraction module of
PointNet++ brings an improvement in feature quality. However, they are somewhat complicated to design in terms of
network structure. PointNeXt [28] adapts the SetAbstrac* Co-first authors with equal contribution to refining the theory and experimental design
† Corresponding authors

tion (SA) module of PointNet++ [26] and proposes the Inverted Residual MLP (InvResMLP) module. The simple
design of MLP network achieves good results. Motivated
by this work, we try to further explore the potential of the
MLP structure.
濄

‫ݓ‬ଵ
濄

濇

‫ݓ‬ଶ

‫ݓ‬ଷ

(a) Attention

濇

濇

濜瀁瀃瀈瀇澳瀃瀂濼瀁瀇瀆

濾濸瀅瀁濸濿

(b) Templated-based method
‫ݖ‬

‫ݖ‬
濄

濄
濇

‫ݔ‬

‫ݔ‬

(c) Dynamic Conv

‫ݕ‬
‫ݕ‬

‫ݖ‬

濇

‫ݔ‬

‫ݕ‬

(d) Vector

Figure 1. Illustrations of the core operations of the different methods. (a) The features of each point are calculated separately by
applying a fixed/isotropic kernel (black arrow) like Linear layer.
Then, it imparts anisotropy by weights generated from inputs. (b)
The displacement vector is used to filter points that approximate
the kernel pattern for features aggregation. (c) It applies unique
dynamic kernels with anisotropy for each point feature. (d) Differently, we generate vector representations based on features, and
the aggregation methods for vectors are anisotropic due to the direction of the vectors.

PointNeXt uses all standard MLPs, which has insufficient feature extraction capability. In addition to attention and dynamic convolution mechanisms, template-based
methods as Fig.1b such as 3D-GCN [19] employ relative
displacement vectors to modulate the association between
input points and the convolutional kernel. We introduce a
vector representation of features to extend the range of feature variation with the intention of more effectively regulating the connections between local features. Our approach
as Fig.1d differs from template-based methods. Instead of
using displacement vectors as a property of the kernel, we

9455

