This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Anchor Transformations for 3D Garment Animation
Fang Zhao1 , Zekun Li1 , Shaoli Huang1 ,* Junwu Weng1 , Tianfei Zhou2 ,
Guo-Sen Xie3 , Jue Wang1 , Ying Shan1
1

Tencent AI Lab 2 ETH Zurich 3 Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
This paper proposes an anchor-based deformation
model, namely AnchorDEF, to predict 3D garment animation from a body motion sequence. It deforms a garment
mesh template by a mixture of rigid transformations with
extra nonlinear displacements. A set of anchors around
the mesh surface is introduced to guide the learning of
rigid transformation matrices. Once the anchor transformations are found, per-vertex nonlinear displacements of
the garment template can be regressed in a canonical space,
which reduces the complexity of deformation space learning. By explicitly constraining the transformed anchors to
satisfy the consistencies of position, normal and direction,
the physical meaning of learned anchor transformations in
space is guaranteed for better generalization. Furthermore,
an adaptive anchor updating is proposed to optimize the
anchor position by being aware of local mesh topology for
learning representative anchor transformations. Qualitative and quantitative experiments on different types of garments demonstrate that AnchorDEF achieves the state-ofthe-art performance on 3D garment deformation prediction
in motion, especially for loose-fitting garments.

Figure 1. 3D garment deformation predicted by the proposed AnchorDEF with body motions. Leveraging the anchor transformations, AnchorDEF is able to realistically deform the garment mesh,
especially for loose-fitting garments, e.g., dresses.

1. Introduction
Animating 3D garments has a wide range of applications
in 3D content generation, digital humans, virtual try-on,
video games, and so on. Existing pipelines of 3D garment
animation usually rely on physics based simulation (PBS),
which requires a large amount of computational resources
and time costs, particularly for high-quality PBS methods.
Some data-driven or learning-based methods have been
proposed to quickly produce 3D garment deformation from
static poses or motion sequences with low computational
complexity [4,5,9,11,12,16,25–28,31,40]. However, many
of them attach garment templates to the skeleton of human body for modeling the articulation of garments, which
* Corresponding author.

only work with tight garments, e.g., T-shirts and pants, and
poorly address loose-fitting ones, e.g., dresses and skirts.
In this case, the topology of garments is different from the
human body. Therefore, using the skinning blend weights
of body yields discontinuities on deformed garment mesh.
Several methods [26, 34] smooth out the blend weights to
alleviate the discontinuities but may lose the shape details
for large deformations of loose-fitting garments, which do
not closely follow body movements.
To this end, we propose an anchor-based deformation
model, namely AnchorDEF, for predicting 3D garment deformation from a body motion sequence. It leverages a
mixture of rigid anchor transformations to represent principle rotations and translations of garments to detach the

491

