This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Global Decay Process for Event Cameras
Urbano Miguel Nunes, Ryad Benosman and Sio-Hoi Ieng
Sorbonne University, 4 place jussieu, 75005 Paris
urbano.goncalves-nunes@inserm.fr, {ryad.benosman, sio-hoi.ieng}@upmc.fr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Contrary to standard frame-based cameras that capture
visual data at a fixed rate and independently of the scene
dynamics [31], event cameras respond asynchronously to
pixel-wise brightness changes by generating events. Event
cameras are thus data-driven sensors that inherently react to
the scene dynamics [18] while providing additional advantages: high temporal resolution in the order of microseconds, low latency, low power consumption, and high dynamic range. However, due to the different visual sensing
paradigm, event cameras pose the challenge of developing
new methods that fully unlock their capabilities [7]. By
“scene dynamics”, we mean the spatio-temporal changes
of the visual inputs due to the relative motion of the scene
w.r.t. the camera. As in mechanics, the involved quantities
are the zero, first, or higher-order derivatives of captured
temporal information.
There are two paradigms for event processing, namely:
event-based [16, 17, 26, 27, 38], whereby each event is pro-

Sparse

Fast

Slow

Proposed

Dense

In virtually all event-based vision problems, there is the
need to select the most recent events, which are assumed
to carry the most relevant information content. To achieve
this, at least one of three main strategies is applied, namely:
1) constant temporal decay or fixed time window, 2) constant number of events, and 3) flow-based lifetime of events.
However, these strategies suffer from at least one major limitation each. We instead propose a novel decay process
for event cameras that adapts to the global scene dynamics and whose latency is in the order of nanoseconds. The
main idea is to construct an adaptive quantity that encodes
the global scene dynamics, denoted by event activity. The
proposed method is evaluated in several event-based vision
problems and datasets, consistently improving the corresponding baseline methods’ performance. We thus believe it
can have a significant widespread impact on event-based research. Code available: https://github.com/neuromorphicparis/event batch.

Constant Decay Constant # Events

Figure 1. Accumulated events using (left) constant temporal decay, (middle) constant number of events, and (right) the proposed
adaptive global decay process. In contrast to the constant processes, the proposed decay process globally adapts to the scene
dynamics. Sequences from dataset [24].

cessed one-by-one, e.g., by locally updating some state, and
batch-based [9,30,44,45], whereby events are grouped into
a batch for later processing. In both paradigms, there is the
intuitive notion that more recent events should be assigned
more relevancy. Thus, each event should have a certain
lifespan, based on which each one is considered active and
whose contribution is considered meaningful to the computation. This raises the fundamental question on what kind of
decay strategy should be employed to quantify each event’s
lifespan. Currently, there exist three main decay strategies.
The first is to consider the events generated within a fixed
time window or by applying some constant temporal decay [17,35]. This strategy does not preserve the data-driven
paradigm of event cameras since it imposes an arbitrary finite temporal support in practice, which generally has no
relation to the visual information source and does not ac-

9771

