This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ultrahigh Resolution Image/Video Matting with Spatio-Temporal Sparsity
Yanan Sun
HKUST

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai
HKUST

now.syn@gmail.com

cktang@cs.ust.hk

yuwing@gmail.com

Abstract
Commodity ultrahigh definition (UHD) displays are becoming more affordable which demand imaging in ultrahigh
resolution (UHR). This paper proposes SparseMat, a computationally efficient approach for UHR image/video matting. Note that it is infeasible to directly process UHR images at full resolution in one shot using existing matting
algorithms without running out of memory on consumerlevel computational platforms, e.g., Nvidia 1080Ti with 11G
memory, while patch-based approaches can introduce unsightly artifacts due to patch partitioning. Instead, our
method resorts to spatial and temporal sparsity for addressing general UHR matting. When processing videos,
huge computation redundancy can be reduced by exploiting spatial and temporal sparsity. In this paper, we show
how to effectively detect spatio-temporal sparsity, which
serves as a gate to activate input pixels for the matting
model. Under the guidance of such sparsity, our method
with sparse high-resolution module (SHM) can avoid patchbased inference while memory efficient for full-resolution
matte refinement. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
SparseMat can effectively and efficiently generate highquality alpha matte for UHR images and videos at the original high resolution in a single pass. Project page is in
https://github.com/nowsyn/SparseMat.git.

1. Introduction
Ultrahigh resolution (UHR) matting is an important
problem [36, 49], and with increasing demand due to the
fast advent and accessibility of commodity ultrahigh definition displays in real-world applications, such as gaming, TV/movie post-production, and image/video editing,
UHR matting becomes ever relevant. However, modern
consumer-level GPU and mobile devices still have limited
hardware resources. Despite good technical contributions,
guided filters and patch-based techniques (Figure 1) are not
applicable, when unsightly blurry and seams artifacts are
unacceptable in UHR imaging.
Matting is a primary technique for image/video editing
and plays an important role in many applications. The goal
of matting is to extract a detailed alpha matte of the fore-

ground object from a given image/video. The matted foreground can be composited on other background images. As
known, matting is an ill-posed problem defined as Equation 1 with the given image I, foreground F , background B
and alpha α ∈ [0, 1] to be extracted:
I = αF + (1 − α)B.

(1)

Most of the existing state-of-the-art matting methods [28, 33, 48] take the whole image as input in a forward
pass, and thus the resolution they can handle is bounded
by available memory. Given limited memory, to process
UHR images, a straightforward approach is to first process
the downsampled input image which will inevitably lead to
blurry artifacts. Thus, super-resolution methods, such as
guided filter (GF) [21] or deep guided filter (DGF) [47],
have been proposed to recover missing details. However,
guided filter or deep guided filter easily produces fuzzy artifacts when processing complex hairy structures as shown
in Figure 1-(a). Patch-based inference [23, 35] is another
plausible strategy. However, small patch can cause artifacts
due to insufficient global context and inconsistent local context as shown in Figure 1-(b). On the other hand, using large
patch (e.g., 2048) with large overlap produces defective alpha matte with missing details or blurry artifacts in long hair
region due to the lack of long-range dependency in UHR
images as shown Figure 1-(b), not to mention that heavy
computation and memory overhead are introduced with increasing patch size making some methods cannot even run,
as shown in Figure 1-(c). In conclusion, super resolving
based on (deep) guided filter or patch-based inference are
not ideal choices for handling UHR matting.
In this paper we propose a general image/video matting
framework SparseMat to address the problem of UHR matting, which is both memory and computation efficient while
generating high-quality alpha mattes. The core idea of our
method is to skip a large amount of redundant computation
on many pixels during processing UHR images or videos.
In general, our method takes the low-resolution prior as
input to generate spatio-temporal sparsity, which serves as
the gate to activate pixels consumed by a sparse convolution
module. Both temporal and spatial information contribute
to the sparsity estimation. Specifically, we compute color
difference between adjacent frames to obtain the temporal

14112

