This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCoDA: Domain Adaptive Shape Completion for Real Scans
Yushuang Wu1,2,3 Zizheng Yan1,2,3 Ce Chen1,2 Lai Wei4 Xiao Li5
Guanbin Li6,7 Yihao Li1,2 Shuguang Cui2,1 Xiaoguang Han2,1#
1
FNii, CUHKSZ 2 SSE, CUHKSZ 3 SRIBD 4 SDS, CUHKSZ 5 Microsoft Research Asia
6
Sun Yat-sen University 7 Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen
{yushuangwu, zizhengyan, cechen, laiwei1}@link.cuhk.edu.cn
{shuguangcui, hanxiaoguang}@cuhk.edu.cn

luoheliyihao@mail.ustc.edu.cn

liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

li.xiao@microsoft.com

Figure 1. The proposed task SCoDA aims to transfer the knowledge in the synthetic domain to the reconstruction of noisy and incomplete
real scans. A dataset, ScanSalon, with paired real scans and 3D models is contributed. Project page: yushuang-wu.github.io/SCoDA.

Abstract
3D shape completion from point clouds is a challenging task, especially from scans of real-world objects. Considering the paucity of 3D shape ground truths for real
scans, existing works mainly focus on benchmarking this
task on synthetic data, e.g. 3D computer-aided design models. However, the domain gap between synthetic and real
data limits the generalizability of these methods. Thus, we
propose a new task, SCoDA, for the domain adaptation of
real scan shape completion from synthetic data. A new
dataset, ScanSalon, is contributed with a bunch of elaborate
3D models created by skillful artists according to scans. To
address this new task, we propose a novel cross-domain
feature fusion method for knowledge transfer and a novel
volume-consistent self-training framework for robust learning from real data. Extensive experiments prove our method
is effective to bring an improvement of 6%∼7% mIoU.

1. Introduction
Shape completion and reconstruction from scans is a
practical 3D digitization task that is of great significance

in applications of virtual and augmented reality. It takes a
scanned point cloud as input and aims to recover the 3D
shape of the target object. The completion of real scans
is challenging for the poor quality of point clouds and the
deficiency of 3D shape ground truths. Existing methods exploit synthetic data, e.g. 3D computer-aided design (CAD)
models to alleviate the demand for real object shapes. For
example, authors of [18, 26, 35] simulate the scanning process to obtain point clouds from CAD models with paired
ground truth shapes to train learning-based reconstruction
models. However, there still exist distinctions between the
simulated and real scan because the latter is scanned from
a real object with complex scanning noise and occlusion,
which limits the generalization quality.
Considering the underexploration in this field, we
propose a new task, SCoDA, Domain Adaptive Shape
Completion, that aims to transfer the knowledge from the
synthetic domain with rich clean shapes (source domain)
into the shape completion of real scans (target domain), as
illustrated in Fig. 1. To this end, we, for the first time, build
an object-centric dataset, ScanSalon, which consists of real
Scans with Shape manual annotations. Our ScanSalon contains a bunch of 3D models that are paired with real scans of
objects in six categories: chair, desk/table, sofa, bed, lamp,

17630

