This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Out-of-Distributed Semantic Pruning for Robust Semi-Supervised Learning
Yu Wang1,4 * Pengchong Qiao1,2,4 * Chang Liu3 Guoli Song2,4 Xiawu Zheng2,4† Jie Chen1,2,4†
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
AI for Science(AI4S)-Preferred Program,Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
{rain wang,pcqiao}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {songgl,zhengxw01,chenj}@pcl.ac.cn,
{liuchang2022}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in robust semi-supervised learning
(SSL) typically ﬁlter out-of-distribution (OOD) information
at the sample level. We argue that an overlooked problem of
robust SSL is its corrupted information on semantic level,
practically limiting the development of the ﬁeld. In this paper, we take an initial step to explore and propose a uniﬁed
framework termed OOD Semantic Pruning (OSP), which
aims at pruning OOD semantics out from in-distribution
(ID) features. Speciﬁcally, (i) we propose an aliasing OOD
matching module to pair each ID sample with an OOD sample with semantic overlap. (ii) We design a soft orthogonality regularization, which ﬁrst transforms each ID feature by
suppressing its semantic component that is collinear with
paired OOD sample. It then forces the predictions before
and after soft orthogonality decomposition to be consistent.
Being practically simple, our method shows a strong performance in OOD detection and ID classiﬁcation on challenging benchmarks. In particular, OSP surpasses the previous state-of-the-art by 13.7% on accuracy for ID classiﬁcation and 5.9% on AUROC for OOD detection on TinyImageNet dataset. The source codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/rain305f/OSP.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have obtained impressive performance on various tasks [30, 44, 46]. Their success is
partially dependent on a large amount of labeled training data, of which the acquisition is expensive and timeconsuming [20, 25, 40, 45]. A prevailing way to reduce the
dependency on human annotation is semi-supervised learning (SSL). It learns informative semantics using annotation* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

23849

Predict: Beetles

OOD Semantic Pruning

Pr
u
Fe ned
atu ID
re

(a)

Predict: Butterfly

es
tur re
Feaatu

e

ID F
rD
choI

An

OOD Semantic
OOD Samples

(b)

ID Samples

OOD Semantic

OOD Semantic Pruning

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Intuitive diagram of OOD Semantic Pruning (OSP),
that pruning OOD semantics out from ID features. (b) t-SNE visualization [52] from the baseline [23]. (c) t-SNE visualization
from our OSP model. The colorful dots donate ID features, while
the black dots mark OOD features. The dots with the same color
represent the features of the same class. Here, our OSP and the
baseline are trained on CIFAR100 with 100 labeled data per class
and 60% OOD in unlabeled data.

free and acquisition-easy unlabeled data to extend the label information from limited labeled data and has achieved
promising results in various tasks [38, 50, 51, 54].
Unfortunately, classical SSL relies on a basic assumption that the labeled and unlabeled data are collected from
the same distribution, which is difﬁcult to hold in real-world
applications. In most practical cases, unlabeled data usually
contains classes that are not seen in the labeled data. Existing works [12, 17, 21, 40] have shown that training the SSL
model with these OOD samples in unlabeled data leads to
a large degradation in performance. To solve this problem,
robust semi-supervised learning (Robust SSL) has been investigated to train a classiﬁcation model that performs sta-

