This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-aware Facial Landmark Detection via
Multi-view Consistent Training on Synthetic Data
Libing Zeng 1∗ , Lele Chen2 , Wentao Bao3∗ , Zhong Li2 , Yi Xu2 , Junsong Yuan4 , Nima K. Kalantari1
1
Texas A&M University, 2 OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology, Inc,
3
Michigan State University, 4 University at Buffalo

Figure 1. We plot the landmark annotations labeled by different annotators with different colors in view #1 of (a). Accurate annotation
of non-frontal faces with large angles like view #1 is challenging. This is a major problem since small differences between annotated
landmarks in view #1, becomes substantially magnified when projected to view #2. Training a system on such datasets could lead to
poor landmark detection accuracy, as shown in (b). We address this issue by proposing a 3D-aware optimization module that enforces
multi-view consistency. We show the landmark detection improvement in (c). Magnified insets in (b) and (c) are shown in (d). After
refined by the proposed 3D-aware learning, the detected facial landmark is better aligned with the identity.

Abstract
Accurate facial landmark detection on wild images plays
an essential role in human-computer interaction, entertainment, and medical applications. Existing approaches
have limitations in enforcing 3D consistency while detecting 3D/2D facial landmarks due to the lack of multi-view
in-the-wild training data. Fortunately, with the recent advances in generative visual models and neural rendering,
we have witnessed rapid progress towards high quality 3D
image synthesis. In this work, we leverage such approaches
to construct a synthetic dataset and propose a novel multiview consistent learning strategy to improve 3D facial landmark detection accuracy on in-the-wild images. The proposed 3D-aware module can be plugged into any learningbased landmark detection algorithm to enhance its accuracy. We demonstrate the superiority of the proposed plug* This work was done when Libing Zeng and Wentao Bao were interns
at OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology, Inc.

in module with extensive comparison against state-of-theart methods on several real and synthetic datasets.

1. Introduction
Accurate and precise facial landmark plays a significant role in computer vision and graphics applications,
such as face morphing [54], facial reenactment [58], 3D
face reconstruction [17, 18, 30], head pose estimation [38],
face recognition [1, 10, 13, 19, 32, 41, 71], and face generation [11, 21, 60, 69]. In these applications, facial landmark
detection provides great sparse representation to ease the
burden of network convergence in different training stages
and is often used as performance evaluation metric. For instance, as a facial prior, it provides good initialization for
subsequent training [66, 67, 69, 76], good intermediate representation to bridge the gap between different modalities
for content generation [11,27,51,79], loss terms which reg-

12747

