This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShadowDiffusion: When Degradation Prior Meets Diffusion Model for
Shadow Removal
Lanqing Guo1 , Chong Wang1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Siyu Huang3 , Yufei Wang1 , Hanspeter Pfister3 , Bihan Wen1 *
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China 3 Harvard University, USA
{lanqing001, wang1711, yufei001, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg,
yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, huang@seas.harvard.edu, pfister@g.harvard.edu

(a) Input+GT

Abstract
Recent deep learning methods have achieved promising
results in image shadow removal. However, their restored
images still suffer from unsatisfactory boundary artifacts,
due to the lack of degradation prior embedding and the deficiency in modeling capacity. Our work addresses these
issues by proposing a unified diffusion framework that integrates both the image and degradation priors for highly
effective shadow removal. In detail, we first propose a
shadow degradation model, which inspires us to build a
novel unrolling diffusion model, dubbed ShandowDiffusion.
It remarkably improves the model’s capacity in shadow removal via progressively refining the desired output with
both degradation prior and diffusive generative prior, which
by nature can serve as a new strong baseline for image
restoration. Furthermore, ShadowDiffusion progressively
refines the estimated shadow mask as an auxiliary task of
the diffusion generator, which leads to more accurate and
robust shadow-free image generation. We conduct extensive experiments on three popular public datasets, including
ISTD, ISTD+, and SRD, to validate our method’s effectiveness. Compared to the state-of-the-art methods, our model
achieves a significant improvement in terms of PSNR, increasing from 31.69dB to 34.73dB over SRD dataset.1

1. Introduction
Shadow removal aims to enhance visibility of the image shadow regions, pursuing a consistent illumination distribution between shadow and non-shadow regions. Deep
learning-based methods [4, 7, 10, 20, 54] achieved superior
performance recently by fully utilizing the power of large
collections of data. While most of the existing methods fo* Corresponding author: Bihan Wen.
This work was carried out at ROSE Lab, supported in part by the MOE
AcRF Tier 1 (RG61/22) and Start-Up Grant.

Input

(b) Previous Methods

GT

PSNR: 29.20
SSIM: 0.813

PSNR: 36.49
SSIM: 0.969

Fu et al.

BMNet

(c) ShadowDiffusion

...

...

...

...

PSNR: 39.53
SSIM: 0.984

Figure 1. (a) Input shadow image and corresponding ground truth
shadow-free image, (b) shadow removal results of two most recent
competing methods Fu et al. [7] and BMNet [54], and (c) our proposed ShadowDiffusion iteratively (T → 0) restores the shadowfree image and refines the shadow mask, in which the x0 and m0
are the final enhanced result and refined mask, respectively.

cused on learning the discriminative models for shadow removal, modeling the underlying distribution of nature images is overlooked in their restoration process. Consequently, the shadow removal results usually contain severe
boundary artifacts and remaining shadow patterns, as shown
in Figure 1(b).
Though the adversarial loss can alleviate this issue, these
approaches [19, 38] require careful adjustment during training, might overfit certain visual features or data distribution,
and might hallucinate new content and artifacts. Very recently, various diffusion models, such as the popular diffusion denoising diffusion probability model (DDPM) [17],
have gained wide interest in the field of low-level vision [33, 34]. Comparing to other deep generative mod1 https://github.com/GuoLanqing/ShadowDiffusion

14049

