This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Autoencoders Enable Efficient Knowledge Distillers
Yutong Bai1 Zeyu Wang2 Junfei Xiao1 Chen Wei1
Huiyu Wang1 Alan Yuille1 Yuyin Zhou2 Cihang Xie2
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 University of California, Santa Cruz
ytongbai@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper studies the potential of distilling knowledge
from pre-trained models, especially Masked Autoencoders.
Our approach is simple: in addition to optimizing the pixel
reconstruction loss on masked inputs, we minimize the distance between the intermediate feature map of the teacher
model and that of the student model. This design leads to a
computationally efficient knowledge distillation framework,
given 1) only a small visible subset of patches is used, and
2) the (cumbersome) teacher model only needs to be partially executed, i.e., forward propagate inputs through the
first few layers, for obtaining intermediate feature maps.
Compared to directly distilling fine-tuned models, distilling pre-trained models substantially improves downstream
performance. For example, by distilling the knowledge
from an MAE pre-trained ViT-L into a ViT-B, our method
achieves 84.0% ImageNet top-1 accuracy, outperforming
the baseline of directly distilling a fine-tuned ViT-L by 1.2%.
More intriguingly, our method can robustly distill knowledge from teacher models even with extremely high masking ratios: e.g., with 95% masking ratio where merely TEN
patches are visible during distillation, our ViT-B competitively attains a top-1 ImageNet accuracy of 83.6%; surprisingly, it can still secure 82.4% top-1 ImageNet accuracy by
aggressively training with just FOUR visible patches (98%
masking ratio). The code and models are publicly available
at https://github.com/UCSC-VLAA/DMAE.

1. Introduction
Following the success in the natural language processing
[10, 27], the Transformer architecture is showing tremendous potentials in computer vision [2, 11, 25, 26, 33], especially when they are pre-trained with a huge amount of
unlabelled data [3] with self-supervised learning techniques
[1, 14]. Masked image modeling, which trains models to
predict the masked signals (either as raw pixels or as semantic tokens) of the input image, stands as one of the most
powerful ways for feature pre-training. With the most re-

cent representative work in this direction, masked autoencoder (MAE) [13], we are now able to efficiently and effectively pre-train high-capacity Vision Transformers (ViTs)
with strong feature representations, leading to state-of-theart solutions for a wide range of downstream visual tasks.
In this paper, we are interested in applying knowledge
distillation [17], which is one of the most popular model
compression techniques, to transfer the knowledge from
these strong but cumbersome ViTs into smaller ones. In
contrast to prior knowledge distillation works [17, 21, 34],
the teacher considered here is a pre-trained model whose
predictions do not necessarily reveal the fine-grained relationship between categories; therefore, typical solutions
like aligning the soft/hard logits between the teacher model
and the student model may no longer remain effective.
Moreover, after distilling the pre-trained teacher model,
these student models need an extra round of fine-tuning to
adapt to downstream tasks. These factors turn distilling pretrained models seemingly a less favorable design choice in
terms of both performance and computational cost.
Nonetheless, surprisingly, we find by building upon
MAE, the whole distillation framework can efficiently yield
high-performance student models. There are two key designs. Firstly, we follow MAE to let the encoder exclusively
operate on a small visible subset of patches and to employ
a lightweight decoder for pixel reconstruction. Whereas
rather than using the “luxury” setups in MAE, we show aggressively simplifying pre-training from 1600 epochs to 100
epochs and pushing masking ratio from 75% to 95% suffice
to distill strong student models. Secondly, instead of aligning logits, we alternatively seek to match the intermediate
feature representation; this enables the cumbersome teacher
model to only forward propagate inputs through the first few
layers, therefore, reducing computations. We note applying
L1 norm for distance measure is essential recipe for ensuring a successful intermediate feature alignment.
We name this distilling MAE framework as DMAE.
Compared to the traditional knowledge distillation framework where the teacher is a fine-tuned model, DMAE is
more efficient and can train much stronger student models

24256

