This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

sRGB Real Noise Synthesizing with Neighboring Correlation-Aware Noise Model
Zixuan Fu1 *, Lanqing Guo1 *, Bihan Wen1 †
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{zixuan.fu, lanqing001, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Modeling and synthesizing real noise in the standard
RGB (sRGB) domain is challenging due to the complicated
noise distribution. While most of the deep noise generators
proposed to synthesize sRGB real noise using an end-to-end
trained model, the lack of explicit noise modeling degrades
the quality of their synthesized noise. In this work, we propose to model the real noise as not only dependent on the
underlying clean image pixel intensity, but also highly correlated to its neighboring noise realization within the local
region. Correspondingly, we propose a novel noise synthesizing framework by explicitly learning its neighboring correlation on top of the signal dependency. With the proposed
noise model, our framework greatly bridges the distribution
gap between synthetic noise and real noise. We show that
our generated “real” sRGB noisy images can be used for
training supervised deep denoisers, thus to improve their
real denoising results with a large margin, comparing to
the popular classic denoisers or the deep denoisers that are
trained on other sRGB noise generators. The code will be
available at https://github.com/xuan611/sRGB-Real-NoiseSynthesizing.

1. Introduction
Real image denoising is one of the most challenging tasks in low-level vision. Deep denoisers that are
trained using synthetic noise, e.g., Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN), perform poorly on real photography
[3, 15], which motivates more realistic noise models, e.g.,
[1, 5, 14–16]. In general, there are two approaches towards
real noise modeling, i.e., modeling in the raw-RGB and
standard RGB (sRGB) domains. Popular modeling methods including the physical-based [25, 28] and data-driven
methods [1, 6] exploit sophisticated noise models in the
raw-RGB domain, which demonstrated promising perfor* Co-first authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: Bihan Wen.

This work was supported in part by the MOE AcRF Tier 1 (RG61/22) and
Start-Up Grant.

mance as noise in raw-RGB is largely simplified comparing to noise in sRGB [20, 22]. However, raw-RGB images
are not usually utilized by common users due to their large
sizes. In contrast, most commercial cameras generate sRGB
images by default, which are more popular in practice. Unfortunately, the noise generation methods in the raw-RGB
domain cannot be directly applied to sRGB images, as the
real noise distribution in sRGB is more complicated than
raw-RGB noise, caused by the in-camera signal processing
(ISP) pipeline [22].
Recent works [5, 15] proposed to generate noise on rawRGB images and convert them into sRGB images by the ISP
pipeline including demosaicing, white balancing, gamma
correction, etc. While these methods synthesized realistic
noise, the requirement of raw-RGB images as well as manually defined ISP pipelines limits their applications. An alternative solution for sRGB real noise modeling is to train the
generative models with sRGB noisy-clean images and directly synthesize real noise on sRGB images [16,17,20,26].
However, these models synthesize noise without explicitly
modeling the characteristics of sRGB real noise, resulting
in degradation of the quality of the synthesized noise.
In this paper, we propose a novel real noise generation
network, based on Neighboring Correlation-Aware noise
model, dubbed as NeCA, to directly synthesize real noise
in the sRGB domain. The proposed real noise synthesis assumes that the sRGB real noise is not only signaldependent, i.e., noise level partially depends on its underlying clean pixel, but also highly correlated with its
neighboring noise realization. Such a real noise model
greatly bridges the gap between the synthetic and real noise
in sRGB. Furthermore, the synthesized “real” images by
the proposed NeCA can be used for training supervised
deep denoisers, thus tackling the real image denoising challenges, subjective to only a few real training data. The
trained deep denoiser using our synthetic noisy images
achieves state-of-the-art denoising performance, compared
to the popular classic denoisers as well as deep denoisers
that are trained on synthetic pairs from other noise models.
To sum up, our main contributions can be concluded as follows:

1683

