This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coaching a Teachable Student
Jimuyang Zhang

Zanming Huang
Boston University

Eshed Ohn-Bar

{zhangjim, huangtom, eohnbar}@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel knowledge distillation framework for
effectively teaching a sensorimotor student agent to drive
from the supervision of a privileged teacher agent. Current distillation for sensorimotor agents methods tend to result in suboptimal learned driving behavior by the student,
which we hypothesize is due to inherent differences between
the input, modeling capacity, and optimization processes of
the two agents. We develop a novel distillation scheme that
can address these limitations and close the gap between the
sensorimotor agent and its privileged teacher. Our key insight is to design a student which learns to align their input
features with the teacher’s privileged Bird’s Eye View (BEV)
space. The student then can benefit from direct supervision
by the teacher over the internal representation learning. To
scaffold the difficult sensorimotor learning task, the student
model is optimized via a student-paced coaching mechanism with various auxiliary supervision. We further propose
a high-capacity imitation learned privileged agent that surpasses prior privileged agents in CARLA and ensures the
student learns safe driving behavior. Our proposed sensorimotor agent results in a robust image-based behavior
cloning agent in CARLA, improving over current models
by over 20.6% in driving score without requiring LiDAR,
historical observations, ensemble of models, on-policy data
aggregation or reinforcement learning.

1. Introduction
Learning internal representations for making intricate
driving decisions from images involves a complex optimization task [4, 43, 54]. The inherent challenge for end-to-end
training of driving agents lies in the immense complexity of
learning to map high-dimensional visual observations into
general and safe navigational decisions [13, 20, 70]. Even
given millions of training examples [4], today’s agents still
fail to reliably learn an internal representation that can be
used for robust processing of complex visual scenarios (e.g.,
dense urban settings with intricate layouts and dynamic obstacles) in a safe and task-driven manner [13, 20, 70].
To ease the challenging sensorimotor training task, re-

Teacher

Privileged Agent

BEV Representation

Bicyclist

Coach

Student
RGB Image

Alignment
Module

Teachable Net

Figure 1. Effective Knowledge Distillation for Sensorimotor
Agents. Our proposed CaT (Coaching a Teachable student) framework enables highly effective knowledge transfer between a privileged teacher and a sensorimotor (i.e., image-based) student. An
alignment module learns to transform image-based features to the
teacher’s BEV feature space, where the student can then leverage extensive and direct supervision on its learned intermediate
representations. The student model is optimized via a coaching
mechanism with extensive auxiliary supervision in order to further scaffold the difficult sensorimotor learning task.

cent approaches decompose the task into stages, e.g., by
first training a high-capacity privileged network with complete knowledge of the world and distilling its knowledge into a less capable vision-based student network [11,
13, 23, 47, 79]. However, due to the inherent differences
between the inputs and architectures of the two agents,
current methods rely on limited supervisory mechanisms
from the teacher, i.e., exclusively through the teacher’s
output [11, 13] or knowledge distillation of a single final
fully-connected layer [71, 79, 81]. Moreover, the privileged
teacher’s demonstration targets may be noisy or difficult for
the student to imitate, given the limited perspective [27]. In
this work, we sought to develop a more effective knowledge
distillation paradigm for training a sensorimotor agent to
drive. Our key insight is to enable more extensive supervision from the teacher by reducing the gap between internal
modeling and learning capabilities between the two agents.
Our proposed approach for holistic knowledge distillation is informed by human instruction, which often involves
structured supervision in addition to high-level demonstra-

7805

