This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Matching Is Not Enough: A Two-Stage Framework
for Category-Agnostic Pose Estimation
Min Shi1, 2, * Zihao Huang1, * Xianzheng Ma2 Xiaowei Hu2 Zhiguo Cao1,
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory

†

{min shi, zihaohuang, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn, {maxianzheng, huxiaowei}@pjlab.org.cn

Query Image

Abstract

(a)

Previous One-Stage Approaches
Prediction

Category-agnostic pose estimation (CAPE) aims to predict keypoints for arbitrary categories given support images with keypoint annotations. Existing approaches match
the keypoints across the image for localization. However,
such a one-stage matching paradigm shows inferior accuracy: the prediction heavily relies on the matching results, which can be noisy due to the open set nature in
CAPE. For example, two mirror-symmetric keypoints (e.g.,
left and right eyes) in the query image can both trigger
high similarity on certain support keypoints (eyes), which
leads to duplicated or opposite predictions. To calibrate
the inaccurate matching results, we introduce a two-stage
framework, where matched keypoints from the first stage
are viewed as similarity-aware position proposals. Then,
the model learns to fetch relevant features to correct the
initial proposals in the second stage. We instantiate the
framework with a transformer model tailored for CAPE.
The transformer encoder incorporates specific designs to
improve the representation and similarity modeling in the
first matching stage. In the second stage, similarity-aware
proposals are packed as queries in the decoder for refinement via cross-attention. Our method surpasses the previous best approach by large margins on CAPE benchmark
MP-100 on both accuracy and efficiency. Code available at
github.com/flyinglynx/CapeFormer

1. Introduction
Humans can quickly grasp the essentials of a keypoint
for arbitrary objects (e.g., the nose of an animal) and
then pinpoint the same keypoint on another object in the
same category. However, most pose estimation models are
still category-specific, which cannot be applied to a new
category unless they are trained with sufficient category*: Equal contribution. †: Corresponding author.

Concatenation

Query
Encoding

Regression
Head

Support
Encoding

Support Image &
Support Keypoints

Our Two-Stage Framework
Similarity-Aware
Proposals

Query Image
Feature

Similarity
Metric

Proposal
Refine
Stage 1

90

(b)

Ours 5-shot

PCK 89.30@12.79FPS

88

Ours 1-shot

PCK 85.30@26.09FPS

86
84

POMNet 5-shot
PCK 80.71@5.52FPS

82

POMNet 1-shot

80
78

Support Keypoint
Feature

Stage 2

PCK 79.70@6.80FPS

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Figure 1. Comparison with existing methods. (a) Compared
with previous one-stage matching paradigm that entirely relies
on keypoint matching, we propose a novel two-stage framework,
which learns to correct unreliable matching results in the second
stage. (b) The proposed approach attains better accuracy and efficiency compared with the previous best approach.

specific data. Recently, category-agnostic pose estimation
(CAPE) [40] is proposed to address such a generic pose
estimation problem. CAPE aims to localize instance keypoints for arbitrary categories given one or few support images with keypoint annotations (support keypoints).
Unlike category-specific pose estimation models that
learn to recognize specific keypoints for a fixed category,
CAPE models learn to represent and compare keypoints for
open-world categories. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), existing
CAPE approaches [40] match the support keypoints across
the query image in an embedding space. Then, the match-

7308

