This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeNeRF: Improving Few-shot Neural Rendering with Free Frequency
Regularization
Jiawei Yang
UC, Los Angeles

Marco Pavone
Nvidia Research, Stanford University

Yue Wang
Nvidia Research

jiawei118@ucla.edu

pavone@stanford.edu

yuewang@nvidia.com

NeRF

Our base Free-NeRF

Turning the left to the right by adding one line of code: pos enc[int(t/T*L)+3:]=0
Figure 1. Example novel view synthesis results from sparse inputs. The only difference between NeRF (left) and FreeNeRF (right)
is the use of our frequency regularization, which can be implemented as few as, approximately, one line of code (bottom, where t and T
denote the current training iteration and regularization duration, respectively; L is the length of the input positional encoding).

Abstract
Novel view synthesis with sparse inputs is a challenging problem for neural radiance fields (NeRF). Recent efforts alleviate this challenge by introducing external supervision, such as pre-trained models and extra depth signals,
or by using non-trivial patch-based rendering. In this paper, we present Frequency regularized NeRF (FreeNeRF),
a surprisingly simple baseline that outperforms previous
methods with minimal modifications to plain NeRF. We analyze the key challenges in few-shot neural rendering and
find that frequency plays an important role in NeRF’s training. Based on this analysis, we propose two regularization
terms: one to regularize the frequency range of NeRF’s
inputs, and the other to penalize the near-camera density
fields. Both techniques are “free lunches” that come at no

additional computational cost. We demonstrate that even
with just one line of code change, the original NeRF can
achieve similar performance to other complicated methods
in the few-shot setting. FreeNeRF achieves state-of-theart performance across diverse datasets, including Blender,
DTU, and LLFF. We hope that this simple baseline will motivate a rethinking of the fundamental role of frequency in
NeRF’s training, under both the low-data regime and beyond. This project is released at FreeNeRF.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [21] has gained tremendous attention in 3D computer vision and computer graphics due to its ability to render high-fidelity novel views.

8254

