This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Infinite Photorealistic Worlds using Procedural Generation
Alexander Raistrick∗ , Lahav Lipson∗ , Zeyu Ma∗ , (∗ equal contribution; alphabetical order)
Lingjie Mei, Mingzhe Wang, Yiming Zuo, Karhan Kayan, Hongyu Wen, Beining Han,
Yihan Wang, Alejandro Newell†, Hei Law†, Ankit Goyal†, Kaiyu Yang†, Jia Deng
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

Abstract
We introduce Infinigen, a procedural generator of photorealistic 3D scenes of the natural world. Infinigen is entirely
procedural: every asset, from shape to texture, is generated
from scratch via randomized mathematical rules, using no
external source and allowing infinite variation and composition. Infinigen offers broad coverage of objects and scenes
in the natural world including plants, animals, terrains, and
natural phenomena such as fire, cloud, rain, and snow. Infinigen can be used to generate unlimited, diverse training
data for a wide range of computer vision tasks including
object detection, semantic segmentation, optical flow, and
3D reconstruction. We expect Infinigen to be a useful resource for computer vision research and beyond. Please visit
infinigen.org for videos, code and pre-generated data.

objects in indoor environments (e.g. [25, 53]).
In this work, we seek to substantially expand the coverage of synthetic data, particularly objects and scenes from
the natural world. We introduce Infinigen, a procedural
generator of photorealistic 3D scenes of the natural world.
Compared to existing sources of synthetic data, Infinigen is
unique due to the combination of the following properties:
• Procedural: Infinigen is not a finite collection of 3D
assets or synthetic images; instead, it is a generator
that can create infinitely many distinct shapes, textures,
materials, and scene compositions. Every asset, from
shape to texture, is entirely procedural, generated from
scratch via randomized mathematical rules that allow
infinite variation and composition. This sets it apart
from datasets or dataset generators that rely on external
assets.

1. Introduction
Data, especially large-scale labeled data, has been a critical driver of progress in computer vision. At the same time,
data has also been a major challenge, as many important
vision tasks remain starved of high-quality data. This is especially true for 3D vision, where accurate 3D ground truth
is difficult to acquire for real images.
Synthetic data from computer graphics is a promising solution to this data challenge. Synthetic data can
be generated in unlimited quantity with high-quality labels. Synthetic data has been used in a wide range of
tasks [10, 18, 44, 46, 52, 55, 65], with notable successes in 3D
vision, where models trained on synthetic data can perform
well on real images zero-shot [31, 51, 75–78, 82].
Despite its great promise, the use of synthetic data in
computer vision remains much less common than real
images. We hypothesize that a key reason is the limited
diversity of 3D assets: for synthetic data to be maximally
useful, it needs to capture the diversity and complexity of the
real world, but existing freely available synthetic datasets
are mostly restricted to a fairly narrow set of objects and
shapes, often driving scenes (e.g. [35, 65]) or human-made
† work done while a student at Princeton University

• Diverse: Infinigen offers a broad coverage of objects
and scenes in the natural world, including plants,
animals, terrains, and natural phenomena such as fire,
cloud, rain, and snow.
• Photorealistic: Infinigen creates highly photorealistic
3D scenes. It achieves high photorealism by procedurally generating not only coarse structures but also fine
details in geometry and texture.
• Real geometry: unlike in video game assets, which
often use texture maps to fake geometrical details (e.g.
a surface appears rugged but is in fact flat), all geometric details in Infinigen are real. This ensures accurate
geometric ground truth for 3D reconstruction tasks.
• Free and open-source: Infinigen builds on top of
Blender [17], a free and open-source graphics tool.
Infinigen’s code is released for free under the GPL
license, same as Blender. Anyone can freely use
Infinigen to obtain unlimited assets and renders ‡ .
‡ The output of GPL code is generally not covered by GPL.
See www . gnu . org / licenses / gpl - faq . en . html #
WhatCaseIsOutputGPL

12630

