This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CodeTalker: Speech-Driven 3D Facial Animation with Discrete Motion Prior
Jinbo Xing1 Menghan Xia2,∗ Yuechen Zhang1 Xiaodong Cun2 Jue Wang2 Tien-Tsin Wong1
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Tencent AI Lab
{jbxing,yczhang21,ttwong}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Speech-driven 3D facial animation has been widely studied, yet there is still a gap to achieving realism and vividness
due to the highly ill-posed nature and scarcity of audiovisual data. Existing works typically formulate the crossmodal mapping into a regression task, which suffers from
the regression-to-mean problem leading to over-smoothed
facial motions. In this paper, we propose to cast speechdriven facial animation as a code query task in a finite
proxy space of the learned codebook, which effectively promotes the vividness of the generated motions by reducing
the cross-modal mapping uncertainty. The codebook is
learned by self-reconstruction over real facial motions and
thus embedded with realistic facial motion priors. Over the
discrete motion space, a temporal autoregressive model is
employed to sequentially synthesize facial motions from the
input speech signal, which guarantees lip-sync as well as
plausible facial expressions. We demonstrate that our approach outperforms current state-of-the-art methods both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Also, a user study further justifies our superiority in perceptual quality. Code
and video demo are available at https://doubiiu.
github.io/projects/codetalker.

1. Introduction
3D facial animation has been an active research topic for
decades, as attributed to its broad applications in virtual reality, film production, and games. The high correlation between speech and facial gestures (especially lip movements)
makes it possible to drive the facial animation with a speech
signal. Early attempts are mainly made to build the complex
mapping rules between phonemes and their visual counterpart, which usually have limited performance [53,63]. With
the advances in deep learning, recent speech-driven facial
animation techniques push forward the state-of-the-art significantly. However, it still remains challenging to generate
human-like motions.
* Corresponding Author.

{menghanxyz,vinthony,arphid}@gmail.com

As an ill-posed problem, speech-driven facial animation
generally has multiple plausible outputs for every input.
Such ambiguity tends to cause over-smoothed results. Anyhow, person-specific approaches [29, 49] can usually obtain decent facial motions because of the relatively consistent talking style, but have low scalability to general applications. Recently, VOCA [10] extends these methods
to generalize across different identities, however, they generally exhibit mild or static upper face expressions. This
is because VOCA formulates the speech-to-motion mapping as a regression task, which encourages averaged motions, especially in the upper face that is only weakly or
even uncorrelated to the speech signal. To reduce the uncertainty, FaceFormer [16] utilizes long-term audio context
through a transformer-based model and synthesizes the sequential motions in an autoregressive manner. Although
it gains important performance promotion, it still inherits
the weakness of one-to-one mapping formulation and suffers from a lack of subtle high-frequency motions. Differently, MeshTalk [50] models a categorical latent space
for facial animation that disentangles audio-correlated and
audio-uncorrelated information so that both aspects could
be well handled. Anyway, the employed quantization and
categorical latent space representation are not well-suited
for motion prior learning, rendering the training tricky and
consequently hindering its performance.
We get inspiration from 3D Face Morphable Model
(3DMM) [35], where general facial expressions are represented in a low-dimensional space. Accordingly, we
propose to formulate speech-driven facial animation as a
code query task in a finite proxy space of the learned discrete codebook prior. The codebook is learned by selfreconstruction over real facial motions using a vectorquantized autoencoder (VQ-VAE) [57], which along with
the decoder stores the realistic facial motion priors. In
contrast to the continuous linear space of 3DMM, combinations of codebook items form a discrete prior space
with only finite cardinality. Still, in the context of the decoder, the code representation possesses high expressiveness. Through mapping the speech to the finite proxy space,
the uncertainty of the speech-to-motion mapping is signif-

12780

