This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint HDR Denoising and Fusion: A Real-World Mobile HDR Image Dataset
Shuaizheng Liu1,2 , Xindong Zhang1,2 , Lingchen Sun1,2 , Zhetong Liang2 , Hui Zeng2 , Lei Zhang1,2 *
1
The HongKong Polytechnic University, 2 OPPO Research
{shuaizhengliu21, cshzeng}@gmail.com; ling-chen.sun@connect.polyu.hk;
liangzhetong@oppo.com; {csxdzhang, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk;

Abstract
Mobile phones have become a ubiquitous and indispensable photographing device in our daily life, while the
small aperture and sensor size make mobile phones more
susceptible to noise and over-saturation, resulting in low
dynamic range (LDR) and low image quality. It is thus
crucial to develop high dynamic range (HDR) imaging
techniques for mobile phones. Unfortunately, the existing
HDR image datasets are mostly constructed by DSLR cameras in daytime, limiting their applicability to the study of
HDR imaging for mobile phones. In this work, we develop, for the first time to our best knowledge, an HDR
image dataset by using mobile phone cameras, namely
Mobile-HDR dataset. Specifically, we utilize three mobile phone cameras to collect paired LDR-HDR images in
the raw image domain, covering both daytime and nighttime scenes with different noise levels. We then propose
a transformer based model with a pyramid cross-attention
alignment module to aggregate highly correlated features
from different exposure frames to perform joint HDR denoising and fusion. Experiments validate the advantages
of our dataset and our method on mobile HDR imaging.
Dataset and codes are available at https://github.
com/shuaizhengliu/Joint-HDRDN .

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of mobile communication
techniques and digital imaging sensors, mobile phones have
surpassed DSLR cameras and become the most prevalent
device for photography in our daily life. Nonetheless, due to
the low dynamic range (LDR) of mobile phone sensors [7],
the captured images may lose details in dark and bright
regions under challenging lighting conditions. Therefore,
high dynamic range (HDR) imaging [3] is critical for improving the quality of mobile phone photography.
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC
RIF grant (R5001-18) and the PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovation Lab.

Actually, HDR imaging has been a long standing research topic in computational photography, even for DSLR
cameras. An effective and commonly used way to construct
an HDR image is to fuse a stack of LDR frames with different exposure levels. If the multiple LDR frames can be
well aligned (e.g., in static scenes), they can be easily fused
to generate the HDR image [3, 23]. Unfortunately, in dynamic scenes where there exist camera shaking and/or object motion, the fused HDR image may introduce ghost artifacts caused by inaccurate alignment [45]. Some deghosting methods have been proposed to reject pixels which can
be hardly registered [12, 16]. However, precisely detecting
moving pixels is challenging and rejecting too many pixels
will sacrifice useful information for HDR fusion.
In the past decade, deep learning [15] has demonstrated
its powerful capability to learn image priors from a rich
amount of data [4]. Unfortunately, the development of
deep models for HDR imaging is relatively slow, mainly
due to the lack of suitable training datasets. Kalantari
et al. [10] built the first dataset with LDR-HDR image
pairs by DSLR cameras in daytime. Benefiting from this
dataset, many deep learning algorithms have been proposed
for HDR imaging. Some works [10] employ the convolutional neural network (CNN) for fusion after aligning multiple frames with optical flow [18], which is however unreliable under occlusion and large motions. Subsequent works
resort to employing various networks to directly reconstruct
the HDR image from LDR frames. Liu et al. [19] developed
a deformable convolution based module to align the features
of input frames. Yan et al. [40] proposed a spatial attention
mechanism to suppress undesired features and employed a
dilated convolution network [42] for frame fusion. Following this spatial attention mechanism, some fusion networks
have been developed with larger receptive fields, such as
non-local networks [41] and Transformer networks [21].
Though the dataset developed in [10] has largely facilitated the research of deep learning on HDR imaging, it is
not well suited for the investigation of HDR imaging techniques for mobile phone cameras. Firstly, due to the small
aperture and sensor size, images captured by mobile phones

13966

