This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Hashing with Minimal-Distance-Separated Hash Centers
Liangdao Wang1 , Yan Pan1 ,* Cong Liu1 , Hanjiang Lai1 , Jian Yin1 , Ye Liu1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University. 2 Big Data Department, Lizhi Inc.
wangld5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,panyan5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep hashing is an appealing approach for large-scale
image retrieval. Most existing supervised deep hashing
methods learn hash functions using pairwise or triple image
similarities in randomly sampled mini-batches. They suffer
from low training efficiency, insufficient coverage of data
distribution, and pair imbalance problems. Recently, central similarity quantization (CSQ) attacks the above problems by using “hash centers” as a global similarity metric,
which encourages the hash codes of similar images to approach their common hash center and distance themselves
from other hash centers. Although achieving SOTA retrieval
performance, CSQ falls short of a worst-case guarantee on
the minimal distance between its constructed hash centers,
i.e. the hash centers can be arbitrarily close. This paper presents an optimization method that finds hash centers with a constraint on the minimal distance between any
pair of hash centers, which is non-trivial due to the nonconvex nature of the problem. More importantly, we adopt
the Gilbert-Varshamov bound from coding theory, which
helps us to obtain a large minimal distance while ensuring
the empirical feasibility of our optimization approach. With
these clearly-separated hash centers, each is assigned to
one image class, we propose several effective loss functions
to train deep hashing networks. Extensive experiments on
three datasets for image retrieval demonstrate that the proposed method achieves superior retrieval performance over
the state-of-the-art deep hashing methods.

1. Introduction
Hashing methods are widely-used in large-scale image
retrieval due to their excellent efficiency in both storage
and retrieval. Recently, much effort has been devoted to
deep-learning-based hashing (deep hashing) methods for
image retrieval. They use deep neural networks to learn
hash functions that encode similar/dissimilar images to
nearby/faraway binary codes, respectively. Most of the ex* Corresponding Author

isting deep hashing methods train models on pairwise/triple
similarities among training samples in randomly sampled
mini-batches (e.g., [1, 10, 18, 22, 24]). Very recently, Yuan
et al. [26] pointed out that these methods lead to restricted
performance due to three problems: low-efficiency to obtain
global similarity of the dataset, incomplete coverage of data
distribution that harms the discriminability of the generated
hash codes, and ineffectiveness on imbalanced amount of
similar/dissimilar data pairs. They then proposed central
similarities that finds mutually separated hash centers for
each class of similar images, and uses these centers to ensure small distances between the hash codes of similar images and large distances between those of dissimilar ones.
For deep hashing methods that use hash centers, it is crucial to construct well-separated hash centers, i.e. the Hamming distance between two hash centers should be significantly larger than the Hamming distance between the hash
codes of two similar images, which makes it challenging
to generalize to various length of hash code and different
number of image classes. For instance, CSQ [26] adopts
Hadamard matrix and Bernoulli sampling to produce hash
centers with nice properties that any two centers’ Hamming
distance is on average half of the hash code length. However, pairs of hash centers constructed in this way can be
arbitrarily small in the worst case, i.e. zero in Hamming
distance (see Table 4). These degenerated hash centers are
expected to harm the retrieval performance.
To address this issue, we propose a novel deep hashing
method that uses an optimization procedure to produce hash
centers, with an additional constraint on a given minimal
distance d between any pair of hash centers. The value of d
is derived using the Gilbert-Varshamov bound [20] adopted
from coding theory, which help us to find a large d while
ensuring the feasibility of our optimization procedure.
As shown in Fig.1, the proposed method employs a twostage pipeline. In Stage 1, we tackle the optimization problem stated above to produce clearly-separated hash centers.
To solve this optimization problem, we propose an alternating optimization procedure that relies on the ℓp -box binary
optimization technique [23]. In Stage 2, we train a deep
hashing network by using the constructed hash centers as a

23455

