This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Detection Transformer for Incremental Object Detection
Yaoyao Liu1
1
2

Bernt Schiele1

Andrea Vedaldi2

Christian Rupprecht2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

{yaoyao.liu, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

{vedaldi, chrisr}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Humans inherently learn in an incremental manner, acquiring new concepts over time without forgetting previous ones. In contrast, machine learning suffers from catastrophic forgetting [21, 35, 36], where learning from noni.i.d. data can override knowledge acquired previously. Unsurprisingly, forgetting also affects object detection [2, 12,
20, 37, 44, 50, 54]. In this context, the problem was formalized by Shmelkov et al. [44], who defined an incremental
object detection (IOD) protocol, where the training samples
for different object categories are observed in phases, re1 Code: https://lyy.mpi-inf.mpg.de/CL-DETR/

Average Precision (%)

Incremental object detection (IOD) aims to train an object detector in phases, each with annotations for new object categories. As other incremental settings, IOD is subject to catastrophic forgetting, which is often addressed by
techniques such as knowledge distillation (KD) and exemplar replay (ER). However, KD and ER do not work well
if applied directly to state-of-the-art transformer-based object detectors such as Deformable DETR [59] and UPDETR [9]. In this paper, we solve these issues by proposing
a ContinuaL DEtection TRansformer (CL-DETR), a new
method for transformer-based IOD which enables effective
usage of KD and ER in this context. First, we introduce a
Detector Knowledge Distillation (DKD) loss, focusing on
the most informative and reliable predictions from old versions of the model, ignoring redundant background predictions, and ensuring compatibility with the available groundtruth labels. We also improve ER by proposing a calibration
strategy to preserve the label distribution of the training set,
therefore better matching training and testing statistics. We
conduct extensive experiments on COCO 2017 and demonstrate that CL-DETR achieves state-of-the-art results in the
IOD setting.1

w/ ER+KD

w/ Ours

Upper Bound

42
40
38
36
Old categories

All categories

Figure 1. The final Average Precision (AP, %) of two-phase incremental object detection on COCO 2017. We observe 70 and 10
categories in the first and second phases, respectively. The baseline is Deformable DETR [59]. “Upper bound” shows the results
of joint training with all previous data accessible in each phase.

stricting the ability of the trainer to access past data.
Popular methods to address forgetting in tasks other than
detection include Knowledge Distillation (KD) and Exemplar Replay (ER). KD [11,16,17,26,57] uses regularization
in an attempt to preserve previous knowledge when training the model on new data. The key idea is to encourage
the new model’s logits or feature maps to be close to those
of the old model. ER methods [5, 29, 32, 33, 41, 52] work
instead by memorising some of the past training data (the
exemplars), replaying them in the following phases to “remember” the old object categories.
Recent state-of-the-art results in object detection have
been achieved by a family of transformer-based architectures that include DETR [4], Deformable DETR [59] and
UP-DETR [9]. In this paper, we show that KD and ER
do not work well if applied directly to these models. For
instance, in Fig. 1 we show that applying KD and ER to
Deformable DETR leads to much worse results compared
to training with all data accessible in each phase (i.e., the
standard non-incremental setting).
We identify two main issues that cause this drop in per-

23799

