This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Co-speech Gesture Synthesis by Reinforcement Learning with Contrastive
Pre-trained Rewards
Mingyang Sun1 *, Mengchen Zhao2 *, Yaqing Hou1†, Minglei Li3 , Huang Xu3 , Songcen Xu2 , Jianye Hao2,4
1
Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, China
3
Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd, China 4 Tianjin University, China
mysun@mail.dlut.edu.cn, houyq@dlut.edu.cn
{zhaomengchen,liminglei29,xuhuang2,xusongcen,haojianye}@huawei.com

Abstract
There is a growing demand of automatically synthesizing
co-speech gestures for virtual characters. However, it remains a challenge due to the complex relationship between
input speeches and target gestures. Most existing works focus on predicting the next gesture that fits the data best,
however, such methods are myopic and lack the ability to
plan for future gestures. In this paper, we propose a novel
reinforcement learning (RL) framework called RACER to
generate sequences of gestures that maximize the overall
satisfactory. RACER employs a vector quantized variational autoencoder to learn compact representations of gestures and a GPT-based policy architecture to generate coherent sequence of gestures autoregressively. In particular,
we propose a contrastive pre-training approach to calculate
the rewards, which integrates contextual information into
action evaluation and successfully captures the complex relationships between multi-modal speech-gesture data. Experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms existing baselines in terms of both objective metrics and subjective human judgements. Demos can be found
at https://github.com/RLracer/RACER.git.

1. Introduction
Gesturing is important for human speakers to improve
their expressiveness. It conveys the necessary non-verbal
information to the audience, giving the speech a more emotional touch so that to enhance persuasiveness and credibility. Similarly, in virtual world, high-quality 3D gesture animations can make a talking character more vividly. For example, in human-computer interaction scenarios, vivid gestures performed by virtual characters can help listeners to
concentrate and improve the intimacy between humans and
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

characters [36]. Attracted by these merits, there has been a
growing demand of automatically synthesizing high-quality
co-speech gestures in computer animation.
However, automatically synthesizing co-speech gestures
remains a challenge due to the complicated relationship between speech audios and gestures. On one hand, a speaker
may play different gestures when speaking the same words
due to different mental and physical states. On the other
hand, a speaker may also play similar gestures when speaking different words. Therefore, co-speech gesture synthesizing is inherently a “many-to-many” problem [21]. Moreover, in order to ensure the overall fluency and consistency,
we must take into consideration both the contextual information and the subsequent effect upon playing a gesture
[23, 38]. Therefore, gesture synthesizing is rather a sequential decision making problem than a simple matching between speeches and gestures.
Compared with traditional rule-based approaches [35],
data-driven gesture synthesis approaches [10,39] has shown
many advantages, including the low development cost and
the ability to generalize. Most existing data-driven approaches consider gesture synthesis as a classification task
[6, 26] or a regression task [17] in a deterministic way i.e.
the same speech or text input always maps to the same gesture output. However, these models rely on the assumption
that there exists a unique ground-truth label for each input sequence of speech, which contradicts to the “many-tomany” nature of the problem. As a consequence, they sacrifice diversity and semantics of gestures and tend to learn
some averaged gestures for any input speeches. Some other
works adopt adversarial learning framework, where a discriminator is trained to distinguish between generated gestures and the recorded gestures in dataset [10,38]. Although
they improve the generalizability of the gesture generator to
some extent, they still fail to explore the essential relationship between speeches and gestures.
In order to address the above challenges, we propose

2331

