This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pruning Parameterization with Bi-level Optimization for Efficient Semantic
Segmentation on the Edge
Changdi Yang*1 Pu Zhao*1 Yanyu Li1 Wei Niu2
Hao Tang3 Minghai Qin1 Bin Ren2 Xue Lin1
1
Northeastern University 2 College of William & Mary

Jiexiong Guan2
Yanzhi Wang1
3
CVL, ETH Zurich

{yang.changd, zhao.pu, li.yanyu, xue.lin, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu
{wniu, jguan}@email.wm.edu, bren@cs.wm.edu, hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch, qinminghai@gmail.com

Abstract
With the ever-increasing popularity of edge devices, it is
necessary to implement real-time segmentation on the edge
for autonomous driving and many other applications. Vision Transformers (ViTs) have shown considerably stronger
results for many vision tasks. However, ViTs with the fullattention mechanism usually consume a large number of
computational resources, leading to difficulties for realtime inference on edge devices. In this paper, we aim to derive ViTs with fewer computations and fast inference speed
to facilitate the dense prediction of semantic segmentation
on edge devices. To achieve this, we propose a pruning parameterization method to formulate the pruning problem of
semantic segmentation. Then we adopt a bi-level optimization method to solve this problem with the help of implicit
gradients. Our experimental results demonstrate that we
can achieve 38.9 mIoU on ADE20K val with a speed of 56.5
FPS on Samsung S21, which is the highest mIoU under the
same computation constraint with real-time inference.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the extraordinary performance of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), DNNs have been applied to various
tasks. In this work, we focus on semantic segmentation,
which aims to assign a class label to each pixel of an image
to perform a dense prediction. It plays an important role in
many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving.
However, as a dense prediction task, segmentation models
usually have complicated multi-scale feature fusion structures with large feature sizes, leading to tremendous memory and computation overhead with slow inference speed.
To reduce the memory and computation cost, certain
lightweight CNN architectures [21, 40, 66] are designed for
efficient segmentation. Besides CNNs, inspired by the recent superior performance of vision transformers (ViTs)
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Comparison of accuracy versus FPS on ADE20K.

[17], some works [10, 11, 72] adopt ViTs in segmentation
tasks to explore self-attention mechanism with the global
receptive field. However, it is still difficult for ViTs to reduce the computation cost of the dense prediction for segmentation with large feature sizes.
With the wide spread of edge devices such as mobile
phones, it is essential to perform real-time inference of segmentation on edge devices in practice. To facilitate mobile segmentation, the state-of-the-art work TopFormer [68]
adopts a token pyramid transformer to produce scale-aware
semantic features with tokens from various scales. It significantly outperforms CNN- and ViT-based networks across
different semantic segmentation datasets and achieves a
good trade-off between accuracy and latency. However, it
only partially optimizes the token pyramid module, which
costs most of the computations and latency.
In this work, we propose a pruning parameterization
method with bi-level optimization to further enhance the
performance of TopFormer. Our objective is to search for
a suitable layer width for each layer in the token pyramid

15402

