This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simple Cues Lead to a Strong Multi-Object Tracker
Jenny Seidenschwarz1 * Guillem Brasó 12
1

Victor Castro Serrano1

Technical University of Munich

2

Ismail Elezi1

Laura Leal-Taixé1†

Munich Center for Machine Learning

Abstract
For a long time, the most common paradigm in MultiObject Tracking was tracking-by-detection (TbD), where
objects are first detected and then associated over video
frames. For association, most models resourced to motion
and appearance cues, e.g., re-identification networks.
Recent approaches based on attention propose to learn
the cues in a data-driven manner, showing impressive
results. In this paper, we ask ourselves whether simple
good old TbD methods are also capable of achieving
the performance of end-to-end models. To this end,
we propose two key ingredients that allow a standard
re-identification network to excel at appearance-based
tracking. We extensively analyse its failure cases, and
show that a combination of our appearance features with
a simple motion model leads to strong tracking results. Our
tracker generalizes to four public datasets, namely MOT17,
MOT20, BDD100k, and DanceTrack, achieving state-ofthe-art performance. https://github.com/dvl-tum/GHOST.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) aims at finding the
trajectories of all moving objects in a video. The dominant
paradigm in the field has long been tracking-by-detection,
which divides tracking into two steps: (i) frame-wise object
detection, (ii) data association to link the detections and
form trajectories. One of the simplest forms of data
association for online trackers is frame-by-frame matching
using the Hungarian algorithm [26]. Matching is often
driven by cues such as appearance, e.g., re-identification
(reID) features [11, 20, 35, 45, 57, 59, 75], or motion cues
[4, 42, 47, 65, 74]. Even recent trackers propose data-driven
motion priors [4, 54, 64, 79] or appearance cues, which may
include external reID models [4, 64].
Most recent trackers based on Transformers [36, 56, 71]
learn all necessary cues from data through self- and crossattention between frames and tracked objects. While this
implicitly gets rid of any heuristic typically embedded in
* Correspondance to j.seidenschwarz@tum.de.
† Currently at NVIDIA.

Figure 1.
IDF1/Rank-1 of different state-of-the-art re-ID
approaches. R50-TR [78], BOT [35], BDB [14], ABD [10]. Basic
is our baseline, Ours is our appearance model.

the handcrafted appearance and motion cues, and could be
the path to more general trackers, the training strategies
are highly complex and the amount of data needed to train
such models is very large, to the point where MOT datasets
[15] are not enough and methods rely on pre-training on
detection datasets such as CrowdHuman [52].
While interesting and challenging from a research point
of view, it is questionable whether we should also follow
the path of learning everything in multi-object tracking,
when there are strong priors that we know how to define
and leverage, such as the good old appearance and motion
cues. As we show in this paper, there are key observations
that need to be made in order to properly leverage such cues.
These observations might seem simple and obvious but have
been largely overlooked by the community. If we spend
as much time in properly understanding and implementing
such cues as we do in training Transformers, we will be
rewarded with a simple Hungarian tracker with appearance
and motion cues that still dominates state-of-the-art on
multiple benchmarks, and does not even need to be trained
on any tracking data.
Our first observation is that simply using state-ofthe-art re-identification (reID) networks for appearance
matching is not enough for the real scenarios of MOT.
In Figure 1, we visualize the performance of several
state-of-the-art reID approaches on Market-1501 dataset
[77] (x-axis), as well as the model’s performance when
used in a simple matching-based tracker (y-axis). It
shows that the reID performance does not necessarily
translate to MOT performance. We identify two problems
causing the weak performance of reID models on MOT: (i)
13813

