This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniHCP: A Unified Model for Human-Centric Perceptions
Yuanzheng Ci1 ,* Yizhou Wang2,3 ,* Meilin Chen2 , Shixiang Tang1 , Lei Bai3†, Feng Zhu4 , Rui Zhao4,5 ,
Fengwei Yu4 , Donglian Qi2 , Wanli Ouyang3
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 SenseTime Research,
5
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
yuanzheng.ci@sydney.edu.au, yizhouwang@zju.edu.cn, bailei@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Human-centric perceptions (e.g., pose estimation, human parsing, pedestrian detection, person re-identification,
etc.) play a key role in industrial applications of visual models. While specific human-centric tasks have their own relevant semantic aspect to focus on, they also share the same
underlying semantic structure of the human body. However,
few works have attempted to exploit such homogeneity and
design a general-propose model for human-centric tasks.
In this work, we revisit a broad range of human-centric
tasks and unify them in a minimalist manner. We propose
UniHCP, a Unified Model for Human-Centric Perceptions,
which unifies a wide range of human-centric tasks in a simplified end-to-end manner with the plain vision transformer
architecture. With large-scale joint training on 33 humancentric datasets, UniHCP can outperform strong baselines
on several in-domain and downstream tasks by direct evaluation. When adapted to a specific task, UniHCP achieves
new SOTAs on a wide range of human-centric tasks, e.g.,
69.8 mIoU on CIHP for human parsing, 86.18 mA on PA100K for attribute prediction, 90.3 mAP on Market1501 for
ReID, and 85.8 JI on CrowdHuman for pedestrian detection, performing better than specialized models tailored for
each task. The code and pretrained model are available at
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/UniHCP.

1. Introduction
Research on human-centric perceptions has come a long
way with tremendous advancements in recent years. Many
methods have been developed to enhance the performance
of pose estimation [9, 25, 60, 91], pedestrian detection [4,
62, 63, 76], person re-identification [42, 86, 101] (ReID),
and many other human-centered tasks. These significant
progress play a key role in advancing the applications of vi* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ReID
Keypoints
Parsing
Detection
Attribute

UniHCP
age 17-30
jeans

…

Figure 1. UniHCP unifies 5 human-centric tasks under one model
and is trained on a massive collection of human-centric datasets.

sual models in numerous fields, such as sports analysis [11],
autonomous driving [97], and electronic retailing [27].
Although different human-centric perception tasks have
their own relevant semantic information to focus on, those
semantics all rely on the same basic structure of the human
body and the attributes of each body part [64, 81]. In light
of this, there have been some attempts trying to exploit such
homogeneity and train a shared neural network jointly with
distinct human-centric tasks [28,29,46,48,61,71,77,87,98].
For instance, human parsing has been trained in conjunction with human keypoint detection [46, 61, 98], pedestrian
attribute recognition [87], pedestrian detection [48] or person re-identification [28]. The experimental results of these
works empirically validate that some human-centric tasks
may benefit each other when trained together. Motivated
by these works, a natural expectation is that a more versatile all-in-one model could be a feasible solution for general human-centric perceptions, which can utilize the homogeneity of human-centric tasks for improving performance,
enable fast adaption to new tasks, and decrease the burden
of memory cost in large-scale multitask system deployment
compared with specific models to specific tasks.
However, unifying distinct human-centric tasks into a

17840

