This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LipFormer: High-fidelity and Generalizable Talking Face Generation
with A Pre-learned Facial Codebook
Jiayu Wang1 Kang Zhao1 Shiwei Zhang1 Yingya Zhang1 Yujun Shen2 Deli Zhao1 Jingren Zhou1
1

Alibaba Group

2

Ant Group

{wangjiayu.wjy, zhaokang.zk, zhangjin.zsw, yingya.zyy, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com,

Audio Exchanged
Results

Results

Ground Truth

{shenyujun0302, zhaodeli}@gmail.com

Figure 1. High-fidelity talking face generation with LipFormer. Top: Five target face pairs. Middle: LipFormer-generated results, driven
by target face’s own audio. Bottom: LipFormer-generated results, after exchanging the audio of each target pair. It is clear that LipFormer
successfully captures the relationship between voice and mouth shape.

Abstract
Generating a talking face video from the input audio
sequence is a practical yet challenging task. Most existing
methods either fail to capture fine facial details or need
to train a specific model for each identity. We argue that
a codebook pre-learned on high-quality face images can
serve as a useful prior that facilitates high-fidelity and
generalizable talking head synthesis. Thanks to the strong
capability of the codebook in representing face textures,
we simplify the talking face generation task as finding
proper lip-codes to characterize the variation of lips during
portrait talking. To this end, we propose LipFormer, a
Transformer-based framework to model the audio-visual
coherence and predict the lip-codes sequence based on
input audio features. We further introduce an adaptive
face warping module, which helps warp the reference
face to the target pose in the feature space, to alleviate
the difficulty of lip-code prediction under different poses.
By this means, LipFormer can make better use of prelearned priors in images and is robust to posture change.
Extensive experiments show that LipFormer can produce

more realistic talking face videos compared to previous
methods and faithfully generalize to unseen identities.

1. Introduction
As an ongoing research topic, talking face generation
aims to build a cross-modal mapping from an audio sequence to a face video while maintaining natural speaking
styles and audio-visual coherence. It has received growing
attention in recent years due to its potential in digital
humans, film-making, virtual video conferences, and online
education [3, 10, 37–39, 44, 45, 47, 48, 50, 53].
A high-fidelity and generalizable talking face generation
model relies heavily on high-quality (HQ) video data with
vast identities. However, the existing datasets still suffer
from two limitations: (1) low resolution and qualities, e.g.,
LRW [5] and LRS2 [1], leading to the learned model an
unsatisfying synthesis quality; (2) a limited number of
identities despite the clear videos, e.g., Obama [17, 31]
and privately recorded data [28], which requires training a
specific model for each person and it is hard to generalize
to unseen portraits. These two drawbacks limit their
practical applications, and it is also a challenge to collect

13844

