This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ingredient-oriented Multi-Degradation Learning for Image Restoration
Jinghao Zhang,* Jie Huang,* Mingde Yao, Zizheng Yang, Hu Yu, Man Zhou, Feng Zhao†
University of Science and Technology of China
{jhaozhang,hj0117,mdyao,yzz6000,yuhu520,manman}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning to leverage the relationship among diverse image restoration tasks is quite beneficial for unraveling the
intrinsic ingredients behind the degradation. Recent years
have witnessed the flourish of various All-in-one methods,
which handle multiple image degradations within a single
model. In practice, however, few attempts have been made
to excavate task correlations in that exploring the underlying fundamental ingredients of various image degradations,
resulting in poor scalability as more tasks are involved. In
this paper, we propose a novel perspective to delve into the
degradation via an ingredients-oriented rather than previous task-oriented manner for scalable learning. Specifically, our method, named Ingredients-oriented Degradation Reformulation framework (IDR), consists of two stages,
namely task-oriented knowledge collection and ingredientsoriented knowledge integration. In the first stage, we conduct ad hoc operations on different degradations according
to the underlying physics principles, and establish the corresponding prior hubs for each type of degradation. While
the second stage progressively reformulates the preceding
task-oriented hubs into single ingredients-oriented hub via
learnable Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and employs a dynamic routing mechanism for probabilistic unknown degradation removal. Extensive experiments on various image restoration tasks demonstrate the effectiveness
and scalability of our method. More importantly, our IDR
exhibits the favorable generalization ability to unknown
downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to recover the high-quality images from their degraded observations, which is a general
term of a series of low-level vision tasks. In addition to
achieving satisfactory visual effects in photography, image
restoration is also widely used in many other real world
scenarios, such as autopilot and surveillance. Complex
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An illustration of our proposed ingredients-oriented
degradation reformulation principle. Instead of previous taskoriented paradigm where each tasks are learned exclusively, we
perform an ingredients-oriented paradigm to explore the correlation among diverse restoration tasks for scaleable degradation reformulated learning, where the Conv., Add. and Mul. means the
convolution, addition and multiplication.

environments put forward higher requirements for image
restoration algorithms, when considering the variability and
unknowability of the corruption types. Since most existing methods have been dedicated into single degradation removal, such as denoising [15, 24, 61], deraining [20, 52, 55],
debluring [8, 40, 42], dehazing [26, 44, 45], low-light enhancement [14, 34, 50], etc., which do not satisfy the applications in real world scenarios.
Recently, all-in-one fashion methods have been coming to the fore, which handle multiple image degradations
within a single model. These methods can be roughly
categorized into two families, i.e., corruption-specific and
corruption-agnostic. Representative studies of the former
[2, 28] deal with different degradations via separate subnetworks, which demands pre-specification of corruption
types, limiting the scope of further application. While the
efforts in latter [25, 47] release the model from the prior
of the corruption types, improving the flexibility in practice. However, both of them suffer from poor scalability as
more tasks are involved, indicating that the diverse degradations are learned exclusively under the potential capability
bottleneck, without touching the intrinsic correlation among
them, which we referred as task-oriented paradigm.

5825

