This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Regularizing Second-Order Influences for Continual Learning
Zhicheng Sun1 , Yadong Mu1,2 *, Gang Hua3
1
Peking University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Wormpex AI Research
{sunzc,myd}@pku.edu.cn, ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual learning aims to learn on non-stationary data
streams without catastrophically forgetting previous knowledge. Prevalent replay-based methods address this challenge by rehearsing on a small buffer holding the seen data,
for which a delicate sample selection strategy is required.
However, existing selection schemes typically seek only to
maximize the utility of the ongoing selection, overlooking
the interference between successive rounds of selection.
Motivated by this, we dissect the interaction of sequential
selection steps within a framework built on influence functions. We manage to identify a new class of second-order
influences that will gradually amplify incidental bias in the
replay buffer and compromise the selection process. To regularize the second-order effects, a novel selection objective
is proposed, which also has clear connections to two widely
adopted criteria. Furthermore, we present an efficient implementation for optimizing the proposed criterion. Experiments on multiple continual learning benchmarks demonstrate the advantage of our approach over state-of-the-art
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/
feifeiobama/InfluenceCL.

1. Introduction
The ability to continually accumulate knowledge is a
hallmark of intelligence, yet prevailing machine learning
systems struggle to remember old concepts after acquiring new ones. Continual learning has hence emerged to
tackle this issue, also known as catastrophic forgetting,
and thereby enable the learning on long task sequences
which are frequently encountered in real-world applications [15, 17]. Amongst a variety of valid methods, the
replay-based approaches [33, 39] achieve evidently strong
results by buffering a small coreset of previously seen data
for rehearsal in later stages. Due to the rigorous constraints
on memory overhead, the replay buffer needs to be carefully
maintained such that only the samples deemed most critical
* Corresponding author.

New data

New data

New data

(a)
Coreset

Selection

Coreset

Selection

Coreset

Influence

Oracle selection

Now

Regularize

(b)
Degraded selection

Greedy selection

Figure 1. (a) In continual learning, earlier coreset selection exerts
a profound influence on subsequent steps through the data flow.
(b) By ignoring this, a greedy selection strategy can degrade over
time. Therefore, we propose to model and regularize the influence
of each selection on the future.

for preserving overall performance are selected during the
learning procedure.
Despite much effort in sophisticated design of coreset
selection criteria [3,7,47,52], existing works are mostly developed for an oversimplified scenario, where each round
of selection is considered isolated and primarily focused on
refining single-round performance. For example, Borsos et
al. [7] greedily minimize the empirical risk on the currently
available subset of data. However, as shown in Fig. 1a, the
actual selection process within continual learning is rather
different in that each prior selection defines the input for
subsequent selection and therefore has an inevitable impact
on the later decision. Neglecting such interactions between
successive selection steps, as in previous practice, may result in a degraded coreset after the prolonged selection process. To maximize overall performance, an ideal continual
learning method should take into account the future influence of each round of selection, which remains unresolved
due to the obscure role of intermediate selection results.

20166

