This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLEX: Full-Body Grasping Without Full-Body Grasps
Purva Tendulkar Dı́dac Surı́s Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
{purvaten, didacsuris, vondrick}@cs.columbia.edu

Figure 1. FLEX generates diverse full-body poses for grasping 3D objects in complex scenes. It does not use any full-body grasping data,
and fully relies on body-pose priors (without grasps) and hand grasping priors (without full-body poses).

Abstract
Synthesizing 3D human avatars interacting realistically
with a scene is an important problem with applications in
AR/VR, video games, and robotics. Towards this goal, we
address the task of generating a virtual human – hands and
full body – grasping everyday objects. Existing methods approach this problem by collecting a 3D dataset of humans
interacting with objects and training on this data. However,
1) these methods do not generalize to different object positions and orientations or to the presence of furniture in
the scene, and 2) the diversity of their generated full-body
poses is very limited. In this work, we address all the above
challenges to generate realistic, diverse full-body grasps in
everyday scenes without requiring any 3D full-body grasping data. Our key insight is to leverage the existence of
both full-body pose and hand-grasping priors, composing
them using 3D geometrical constraints to obtain full-body
grasps. We empirically validate that these constraints can
generate a variety of feasible human grasps that are superior to baselines both quantitatively and qualitatively. See
our webpage for more details: flex.cs.columbia.edu.

1. Introduction
Generating realistic virtual humans is an exciting step
towards building better animation tools, video games, immersive VR technology and more realistic simulators with
human presence. Towards this goal, the research community has invested a lot of effort in collecting large-scale
3D datasets of humans [1–18]. However, the reliance on
data collection will be a major bottleneck when scaling to
broader scenarios, for two main reasons. First, data collection using optical marker-based motion capture (MoCap)
systems is quite tedious to work with. This becomes even
more complicated when objects [19] or scenes [20] are involved, requiring expertise in specialized hardware systems
[21–23], as well as commercial software [24–27]. Even
with the best combination of state-of-the-art solutions, this
process often requires multiple skilled technicians to ensure
clean data [19].
Second, it is practically impossible to capture all possible
ways of interacting with the ever-changing physical world.
The number of scenarios grows exponentially with every
considered variable (such as human pose, object class, task,

21179

