This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perspective Fields for Single Image Camera Calibration
Linyi Jin1∗ , Jianming Zhang2 , Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 , Oliver Wang2 ,
Kevin Blackburn-Matzen2 , Matthew Sticha1 , David F. Fouhey1
University of Michigan1 , Adobe Research2
1
2

(A)

{jinlinyi,msticha,fouhey}@umich.edu

{jianmzha,holdgeof,owang,matzen}@adobe.com

Horizon
(B)

Up

Horizon
(C)

Up

Horizon
(D)

Up
40°

Horizon

30°

Up

20°

Building

10°
0°
-10°

Princ. Pt.
Pitch

x

Roll

z

Figure 1. (A): a photo (credit David Clapp) with an off-centered principal point due to cropping. (B), (C): assuming traditional pinhole
model with principal point at the center, as used by [10, 24, 29], there is no way to correctly represent both up directions (wrong in B)
and horizon (wrong in C). (D): Our proposed Perspective Fields model correctly models the Up-vectors (arrows) aligned with gravity, and
Latitude values (contour line: −π/2
π/2) with 0◦ on the horizon. We can further recover camera parameters Roll −0.5◦ , Pitch
◦
◦
1.7 , FoV 64.6 and principal point at × from the prediction.

Abstract
Geometric camera calibration is often required for applications that understand the perspective of the image. We
propose Perspective Fields as a representation that models the local perspective properties of an image. Perspective Fields contain per-pixel information about the camera view, parameterized as an Up-vector and a Latitude
value. This representation has a number of advantages; it
makes minimal assumptions about the camera model and
is invariant or equivariant to common image editing operations like cropping, warping, and rotation. It is also
more interpretable and aligned with human perception. We
train a neural network to predict Perspective Fields and
the predicted Perspective Fields can be converted to calibration parameters easily. We demonstrate the robustness
of our approach under various scenarios compared with
camera calibration-based methods and show example applications in image compositing. Project page: https:
//jinlinyi.github.io/PerspectiveFields/

* Work partially done during internship at Adobe.

1. Introduction
Take a look at the left-most photo in the teaser (Fig. 1A). Can you tell if the photo is captured from an everyday
camera and if it has been geometrically edited? The horizon
location at the bottom of the image and the parallel vertical
lines of the buildings do not follow a typical camera model:
The horizon at the bottom of the image indicates the camera was tilted up (pitch ̸= 0), but this would instead produce converging vertical lines in the image due to perspective projection (Fig. 1-B). Alternatively suppose the camera
has 0 pitch, preserving the vertical lines of the buildings,
the horizon line would instead be in the middle of the image
(Fig. 1-C). This contradiction is explained by the shift of the
photo, yielding a non-center principal point, and breaking a
usual assumption of many camera calibration systems.
Many single-image camera calibration works make use
of a simplified pinhole camera model [22] that assumes a
centered principal point [10,24,29] and is parameterized by
extrinsic properties such as roll, pitch, and intrinsic properties such as field of view. However, estimating the calibration of a camera is challenging for images in the wild since
they are captured by various types of cameras and lenses.
Moreover, like the example in Fig. 1, the images are often

17307

