This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language-image learning
Mehdi Cherti1,5 §§ Romain Beaumont1 §§ Ross Wightman1,3 §§
Mitchell Wortsman4 §§ Gabriel Ilharco4 §§ Cade Gordon2
Christoph Schuhmann1 Ludwig Schmidt1,4 °° Jenia Jitsev1,5 §§°°
LAION1 UC Berkeley2 HuggingFace3 University of Washington4
Juelich Supercomputing Center (JSC), Research Center Juelich (FZJ)5
contact@laion.ai, {m.cherti,j.jitsev}@fz-juelich.de
§§ Equal first contributions, °° Equal senior contributions

Abstract
Scaling up neural networks has led to remarkable performance across a wide range of tasks. Moreover, performance
often follows reliable scaling laws as a function of training
set size, model size, and compute, which offers valuable guidance as large-scale experiments are becoming increasingly
expensive. However, previous work on scaling laws has primarily used private data & models or focused on uni-modal
language or vision learning. To address these limitations, we
investigate scaling laws for contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP) with the public LAION dataset and the opensource OpenCLIP repository. Our large-scale experiments
involve models trained on up to two billion image-text pairs
and identify power law scaling for multiple downstream tasks
including zero-shot classification, retrieval, linear probing,
and end-to-end fine-tuning. We find that the training distribution plays a key role in scaling laws as the OpenAI
and OpenCLIP models exhibit different scaling behavior
despite identical model architectures and similar training
recipes. We open-source our evaluation workflow and all
models, including the largest public CLIP models, to ensure reproducibility and make scaling laws research more
accessible. Source code and instructions to reproduce this
study is available at https://github.com/LAIONAI/scaling-laws-openclip.

1. Introduction
Large pre-trained models now achieve state-of-the-art
performance on a wide range of tasks. In particular, large
models have led to substantial advances in speech [56],
language [8, 17, 28, 57], vision [38, 84], and multi-modal
language-vision settings [33,54,55,59,62]. A key ingredient
in these breakthroughs has been self- or weakly-supervised
learning, which enabled the use of Internet-harvested training sets and reduced the need for human annotated data. In

Data

Arch. ImageNet VTAB+ COCO

CLIP [55] WIT-400M L/14
Ours
LAION-2B L/14
Ours
LAION-2B H/14

75.5
75.2
78.0

55.8
54.6
56.4

61.1
71.1
73.4

Table 1. We study the scaling behavior of large CLIP models using
fully open-source training code and data. All models in our investigation are available, including the largest public CLIP models.
This table shows zero-shot performance at 224 pixel resolution,
displaying accuracy on ImageNet [15], average accuracy on 35
VTAB+ datasets [65, 85], and image retrieval recall at 5 on MSCOCO image retrieval [46].

addition, recent pre-trained models relied on increasing the
compute, model, and data scale by orders of magnitude.
When varying model size, compute amount, and data
quantity, several papers have empirically observed that both
pre-training loss and downstream task performance reliably
improve with scale. Specifically, researchers have postulated
scaling laws in the form of power law relationships between
model performance and model compute, or data scale [35,
61, 73, 84]. Such scaling laws allow practitioners to predict
model performance for a given model and compute scale,
extrapolate to larger scales, and can be used to determine
pre-training regimes that obtain optimal model performance
for a fixed amount of compute [28, 35].
So far, the literature on empirical scaling laws has focused on language-only [28, 35, 73] or vision-only models [25, 61, 83]. In the multimodal domain of language and
vision, contrastive language-image models such as CLIP [55]
have recently achieved large performance gains in zeroimage classification, for instance improving zero-shot ImageNet accuracy from the prior state-of-the-art of 12% to
76%. Moreover, these models demonstrate unprecedented
robustness to distribution shifts compared to prior supervised
models [55, 71, 78]. However, there is currently no systematic investigation for scaling trends in contrastive language-

2818

