This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards End-to-End Generative Modeling of Long Videos
with Memory-Efficient Bidirectional Transformers
Jaehoon Yoo1 , Semin Kim1 , Doyup Lee2 , Chiheon Kim2 , Seunghoon Hong1
1
KAIST, 2 Kakao Brain
{wogns98, kimsm1121, seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr, {damien.re, frost.conv}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Autoregressive transformers have shown remarkable
success in video generation. However, the transformers are
prohibited from directly learning the long-term dependency
in videos due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention,
and inherently suffering from slow inference time and error propagation due to the autoregressive process. In this
paper, we propose Memory-efficient Bidirectional Transformer (MeBT) for end-to-end learning of long-term dependency in videos and fast inference. Based on recent advances in bidirectional transformers, our method learns to
decode the entire spatio-temporal volume of a video in parallel from partially observed patches. The proposed transformer achieves a linear time complexity in both encoding
and decoding, by projecting observable context tokens into
a fixed number of latent tokens and conditioning them to
decode the masked tokens through the cross-attention. Empowered by linear complexity and bidirectional modeling,
our method demonstrates significant improvement over the
autoregressive transformers for generating moderately long
videos in both quality and speed. Videos and code are available at https://sites.google.com/view/mebt-cvpr2023.

1. Introduction
Modeling the generative process of videos is an important yet challenging problem. Compared to images, generating convincing videos requires not only producing highquality frames but also maintaining their semantic structures and dynamics coherently over long timescale [11, 16,
27, 36, 38, 54].
Recently, autoregressive transformers on discrete representation of videos have shown promising generative modeling performances [11,32,51,53]. Such methods generally
involve two stages, where the video frames are first turned
into discrete tokens through vector quantization, and then
their sequential dynamics are modeled by an autoregressive
transformer. Powered by the flexibility of discrete distri-

butions and the expressiveness of transformer architecture,
these methods demonstrate impressive results in learning
and synthesizing high-fidelity videos.
However, autoregressive transformers for videos suffer
from critical scaling issues in both training and inference.
During training, due to the quadratic cost of self-attention,
the transformers are forced to learn the joint distribution of
frames entirely from short videos (e.g., 16 frames [11, 53])
and cannot directly learn the statistical dependencies of
frames over long timescales. During inference, the models are challenged by two issues of autoregressive generative process – its serial process significantly slows down
the inference speed, and perhaps more importantly, autoregressive prediction is prone to error propagation where the
prediction error of the frames accumulates over time.
To (partially) address the issues, prior works proposed
improved transformers for generative modeling of videos,
which are categorized as the following: (a) Employing
sparse attention to improve scaling during training [12, 16,
51], (b) Hierarchical approaches that employ separate models in different frame rates to generate long videos with
a smaller computation budget [11, 16], and (c) Removing autoregression by formulating the generative process as
masked token prediction and training a bidirectional transformer [12, 13]. While each approach is effective in addressing specific limitations in autoregressive transformers,
none of them provides comprehensive solutions to aforementioned problems – (a, b) still inherits the problems in
autoregressive inference and cannot leverage the long-term
dependency by design due to the local attention window,
and (c) is not appropriate to learn long-range dependency
due to the quadratic computation cost. We believe that an
alternative that jointly resolves all the issues would provide
a promising approach towards powerful and efficient video
generative modeling with transformers.
In this work, we propose an efficient transformer for
video synthesis that can fully leverage the long-range dependency of video frames during training, while being able
to achieve fast generation and robustness to error propagation. We achieve the former with a linear complexity ar-

22888

