This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explaining Image Classifiers with Multiscale Directional Image Representation
Stefan Kolek1 , Robert Windesheim1 , Hector Andrade-Loarca1 , Gitta Kutyniok1,2 , Ron Levie3
1
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Department of Mathematics
2
University of Tromsø, Department of Physics and Technology
3
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Department of Mathematics
{kolek,windesheim,andrade,kutyniok}@math.lmu.de, levieron@technion.ac.il
Abstract
Image classifiers are known to be difficult to interpret
and therefore require explanation methods to understand
their decisions. We present ShearletX, a novel mask explanation method for image classifiers based on the shearlet transform – a multiscale directional image representation. Current mask explanation methods are regularized
by smoothness constraints that protect against undesirable
fine-grained explanation artifacts. However, the smoothness of a mask limits its ability to separate fine-detail patterns, that are relevant for the classifier, from nearby nuisance patterns, that do not affect the classifier. ShearletX
solves this problem by avoiding smoothness regularization
all together, replacing it by shearlet sparsity constraints.
The resulting explanations consist of a few edges, textures,
and smooth parts of the original image, that are the most
relevant for the decision of the classifier. To support our
method, we propose a mathematical definition for explanation artifacts and an information theoretic score to evaluate
the quality of mask explanations. We demonstrate the superiority of ShearletX over previous mask based explanation
methods using these new metrics, and present exemplary
situations where separating fine-detail patterns allows explaining phenomena that were not explainable before.

1. Introduction
Modern image classifiers are known to be difficult to
explain. Saliency maps comprise a well-established explainability tool that highlights important image regions
for the classifier and helps interpret classification decisions. An important saliency approach frames saliency
map computation as an optimization problem over masks
[8, 10, 13, 14, 18, 24, 29]. The explanation mask is optimized to keep only parts of the image that suffice to retain
the classification decision. However, Fong and Vedaldi [14]
showed that an unregularized explanation mask is very susceptible to explanation artifacts and is hence unreliable.

Figure 1. Left column: ImageNet samples with prediction. Middle column: Smooth pixel mask explanation from Fong et al. [13].
Right column: ShearletX (ours). Retained probability is computed
as class probability after masking divided by class probability before masking. ShearletX is the first mask explanation method that
can separate fine-detail patterns, that are relevant for the classifier,
from nearby patterns that are irrelevant, without producing artifacts.

Therefore, current practice [8,13,14] heavily regularizes the
explanation masks to be smooth. The smooth explanation
masks can communicate useful explanatory information by
roughly localizing the relevant image region. However, the
pattern that is relevant for the classifier is often overlaid on
patterns that do not affect the classifier. In such a situation the mask cannot effectively separate the relevant pattern from the nuisance pattern, due to the smoothness con1
18600

