This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing Animatable Categories from Videos
Gengshan Yang Chaoyang Wang N Dinesh Reddy Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University
sphynx cat

Morphology

Color: Skinning weights

Differentiable
Rendering

cheetah

Skeleton
t=0s

Internet Videos of a Category

t=2s

Articulations & Deformations

Canonical Space

Motion Transfer

Figure 1. Given videos of a deformable category and a skeleton, we reconstruct an animatable 3D model that factorizes variations across
instances (e.g., cheetah’s and sphynx’s are both cats but with different shape morphology, skeleton dimensions, and texture) from
time-specific variations within an instance (e.g., skeleton articulations and elastic shape deformation). Left: Input videos; Middle-left: 3D
shape, skeleton, and skinning weights (visualized as surface colors) in the canonical space; Middle-right: Disentangled between-instance
and within-instance variations over time. Right: Morphology and motion transferred across the two instances.

Abstract
Building animatable 3D models is challenging due to the
need for 3D scans, laborious registration, and rigging. Recently, differentiable rendering provides a pathway to obtain high-quality 3D models from monocular videos, but
these are limited to rigid categories or single instances. We
present RAC, a method to build category-level 3D models
from monocular videos, disentangling variations over instances and motion over time. Three key ideas are introduced to solve this problem: (1) specializing a categorylevel skeleton to instances, (2) a method for latent space
regularization that encourages shared structure across a
category while maintaining instance details, and (3) using 3D background models to disentangle objects from the
background. We build 3D models for humans, cats and dogs
given monocular videos. Project page: https://gengshany.github.io/rac-www/.

1. Introduction
We aim to build animatable 3D models for deformable
object categories. Prior work has done so for targeted categories such as people (e.g., SMPL [1, 30]) and quadruped
animals (e.g., SMAL [4]), but such methods appear challenging to scale due to the need of 3D supervision and registration. Recently, test-time optimization through differ-

entiable rendering [40, 41, 44, 56, 69] provides a pathway
to generate high-quality 3D models of deformable objects
and scenes from monocular videos. However, such models
are typically built independently for each object instance or
scene. In contrast, we would like to build category models
that can generate different instances along with deformations, given causally-captured video collections.
Though scalable, such data is challenging to leverage
in practice. One challenge is how to learn the morphological variation of instances within a category. For example, huskys and corgis are both dogs, but have different body shapes, skeleton dimensions, and texture appearance. Such variations are difficult to disentangle from
the variations within a single instance, e.g., as a dog articulates, stretches its muscles, and even moves into different illumination conditions. Approaches for disentangling
such factors require enormous efforts in capture and registration [1, 5], and doing so without explicit supervision
remains an open challenge.
Another challenge arises from the impoverished nature
of in-the-wild videos: objects are often partially observable at a limited number of viewpoints, and input signals
such as segmentation masks can be inaccurate for such “inthe-wild” data. When dealing with partial or impoverished
video inputs, one would want the model to listen to the common structures learned across a category – e.g., dogs have
two ears. On the other hand, one would want the model to

16995

