This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuro-Modulated Hebbian Learning for Fully Test-Time Adaptation
Yushun Tang1,2 , Ce Zhang1 , Heng Xu1 , Shuoshuo Chen1 ,
Jie Cheng2 , Luziwei Leng2 , Qinghai Guo2* , Zhihai He1,3*
1

Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Advanced Computing and Storage Laboratory, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
3
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{tangys2022, zhangc2019, xuh2022, chenss2021}@mail.sustech.edu.cn
{chengjie8, lengluziwei, guoqinghai}@huawei.com, hezh@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Fully test-time adaptation aims to adapt the network
model based on sequential analysis of input samples during the inference stage to address the cross-domain performance degradation problem of deep neural networks.
We take inspiration from the biological plausibility learning where the neuron responses are tuned based on a local synapse-change procedure and activated by competitive lateral inhibition rules. Based on these feed-forward
learning rules, we design a soft Hebbian learning process
which provides an unsupervised and effective mechanism
for online adaptation. We observe that the performance
of this feed-forward Hebbian learning for fully test-time
adaptation can be significantly improved by incorporating
a feedback neuro-modulation layer. It is able to fine-tune
the neuron responses based on the external feedback generated by the error back-propagation from the top inference
layers. This leads to our proposed neuro-modulated Hebbian learning (NHL) method for fully test-time adaptation.
With the unsupervised feed-forward soft Hebbian learning
being combined with a learned neuro-modulator to capture
feedback from external responses, the source model can be
effectively adapted during the testing process. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed method can significantly improve the adaptation performance of network models and outperforms existing stateof-the-art methods.

main and the testing data in the target domain [40]. To address the performance degradation problem, unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) [16, 38, 50] has been proposed to
fine-tune the model parameters with a large amount of unlabeled testing data in an unsupervised manner. Source-free
UDA methods [33, 35, 67] aim to adapt the network model
without the need to access the source-domain samples.
There are two major categories of source-free UDA
methods. The first category needs to access the whole test
dataset on the target domain to achieve their adaptation performance [35, 67]. Notice that, in many practical scenarios
when we deploy the network model on client devices, the
network model does not have access to the whole dataset in
the target domain since collecting and constructing the test
dataset on the client side is very costly. The second type of
method, called fully test-time adaptation, only needs access
to live streams of test samples [41, 64, 66], which is able to
dynamically adapt the source model on the fly during the
testing process. Existing methods for fully test-time adaptation mainly focus on constructing various loss functions
to regulate the inference process and adapt the model based
on error back-propagation. For example, the TENT method
[66] updates the batch normalization module by minimizing
an entropy loss. The TTT method [64] updates the feature
extractor parameters according to a self-supervised loss on
a proxy learning task. The TTT++ method [37] introduces a
feature alignment strategy based on online moment matching.

1.1. Challenges in Fully Test-Time UDA

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have achieved great
success in various machine learning tasks, their performance tends to degrade significantly when there is data
shift [27, 55] between the training data in the source do* Corresponding authors.

We recognize that most of the domain variations, such
as changes in the visual scenes and image transformations
or corruptions, are early layers of features in the semantic
hierarchy [66]. They can be effectively captured and modeled by lower layers of the network model. From the perspective of machine learning, early representations through
the lower layer play an important role to capture the pos-

3728

