This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Unbiased Volume Rendering of Neural Implicit Surfaces with
Geometry Priors
Yongqiang Zhang1 , Zhipeng Hu1 , Haoqian Wu1 , Minda Zhao1 , Lincheng Li1 *, Zhengxia Zou2 ,
Changjie Fan1
1
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, 2 Beihang University
{zhangyongqiang02,zphu,wuhaoqian,zhaominda01,lilincheng}@corp.netease.com,
zhengxiazou@buaa.edu.cn, fanchangjie@corp.netease.com

Abstract
Learning surface by neural implicit rendering has been
a promising way for multi-view reconstruction in recent
years. Existing neural surface reconstruction methods,
such as NeuS [24] and VolSDF [32], can produce reliable
meshes from multi-view posed images. Although they build
a bridge between volume rendering and Signed Distance
Function (SDF), the accuracy is still limited. In this paper, we argue that this limited accuracy is due to the bias of
their volume rendering strategies, especially when the viewing direction is close to be tangent to the surface. We revise
and provide an additional condition for the unbiased volume rendering. Following this analysis, we propose a new
rendering method by scaling the SDF field with the angle
between the viewing direction and the surface normal vector. Experiments on simulated data indicate that our rendering method reduces the bias of SDF-based volume rendering. Moreover, there still exists non-negligible bias when
the learnable standard deviation of SDF is large at early
stage, which means that it is hard to supervise the rendered
depth with depth priors. Alternatively we supervise zerolevel set with surface points obtained from a pre-trained
Multi-View Stereo network. We evaluate our method on the
DTU dataset and show that it outperforms the state-of-thearts neural implicit surface methods without mask supervision.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is an important task in 3D games and
AR/VR applications. As a key technique in computer vision and graphics, recovering surfaces and textures from
Multi-View calibrated RGB images has been widely studied
in recent decades. Early unsupervised Multi-View Stereo
(MVS) approaches [14, 20] provide solutions through a
* Corresponding author

certain multistage pipeline, including grouping the related
views, depth prediction, filtering with photometric consistency and geometry consistency, fusion of points from
different views, meshing the dense points by off-the-shelf
methods such as screened Poisson Surface Reconstruction
[8], and texture mapping finally.
Later MVS networks [5,20,27,36] are developed rapidly
benefiting from the available large-scale 3D datasets. This
kind of MVS networks use Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) to predict depth maps effectively, then follow the
traditional pipeline to fuse a global dense point cloud and
mesh it. However, MVS networks suffer from texture-less
regions and sudden depth changes, so there usually exist
many holes in the recovered meshes.
Recently, neural implicit surface and differentiable rendering methods present a promising way to improve and
simplify the progress of the Multi-View 3D reconstruction.
The surfaces are represented as Signed Distance Functions
(SDF) [18, 24, 32, 33] or occupancy field [16, 17]. At the
same time, neural radiance field [13, 35] are proposed with
different volume rendering. The neural surface-based rendering method can recover reliable and smooth surfaces, but
it is hard to train without mask supervision. On the contrary,
the different volume rendering can achieve good 2D views
without mask supervision, but the quality of 3D geometry
is rather coarse.
Is there some connections between the SDF field and
occupancy field? NeuS [24] and VolSDF [32] point that
the connection can be conducted with a certain Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF). Thanks to this significant
progress, it is able to learn 3D surfaces effectively from neural implicit surface with the self-supervised volume rendering. The necessary input can only be well-posed 2D images.
Masks could be removed, because it is hard to obtain accurate masks for many complex objects in the real world.
Although these great methods have made big progress
on 3D reconstruction from calibrated multi-view images,

4359

