This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention-Based Point Cloud Edge Sampling
Chengzhi Wu1 Junwei Zheng1 Julius Pfrommer2,3 Jürgen Beyerer1,2,3
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany 2 Fraunhofer IOSB, Germany
3
Fraunhofer Center for Machine Learning, Germany

1

{chengzhi.wu, junwei.zheng}@kit.edu,

{julius.pfrommer, juergen.beyerer}@iosb.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
Point cloud sampling is a less explored research topic
for this data representation. The most commonly used sampling methods are still classical random sampling and farthest point sampling. With the development of neural networks, various methods have been proposed to sample point
clouds in a task-based learning manner. However, these
methods are mostly generative-based, rather than selecting
points directly using mathematical statistics. Inspired by
the Canny edge detection algorithm for images and with
the help of the attention mechanism, this paper proposes a
non-generative Attention-based Point cloud Edge Sampling
method (APES), which captures salient points in the point
cloud outline. Both qualitative and quantitative experimental results show the superior performance of our sampling
method on common benchmark tasks.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are a widely used data representation in various domains including autonomous driving, augmented reality, and robotics. Due to the typically large amount of
data, the sampling of a representative subset of points is a
fundamental and important task in 3D computer vision.
Apart from random sampling (RS), other classical point
sampling methods including grid sampling, uniform sampling, and geometric sampling have been well-established.
Grid sampling samples points with regular grids and thus
cannot control the number of sampled points exactly. Uniform sampling takes the points in the point cloud evenly
and is more popular due to its robustness. Farthest point
sampling (FPS) [9, 29] is the most famous of them and has
been widely used in many current methods when downsampling operations are required [19, 34, 47, 52, 56]. Geometric sampling samples points based on local geometry, such
as the curvature of the underlying shape. Another example
of Inverse Density Importance Sampling (IDIS) [11] samples points whose distance sum values with neighbors are
smaller. But this method requires the point cloud to have a
high density throughout, and it performs even worse when
the raw point cloud has an uneven distribution.

Figure 1. Similar to the Canny edge detection algorithm that detects edge pixels in images, our proposed APES algorithm samples
edge points which indicate the outline of the input point clouds.
The blue grids/spheres represent the local patches for given center
pixels/points.

In addition to the above mathematical statistics-based
methods, with the development of deep learning techniques,
several neural network-based methods have been proposed
for task-oriented sampling, including S-Net [8], SampleNet
[16], DA-Net [21], etc. They use simple multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to generate new point cloud sets of desired
sizes as resampled results, supplemented by different postprocessing operations. MOPS-Net [36] learns a sampling
transformation matrix first, and then generates the sampled
point cloud by multiplying it with the original point cloud.
However, all these methods are generative-based, rather
than selecting points directly. On the other hand, there is an
increasing body of work designing neural network-based local feature aggregation operators for point clouds. Although
some of them (e.g., PointCNN [19], PointASNL [52], GSS
[53]) decrease the point number while learning latent features, they can hardly be considered as sampling methods
in the true sense as no real spatial points exist during the
processing. Moreover, none of the above methods consider
shape outlines as special features.
In this paper, we propose a point cloud edge sampling
method that combines neural network-based learning and
mathematical statistics-based direct point selecting. One
key to the success of 2D image processing with neural networks is that they can detect primary edges and use them
to form shape contours implicitly in the latent space [55].

5333

