This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RobustNeRF: Ignoring Distractors with Robust Losses4
Sara Sabour1,2 Suhani Vora1 Daniel Duckworth1 Ivan Krasin1
David J. Fleet1,2 Andrea Tagliasacchi1,2,3
1

Google Research, Brain Team

2

University of Toronto

3

Simon Fraser University

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) excel at synthesizing new
views given multi-view, calibrated images of a static scene.
When scenes include distractors, which are not persistent
during image capture (moving objects, lighting variations,
shadows), artifacts appear as view-dependent effects or
’floaters’. To cope with distractors, we advocate a form
of robust estimation for NeRF training, modeling distractors in training data as outliers of an optimization problem.
Our method successfully removes outliers from a scene and
improves upon our baselines, on synthetic and real-world
scenes. Our technique is simple to incorporate in modern
NeRF frameworks, with few hyper-parameters. It does not
assume a priori knowledge of the types of distractors, and
is instead focused on the optimization problem rather than
pre-processing or modeling transient objects. More results
at https://robustnerf.github.io/public.

1. Introduction
The ability to understand the structure of a static 3D
scene from 2D images alone is a fundamental problem is
computer vision [44]. It finds applications in AR/VR for
mapping virtual environments [6, 36, 61], in autonomous
robotics for action planning [1], and in photogrammetry to
create digital copies of real-world objects [34].
Neural fields [55] have recently revolutionized this classical task, by storing 3D representations within the weights
of a neural network [39]. These representations are optimized by back-propagating image differences. When the
fields store view-dependent radiance and volumetric rendering is employed [21], we can capture 3D scenes with
photo-realistic accuracy, and we refer to the generated representation as Neural Radiance Fields, or NeRF [25]).
Training of NeRF models generally requires a large
collection of images equipped with accurate camera calibration, which can often be recovered via structure-frommotion [37]. Behind its simplicity, NeRF hides several assumptions. As models are typically trained to minimize
error in RGB color space, it is of paramount importance
4 Work done at Google Research.

Figure 1. NeRF assumes photometric consistency in the observed
images of a scene. Violations of this assumption, as with the images in the top row, yield reconstructed scenes with inconsistent
content in the form of “floaters” (highlighted with ellipses). We
introduce a simple technique that produces clean reconstruction
by automatically ignoring distractors without explicit supervision.

that images are photometrically consistent – two photos
taken from the same vantage point should be identical up
to noise. Unless one employs a method explicitly accounting for it [35], one should manually hold a camera’s focus,
exposure, white-balance, and ISO fixed.
However, properly configuring one’s camera is not all
that is required to capture high-quality NeRFs – it is also
important to avoid distractors: anything that isn’t persistent
throughout the entire capture session. Distractors come in
many shapes and forms, from the hard-shadows cast by the
operators as they explore the scene to a pet or child casually
walking within the camera’s field of view. Distractors are
tedious to remove manually, as this would require pixel-bypixel labeling. They are also tedious to detect, as typical
NeRF scenes are trained from hundreds of input images,
and the types of distractors are not known a priori. If distractors are ignored, the quality of the reconstruction scene
suffers significantly; see Figure 1.
In a typical capture session, it is difficult to to capture
multiple images of the same scene from the same viewpoint,
rendering distractors challenging to model mathematically.
As such, while view-dependent effects are what give NeRF
their realistic look, how can the model tell the difference
between a distractor and a view-dependent effect?

20626

