This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIDNet: A Real-time Semantic Segmentation Network Inspired by PID
Controllers
Jiacong Xu
Zixiang Xiong
Shankar P. Bhattacharyya
Dept of ECE, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843
jxu155@jhu.edu, zx@ece.tamu.edu, spb@tamu.edu

Abstract
Two-branch network architecture has shown its efficiency and effectiveness in real-time semantic segmentation
tasks. However, direct fusion of high-resolution details and
low-frequency context has the drawback of detailed features
being easily overwhelmed by surrounding contextual information. This overshoot phenomenon limits the improvement
of the segmentation accuracy of existing two-branch models. In this paper, we make a connection between Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Proportional-IntegralDerivative (PID) controllers and reveal that a two-branch
network is equivalent to a Proportional-Integral (PI) controller, which inherently suffers from similar overshoot issues. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel threebranch network architecture: PIDNet, which contains three
branches to parse detailed, context and boundary information, respectively, and employs boundary attention to guide
the fusion of detailed and context branches. Our family of
PIDNets achieve the best trade-off between inference speed
and accuracy and their accuracy surpasses all the existing
models with similar inference speed on the Cityscapes and
CamVid datasets. Specifically, PIDNet-S achieves 78.6%
mIOU with inference speed of 93.2 FPS on Cityscapes and
80.1% mIOU with speed of 153.7 FPS on CamVid.

1. Introduction
Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) Controller is a
classic concept that has been widely applied in modern dynamic systems and processes such as robotic manipulation
[3], chemical processes [24], and power systems [25]. Even
though many advanced control strategies with better control performance have been developed in recent years, PID
controller is still the go-to choice for most industry applications due to its simplicity and robustness. Furthermore, the
idea of PID controller has been extended to many other ar1 Work supported in part by NSF grants ECCS-1923803 and CCF2007527.

Figure 1. The trade-off between inference speed and accuracy (reported) for real-time models on the Cityscapes [12] test set. Blue
stars refer to our models while green triangles represent others.

eas. For example, researchers introduced the PID concept to
image denoising [32], stochastic gradient decent [1] and numerical optimization [50] for better algorithm performance.
In this paper, we devise a novel architecture for real-time semantic segmentation tasks by employing the basic concept
of PID controller and demonstrate that the performance of
our model surpasses all the previous works and achieves the
best trade-off between inference speed and accuracy, as illustrated in Figure 1, by extensive experiments.
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task for visual
scene parsing with the objective of assigning each pixel in
the input image to a specific class label. With the increasing demand of intelligence, semantic segmentation has become the basic perception component for applications such
as autonomous driving [16], medical imaging diagnosis [2]
and remote sensing imagery [54]. Starting from FCN [31],
which achieved great improvement over traditional methods, deep convnets gradually dominated the semantic segmentation field and many representative models have been
proposed [4, 6, 40, 48, 59, 60]. For better performance, various strategies were introduced to equip these models with
the capability of learning contextual dependencies among

19529

