This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Semantic-Aware Knowledge Guidance for
Low-Light Image Enhancement
Yuhui Wu1 , Chen Pan1 , Guoqing Wang1 *, Yang Yang1 , Jiwei Wei1 , Chongyi Li2 , Heng Tao Shen1
1
Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
wuyuhui132@gmail.com; panchen0103@163.com; gqwang0420@hotmail.com;
dlyyang@gmail.com; mathematic6@gmail.com; chongyi.li@ntu.edu.sg; shenhengtao@hotmail.com
Low-light

Normal-light

Low-light

Normal-light

Low-light

Normal-light

28

29

LLFlow-L-SKF(Ours)
LLFlow-S-SKF(Ours)

LLFlow-L-SKF(Ours)
LLFlow-S-SKF(Ours)

PSNR

24

HWMNet-SKF(Ours)
SNR-Net-SKF(Ours)
LLFlow-L
SNR-Net(CVPR 22)
(AAAI 22)
HWMNet(ICIP 22)
LLFlow-S(AAAI 22)
DRBN-SKF(Ours)

22

27

LLFlow-L(AAAI 22)
LLFlow-S(AAAI 22)

25
PSNR

26

23

HWMNet-SKF(Ours)

DRBN-SKF(Ours)
SNR-Net-SKF(Ours)

20

KinD++-SKF(Ours)

21

DRBN(CVPR 20)
KinD++(IJCV 20)

w/o Semantic

w/ Semantic

w/o Semantic

w/ Semantic

w/o Semantic

w/ Semantic

18
0.80

(a) Visual comparison on various scenes including car, human and sky.

0.82

0.84
SSIM

0.86

0.88

19
0.79

HWMNet(ICIP 22)

SNR-Net(CVPR 22)

DRBN(CVPR 20)
KinD++-SKF(Ours)
KinD++(IJCV 20)
0.83

0.86
SSIM

0.89

0.91

(b) Performance comparison on LOL/LOL-v2 (left/right) datasets

Figure 1. Motivation and superiority. (a) The enhancement results (bottom row) without semantic priors show color deviations (e.g., the
black car turns gray). (b) Our SKF provides remarkable performance boost on LOL/LOL-v2 datasets in terms of PSNR/SSIM.

Abstract
Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) investigates how
to improve illumination and produce normal-light images.
The majority of existing methods improve low-light images
via a global and uniform manner, without taking into account the semantic information of different regions. Without semantic priors, a network may easily deviate from a
region’s original color. To address this issue, we propose a
novel semantic-aware knowledge-guided framework (SKF)
that can assist a low-light enhancement model in learning
rich and diverse priors encapsulated in a semantic segmentation model. We concentrate on incorporating semantic
knowledge from three key aspects: a semantic-aware embedding module that wisely integrates semantic priors in
feature representation space, a semantic-guided color histogram loss that preserves color consistency of various instances, and a semantic-guided adversarial loss that produces more natural textures by semantic priors. Our SKF
is appealing in acting as a general framework in LLIE
task. Extensive experiments show that models equipped
with the SKF significantly outperform the baselines on multiple datasets and our SKF generalizes to different models
and scenes well. The code is available at Semantic-AwareLow-Light-Image-Enhancement

1. Introduction
In real world, low-light imaging is fairly common due to
unavoidable environmental or technical constraints such as

insufficient illumination and limited exposure time. Lowlight images not only have poor visibility for human perception, but also are unsuitable for subsequent multimedia computing and downstream vision tasks designed for
high-quality images [4, 9, 36]. Thus, low-light image enhancement (LLIE) is proposed to reveal buried details in
low-light images and avoid degraded performance in subsequent vision tasks. Mainstream traditional methods for
LLIE include Histogram Equalization-based methods [2]
and Retinex model-based methods [18].
Recently, many deep learning-based LLIE methods have
proposed, such as end-to-end frameworks [5,7,34,45,46,48]
and Retinex-based frameworks [29, 41, 43, 44, 49, 53, 54].
Benefiting from their ability in modeling the mapping between the low-light and high-quality image, deep LLIE
methods commonly achieve better results than traditional
approaches. However, existing methods typically improve
low-light images globally and uniformly, without taking
into account the semantic information of different regions,
which is crucial for enhancement. As shown in Fig. 1(a),
a network that lacks the utilization of semantic priors can
easily deviate from a region’s original hue [22]. Furthermore, studies have demonstrated the significance of incorporating semantic priors into low-light enhancement. Fan et
al. [8] utilize semantic map as prior and incorporated it into
the feature representation space, thereby enhancing image
quality. Rather than relying on optimizing intermediate fea-

1662

