This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GradMA: A Gradient-Memory-based Accelerated Federated Learning with
Alleviated Catastrophic Forgetting
Kangyang Luo, Xiang Li*, Yunshi Lan, Ming Gao
East China Normal University
Shanghai, China
52205901003@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {xiangli, yslan, mgao}@dase.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a de facto machine learning area and received rapid increasing research
interests from the community. However, catastrophic forgetting caused by data heterogeneity and partial participation
poses distinctive challenges for FL, which are detrimental
to the performance. To tackle the problems, we propose a
new FL approach (namely GradMA), which takes inspiration from continual learning to simultaneously correct the
server-side and worker-side update directions as well as
take full advantage of server’s rich computing and memory resources. Furthermore, we elaborate a memory reduction strategy to enable GradMA to accommodate FL with
a large scale of workers. We then analyze convergence of
GradMA theoretically under the smooth non-convex setting
and show that its convergence rate achieves a linear speed
up w.r.t the increasing number of sampled active workers.
At last, our extensive experiments on various image classification tasks show that GradMA achieves significant performance gains in accuracy and communication efficiency
compared to SOTA baselines. We provide our code here:
https://github.com/lkyddd/GradMA.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [18, 26] is a privacy-preserving
distributed machine learning scheme in which workers
jointly participate in the collaborative training of a centralized model by sharing model information (parameters or
updates) rather than their private datasets. In recent years,
FL has shown its potential to facilitate real-world applications, which falls broadly into two categories [10]: the
cross-silo FL and the cross-device FL. The cross-silo FL
corresponds to a relatively small number of reliable workers, usually organizations, such as healthcare facilities [9]
and financial institutions [41], etc. In contrast, for the cross* Corresponding author

device FL, the number of workers can be very huge and
unreliable, such as mobile devices [26], IoT [27] and autonomous driving cars [22], among others. In this paper, we
focus on cross-device FL.
The privacy-preserving and communication-efficient
properties of the cross-device FL make it promising, but it
also confronts practical challenges arising from data heterogeneity (i.e., non-iid data distribution across workers) and
partial participation [5, 12, 20, 39]. Specifically, the datasets
held by real-world workers are generated locally according to their individual circumstances, resulting in the distribution of data on different workers being not identical.
Moreover, owing to the flexibility of worker participation
in many scenarios (e.g., IoT and mobile devices), workers
can join or leave the FL system at will, thus making the set
of active workers random and time-varying across communication rounds. Note that we consider a worker participates
or is active at round t (i.e., the index of the communication
round) if it is able to complete the computation task and
send back model information at the end of round t.
The above-mentioned challenges mainly bring catastrophic forgetting (CF) [25, 30, 37] to FL. In a typical FL
process, represented by FedAvg [26], a server updates the
centralized model by iteratively aggregating the model information from workers that generally is trained over several steps locally before being sent to the server. On the
one hand, due to data heterogeneity, the model is updated
on private data in local training, which is prone to overfit
the current knowledge and forget the previous experience,
thus leading to CF [8]. In other words, the updates of the local models are prone to drift and diverge increasingly from
the update of the centralized model [12]. This can seriously
deteriorate the performance of the centralized model. To
ameliorate this issue, a variety of existing efforts regularize the objectives of the local models to align the centralized optimization objective [1, 12, 13, 17, 19]. On the other
hand, the server can only aggregate model information from
active workers per communication round caused by partial
participation. In this case, many existing works directly dis-

3708

