This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What Happened 3 Seconds Ago? Inferring the Past with Thermal Imaging
Zitian Tang1
1

Wenjie Ye1

IIIS, Tsinghua University

2

Wei-Chiu Ma2

CSAIL, MIT

3

Hang Zhao1,3

Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

What was
the person
doing?

Now

Choices

Now

Choices

Figure 1. Can you tell what the person was doing 3 seconds ago? Inferring past human motions based on RGB images suffers from
huge uncertainty. See the answers in Fig. 2.

Abstract
Inferring past human motion from RGB images is challenging due to the inherent uncertainty of the prediction
problem. Thermal images, on the other hand, encode
traces of past human-object interactions left in the environment via thermal radiation measurement. Based on
this observation, we collect the first RGB-Thermal dataset
for human motion analysis, dubbed Thermal-IM. Then
we develop a three-stage neural network model for accurate past human pose estimation. Comprehensive experiments show that thermal cues significantly reduce the ambiguities of this task, and the proposed model achieves
remarkable performance. The dataset is available at
https://github.com/ZitianTang/Thermal-IM.

1. Introduction
Imagine we have a robot assistant at home. When it
comes to offering help, it may wonder what we did in the
past. For instance, it wonders which cups were used, then
cleans them. Or it can better predict our future actions once
the past is known. But how can it know this? Consider
the images in Fig. 1. Can you tell what happened 3 seconds ago? An image contains a wealth of information. The
robot may extract geometric and semantic cues, infer the
affordance of the scene, and imagine how humans would
interact and fit in the environment. Therefore, in the left
image, it can confidently deduce that the person was sitting
on the couch; however, it is not sure where. Similarly, it can
imagine many possibilities in the right image but cannot be
Corresponding to: hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

certain. Indeed, given a single RGB image, the problem is
inherently ill-posed.
In this paper, we investigate the use of a novel sensor
modality, thermal data, for past human behavior analysis.
Thermal images are typically captured by infrared cameras,
with their pixel values representing the temperature at the
corresponding locations in the scene. As heat transfer occurs whenever there is contact or interaction between human bodies and their environment, thermal images serve as
strong indicators of where and what has happened. Consider the thermal images in Fig. 2. With thermal images, we
can instantly determine where the person was sitting. This
is because the objects they contacted were heated, leaving
behind bright marks. If a robot assistant is equipped with
a thermal camera, it can more effectively infer the past and
provide better assistance. Otherwise, we may need a camera
installed in every room and keep them operational throughout the day.
With these motivations in mind, we propose to develop a
system that, given an indoor thermal image with a human in
it, generates several possible poses of the person N (N = 3)
seconds ago. To achieve this goal, we first collect a Thermal
Indoor Motion dataset (Thermal-IM) composed of RGB,
thermal, and depth videos of indoor human motion with estimated human poses. In each video, the actor performs
various indoor movements (e.g., walking, sitting, kneeling)
and interacts with different objects (e.g., couch, chair, cabinet, table) in a room. Then we design a novel, interpretable
model for past human pose estimation. The model consists
of three stages: the first stage proposes where the human
might have been 3 seconds ago, leveraging the most discernible information in thermal images. The second stage
infers what action the human was performing. Finally, the

17111

