This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Attention Unit: Towards Efficient Spatiotemporal Predictive Learning
Cheng Tan∗ , Zhangyang Gao,* Lirong Wu, Yongjie Xu, Jun Xia, Siyuan Li, Stan Z. Li†
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
{tancheng,gaozhangyang,wulirong,xuyongjie,xiajun,lisiyuan,stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatiotemporal predictive learning aims to generate future frames by learning from historical frames. In this paper, we investigate existing methods and present a general
framework of spatiotemporal predictive learning, in which
the spatial encoder and decoder capture intra-frame features and the middle temporal module catches inter-frame
correlations. While the mainstream methods employ recurrent units to capture long-term temporal dependencies, they
suffer from low computational efficiency due to their unparallelizable architectures. To parallelize the temporal module, we propose the Temporal Attention Unit (TAU), which
decomposes temporal attention into intra-frame statical attention and inter-frame dynamical attention. Moreover,
while the mean squared error loss focuses on intra-frame
errors, we introduce a novel differential divergence regularization to take inter-frame variations into account. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
enables the derived model to achieve competitive performance on various spatiotemporal prediction benchmarks.

supervised learning, spatiotemporal predictive learning that
predicts future frames from past frames at the videolevel [6, 19, 27, 46, 60, 63].

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

ConvLSTM

3D Conv

Temporal
Module

ConvLSTM

E3D-LSTM

Spatial
Encoder

ConvLSTM

3D Conv

(b) ConvLSTM

(c) E3D-LSTM

Reverse
Flow

Conv

ST-LSTM

TAU

Conv

Invertible
Flow

Conv

(d) PhyDNet

(e) CrevNet

(f) Ours

(a) General framework

Conv

Conv
LSTM

1. Introduction
The last decade has witnessed revolutionary advances in
deep learning across various supervised learning tasks such
as image classification [34,52,87], object detection [73,75],
computational biology [21, 22, 43, 83, 84], and etc. Despite
significant breakthroughs in supervised learning, which relies on large-scale labeled datasets, the potential of unsupervised learning remains largely untapped. Self-supervised
learning that designs pretext tasks to produce labels derived
from the data itself is recognized as a subset of unsupervised
learning. In the context of self-supervised learning, contrastive self-supervised learning [7, 8, 28, 33, 85, 86, 92, 104]
predicts the noise contrastive estimation from predefined
positive or negative pairs, and masked self-supervised learning [17, 32, 45, 51, 57, 102] predicts the masked patches
from the visible patches. Unlike these image-level self-

Spatial
Decoder

PhyCell

Figure 1. Comparison of model architectures among common spatiotemporal predictive learning methods. Note that we denote 2D
convolutional neural networks as Conv while 3D Conv means 3D
convolutional neural networks.

Accurate spatiotemporal predictive learning can benefit broad practical applications in climate change [74, 77],
human motion forecasting [91, 107], traffic flow prediction [18, 97], and representation learning [39, 71]. The
significance of spatiotemporal predictive learning primarily
lies in its potential of exploring both spatial correlation and
temporal evolution in the physical world. Moreover, the
self-supervised nature of spatiotemporal predictive learning aligns well with human learning styles without a large
amount of labeled data. Massive videos can provide a rich
source of visual information, enabling spatiotemporal pre-

18770

