This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Non-line-of-sight Imaging with Signal Superresolution Network
Jianyu Wang1 , Xintong Liu1 , Leping Xiao1 , Zuoqiang Shi1,2 , Lingyun Qiu1,2 , and Xing Fu1
1
Tsinghua University
2
Yanqi Lake Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications

Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging aims at reconstructing the location, shape, albedo, and surface normal of the
hidden object around the corner with measured transient
data. Due to its strong potential in various fields, it has
drawn much attention in recent years. However, long exposure time is not always available for applications such
as auto-driving, which hinders the practical use of NLOS
imaging. Although scanning fewer points can reduce the
total measurement time, it also brings the problem of imaging quality degradation. This paper proposes a general
learning-based pipeline for increasing imaging quality with
only a few scanning points. We tailor a neural network
to learn the operator that recovers a high spatial resolution signal. Experiments on synthetic and measured data
indicate that the proposed method provides faithful reconstructions of the hidden scene under both confocal and nonconfocal settings. Compared with original measurements,
the acquisition of our approach is 16 times faster while
maintaining similar reconstruction quality. Besides, the
proposed pipeline can be applied directly to existing optical systems and imaging algorithms as a plug-in-and-play
module. We believe the proposed pipeline is powerful in
increasing the frame rate in NLOS video imaging.

1. Introduction
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging problem usually employs a high temporal resolution optical system to recover
the hidden object around the corner. As shown in Fig. 1a,
photons emitted by the laser are collected by the detector
after three diffuse reflections: the reflection at the visible
wall, the reflection at the hidden object, and the reflection
at the visible wall again. Scanning a region on the visible
wall can get measured histogram data to recover the hidden
scene.
Due to its potential applications in various fields, such
as auto-driving, disaster relief, and remote sensing, the
NLOS imaging problem has become an emerging field
since it was first proposed by Kirmani et al. [17] in 2009.

(a) NLOS scenario

(b) Scanning points

(c) Results

Figure 1. A typical NLOS scenario and reconstruction results. (a)
An illustration of a typical NLOS scenario. (b) An illustration
of the scanning points on the visible wall. Using the proposed
pipeline, only the blue circle points are needed to be illuminated,
and the signal at the yellow square points can be recovered with
the proposed pipeline. (c) Comparisons of the reconstruction results of the pyramid with different signals. The maximum intensity
projection of the albedo values along the depth direction is shown
in the upper left corner (GT). The results are reconstructed by the
original signal with spatial resolution 32 × 32 (Original), the subsampled signal with spatial resolution 8 × 8 (Low), and the signal
recovered by the proposed network with spatial resolution 32 × 32
(Ours).

Many methods have been proposed to improve the prac-

17420

