This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RODIN: A Generative Model for Sculpting 3D Digital Avatars Using Diffusion
Tengfei Wang1∗† Bo Zhang2∗‡ Ting Zhang2 Shuyang Gu2 Jianmin Bao2
Tadas Baltrusaitis2 Jingjing Shen2 Dong Chen2 Fang Wen2 Qifeng Chen1 Baining Guo2
1
HKUST 2 Microsoft Research

Input portrait

Generated 3D avatar

“In white suit” “Smile with glasses” “With red hair”

“bearded man with curly hair in black leather jacket”

Figure 1. Our diffusion model, RODIN, can produce high-fidelity 3D avatars (the first row). Our model also supports 3D avatar generation
from a single portrait or text prompt, while permitting text-based semantic manipulation (second row). See the webpage for video demos.

Abstract
This paper presents a 3D diffusion model that automatically generates 3D digital avatars represented as neural
radiance fields (NeRFs). A significant challenge for 3D
diffusion is that the memory and processing costs are prohibitive for producing high-quality results with rich details.
To tackle this problem, we propose the roll-out diffusion network (RODIN), which takes a 3D NeRF model represented
as multiple 2D feature maps and rolls out them onto a single 2D feature plane within which we perform 3D-aware
diffusion. The RODIN model brings much-needed computational efficiency while preserving the integrity of 3D diffusion by using 3D-aware convolution that attends to projected features in the 2D plane according to their original relationships in 3D. We also use latent conditioning to
orchestrate the feature generation with global coherence,
leading to high-fidelity avatars and enabling semantic editing based on text prompts. Finally, we use hierarchical synthesis to further enhance details. The 3D avatars generated
by our model compare favorably with those produced by existing techniques. We can generate highly detailed avatars
with realistic hairstyles and facial hair. We also demonstrate 3D avatar generation from image or text, as well as
text-guided editability.
† Intern at Microsoft Research. ‡ Corresponding author. ∗ Equal contribution. Project Webpage: https://3d-avatar-diffusion.microsoft.com

1. Introduction
Generative models [2, 34] are one of the most promising
ways to analyze and synthesize visual data including 2D
images and 3D models. At the forefront of generative modeling is the diffusion model [14, 24, 61], which has shown
phenomenal generative power for images [19,47,50,52] and
videos [23,59]. Indeed, we are witnessing a 2D content creation revolution driven by the rapid advances of diffusion
and generative modeling. In this paper, we aim to expand
the applicability of diffusion to 3D digital avatars. We use
“digital avatars” to refer to the traditional avatars manually
created by 3D artists, as opposed to the recently emerging
photorealistic avatars [8, 43]. The reason for focusing on
digital avatars is twofold. On the one hand, digital avatars
are widely used in movies, games, the metaverse, and the
3D industry in general. On the other hand, the available
digital avatar data is very scarce as each avatar must be
painstakingly created by a specialized 3D artist using a sophisticated creation pipeline [20, 35], especially for modeling hair and facial hair. All this leads to a compelling
scenario for generative modeling.
We present a diffusion model for automatically producing digital avatars represented as NeRFs [38], with each
point describing its color radiance and density within the
3D volume. The core challenge in generating these avatars

4563

