This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pose-disentangled Contrastive Learning for Self-supervised Facial
Representation
Yuanyuan Liu1 *, Wenbin Wang1∗ , Yibing Zhan2 , Shaoze Feng1 , Kejun Liu1 , Zhe Chen3†
1
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
2
JD Explore Academy, China
3
The University of Sydney, Australia
{liuyy, wangwenbin, fengshaoze, liukejun}@cug.edu.cn; zhanyibing@jd.com; zhe.chen1@sydney.edu.au

Self-supervised facial representation has recently attracted increasing attention due to its ability to perform
face understanding without relying on large-scale annotated datasets heavily. However, analytically, current
contrastive-based self-supervised learning (SSL) still performs unsatisfactorily for learning facial representation.
More specifically, existing contrastive learning (CL) tends
to learn pose-invariant features that cannot depict the pose
details of faces, compromising the learning performance.
To conquer the above limitation of CL, we propose a novel
Pose-disentangled Contrastive Learning (PCL) method for
general self-supervised facial representation. Our PCL first
devises a pose-disentangled decoder (PDD) with a delicately designed orthogonalizing regulation, which disentangles the pose-related features from the face-aware features; therefore, pose-related and other pose-unrelated facial information could be performed in individual subnetworks and do not affect each other’s training. Furthermore,
we introduce a pose-related contrastive learning scheme
that learns pose-related information based on data augmentation of the same image, which would deliver more effective
face-aware representation for various downstream tasks.
We conducted linear evaluation on four challenging downstream facial understanding tasks, i.e., facial expression
recognition, face recognition, AU detection and head pose
estimation. Experimental results demonstrate that PCL significantly outperforms cutting-edge SSL methods. Our Code
is available at https://github.com/DreamMr/PCL.

1. Introduction
Human face perception and understanding is an important and long-lasting topic in computer vision. By analyzing
* Equally-contributed first authors
† Corresponding author

SimCLR
Positive

PCL(ours)
Positive

75

CL Loss
Negative

Same face Different faces
CL Loss

SimCLR

Negative

Positive

Negative

Same pose Different poses

Disentangle

pose-related CL Loss

(a) Motivation of SimCLR and our PCL

Accuracy(%)

Abstract

74

PCL(ours)

79

76
73

71

FER (RAF-DB) Identity (LFW) AU (DISFA)

(b) Results of SimCLR and our PCL

Figure 1. The motivation of our method. Affected by different poses, the popular CL method, e.g., SimCLR, treats pose and
other face information uniformly, resulting in sub-optimal results.
To alleviate this limitation for CL, our PCL attempts to disentangle the learning on pose-related features and pose-unrelated facial
features, thus achieving more effective self-supervised facial representation learning for downstream facial tasks.

faces, we can obtain various kinds of information, including
identities, emotions, and gestures. Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) [20, 30, 62] have achieved
promising facial understanding results, but they require a
large amount of annotated data for model training. Since
labeling face data is generally a labor- and time-costly process [61], it becomes important to enable DCNN models to
learn from unlabelled face images, which are much easier
to collect. Accordingly, researchers have introduced selfsupervised learning (SSL) schemes to achieve better learning performance on unlabeled facial data.
To achieve effective SSL performance, contrastive learning (CL) based strategy is widely applied in the community
[6,26,43]. In general, a CL-based method pulls two features
representing similar samples closer to each other and pushes
those of diverse samples far away from each other [56],
thus facilitating the DCNNs to learn various visual patterns
without annotations. Generally, without supervision, similar/positive samples of CL are obtained by augmenting the
same image, and the diverse/negative samples can refer to
different images. To learn from unlabelled face images, ex-

9717

