This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RealFusion
360 Reconstruction of Any Object from a Single Image
◦

Luke Melas-Kyriazi

Iro Laina

Christian Rupprecht

Andrea Vedaldi

Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{lukemk,iro,chrisr,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk
https://lukemelas.github.io/realfusion

Figure 1. RealFusion generates a full 360◦ reconstruction of any object given a single image of it (left column). It does so by leveraging
an existing diffusion-based 2D image generator. From the given image, it synthesizes a prompt that causes the diffusion model to “dream
up” other views of the object. It then extracts a neural radiance field from the original image and the diffusion model-based prior, thereby
reconstructing the object in full. Both appearance and geometry are reconstructed faithfully and extrapolated in a plausible manner.

Abstract
We consider the problem of reconstructing a full 360◦
photographic model of an object from a single image of it.
We do so by fitting a neural radiance field to the image,
but find this problem to be severely ill-posed. We thus take
an off-the-self conditional image generator based on diffusion and engineer a prompt that encourages it to “dream
up” novel views of the object. Using the recent DreamFusion method, we fuse the given input view, the conditional
prior, and other regularizers into a final, consistent reconstruction. We demonstrate state-of-the-art reconstruction
results on benchmark images when compared to prior methods for monocular 3D reconstruction of objects. Qualitatively, our reconstructions provide a faithful match of the
input view and a plausible extrapolation of its appearance
and 3D shape, including to the side of the object not visible

in the image.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of obtaining a 360◦ photographic reconstruction of any object given a single image
of it. The challenge is that a single image does not contain sufficient information for 3D reconstruction. Without
access to multiple views, an image only provides weak evidence about the 3D shape of the object, and only for one
side of it. Even so, there is proof that this task can be solved:
any skilled 3D artist can take a picture of almost any object
and, given sufficient time and effort, create a plausible 3D
model of it. The artist can do so by tapping into their vast
knowledge of the natural world and the objects it contains,
making up for the information missing from the image.
Hence, monocular 3D reconstruction requires combining
18446

