This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DINN360: Deformable Invertible Neural Network for Latitude-aware
360◦ Image Rescaling
Yichen Guo1 , Mai Xu1 *, Lai Jiang2∗ , Leonid Sigal2 , Yunjin Chen
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

1

90°

High latitude

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of virtual reality, 360◦ images have gained increasing popularity. Different from 2D
images, 360◦ images cover a scene with a wide range of
360◦ × 180◦ views, requiring high resolution for ensuring
the image quality. However, this also makes it considerably
more costly to acquire, store and even process such highresolution (HR) 360◦ images. To address these issues, it is
necessary to conduct 360◦ image rescaling, which consists
of image downscaling for generating low-resolution (LR)
* Corresponding authors: Mai Xu (MaiXu@buaa.edu.cn), Lai Jiang
(jianglai.china@buaa.edu.cn)

Latitude

0°

Severe deformation

Deformation

With the rapid development of virtual reality, 360◦ images have gained increasing popularity. Their wide field
of view necessitates high resolution to ensure image quality. This, however, makes it harder to acquire, store and
even process such 360◦ images. To alleviate this issue, we
propose the first attempt at 360◦ image rescaling, which
refers to downscaling a 360◦ image to a visually valid lowresolution (LR) counterpart and then upscaling to a highresolution (HR) 360◦ image given the LR variant. Specifically, we first analyze two 360◦ image datasets and observe
several findings that characterize how 360◦ images typically change along their latitudes. Inspired by these findings, we propose a novel deformable invertible neural network (INN), named DINN360, for latitude-aware 360◦ image rescaling. In DINN360, a deformable INN is designed
to downscale the LR image, and project the high-frequency
(HF) component to the latent space by adaptively handling
various deformations occurring at different latitude regions.
Given the downscaled LR image, the high-quality HR image
is then reconstructed in a conditional latitude-aware manner by recovering the structure-related HF component from
the latent space. Extensive experiments over four public
datasets show that our DINN360 method performs considerably better than other state-of-the-art methods for 2×, 4×
and 8× 360◦ image rescaling.

Latitude

Abstract

Low latitude
Slight deformation

ERP

-90°

Spherical Characteristic
Guide

Non-uniform sampling density

DINN360 rescaling method
1
Forward

Reverse
HR

3

Deformable
downscaling

2

Latitude-aware
HF projection

Reverse upscaling

LR
𝒛𝒛

Latent space

Figure 1. Motivation and pipeline of our DINN360 method. The
non-uniform sampling density causes various deformations at different latitude regions, and this guides the design of our DINN360
model. Finally, the HR 360◦ image can be rescaled from the corresponding LR image and latent space.

images with visually valid information and image upscaling
for reconstructing HR 360◦ images. Different from image
super-resolution (SR) that only upscales from LR images,
image rescaling can directly utilize the texture information
from the input HR 360◦ images, and therefore achieves better reconstruction results.
Recently, 2-dimensional (2D) image rescaling has received increasing research interests [17, 21, 23, 36, 43, 44],
due to its promising application potential. Specifically, Kim
et al. [17] proposed a task-aware auto-encoder-based framework including a task-aware downscaling (TAD) model and
a task-aware upscaling (TAU) model. In this work, the procedures of downscaling and upscaling are implemented by
two individual deep neural networks (DNNs), and then they
are jointly optimized. Xiao et al. [44] proposed an image rescaling framework based on invertible neural network
(INN), in which downscaling and upscaling are regarded as
invertible procedures. Different from 2D images, as shown
in Fig. 1, 360◦ images contain various types of deformation
at different latitude regions, due to the non-uniform sampling density of the sphere-to-plain projection. Therefore,
it is inappropriate to directly apply the existing 2D rescaling methods on 360◦ images (see analysis in Section 3).
Hence, it is necessary to develop a specialized framework

21519

