This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H OLO D IFFUSION: Training a 3D Diffusion Model using 2D Images
Animesh Karnewar⋆†
UCL

Andrea Vedaldi
Meta AI

David Novotny⋆
Meta AI

Niloy J. Mitra
UCL

a.karnewar@ucl.ac.uk

vedaldi@meta.com

dnovotny@meta.com

n.mitra@ucl.ac.uk

https://holodiffusion.github.io

Figure 1. We present H OLO D IFFUSION as the first 3D-aware generative diffusion model that produces 3D-consistent images and is
trained with only posed image supervision. Here we show a few different samples generated from models trained on different classes of
the CO3D dataset [46].

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as the best approach for
generative modeling of 2D images. Part of their success is
due to the possibility of training them on millions if not billions of images with a stable learning objective. However,
extending these models to 3D remains difficult for two reasons. First, finding a large quantity of 3D training data is
much more complex than for 2D images. Second, while it is
conceptually trivial to extend the models to operate on 3D
rather than 2D grids, the associated cubic growth in memory and compute complexity makes this infeasible. We address the first challenge by introducing a new diffusion setup
that can be trained, end-to-end, with only posed 2D images
for supervision; and the second challenge by proposing an
image formation model that decouples model memory from
spatial memory. We evaluate our method on real-world
data, using the CO3D dataset which has not been used to
train 3D generative models before. We show that our diffusion models are scalable, train robustly, and are competitive in terms of sample quality and fidelity to existing approaches for 3D generative modeling.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have rapidly emerged as formidable
generative models for images, replacing others (e.g., VAEs,
GANs) for a range of applications, including image colorization [47], image editing [35], and image synthesis [9,
21]. These models explicitly optimize the likelihood of the
training samples, can be trained on millions if not billions
of images, and have been shown to capture the underlying
model distribution better [9] than previous alternatives.
A natural next step is to bring diffusion models to 3D
data. Compared to 2D images, 3D models facilitate direct manipulation of the generated content, result in perfect
view consistency across different cameras, and allow object
placement using direct handles. However, learning 3D diffusion models is hindered by the lack of a sufficient volume
of 3D data for training. A further question is the choice
of representation for the 3D data itself (e.g., voxels, point
clouds, meshes, occupancy grids, etc.). Researchers have
proposed 3D-aware diffusion models for point clouds [33],
⋆ Indicates equal contribution.
† part of this work was done during an internship at MetaAI.

18423

