This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACL-SPC: Adaptive Closed-Loop system for
Self-Supervised Point Cloud Completion
Reyhaneh Neshatavar2
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
Mohsen Yavartanoo2 *
Sangmin Hong1 *
1
2
IPAI, Dept. of ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{mchiash2,myavartanoo,reyhanehneshat,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Point cloud completion addresses filling in the missing
parts of a partial point cloud obtained from depth sensors
and generating a complete point cloud. Although there
has been steep progress in the supervised methods on the
synthetic point cloud completion task, it is hardly applicable in real-world scenarios due to the domain gap between
the synthetic and real-world datasets or the requirement of
prior information. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel self-supervised framework ACL-SPC for point
cloud completion to train and test on the same data. ACLSPC takes a single partial input and attempts to output the
complete point cloud using an adaptive closed-loop (ACL)
system that enforces the output same for the variation of
an input. We evaluate our ACL-SPC on various datasets
to prove that it can successfully learn to complete a partial
point cloud as the first self-supervised scheme. Results show
that our method is comparable with unsupervised methods and achieves superior performance on the real-world
dataset compared to the supervised methods trained on the
synthetic dataset. Extensive experiments justify the necessity of self-supervised learning and the effectiveness of our
proposed method for the real-world point cloud completion
task. The code is publicly available from this link.

1. Introduction
Along with the development of autonomous driving cars
and robotics, the usage of depth sensors such as LiDARs
has increased. These sensors can collect numerous points
in the 3D space, and the combination of these points forms
a 3D representation called a point cloud. Point cloud representation has been widely used in many applications as it
is highly convertible to other 3D data representations, e.g.,
voxel and mesh, and accessible for obtaining information
from the real world. However, point clouds obtained from
a real-world sensor, e.g., a LiDAR, are often incomplete
* equal contribution

ACL-SPC

Initial predicted
complete pc
Synthetic
partial pc
Random view

Loss
Predicted
complete pc
Error

Optimizer

Partial pc
generator

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed pipeline. We first generate
C0 using the initial partial point cloud. Then, multiple synthetic
point clouds Pv are generated from the random views of C0 . We
input the generated Pv to the network and make predicted complete point clouds. We take the loss between C0 and Cv to optimize the parameters of the network fθ .

and sparse due to occlusion, limitations of sensor resolution, and viewing angle [49] leading to loss of some geometric information and difficulty in proceeding with further
applications e.g., object detection [26] and object segmentation [7]. We define such point clouds as partial point clouds.
Therefore, point cloud completion is a crucial task that infers completing geometric 3D shapes by using such partial
point cloud observations.
With the advent of deep learning, previous data-driven
works [40, 43, 49] have been able to solve this task using complete point cloud ground-truths. Even though
such methods have achieved decent performance, they are
not applicable in real-world scenarios where the groundtruth point clouds are not easy to obtain. For these reasons, researchers have recently attempted to overcome the
lack of high-quality and large-scale paired training data
using multiple views of the point cloud in unsupervised
and weakly-supervised manners. Especially, recent methods [15, 21] leverage multi-view consistency of the desired
object, which shows effectiveness in supervising 3D shape
prediction. PointPnCNet [21] claims that its method is
based on self-supervised learning. However, combining
multi-view consistency enables reconstructing a complete
3D point cloud and can be weak supervision. Moreover,
collecting multiple partial views of an object in real-world

9435

