This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MOVES: Manipulated Objects in Video Enable Segmentation
Richard E. L. Higgins David F. Fouhey
University of Michigan
{relh,fouhey}@umich.edu

Abstract
Our method uses manipulation in video to learn to understand held-objects and hand-object contact. We train
a system that takes a single RGB image and produces a
pixel-embedding that can be used to answer grouping questions (do these two pixels go together) as well as handassociation questions (is this hand holding that pixel).
Rather than painstakingly annotate segmentation masks, we
observe people in realistic video data. We show that pairing
epipolar geometry with modern optical flow produces simple and effective pseudo-labels for grouping. Given people
segmentations, we can further associate pixels with hands
to understand contact. Our system achieves competitive results on hand and hand-held object tasks.

1. Introduction
Fig. 1 shows someone making breakfast. Despite having
never been there, you understand the bag the hand is holding as an object, recognize that the hand is holding the bag,
and recognize that the milk carton in the background is a
distinct object. The goal of this paper is to build a computer
vision system with such capabilities: grouping held objects
(the bag), recognizing contact (the hand holding the bag),
and grouping non-held objects (the carton). We accomplish
our aim by pairing modern optical flow with 3D geometry and, to associate objects with hands, per-pixel human
masks. Our results show that direct discriminative training on simple pseudo-labels generated by epipolar geometry produces strong feature representations that we can use
to solve a variety of hand-held object-related tasks.
The topic of understanding hands and the objects they
hold has been a subject of intense interest from the computer vision community for decades. Recently, this has
often taken the form of extensive efforts annotating hands
and hand-held objects [9, 13, 36, 47]. These methods often go beyond standard detection and segmentation approaches [17, 25] by producing associations between hands
and objects and by detecting on any held object, as opposed
to a fixed set of pre-defined object classes. Since these re-

Image

Clusters

MOVES Features

Box2Seg

Figure 1. Given an input image, MOVES produces features (shown
using PCA to project to RGB) that easily group with ordinary clustering systems and can also be used to associate hands with the
objects they hold. The clusters are often sufficient for defining
objects, but additional cues such as a box further improve them.
At training time, MOVES learns this feature space from direct
discriminative training on simple pseudo-labels. While MOVES
learns only from objects that hands are actively holding (such as
the semi-transparent bag), we show that it works well on inactive
objects as well (such as the milk carton).

quire expensive annotations, many researchers have started
focusing on using weaker supervision [12, 37] by starting
with a few readily obtained cues (e.g., basic information
about humans, flow). These weakly-supervised methods,
however, have not matched supervised methods regardless
of supervision, methods like [36, 37] only understand objects when they are held and cannot group un-held objects.
We propose a simple approach based on directly predicting two properties: grouping, or whether pixels move together (the classic Gestalt law of common fate [43]); as well
as hand association, whether a hand pixel is likely holding
another pixel. We show that these can be learned from automatically generated pseudo-labels that use optical flow [21],
epipolar geometry [15], and person masks [19]. Our network, named MOVES, learns a mapping to a per-pixel embedding; this embedding is then analyzed by grouping and
association heads that are trained by cross-entropy to predict the pseudo-labels. While the pseudo-labels themselves

6334

