This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Don’t Lie to Me!
Robust and Efficient Explainability with Verified Perturbation Analysis
Thomas Fel1,2,5† Melanie Ducoffe2,7† David Vigouroux2,4† Rémi Cadène1,3
Mikael Capelle6
Claire Nicodème5
Thomas Serre1,2
1

Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, USA
2
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute
3
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, France 4 IRT Saint-Exupery, France
5
Innovation & Research Division, SNCF 6 Thales Alenia Space, France
7
Airbus AI Research

Abstract
A plethora of attribution methods have recently been developed to explain deep neural networks. These methods
use different classes of perturbations (e.g, occlusion, blurring, masking, etc) to estimate the importance of individual image pixels to drive a model’s decision. Nevertheless, the space of possible perturbations is vast and current attribution methods typically require significant computation time to accurately sample the space in order to
achieve high-quality explanations. In this work, we introduce EVA (Explaining using Verified Perturbation Analysis)
– the first explainability method which comes with guarantees that an entire set of possible perturbations has been
exhaustively searched. We leverage recent progress in verified perturbation analysis methods to directly propagate
bounds through a neural network to exhaustively probe a
– potentially infinite-size – set of perturbations in a single
forward pass. Our approach takes advantage of the beneficial properties of verified perturbation analysis, i.e., time
efficiency and guaranteed complete – sampling agnostic –
coverage of the perturbation space – to identify image pixels
that drive a model’s decision. We evaluate EVA systematically and demonstrate state-of-the-art results on multiple
benchmarks. Our code is freely available: github.com/
deel-ai/formal-explainability

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are now being widely deployed in
many applications from medicine, transportation, and security to finance, with broad societal implications [40]. They
are routinely used to making safety-critical decisions – often without an explanation as their decisions are notoriously

Figure 1. Manifold exploration of current attribution methods. Current methods assign an importance score to individual pixels using perturbations around a given input image x.
Saliency [56] uses infinitesimal perturbations around x, Occlusion [71] switches individual pixel intensities on/off. More recent
approaches [17,43,46,48,49] use (Quasi-) random sampling methods in specific perturbation spaces (occlusion of segments of pixels, blurring, ...). However, the choice of the perturbation space undoubtedly biases the results – potentially even introducing serious
artifacts [26, 29, 38, 64]. We propose to use verified perturbation
analysis to efficiently perform a complete coverage of a perturbation space around x to produce reliable and faithful explanations.

hard to interpret.
Many explainability methods have been proposed to gain
insight into how network models arrive at a particular decision [17,24,43,46,48,49,53,55,61,65,71]. The applications
of these methods are multiple – from helping to improve
or debug their decisions to helping instill confidence in the
reliability of their decisions [14]. Unfortunately, a severe
limitation of these approaches is that they are subject to a
confirmation bias: while they appear to offer useful expla-

16153

