This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusioNeRF: Regularizing Neural Radiance Fields
with Denoising Diffusion Models
Jamie Wynn

Daniyar Turmukhambetov
Niantic
www.github.com/nianticlabs/diffusionerf

Abstract
Under good conditions, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs)
have shown impressive results on novel view synthesis tasks.
NeRFs learn a scene’s color and density fields by minimizing the photometric discrepancy between training views and
differentiable renderings of the scene. Once trained from
a sufficient set of views, NeRFs can generate novel views
from arbitrary camera positions. However, the scene geometry and color fields are severely under-constrained, which
can lead to artifacts, especially when trained with few input
views.
To alleviate this problem we learn a prior over scene
geometry and color, using a denoising diffusion model
(DDM). Our DDM is trained on RGBD patches of the synthetic Hypersim dataset and can be used to predict the gradient of the logarithm of a joint probability distribution of
color and depth patches. We show that, these gradients of
logarithms of RGBD patch priors serve to regularize geometry and color of a scene. During NeRF training, random
RGBD patches are rendered and the estimated gradient of
the log-likelihood is backpropagated to the color and density fields. Evaluations on LLFF, the most relevant dataset,
show that our learned prior achieves improved quality in
the reconstructed geometry and improved generalization to
novel views. Evaluations on DTU show improved reconstruction quality among NeRF methods.

1. Introduction
Neural radiance fields, neural implicit surfaces, and
coordinate-based scene representations are proving valuable for novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction tasks.
NeRFs [17] learn a specific scene’s appearance as a multilayer perceptron that predicts density and color, when given
any 3D point and a viewing direction.
This volume representation allows differentiable rendering from arbitrary views, where predicted color contributions along a ray are alpha-composited according to the den-

(a) DiffusioNeRF (Ours)

(b) RegNeRF [21]
Figure 1. Image and depth map rendered from a test view. All
NeRF models were trained with 3 views of the LLFF [16] dataset’s
“Room” scene. Our priors encourage NeRF to explain the TV and
table geometry with flat surfaces in the density field, and to explain
the view-dependent color changes with the color field.

sity predictions.
The model is trained with the aim of faithfully reconstructing images captured with known camera poses. Even
when trained with just a photometric reconstruction loss,
NeRFs show impressive generalization capabilities, inspiring novel applications in virtual and augmented reality, and
visual special effects.
However, with small numbers or even with large numbers of input views, the scene color and geometry fields are
severely under-constrained. Indeed, an infinite number of
NeRFs can explain all training views. In practice, NeRFs
can generate low-quality and physically implausible geometries and surface appearances. For example, “floaters”
are one common artifact, where the fitted density field contains clouds of semi-transparent material floating in mid-air
that would look reasonable in 2D once rendered from training views, but look implausible from novel views.

4180

