This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Rotation-Equivariant Features for Visual Correspondence
Jongmin Lee

Byungjin Kim

Seungwook Kim

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/RELF

Abstract
Extracting discriminative local features that are invariant to imaging variations is an integral part of establishing correspondences between images. In this work, we
introduce a self-supervised learning framework to extract
discriminative rotation-invariant descriptors using groupequivariant CNNs. Thanks to employing group-equivariant
CNNs, our method effectively learns to obtain rotationequivariant features and their orientations explicitly, without having to perform sophisticated data augmentations.
The resultant features and their orientations are further processed by group aligning, a novel invariant mapping technique that shifts the group-equivariant features by their orientations along the group dimension. Our group aligning technique achieves rotation-invariance without any collapse of the group dimension and thus eschews loss of discriminability. The proposed method is trained end-to-end
in a self-supervised manner, where we use an orientation
alignment loss for the orientation estimation and a contrastive descriptor loss for robust local descriptors to geometric/photometric variations. Our method demonstrates
state-of-the-art matching accuracy among existing rotationinvariant descriptors under varying rotation and also shows
competitive results when transferred to the task of keypoint
matching and camera pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Extracting local descriptors is an essential step for visual correspondence across images, which is used for a
wide range of computer vision problems such as visual localization [29, 47, 48], simultaneous localization and mapping [7, 8, 39], and 3D reconstruction [1, 16, 17, 49, 66]. To
establish reliable visual correspondences, the properties of
invariance and discriminativeness are required for local descriptors; the descriptors need to be invariant to geometric/photometric variations of images while being discriminative enough to distinguish true matches from false ones.
Since the remarkable success of deep learning for visual

recognition, deep neural networks have also been adopted
to learn local descriptors, showing enhanced performances
on visual correspondence [44, 45, 64]. Learning rotationinvariant local descriptors, however, remains challenging;
the classical techiniques [11, 27, 46] for rotation-invariant
descriptors, which are used for shallow gradient-based feature maps, cannot be applied to feature maps from standard deep neural networks, in which rotation of input induces unpredictable feature variations. Achieving rotation
invariance without sacrificing disriminativeness is particularly important for local descriptors as rotation is one of the
most frequent imaging variations in reality.
In this work, we propose a self-supervised approach to
obtain rotation-invariant and discriminative local descriptors by leveraging rotation-equivariant CNNs. First, we
use group-equivariant CNNs [60] to jointly extract rotationequivariant local features and their orientations from an image. To extract reliable orientations, we use an orientation
alignment loss [21, 23, 63], which trains the network to predict the dominant orientation robustly against other imaging variations, including illumination or viewpoint changes.
Using group-equivariant CNNs enables the local features
to be empowered with explicitly encoded rotation equivariance without having to perform rigorous data augmentations [58, 60]. Second, to obtain discriminative rotationinvariant descriptors from rotation-equivariant features, we
propose group-aligning that shifts the group-equivariant
features by their dominant orientation along their group
dimension. Conventional methods to yield invariant features from group-equivariant features collapse the group dimension by group-pooling, e.g., max-pooling or bilinearpooling [26], resulting in a drop in feature discriminability and quality. In contrast, our group-aligning preserves
the group dimension, achieving rotation-invariance while
eschewing loss of discriminability. Furthermore, by preserving the group dimension, we can obtain multiple descriptors by performing group-aligning using multiple orientation candidates, which improves the matching performance by compensating for potential errors in dominant
orientation prediction. Finally, we evaluate our rotationinvariant descriptors against existing local descriptors, and

21887

