This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning 3D Scene Priors with 2D Supervision
Yinyu Nie1 Angela Dai1 Xiaoguang Han2 Matthias Nießner1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)

Abstract
Holistic 3D scene understanding entails estimation of
both layout configuration and object geometry in a 3D environment. Recent works have shown advances in 3D scene
estimation from various input modalities (e.g., images, 3D
scans), by leveraging 3D supervision (e.g., 3D bounding
boxes or CAD models), for which collection at scale is expensive and often intractable. To address this shortcoming,
we propose a new method to learn 3D scene priors of layout
and shape without requiring any 3D ground truth. Instead,
we rely on 2D supervision from multi-view RGB images.
Our method represents a 3D scene as a latent vector, from
which we can progressively decode to a sequence of objects
characterized by their class categories, 3D bounding boxes,
and meshes. With our trained autoregressive decoder representing the scene prior, our method facilitates many downstream applications, including scene synthesis, interpolation, and single-view reconstruction. Experiments on 3DFRONT and ScanNet show that our method outperforms
state of the art in single-view reconstruction, and achieves
state-of-the-art results in scene synthesis against baselines
which require for 3D supervision. Project page: https:
//yinyunie.github.io/sceneprior-page/

1. Introduction
Understanding the geometric structures in real world
scenes takes significant meaning in 3D computer vision. In
recent years, many prominent approaches have been proposed to understand 3D scenes for different applications,
e.g., scene synthesis [24, 28, 36, 48, 49, 52] and semantic reconstruction [6,15,16,18–21,26,30,34,35,56]. These methods have shown initial promise in estimating object layouts
and shapes in 3D scenes, from RGB or RGB-D input data.
However, such methods have focused on leveraging full
3D supervision for layout and shape learning, in taskspecific fashion. Such ground truth 3D scene geometry with
semantic decomposition to objects and structures is difficult
and expensive to acquire, requiring significant artist modeling efforts [13] or expert annotations [1] of CAD modeling.
In contrast, 2D image and video acquisition is significantly

Figure 1. We learn 3D scene priors with 2D supervision. We
model a latent hypersphere surface to represent a manifold of 3D
scenes, characterizing the semantic and geometric distribution of
objects in 3D scenes. This supports many downstream applications, including scene synthesis, interpolation and single-view reconstruction.

more accessible. We thus propose to instead learn a general 3D scene prior from only multi-view 2D information.
This approach takes a unified perspective to 3D scene understanding: our 3D scene prior is learned in a generalizable fashion from only multi-view 2D information, enabling
application to multiple downstream tasks, including scene
synthesis and single-view reconstruction.
In order to understand geometric 3D scene structure
from only multi-view RGB images, we must bridge the
domain gap between 3D geometry and RGB colors. To
this end, we propose to leverage the 2D semantic domain:
we learn our 3D scene prior by ensuring that our learned
3D scene structures and objects, when differentiably rendered, match the 2D semantic distribution of estimated 2D
instance segmentations from the RGB images. This enables
supervision of 3D object and layout structures guided by 2D
information.
Our 3D scene prior is learned by optimizing for a mapping from a latent space (parameterized as a hypersphere
surface) to a manifold of 3D scenes, as shown in Fig. 1.
Each random vector sampled from the latent space is decoded into a sequence of objects autoregressively using our
permutation-invariant transformer. Each output object is
characterized by their class category, 3D bounding box and
mesh. By training this decoder, we encode the scene prior

792

