This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Analyzing and Diagnosing Pose Estimation with Attributions
Qiyuan He*

Linlin Yang*
Kerui Gu
Qiuxia Lin
National University of Singapore

Angela Yao

Abstract
We present Pose Integrated Gradient (PoseIG), the first interpretability technique designed for pose estimation. We extend the concept of integrated gradients for pose estimation
to generate pixel-level attribution maps. To enable comparison across different pose frameworks, we unify different pose
outputs into a common output space, along with a likelihood
approximation function for gradient back-propagation.
To complement the qualitative insight from the attribution
maps, we propose three indices for quantitative analysis.
With these tools, we systematically compare different pose
estimation frameworks to understand the impacts of network
design, backbone and auxiliary tasks. Our analysis reveals
an interesting shortcut of the knuckles (MCP joints) for hand
pose estimation and an under-explored inversion error for
keypoints in body pose estimation. Project page and code:
https://qy-h00.github.io/poseig/.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation of both the body and the hand
is a critical vision task for augmented and virtual reality
applications. State-of-the-art methods [12, 15, 19, 20, 33,
36] perform impressively on benchmarks but are difficult
to compare beyond differences in average end-point-error
(EPE). Averaged results on large-scale benchmarks depend
on the underlying data distribution and tend to obscure the
behaviour of pose estimation systems [10]. As such, we are
motivated to find alternative ways to interpret and compare
pose estimates across different methods. To that end, we
present the first method for estimating pixel-level attribution
maps designed specifically for pose estimation.
Integrated Gradients (IG) [35] is a commonly used attribution technique. IG and its derived variants [21, 35, 40] can
produce pixel-level attribution maps for various image and
natural language classification tasks. IG computes gradients
to measure the relationship between changes to an input and
changes to the target likelihood. However, IG is not directly
applicable to pose estimation. Unlike in classification, where
* Equal contribution

Prediction

Ground truth

Common
Output

Joint
Selection

FI:3.6, LI:22.5, DI:11.5
Visualization

Indices

Likelihood

Forward

Backward

Figure 1. Pose Integrated Gradients (PoseIG) generates spatial
attribution maps for pose estimation. Based on the attribution maps,
we propose numerical indices to quantitatively characterize the
attributions throughout the scene.

models always directly output a class likelihood, pose estimation models vary in their output, ranging from spatial
likelihoods to regressed coordinates. Therefore, we must introduce a likelihood approximation function between the predicted outputs and their targets to approximate the target likelihood. Based on these likelihoods, we can back-propagate
the gradients and generate attribution maps. Moreover, to
enable meaningful comparison across frameworks, we propose unifying the different outputs into a common output
space and use the same likelihood approximation function
S(·) for back-propagation. Fig. 1 shows our interpretability
pipeline for generating pixel-level attribution maps that can
be compared across different pose frameworks.
Existing works [35] and [21] focus on qualitative attributions and produce visualizations for single inputs. We
are interested in these visualizations for pose estimation;
however, we additionally target quantitative analysis of the
attributions. As such, we have designed attribution-based
indices to help analyze and diagnose pose estimation frameworks. Based on PoseIG’s attribution maps, we introduce
three indices to numerically characterize the attributions.
The Foreground Index (FI) measures the extent to which the
foreground is considered in the attributions. The Locality
Index (LI) measures the amount of attribution around an im-

4821

