This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Assignment for Geometry Aware Local Feature Matching
Dihe Huang1 * Ying Chen2 * Yong Liu2 Jianlin Liu2 Shang Xu2
Wenlong Wu2 Yikang Ding1 Fan Tang4† Chengjie Wang2,3†
1
Tsinghua Univeristy 2 Tencent YouTu Lab 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{hdh20, dyk20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

tfan.108@gmail.com

{mumuychen, choasliu, jenningsliu, shangxu, wenlongwu, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com

Abstract
The detector-free feature matching approaches are currently attracting great attention thanks to their excellent
performance. However, these methods still struggle at
large-scale and viewpoint variations, due to the geometric inconsistency resulting from the application of the
mutual nearest neighbour criterion (i.e., one-to-one assignment) in patch-level matching. Accordingly, we introduce AdaMatcher, which first accomplishes the feature correlation and co-visible area estimation through
an elaborate feature interaction module, then performs
adaptive assignment on patch-level matching while estimating the scales between images, and finally refines
the co-visible matches through scale alignment and subpixel regression module. Extensive experiments show
that AdaMatcher outperforms solid baselines and achieves
state-of-the-art results on many downstream tasks. Additionally, the adaptive assignment and sub-pixel refinement module can be used as a refinement network for other
matching methods, such as SuperGlue, to boost their performance further. The code will be publicly available at
https://github.com/AbyssGaze/AdaMatcher.

1. Introduction
Establishing accurate correspondences for local features
between image pairs is an essential basis for a broad range
of computer vision tasks, including visual localization,
structure from motion (SfM), simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM), etc. However, achieving reliable and accurate feature matching is still challenging due to various
factors such as scale changes, viewpoint diversification, illumination variations, repetitive patterns, and poor texture.
Existing image matching pipelines are mainly divided
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

𝑰𝑩

Patch centre
Projected point

𝑰𝑪

𝑰𝑨

𝑰𝑪

𝑝𝐵
𝑝𝐴

𝑝𝐵
𝑝𝐴

𝑝1𝐶
𝑝2𝐶

One-to-one Assignment

𝑝1𝐶
𝑝2𝐶

Adaptive Assignment

Figure 1. An illustration of one-to-one assignment and adaptive assignment. Under viewpoint changes or scale variations,
one-to-one assignment leads to geometric inconsistency in patchlevel feature matching, while adaptive assignment does not. For
example, with one-to-one assignment, patch pair (pA , pC
2 ) is
C
treated as a negative example, even though both pC
1 and p2 are
A
A
projected into p of I . Such a matching rule is inconsistent with
two-view and multi-view projective geometry.

into two types: detector-based and detector-free. The former is to build matches on detected and described sparse
keypoints [8, 19, 20, 23, 26, 32]. However, as the detectorbased matching pipeline relies on the reliability of keypoint detectors and features description, it tends to perform poorly under large viewpoint changes or scale variations. For the latter, the detector-free matching pipeline
can take full advantage of the rich context to establish corre-

5425

