This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MM-3DScene: 3D Scene Understanding by Customizing Masked Modeling with
Informative-Preserved Reconstruction and Self-Distilled Consistency
Mingye Xu1,3,4 *, Mutian Xu2,5 *, Tong He4 , Wanli Ouyang4 , Yali Wang1,4†, Xiaoguang Han2,5 , Yu Qiao1,4†
1

The Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
3
SSE, CUHKSZ
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
FNii, CUHKSZ
mingyexu.github.io/mm3dscene

Figure 1. How to apply masked modeling for large-scale 3D scenes? (a) Conventional random masked modeling on 3D scenes may cause a
high risk of uncertainty.In this figure, a chair and a TV are totally masked, which are extremely difficult to be recovered without any context
guidance. (b) Our MM-3DScene exploits local statistics to discover and preserve representative structured points, effectively simplifying
the pretext task. At each learning step, our method focuses on restoring regional geometry, and enjoys less ambiguity. Moreover, since
unmasked areas are underexplored during reconstruction, the model is encouraged to maintain the intrinsic spatial consistency on unmasked
points between different masking ratios, which requires the consistent understanding of unmasked areas.

Abstract
Masked Modeling (MM) has demonstrated widespread
success in various vision challenges, by reconstructing
masked visual patches. Yet, applying MM for large-scale
3D scenes remains an open problem due to the data sparsity and scene complexity. The conventional random masking paradigm used in 2D images often causes a high risk of
ambiguity when recovering the masked region of 3D scenes.
To this end, we propose a novel informative-preserved reconstruction, which explores local statistics to discover and
preserve the representative structured points, effectively enhancing the pretext masking task for 3D scene understanding. Integrated with a progressive reconstruction manner, our method can concentrate on modeling regional geometry and enjoy less ambiguity for masked reconstruction. Besides, such scenes with progressive masking ra*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

tios can also serve to self-distill their intrinsic spatial consistency, requiring to learn the consistent representations
from unmasked areas. By elegantly combining informativepreserved reconstruction on masked areas and consistency
self-distillation from unmasked areas, a unified framework
called MM-3DScene is yielded. We conduct comprehensive
experiments on a host of downstream tasks. The consistent
improvement (e.g., +6.1% mAP@0.5 on object detection
and +2.2% mIoU on semantic segmentation) demonstrates
the superiority of our approach.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding plays an essential role in various visual applications, such as virtual reality, robot navigation, and autonomous driving. Over the past few years, deep
learning has dominated 3D scene parsing tasks [26, 40, 73].
However, traditional supervised learning methods require
massive annotation of 3D scene data that are extremely la-

4380

