This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstMove: Instance Motion for Object-centric Video Segmentation
Qihao Liu*1
1

Junfeng Wu*2

Johns Hopkins University

2

Yi Jiang3

Xiang Bai2

Alan Yuille1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology

1. Introduction
Segmenting and tracking object instances in a given
video is a critical topic in computer vision, with various applications in video understanding, video editing, autonomous driving, augmented reality, etc. Three representative tasks include video object segmentation (VOS), video
* First two authors contributed equally. Work done during an internship
at ByteDance. The code and models are available for research purposes at
https://github.com/wjf5203/VNext.

Instance Motion

Despite significant efforts, cutting-edge video segmentation methods still remain sensitive to occlusion and rapid
movement, due to their reliance on the appearance of objects in the form of object embeddings, which are vulnerable to these disturbances. A common solution is to
use optical flow to provide motion information, but essentially it only considers pixel-level motion, which still relies on appearance similarity and hence is often inaccurate under occlusion and fast movement. In this work,
we study the instance-level motion and present InstMove,
which stands for Instance Motion for Object-centric Video
Segmentation. In comparison to pixel-wise motion, InstMove mainly relies on instance-level motion information
that is free from image feature embeddings, and features
physical interpretations, making it more accurate and robust toward occlusion and fast-moving objects. To better
fit in with the video segmentation tasks, InstMove uses instance masks to model the physical presence of an object
and learns the dynamic model through a memory network
to predict its position and shape in the next frame. With only
a few lines of code, InstMove can be integrated into current
SOTA methods for three different video segmentation tasks
and boost their performance. Specifically, we improve the
previous arts by 1.5 AP on OVIS dataset, which features
heavy occlusions, and 4.9 AP on YouTubeVIS-Long dataset,
which mainly contains fast moving objects. These results
suggest that instance-level motion is robust and accurate,
and hence serving as a powerful solution in complex scenarios for object-centric video segmentation.

3

ByteDance

Frame t-1

Frame t

Frame t-1 Mask

Optical Flow

GT mask

Propagated Mask

Pixel Motion

Abstract

Song Bai3

+

Motion Mask

Previous Masks

InstMove

Figure 1. Different from optical flow that estimates pixel-level
motion, InstMove learns instance-level motion and deformation
directly from previous instance masks and predicts more accurate
and robust position and shape estimates for the current frame, even
in scenarios with occlusions and rapid motion.

instance segmentation (VIS), and multi-object tracking and
segmentation (MOTS). These tasks differ significantly from
video semantic segmentation [16, 19, 31, 52], which aims
to classify every pixel in a video frame, hence we refer to
them as object-centric video segmentation in this paper. Despite significant progress, state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
are still struggle with occlusion, rapid motion, and significant changes in objects, resulting in a marked drop in handling longer or more complex videos.
One reason we observe is that most methods rely solely
on appearance to localize objects and track them across
frames. Specifically, a majority of VOS methods [10, 30,
35, 40, 51, 67] use the previous frames as target templates
and construct a feature memory bank of embeddings for all
target objects. This is then used to match the pixel-level feature in the new frame. Online VIS [6, 15, 21, 28, 65, 72, 73]
and MOTS [25, 71] methods directly perform per-frame instance segmentation based on image features and use the
object embeddings to track them through the video. While
these paradigms work well on simple videos, they are sensitive to intense appearance changes and struggle with handling multiple object instances with similar appearances, resulting in large errors when dealing with complex scenarios

6344

