This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Spatio-temporal Alignment
for Efficient Event-based Motion Estimation
Xueyan Huang
Yueyi Zhang *
Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China
hxy2020@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Time (ms)
20

t

In this paper, we propose an efficient event-based motion
estimation framework for various motion models. Different from previous works, we design a progressive event-tomap alignment scheme and utilize the spatio-temporal correlations to align events. In detail, we progressively align
sampled events in an event batch to the time-surface map
and obtain the updated motion model by minimizing a novel
time-surface loss. In addition, a dynamic batch size strategy is applied to adaptively adjust the batch size so that
all events in the batch are consistent with the current motion model. Our framework has three advantages: a) the
progressive scheme refines motion parameters iteratively,
achieving accurate motion estimation; b) within one iteration, only a small portion of events are involved in optimization, which greatly reduces the total runtime; c) the
dynamic batch size strategy ensures that the constant velocity assumption always holds. We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate our framework on challenging high-speed scenes with three motion models: rotational,
homography, and 6-DOF models. Experimental results
demonstrate that our framework achieves state-of-the-art
estimation accuracy and efficiency. The code is available
at https://github.com/huangxueyan/PEME.

1. Introduction
Event cameras [25, 30, 33], also known as bio-inspired
silicon retinas, are novel vision sensors that asynchronously
respond to pixel-wise brightness changes. Event cameras
have the properties of high temporal resolution and high dynamic range, which make event cameras appealing to tackle
many computer vision tasks under challenging conditions,
such as high-speed pose estimation [5, 18, 19], HDR video
generation [27, 31, 32, 34], 3D reconstruction [9, 11, 26] and
low-latency motion estimation [7, 10, 24].
Event-based motion estimation aims to find the ego* Corresponding author

15

!"#
y

!"$
!"%

y

x

(a) Event stream

y

!"%
!"$
!"#

10

!

5

x

(b) Unaligned events

x

0

(c) Aligned events

Figure 1. Event-based motion estimation. (a): A segment
of the event cloud generated by rotational motion from the
shapes rotation dataset [20]. (b): An event frame generated from
unaligned events. (c): An event frame generated from aligned
events.

motion of the event camera. Since events can be triggered
by the motion of the camera, the alignment of events is
highly correlated with the camera’s motion. The motion estimation problem is normally cast to an optimization problem based on the alignment of events [4]. With correct motion parameters, events triggered by the same world point
can be aligned to the same pixel, forming an event frame
with sharp edges. As for unaligned events, they generate
blurred edges in the event frame. Fig. 1 shows a segment of
the event cloud as well as two event frames with unaligned
and aligned events.
Many approaches have been proposed for event-based
motion estimation, such as contrast maximization, entropy
minimization, and Poisson point process [6, 8, 22]. These
methods follow the same procedure: slice an event cloud
into batches with a fixed size or a fixed time interval, and
then optimize a loss function with all the events in the batch.
In practice, an event batch usually contains tens of thousands of events. It is very time-consuming and computationally redundant to involve such an amount of event data
to optimize a motion transformation with 3 or 6 degrees of
freedom (DOF). We observe that events approximately follow the same motion transformation in a short period; thus,
it is probably not necessary to take all the events into account for motion estimation. From this point of view, we
attempt to utilize sampled events to reduce the computational burden. To achieve this, we propose a distinct event-

1537

