This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneTrilogy: On Human Scene-Sketch and its Complementarity
with Photo and Text
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1,2 Subhadeep Koley1,2
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{p.chowdhury, a.bhunia, a.sain, s.koley, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

1. Introduction
Scene understanding sits at the very core of computer vision. As object-level research matures [24, 32], an encouraging shift can be observed in recent years on scene-level
tasks, e.g., scene recognition [113], scene captioning [55],
scene synthesis [34], and scene retrieval [13, 57].
Scene research has generally progressed from that of single modality [113, 114] to the very recent focus on multimodality [3, 13, 19]. The latter setting not only triggered
a series of practical applications [34, 57, 101, 115] but im-

A bench is there in
front of a house.

STBIR

Our
Model
TBIR
Sketch

Subjective
(b)

(d)
sketch specific

text specific

Our
Model

Captioning

In this paper, we extend scene understanding to include
that of human sketch. The result is a complete trilogy of
scene representation from three diverse and complementary
modalities – sketch, photo, and text. Instead of learning a
rigid three-way embedding and be done with it, we focus on
learning a flexible joint embedding that fully supports the
“optionality” that this complementarity brings. Our embedding supports optionality on two axes: (i) optionality
across modalities – use any combination of modalities as
query for downstream tasks like retrieval, (ii) optionality
across tasks – simultaneously utilising the embedding for either discriminative (e.g., retrieval) or generative tasks (e.g.,
captioning). This provides flexibility to end-users by exploiting the best of each modality, therefore serving the very
purpose behind our proposal of a trilogy in the first place.
First, a combination of information-bottleneck and conditional invertible neural networks disentangle the modalityspecific component from modality-agnostic in sketch, photo,
and text. Second, the modality-agnostic instances from
sketch, photo, and text are synergised using a modified
cross-attention. Once learned, we show our embedding can
accommodate a multi-facet of scene-related tasks, including
those enabled for the first time by the inclusion of sketch,
all without any task-specific modifications. Project Page:
https:// pinakinathc.github.io/ scenetrilogy

SBIR

(c)

(a)

Photo Gallery

Abstract

Photo
photo specific

modality agnostic

Figure 1. Some scenes are easy to describe via sketch; for others, text is better. We provide the option to sketch, write, or
both (sketch+text). For “optionality” across tasks, we disentangle
sketch, text, and photo into a discriminative (e.g., retrieval) part
f ag shared across modalities, and a generative (e.g., captioning)
part specific to one modality (fssp , ftsp fpsp ). This supports a multifacet of scene-related tasks without task-specific modifications.

portantly helped to cast insights into scene understanding
on a conceptual level (i.e., what is really being perceived
by humans). To date, research on multi-modal scene understanding has mainly focused on two modalities – text and
photo [59, 61, 62], via applications such as text-based scene
retrieval (TBIR) [35], and scene captioning [23, 61, 62].
This paper follows the said trend of multi-modal scene
understanding and extend it to also include human scenesketch. Sketch is identified because of its unique characteristics of being both expressive and subjective, evident in
an abundance of object-level sketch research [11], and very
recently on scene-level [19]. To verify there is indeed useful complementarity that sketch can bring to multi-modal
scene understanding, we first conducted two pilot studies
(i) on expressivity, we compare text and sketch in terms
of scene image retrieval, and (ii) on subjectivity, we test a
novel task of subjective captioning where sketch or parts-ofspeech [26] are used as guidance for image captioning. On
(i), results show there is significant disagreement in terms of
retrieval accuracy when one is used as query over the other,

10972

