This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

itKD: Interchange Transfer-based Knowledge Distillation for 3D Object
Detection
Hyeon Cho1 , Junyong Choi1,2 , Geonwoo Baek1 , and Wonjun Hwang1,3
1
Ajou University, 2 Hyundai Motor Company, 3 Naver AI Lab
ch0104@ajou.ac.kr, chldusxkr@hyundai.com, bkw0622@ajou.ac.kr, wjhwang@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
Point-cloud based 3D object detectors recently have
achieved remarkable progress. However, most studies are
limited to the development of network architectures for improving only their accuracy without consideration of the
computational efficiency. In this paper, we first propose
an autoencoder-style framework comprising channel-wise
compression and decompression via interchange transferbased knowledge distillation. To learn the map-view feature
of a teacher network, the features from teacher and student
networks are independently passed through the shared autoencoder; here, we use a compressed representation loss
that binds the channel-wised compression knowledge from
both student and teacher networks as a kind of regularization. The decompressed features are transferred in opposite
directions to reduce the gap in the interchange reconstructions. Lastly, we present an head attention loss to match the
3D object detection information drawn by the multi-head
self-attention mechanism. Through extensive experiments,
we verify that our method can train the lightweight model
that is well-aligned with the 3D point cloud detection task
and we demonstrate its superiority using the well-known
public datasets; e.g., Waymo and nuScenes.1

Figure 1. Performance comparison between teacher and student networks for a point-cloud based 3D object detection. The
top example images are qualitatively compared between the results
of teacher, student and our networks. Specifically, the first row images are an input sample with labels and the center heatmap head
of the teacher network. The second row examples are responses
of teacher, student, and ours for the yellow circle on the heatmap
(or the blue dash circle on the input). The bottom image quantitatively shows the computational complexity and the corresponding
accuracy of teacher, student and our networks, respectively. Best
viewed in color.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNN)-based 3D object
detection methods using point clouds [13] [35] [36] [43]
[49] have attracted wide attention based on their outstanding performance for self-driving cars. Recent CNN-based
works have required more computational complexity to
achieve higher precision under the various wild situation.
Some studies [23] [36] [43] have proposed methods to improve the speed of 3D object detection through which the
non-maximum suppression (NMS) or anchor procedures
are removed but the network parameters are still large.
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/hyeon-jo/interchangetransfer-KD.

Knowledge distillation (KD) is one of the parameter
compression techniques, which can effectively train a compact student network through the guidance of a deep teacher
network, as shown in the example images of Fig. 1. Starting
with Hinton’s work [9], many KD studies [10] [20] [28] [44]
have transferred the discriminative teacher knowledge to the
student network for classification tasks. From the viewpoint
of the detection task, KD should be extended to the regression problem, including the object locations, which is not
easy to straight-forwardly apply the classification-based KD
methods to the detection task. To alleviate this problem, KD
methods for object detection have been developed for mimicking the output of the backbone network [15] (e.g., region

13540

