This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Fourier Filter Bank
Zhijie Wu
Yuhe Jin
Kwang Moo Yi
University of British Columbia
{zhijiewu, yuhejin, kmyi}@cs.ubc.ca

Intensity Error (intensity is between 0 and 255)

Frequency

Frequency

Frequency

Frequency

PSNR

Space

Space

Space

Space

InstantNGP

SIREN

ModSine

Ours

Iterations

Figure 1. Teaser – We propose neural Fourier filter bank to perform spatial and frequency-wise decomposition jointly, inspired by wavelets.
Our method provides significantly improved reconstruction quality given the same computation and storage budget, as represented by
the PSNR curve and the error image overlay. Relying only on space partitioning without frequency resolution (InstantNGP) [37] or
frequency encodings without space resolution (SIREN) [47] provides suboptimal performance and convergence. Simply considering both
(ModSine) [34] enhances scalability when applied to larger scenes, but not in terms of quality and convergence.

Abstract
We present a novel method to provide efficient and highly
detailed reconstructions. Inspired by wavelets, we learn a
neural field that decompose the signal both spatially and
frequency-wise. We follow the recent grid-based paradigm
for spatial decomposition, but unlike existing work, encourage specific frequencies to be stored in each grid via Fourier
features encodings. We then apply a multi-layer perceptron
with sine activations, taking these Fourier encoded features
in at appropriate layers so that higher-frequency components are accumulated on top of lower-frequency components sequentially, which we sum up to form the final output. We demonstrate that our method outperforms the state
of the art regarding model compactness and convergence
speed on multiple tasks: 2D image fitting, 3D shape reconstruction, and neural radiance fields. Our code is available
at https://github.com/ubc-vision/NFFB.

1. Introduction
Neural fields [59] have recently been shown to be highly
effective for various tasks ranging from 2D image com-

pression [10, 64], image translation [4, 49], 3D reconstruction [41, 48], to neural rendering [1, 36, 37]. Since the introduction of early methods [36, 38, 48], efforts have been
made to make neural fields more efficient and scalable.
Among various extensions, we are interested in two particular directions: those that utilize spatial decomposition in
the form of grids [7,37,51] that allow fast training and level
of detail; and those that encode the inputs to neural fields
with high-dimensional features via frequency transformation such as periodic sinusoidal representations [36, 47, 53]
that fight the inherent bias of neural fields that is towards low-frequency data [53]. The former drastically reduced the training time allowing various new application
areas [11, 52, 58, 60], while the latter has now become a
standard operation when applying neural fields.
While these two developments have become popular, a
caveat in existing works is that they do not consider the two
together—all grids are treated similarly and interpreted together by a neural network. We argue that this is an important oversight that has a critical outcome. For a model to
be efficient and accurate, different grid resolutions should
focus on different frequency components that are properly
localized. While existing grid methods that naturally local-

14153

