This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVFormer: Semi-supervised Video Transformer for Action Recognition
Zhen Xing1,2 Qi Dai3 Han Hu3 Jingjing Chen1,2 Zuxuan Wu1,2† Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Research Asia
60

Abstract
Semi-supervised action recognition is a challenging but
critical task due to the high cost of video annotations. Existing approaches mainly use convolutional neural networks,
yet current revolutionary vision transformer models have
been less explored. In this paper, we investigate the use
of transformer models under the SSL setting for action
recognition. To this end, we introduce SVFormer, which
adopts a steady pseudo-labeling framework (i.e., EMATeacher) to cope with unlabeled video samples. While a
wide range of data augmentations have been shown effective for semi-supervised image classification, they generally
produce limited results for video recognition. We therefore introduce a novel augmentation strategy, Tube TokenMix, tailored for video data where video clips are mixed
via a mask with consistent masked tokens over the temporal
axis. In addition, we propose a temporal warping augmentation to cover the complex temporal variation in videos,
which stretches selected frames to various temporal durations in the clip. Extensive experiments on three datasets
Kinetics-400, UCF-101, and HMDB-51 verify the advantage of SVFormer. In particular, SVFormer outperforms
the state-of-the-art by 31.5% with fewer training epochs
under the 1% labeling rate of Kinetics-400. Our method
can hopefully serve as a strong benchmark and encourage future search on semi-supervised action recognition
with Transformer networks. Code is released at https:
//github.com/ChenHsing/SVFormer.

1. Introduction
Videos have gradually replaced images and texts on Internet and grown at an exponential rate. On video websites
such as YouTube, millions of new videos are uploaded every day. Supervised video understanding works [4, 15, 17,
29, 34, 56, 70] have achieved great successes. They rely on
† Corresponding author.

Top-1 Accuracy

50
40

Supervised (R-50)
Supervised (ViT-S)
CMPL
SVFormer-S
SVFormer-B

30
20
10

0
UCF101-1%

Kinetics400-1%

Figure 1. Comparison of our method with the supervised baseline
and previous state-of-the-art SSL method [64]. SVFormer significantly outperforms previous methods under the case with very
little labeled data.

large-scale manual annotations, yet labeling so many videos
is time-consuming and labor-intensive. How to make use of
unlabeled videos that are readily available for better video
understanding is of great importance [25, 38, 39].
In this spirit, semi-supervised action recognition [25,
40, 57] explores how to enhance the performance of deep
learning models using large-scale unlabeled data. This
is generally done with labeled data to pretrain the networks [57,64], and then leveraging the pretrained models to
generate pseudo labels for unlabeled data, a process known
as pseudo labeling. The obtained pseudo labels are further
used to refine the pretrained models. In order to improve
the quality of pseudo labeling, previous methods [57, 62]
use additional modalities such as optical flow [3] and temporal gradient [50], or introduce auxiliary networks [64] to
supervise unlabeled data. Though these methods present
promising results, they typically require additional training
or inference cost, preventing them from scaling up.
Recently, video transformers [2,4,34] have shown strong
results compared to CNNs [15, 17, 22]. Though great success has been achieved, the exploration of transformers on
semi-supervised video tasks remains unexplored. While it
sounds appealing to extend vision transformers directly to
SSL, a previous study shows that transformers perform significantly worse compared to CNNs in the low-data regime

18816

