This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShadowNeuS: Neural SDF Reconstruction by Shadow Ray Supervision
Jingwang Ling1
1

Zhibo Wang2

School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Feng Xu1 *
2

SenseTime Research

Abstract
By supervising camera rays between a scene and multiview image planes, NeRF reconstructs a neural scene representation for the task of novel view synthesis. On the
other hand, shadow rays between the light source and the
scene have yet to be considered. Therefore, we propose a
novel shadow ray supervision scheme that optimizes both
the samples along the ray and the ray location. By supervising shadow rays, we successfully reconstruct a neural SDF of the scene from single-view images under multiple lighting conditions. Given single-view binary shadows, we train a neural network to reconstruct a complete
scene not limited by the camera’s line of sight. By further
modeling the correlation between the image colors and the
shadow rays, our technique can also be effectively extended
to RGB inputs. We compare our method with previous works
on challenging tasks of shape reconstruction from singleview binary shadow or RGB images and observe significant improvements. The code and data are available at
https://github.com/gerwang/ShadowNeuS.

1. Introduction
Neural field [43] has been used for 3D scene representation in recent years. It achieves remarkable quality because
of the ability to continuously parameterize a scene with a
compact neural network. The neural network nature makes
it amenable to various optimization tasks in 3D vision, including long-standing problems like image-based [28, 51]
and point cloud-based [26, 31] 3D reconstruction. So more
and more works are using neural fields as the 3D scene representation for various related tasks.
Among these works, NeRF [27] is a representative
method that incorporates a part of physically based light
transport [38] into the neural field. The light transport describes light travels from the light source to the scene and
then from the scene to the camera. NeRF considers the latter
part to model the interaction between the scene and the cameras along the camera rays (rays from the camera through
* Corresponding author

Single-view inputs

Reconstruction viewed at novel views

Figure 1. Our method can reconstruct neural scenes from singleview images captured under multiple lightings by effectively leveraging a novel shadow ray supervision scheme.

the scene). By supervising these camera rays of different
viewpoints with the corresponding recorded images, NeRF
optimizes a neural field to represent the scene. Then NeRF
casts camera rays from novel viewpoints through the optimized neural field to generate novel-view images.
However, NeRF does not model the rays from the scene
to the light source, which motivates us to consider: can we
optimize a neural field by supervising these rays? These
rays are often called shadow rays as the light emitted from
the light source can be absorbed by scene particles along the
rays, resulting in varying light visibility (a.k.a. shadows) at
the scene surface. By recording the incoming radiance at
the surface, we should be able to supervise the shadow rays
to infer the scene geometry.
Given this observation, we derive a novel problem of supervising the shadow rays to optimize a neural field representing the scene, analogizing to NeRF that models the
camera rays. Like multiple viewpoints in NeRF, we illuminate the scene multiple times using different light directions
to obtain sufficient observations. For each illumination, we
use a fixed camera to record the light visibility at the scene

175

