This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TBP-Former: Learning Temporal Bird’s-Eye-View Pyramid for
Joint Perception and Prediction in Vision-Centric Autonomous Driving
Shaoheng Fang1 * Zi Wang1 * Yiqi Zhong2 Junhao Ge1 Siheng Chen1,3†
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
1

{shfang, w4ngz1, cancaries, sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn

2

{yiqizhon}@usc.edu

Abstract
Vision-centric joint perception and prediction (PnP) has
become an emerging trend in autonomous driving research.
It predicts the future states of the traffic participants in
the surrounding environment from raw RGB images. However, it is still a critical challenge to synchronize features
obtained at multiple camera views and timestamps due to
inevitable geometric distortions and further exploit those
spatial-temporal features. To address this issue, we propose a temporal bird’s-eye-view pyramid transformer (TBPFormer) for vision-centric PnP, which includes two novel
designs. First, a pose-synchronized BEV encoder is proposed to map raw image inputs with any camera pose at
any time to a shared and synchronized BEV space for better spatial-temporal synchronization. Second, a spatialtemporal pyramid transformer is introduced to comprehensively extract multi-scale BEV features and predict future BEV states with the support of spatial priors. Extensive experiments on nuScenes dataset show that our
proposed framework overall outperforms all state-of-theart vision-based prediction methods. Code is available
at: https://github.com/MediaBrain-SJTU/TBP-Former

1. Introduction
As one of the most fascinating engineering projects,
autonomous driving has been an aspiration for many researchers and engineers for decades. Although significant
progress has been made, it is still an open question in designing a practical solution to achieve the goal of full selfdriving. A traditional and common solution consists of a
sequential stack of perception, prediction, planning, and
control. Despite the idea of divide-and-conquer having
achieved tremendous success in developing software sys* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Two major challenges in vision-based perception and
prediction are (a) how to avoid distortion and deficiency when aggregating features across time and camera views; and (b) how to
achieve spatial-temporal feature learning for prediction. Our PoseSynchronized BEV Encoder can precisely map the visual features into synchronized BEV space, and Spatial-Temporal Pyramid Transformer extracts feature at multiple scales.

tems, a long stack could cause cascading failures in an autonomous system. Recently, there is a trend to combine
multiple parts in an autonomous system to be a joint module, cutting down the stack. For example, [25, 46] consider
joint perception and prediction and [5,43] explore joint prediction and planning. This work focuses on joint perception
and prediction.
The task of joint perception and prediction (PnP) aims
to predict the current and future states of the surrounding environment with the input of multi-frame raw sensor

1368

