This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Depth Estimation from Thermal Image
Ukcheol Shin
KAIST

Jinsun Park
Pusan National University

In So Kweon
KAIST

shinwc159@gmail.com

jspark@pusan.ac.kr

iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Robust and accurate geometric understanding against
adverse weather conditions is one top prioritized conditions to achieve a high-level autonomy of self-driving cars.
However, autonomous driving algorithms relying on the visible spectrum band are easily impacted by weather and
lighting conditions. A long-wave infrared camera, also
known as a thermal imaging camera, is a potential rescue to achieve high-level robustness. However, the missing necessities are the well-established large-scale dataset
and public benchmark results. To this end, in this paper, we first built a large-scale Multi-Spectral Stereo (MS2 )
dataset, including stereo RGB, stereo NIR, stereo thermal,
and stereo LiDAR data along with GNSS/IMU information. The collected dataset provides about 195K synchronized data pairs taken from city, residential, road, campus,
and suburban areas in the morning, daytime, and nighttime
under clear-sky, cloudy, and rainy conditions. Secondly,
we conduct an exhaustive validation process of monocular and stereo depth estimation algorithms designed on
visible spectrum bands to benchmark their performance
in the thermal image domain. Lastly, we propose a unified depth network that effectively bridges monocular depth
and stereo depth tasks from a conditional random field
approach perspective. Our dataset and source code are
available at https://github.com/UkcheolShin/
MS2-MultiSpectralStereoDataset.

1. Introduction
Recently, a number of researches have been conducted
for accurate and robust geometric understanding in selfdriving cars based on the widely-used benchmark datasets,
such as KITTI [15], DDAD [17], and nuScenes [4]. Modern computer vision algorithms deploy a deep neural network and data-driven machine learning technique to achieve
high-level accuracy, which needs large-scale datasets. However, from the perspective of robustness in real-world, the
algorithms mostly rely on visible spectrum images and are
easily degenerated by weather and lighting conditions.

(a) Depth from thermal images via unified depth network

(b) RGB (Reference)

(c) Thermal image

(d) Depth map

Figure 1. Depth from thermal images in various environments.
Our proposed network can estimate both monocular and stereo
depth maps regardless of given a single or stereo thermal image
via unified network architecture. Furthermore, depth estimation
results from thermal images show high-level reliability and robustness under day-light, low-light, and rainy conditions.

Therefore, recent works have actively investigated alternative sensors such as Near-Infrared (NIR) cameras [39],
LiDARs [16, 51], radars [14, 32], and long-wave infrared
(LWIR) cameras [35, 45] to achieve reliable and robust
geometric understanding in adverse conditions. Among
these alternative and complementary sensors, LWIR camera (i.e., thermal camera) has become more popular because of its competitive price, adverse weather robustness,
and unique modality information (i.e., temperature). Therefore, various thermal image based computer vision solutions [3, 21–23, 27, 35, 45, 47–50] to achieve high-level robustness have been actively attracting attention recently.

1043

