This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LASP: Text-to-Text Optimization for Language-Aware Soft Prompting
of Vision & Language Models

1

Adrian Bulat1,2 , Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3
Samsung AI Cambridge 2 Technical University of Iasi 3 Queen Mary University of London

Abstract
Soft prompt learning has recently emerged as one of the
methods of choice for adapting V&L models to a downstream task using a few training examples. However, current methods significantly overfit the training data, suffering from large accuracy degradation when tested on unseen classes from the same domain. To this end, in this
paper, we make the following 4 contributions: (1) To alleviate base class overfitting, we propose a novel LanguageAware Soft Prompting (LASP) learning method by means of
a text-to-text cross-entropy loss that maximizes the probability of the learned prompts to be correctly classified with
respect to pre-defined hand-crafted textual prompts. (2) To
increase the representation capacity of the prompts, we propose grouped LASP where each group of prompts is optimized with respect to a separate subset of textual prompts.
(3) We identify a visual-language misalignment introduced
by prompt learning and LASP, and more importantly, propose a re-calibration mechanism to address it. (4) We show
that LASP is inherently amenable to including, during training, virtual classes, i.e. class names for which no visual
samples are available, further increasing the robustness of
the learned prompts. Through evaluations on 11 datasets,
we show that our approach (a) significantly outperforms all
prior works on soft prompting, and (b) matches and surpasses, for the first time, the accuracy on novel classes obtained by hand-crafted prompts and CLIP for 8 out of 11
test datasets. Code will be made available here.

1. Introduction
Large-scale pre-training of neural networks has recently
resulted in the construction of a multitude of foundation
models for Language [7,25] and Vision & Language (V&L)
understanding [1, 13, 24, 34]. Unlike the previous generation of neural networks, such models can better capture the
distribution of the world from which new favorable properties and characteristics emerge. Of particular interest to
this work are V&L models trained with contrastive learning (i.e. CLIP-like models [13, 18, 24, 33, 34]), which have

enabled seamless few-shot and even zero-shot adaptation to
new downstream tasks and datasets. Specifically, this paper proposes a simple yet highly effective way to drastically
improve soft prompt learning for the few-shot adaptation of
the V&L model to a given downstream task.
Similarly to their NLP counterparts [16, 17, 24], prompt
engineering and learning has emerged as one of the
most powerful techniques for adapting a V&L to new
tasks. Initially, in [24], a set of manually-defined handengineered templates (or prompts) like a photo of a
{cls name}, or a black and white photo of
a {cls name} were passed through the text encoder of
the V&L model to create class-specific weights for category
cls name that can be used for zero-shot recognition. Following research in NLP [16, 17], subsequent work [35, 36]
has proposed replacing the manually picked templates with
a sequence of learnable vectors, also coined soft prompts,
which are fed as input to the text encoder along with the
class name cls name. The soft prompts are learned from
a few training examples with the entire V&L model kept
frozen. The whole process can be seen as parameter efficient fine-tuning of the model on a small training dataset.
However, a clearly identifiable problem with prompt
learning is base class overfitting: while the accuracy on
the classes used for training (base classes) significantly increases, the accuracy on unseen, during training, (novel)
classes significantly drops. This is to some extent expected,
as soft prompts are learned from few examples belonging to
the base classes. Notably, on novel classes, direct, zero-shot
recognition using hand-engineered prompts outperforms all
existing soft prompt learning methods.
Key idea: To alleviate base class overfitting, in this work,
we propose a solution motivated by the following observation: since prompt learning improves the accuracy on
base classes, but prompt engineering is significantly better on novel classes, we propose to learn the soft prompts
by adding a cross entropy text-to-text loss that enforces the
learned prompts to be close, in embedding space, to the
textual ones, thus exploiting the intrinsic information captured by the text encoder. The proposed text-to-text loss enables language-only optimization for V&L model adaption

23232

