This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Activating More Pixels in Image Super-Resolution Transformer
Xiangyu Chen1,2,3 Xintao Wang4 Jiantao Zhou1 Yu Qiao2,3 Chao Dong2,3†
1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, University of Macau
2
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
{chxy95, xintao.alpha}@gmail.com jtzhou@um.edu.mo {yu.qiao, chao.dong}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Transformer-based methods have shown impressive performance in low-level vision tasks, such as image superresolution. However, we find that these networks can only
utilize a limited spatial range of input information through
attribution analysis. This implies that the potential of
Transformer is still not fully exploited in existing networks.
In order to activate more input pixels for better reconstruction, we propose a novel Hybrid Attention Transformer
(HAT). It combines both channel attention and windowbased self-attention schemes, thus making use of their complementary advantages of being able to utilize global statistics and strong local fitting capability. Moreover, to better
aggregate the cross-window information, we introduce an
overlapping cross-attention module to enhance the interaction between neighboring window features. In the training stage, we additionally adopt a same-task pre-training
strategy to exploit the potential of the model for further improvement. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of
the proposed modules, and we further scale up the model to
demonstrate that the performance of this task can be greatly
improved. Our overall method significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods by more than 1dB.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) is a classic problem in computer vision and image processing. It aims
to reconstruct a high-resolution image from a given lowresolution input. Since deep learning has been successfully applied to the SR task [10], numerous methods based
on the convolutional neural network (CNN) have been proposed [8, 11, 12, 24, 29, 32, 68, 70] and almost dominate this
field in the past few years. Recently, due to the success in
natural language processing, Transformer [53] has attracted
the attention of the computer vision community. After mak† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Performance comparison on PSNR(dB) of the proposed
HAT with the state-of-the-art methods SwinIR [31] and EDT [27].
HAT-L represents a larger variant of HAT. Our approach can surpass the state-of-the-art methods by 0.3dB∼1.2dB.

ing rapid progress on high-level vision tasks [14, 39, 54],
Transformer-based methods are also developed for lowlevel vision tasks [6, 57, 65], as well as for SR [27, 31]. Especially, a newly designed network, SwinIR [31], obtains a
breakthrough improvement in this task.
Despite the success, “why Transformer is better than
CNN” remains a mystery. An intuitive explanation is that
this kind of network can benefit from the self-attention
mechanism and utilize long-range information. Thus, we
employ the attribution analysis method LAM [15] to examine the involved range of utilized information for reconstruction in SwinIR. Interestingly, we find that SwinIR does
NOT exploit more input pixels than CNN-based methods
(e.g., RCAN [68]) in super-resolution, as shown in Fig. 2.
Besides, although SwinIR obtains higher quantitative performance on average, it produces inferior results to RCAN
in some samples, due to the limited range of utilized information. These phenomena illustrate that Transformer has
a stronger ability to model local information, but the range
of its utilized information needs to be expanded. In addition, we also find that blocking artifacts would appear in the
intermediate features of SwinIR, as depicted in Fig. 3. It
demonstrates that the shift window mechanism cannot perfectly realize cross-window information interaction.

22367

