This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-Aware Face Swapping
Yixuan Li Chao Ma* Yichao Yan* Wenhan Zhu Xiaokang Yang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{lyx0208, chaoma, yanyichao, zhuwenhan823, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Demonstration of the proposed 3dSwap. Given single-view source and target images, our method synthesizes high-fidelity and
multi-view-consistent images of the swapped faces and the corresponding geometries. More results can be found on our project page.

Abstract
Face swapping is an important research topic in computer vision with wide applications in entertainment and
privacy protection. Existing methods directly learn to swap
2D facial images, taking no account of the geometric information of human faces. In the presence of large pose
variance between the source and the target faces, there
always exist undesirable artifacts on the swapped face.
In this paper, we present a novel 3D-aware face swapping method that generates high-fidelity and multi-viewconsistent swapped faces from single-view source and target images. To achieve this, we take advantage of the strong
geometry and texture prior of 3D human faces, where the
2D faces are projected into the latent space of a 3D generative model. By disentangling the identity and attribute features in the latent space, we succeed in swapping faces in
a 3D-aware manner, being robust to pose variations while
transferring fine-grained facial details. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our 3D-aware face
swapping framework in terms of visual quality, identity similarity, and multi-view consistency. Code is available at
https://lyx0208.github.io/3dSwap.
∗ Corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
Face swapping aims to transfer the identity of a person
in the source image to another person in the target image
while preserving other attributes like head pose, expression,
illumination, background, etc. It has attracted extensive attention recently in the academic and industrial world for its
potential wide applications in entertainment [14,30,38] and
privacy protection [7, 37, 48].
The key of face swapping is to transfer the geometric
shape of the facial region (i.e., eyes, nose, mouth) and
detailed texture information (such as the color of eyes)
from the source image to the target image while preserving both geometry and texture of non-facial regions
(i.e., hair, background, etc). Currently, some 3D-based
methods consider geometry prior of human faces by fitting the input image to 3D face models such as 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [8] to overcome the differences of
face orientation and expression between sources and targets [7, 15, 34, 43]. However, these parametric face models only produce coarse frontal faces without fine-grained
details, leading to low-resolution and fuzzy swapping results. On the other hand, following Generative Adversarial
Network [24], GAN-based [6, 23, 32, 39, 40, 42] or GANinversion-based [44, 55, 57, 60] approaches adopt the ad-

12705

