This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Breaking the “Object” in Video Object Segmentation
Pavel Tokmakov
Jie Li
Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute
first.last@tri.global

Abstract
The appearance of an object can be fleeting when it
transforms. As eggs are broken or paper is torn, their color,
shape and texture can change dramatically, preserving virtually nothing of the original except for the identity itself.
Yet, this important phenomenon is largely absent from existing video object segmentation (VOS) benchmarks. In this
work, we close the gap by collecting a new dataset for
Video Object Segmentation under Transformations (VOST).
It consists of more than 700 high-resolution videos, captured in diverse environments, which are 20 seconds long on
average and densely labeled with instance masks. We adopt
a careful, multi-step approach to ensure that these videos
focus on complex object transformations, capturing their
full temporal extent. We then extensively evaluate stateof-the-art VOS methods and make a number of important
discoveries. In particular, we show that existing methods
struggle when applied to this novel task and that their main
limitation lies in over-reliance on static appearance cues.
This motivates us to propose a few modifications for the topperforming baseline that improve its capabilities by better
modeling spatio-temporal information. More broadly, our
work highlights the need for further research on learning
more robust video object representations.

Nothing is lost or created, all things are merely transformed.

Antoine Lavoisier

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal cues are central in segmenting and
tracking objects in humans, with static appearance playing only a supporting role [23, 27, 43]. In the most extreme scenarios, we can even localize and track objects defined by coherent motion alone, with no unique appearance
whatsoever [20]. Among other benefits, this appearancelast approach increases robustness to sensory noise and
enables object permanence reasoning [41]. By contrast,
modern computer vision models for video object segmentation [3, 11, 44, 64] operate in an appearance-first paradigm.

Figure 1. Video frames from the DAVIS’17 dataset [42] (above),
and our proposed VOST (below). While existing VOS datasets
feature many challenges, such as deformations and pose change,
the overall appearance of objects varies little. Our work focuses on
object transformations, where appearance is no longer a reliable
cue and more advanced spatio-temporal modeling is required.

Indeed, the most successful approaches effectively store
patches with associated instance labels and retrieve the closest patches to segment the target frame [11, 38, 44, 64].
What are the reasons for this stark disparity? While some
are algorithmic (e.g., object recognition models being first
developed for static images), a key reason lies in the datasets
we use. See for instance the “Breakdance” sequence from
the validation set of DAVIS’17 [42] in Figure 1: while
the dancer’s body experiences significant deformations and
pose changes, the overall appearance of the person remains
constant, making it an extremely strong cue.
However, this example – representative of many VOS
datasets – covers only a narrow slice of the life of an object.
In addition to translations, rotations, and minor deformations, objects can transform. Bananas can be peeled, paper
can be cut, clay can be molded into bricks, etc. These transformations can dramatically change the color, texture, and
shape of an object, preserving virtually nothing of the orig-

22836

