This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Network-free, unsupervised semantic segmentation with synthetic images
Qianli Feng

Raghudeep Gadde

Wentong Liao
Amazon

Eduard Ramon

Aleix Martinez

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation results of scenes and single objects. Top row: Segmentation of couches (blue mask) and coffee tables
(orange mask) in living room scene images. Middle row: Foreground-background face segmentation as well as fine-grained semantic
segmentation of facial components. Bottom row: Foreground-background segmentation of animals.

Abstract
We derive a method that yields highly accurate semantic
segmentation maps without the use of any additional neural network, layers, manually annotated training data, or
supervised training. Our method is based on the observation that the correlation of a set of pixels belonging to the
same semantic segment do not change when generating synthetic variants of an image using the style mixing approach
in GANs. We show how we can use GAN inversion to accurately semantically segment synthetic and real photos as
well as generate large training image-semantic segmentation mask pairs for downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a computer vision problem with countless important applications, including selfdriving cars, medical image analysis, and image content
generation and editing [5, 11, 12, 19]. Yet, attaining accurate semantic segmentation masks remains an open problem [18, 28]. A recent proposed solution is to synthesize
large training data-sets of photo-realistic images and their
masks using generative models like Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [1, 6, 18, 19, 28]. However, these methods require 1. adding and training an extra neural network
to synthesize the mask, increasing model and training complexity, and 2. very costly pixel-wise human annotations on
a large set of training images for every type of object and

23602

