This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QuantArt: Quantizing Image Style Transfer Towards High Visual Fidelity
Donglai Wei3
Jiebo Luo2
Hanspeter Pfister1
Jie An2 *
Siyu Huang1 *
1
Harvard University 2 University of Rochester 3 Boston College
{huang,pfister}@seas.harvard.com
Art

Photo

Photo

donglai.wei@bc.edu
Art

Art

Art

Photo

Ours

Reference

Input

Photo

{jan6,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

Figure 1. The proposed QuantArt method produces impressive arbitrary style transfer results on various image style transfer tasks.

Abstract
The mechanism of existing style transfer algorithms is
by minimizing a hybrid loss function to push the generated
image toward high similarities in both content and style.
However, this type of approach cannot guarantee visual fidelity, i.e., the generated artworks should be indistinguishable from real ones. In this paper, we devise a new style
transfer framework called QuantArt for high visual-fidelity
stylization. QuantArt pushes the latent representation of the
generated artwork toward the centroids of the real artwork
distribution with vector quantization. By fusing the quantized and continuous latent representations, QuantArt allows flexible control over the generated artworks in terms
of content preservation, style similarity, and visual fidelity.
Experiments on various style transfer settings show that our
QuantArt framework achieves significantly higher visual fidelity compared with the existing style transfer methods.

1. Introduction
Image style transfer aims at transferring the artistic style
of a reference image to a content image, where the output
image should have the style (e.g., colors, textures, strokes,

and tones) of the reference and the content information of
the content image. Great advances [4, 5, 13, 14, 39, 40, 63]
have been made in the area of image style transfer, where
the arbitrary style transfer (AST) has become one of the
main research focuses. Given a trained model, AST algorithms [8, 26, 33] can perform style transfer on arbitrary unseen content-style pairs in a zero-shot manner, such that it
enables more practical applications1 .
Existing AST algorithms, including the statistics-based
methods [1, 26, 35, 60] and the patch-based methods [6, 47],
deliver remarkable style transfer results by matching the
artistic style information of the stylized image and the style
reference. However, taking the high-fidelity artwork generation as the ultimate goal of image style transfer, all existing
methods can still be improved since there are few mechanisms to guarantee a high artistic fidelity of the stylized
image. A few existing work [3,59] accommodate the adversarial loss [15] into the style transfer framework to enhance
the image quality. However, the performance improvement
is hindered by the heterogeneous optimization objectives of
high image quality and faithful image stylization.
In this work, we introduce visual fidelity as a new eval1 The codes of this paper are available at https://github.com/
siyuhuang/QuantArt

5947

