This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAGE: MAsked Generative Encoder to Unify
Representation Learning and Image Synthesis
Tianhong Li1∗ Huiwen Chang3 Shlok Kumar Mishra2 Han Zhang3
Dina Katabi1 Dilip Krishnan3
1
MIT CSAIL 2 University of Maryland 3 Google Research

Abstract
Generative modeling and representation learning are
two key tasks in computer vision. However, these models
are typically trained independently, which ignores the potential for each task to help the other, and leads to training
and model maintenance overheads. In this work, we propose MAsked Generative Encoder (MAGE), the first framework to unify SOTA image generation and self-supervised
representation learning. Our key insight is that using variable masking ratios in masked image modeling pre-training
can allow generative training (very high masking ratio)
and representation learning (lower masking ratio) under
the same training framework. Inspired by previous generative models, MAGE uses semantic tokens learned by
a vector-quantized GAN at inputs and outputs, combining
this with masking. We can further improve the representation by adding a contrastive loss to the encoder output.
We extensively evaluate the generation and representation
learning capabilities of MAGE. On ImageNet-1K, a single
MAGE ViT-L model obtains 9.10 FID in the task of classunconditional image generation and 78.9% top-1 accuracy
for linear probing, achieving state-of-the-art performance
in both image generation and representation learning. Code
is available at https://github.com/LTH14/mage.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have seen rapid progress in both generative models and representation learning of visual data.
Generative models have demonstrated increasingly spectacular performance in generating realistic images [3,7,15,46],
while state-of-the-art self-supervised representation learning methods can extract representations at a high semantic level to achieve excellent performance on a number of
∗ This work was done when Tianhong Li interned at Google Research,

and was partially supported by the MIT-IBM Watson Research Collaboration grant. Correspondence to: Tianhong Li <tianhong@mit.edu>,
Huiwen Chang <huiwenchang@google.com>.

Figure 1. Linear probing and class unconditional generation performance of different methods trained and evaluated on ImageNet1K. MAGE achieves SOTA performance in linear probing and establishes a new SOTA in class unconditional generation.

downstream tasks such as linear probing and few-shot transfer [2, 6, 8, 13, 25, 26].
Currently, these two families of models are typically
trained independently. Intuitively, since generation and
recognition tasks require both visual and semantic understanding of data, they should be complementary when combined in a single framework. Generation benefits representation by ensuring that both high-level semantics and lowlevel visual details are captured; conversely, representation
benefits generation by providing rich semantic guidance.
Researchers in natural language processing have observed
this synergy: frameworks such as BERT [14] have both
high-quality text generation and feature extraction. Another
example is DALLE-2 [43], where latents conditioned on
a pre-trained CLIP representation are used to create highquality text-to-image generations.
However, in computer vision, there are currently no
widely adopted models that unify image generation and
representation learning in the same framework. Such uni-

2142

