This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incrementer: Transformer for Class-Incremental Semantic Segmentation with
Knowledge Distillation Focusing on Old Class
Chao Shang,

Hongliang Li ∗, Fanman Meng, Qingbo Wu, Heqian Qiu ∗,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Lanxiao Wang

shangc@std.uestc.edu.cn, hlli@uestc.edu.cn, fmmeng@uestc.edu.cn, qbwu@uestc.edu.cn,
hqqiu@std.uestc.edu.cn, lanxiao.wang@std.uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual Embeddings

Step 1

...

Transformer Decoder

Step 2

...

...

∗ Corresponding authors.

cat
dog
sofa

...

Semantic segmentation [4, 5, 36, 41] is one of the fundamental tasks in the field of computer vision, which aims
to classify each pixel in an image and assign a class label.
Traditional semantic segmentation networks are trained on
datasets where labels for all classes are available simultaneously. However, in practical applications, a more realis-

Step 1
Step 2
Step 3

...

1. Introduction

Input Image

Transformer
Encoder

Class-incremental semantic segmentation aims to incrementally learn new classes while maintaining the capability to segment old ones, and suffers catastrophic forgetting
since the old-class labels are unavailable. Most existing
methods are based on convolutional networks and prevent
forgetting through knowledge distillation, which (1) need to
add additional convolutional layers to predict new classes,
and (2) ignore to distinguish different regions corresponding to old and new classes during knowledge distillation
and roughly distill all the features, thus limiting the learning
of new classes. Based on the above observations, we propose a new transformer framework for class-incremental
semantic segmentation, dubbed Incrementer, which only
needs to add new class tokens to the transformer decoder
for new-class learning. Based on the Incrementer, we propose a new knowledge distillation scheme that focuses on
the distillation in the old-class regions, which reduces the
constraints of the old model on the new-class learning, thus
improving the plasticity. Moreover, we propose a class deconfusion strategy to alleviate the overfitting to new classes
and the confusion of similar classes. Our method is simple and effective, and extensive experiments show that our
method outperforms the SOTAs by a large margin (5∼15
absolute points boosts on both Pascal VOC and ADE20k).
We hope that our Incrementer can serve as a new strong
pipeline for class-incremental semantic segmentation.

Step N
Class Tokens

Class Embeddings

Step 3

Figure 1. Class-incremental learning process based on transformer, assuming that each step contains one new class, so each
step adds one new class token to the decoder.

tic situation is that the network needs to continuously learn
new classes, while the data containing labels of old classes
is not available due to privacy or legal reasons. If the old
model is fine-tuned directly on the new data, the network
will fit the new data and forget the old knowledge learned
before, resulting in catastrophic forgetting [14, 24]. Thus,
this problem leads to a challenging task referred as ClassIncremental Semantic Segmentation [2, 8, 28]. The existing methods [2, 8, 32, 48] for this task typically use fullyconvolutional network [4, 5] as the basic framework, which
uses a CNN backbone as an encoder to extract image features, and then generates segmentation predictions through
a convolutional decoder. To prevent catastrophic forgetting,
most existing methods [8, 32, 45, 48] preserve the learned
old knowledge through knowledge distillation.
Although these methods [8, 25, 48] have achieved remarkable performance, there are still some limitations.
Firstly, global context information is critical for accurate semantic segmentation, while convolution kernel with the local view is difficult to capture global information. More, in
the incremental learning, existing convolution-based methods need to add additional convolution layers into the decoder to predict new classes, and generate segmentations of
classes in different steps through different decoding layers,
which is inefficient with the increasing number of learning

7214

