This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyLess: Boosting the Transferability of Adversarial Examples
Kaisheng Liang
Bin Xiao*
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{cskliang, csbxiao}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

Style Transfer
Inject Style

Adversarial attacks can mislead deep neural networks
(DNNs) by adding imperceptible perturbations to benign
examples. The attack transferability enables adversarial
examples to attack black-box DNNs with unknown architectures or parameters, which poses threats to many realworld applications. We find that existing transferable attacks do not distinguish between style and content features
during optimization, limiting their attack transferability. To
improve attack transferability, we propose a novel attack
method called style-less perturbation (StyLess). Specifically, instead of using a vanilla network as the surrogate
model, we advocate using stylized networks, which encode
different style features by perturbing an adaptive instance
normalization. Our method can prevent adversarial examples from using non-robust style features and help generate transferable perturbations. Comprehensive experiments
show that our method can significantly improve the transferability of adversarial examples. Furthermore, our approach
is generic and can outperform state-of-the-art transferable
attacks when combined with other attack techniques. 1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) [14, 24] are currently effective methods for solving various challenging tasks such
as computer vision, and natural language processing. Although DNNs have amazing accuracy, especially for computer vision tasks such as image classification, they are also
known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [12, 43].
Adversarial examples are malicious images obtained by
adding imperceptible perturbations to benign images. Notably, the transferability of adversarial examples is an intriguing phenomenon, which refers to the property that the
same adversarial example can successfully attack different
black-box DNNs [5, 30, 34, 51].
It has been observed that image style can be decoupled
from image content, and style transfer techniques allow us
* Corresponding author.
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/uhiu/StyLess

Encoder

IN

Stylized Output

Decoder

Inject Synthesized Style
IN
Stylized Model

Update adversarial examples with style-less perturbation

Benign Sample

Stylized Output

StyLess Attack

Figure 1. An overview of our StyLess attack. We create stylized
model F̄ by injecting synthesized style features into the surrogate
model (F = F2 ◦ F1 ) using an adaptive IN layer. StyLess reduces
the use of non-robust style features in the vanilla surrogate model
F , ultimately improving attack transferability.

to generate stylized images based on arbitrary style images [18]. Image style refers to the unique visual characteristics of an image, including its colors, textures, and
lighting. For instance, two photos of the same object taken
by different photographers can have very different styles.
Robust DNNs should rely more on content features of data
than style features. This inspired us to improve attack transferability from the perspective of avoiding non-robust features. We believe that style features of DNNs are non-robust
for building transferable attacks. However, existing attacks
do not distinguish between the surrogate models’ style and
content features, which may reduce attack transferability.
We propose using stylized surrogate models to control
style features, which can significantly improve transferability. We refer to the original surrogate model as the “vanilla
model.” The proposed stylized model is created by adding
an adaptive instance normalization (IN) layer to the vanilla

8163

