This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-frequency Stereo Matching Network
Haoliang Zhao1,4† , Huizhou Zhou2,4† , Yongjun Zhang1* , Jie Chen3 , Yitong Yang1 and Yong Zhao3,4**
1

Text Computing & Cognitive Intelligence Engineering Research Center of National Education
Ministry, State Key Laboratory of Public Big Data, College of Computer Science and Technology,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, Guizhou, China
2
School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou
510006, China
3
The Key Laboratory of Integrated Microsystems, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
4
Ghost-Valley AI Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China

Abstract
In the field of binocular stereo matching, remarkable
progress has been made by iterative methods like RAFTStereo and CREStereo. However, most of these methods
lose information during the iterative process, making it
difficult to generate more detailed difference maps that take
full advantage of high-frequency information. We propose
the Decouple module to alleviate the problem of data
coupling and allow features containing subtle details to
transfer across the iterations which proves to alleviate the
problem significantly in the ablations. To further capture
high-frequency details, we propose a Normalization Refinement module that unifies the disparities as a proportion of
the disparities over the width of the image, which address
the problem of module failure in cross-domain scenarios.
Further, with the above improvements, the ResNet-like
feature extractor that has not been changed for years
becomes a bottleneck. Towards this end, we proposed a
multi-scale and multi-stage feature extractor that introduces the channel-wise self-attention mechanism which
greatly addresses this bottleneck. Our method (DLNR)
ranks 1st on the Middlebury leaderboard, significantly
outperforming the next best method by 13.04%. Our
method also achieves SOTA performance on the KITTI2015 benchmark for D1-fg. Code and demos are available
at: https://github.com/David- Zhao- 1997/
High- frequency- Stereo- Matching- Network.
† These authors contributed equally.
⋆ Corresponding author.

Email: zyj6667@126.com.
⋆⋆ Second Corresponding author.
Email: zhaoyong@pkusz.edu.cn

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Motivation. We aim to address the problem of blurry
edges, thin object missing, and textureless region mismatch.

Stereo depth estimation is becoming the infrastructure
for 3D applications. Accurate depth perception is vital for
autonomous driving, drones navigation, robotics and other
related fields. The main point of the task is to estimate a
pixel-wise displacement map also known as disparity that
can be used to determine the depth of the pixels in the scene.
Traditional stereo matching algorithms [7,11,12] are mainly
divided into two types: global methods [6, 16, 17, 26] and
local methods [1, 13]. Both methods solve the optimization problem by minimizing the objective function containing the data and smoothing terms, while the former takes
into account the global information, the latter simply takes
into account the local information, hence both have their
own benefits in terms of accuracy and speed when solving the optimization problem. Traditional methods have excellent generalization performance and robustness in different scenarios, but perform poorly on details such as weak

1327

