This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Realism Image Compression with a Conditional Generator
Eirikur Agustsson
Google Research
Reykjavı́k, Iceland

David Minnen
Google Research
Mountain View, USA

George Toderici
Google Research
Mountain View, USA

Fabian Mentzer
Google Research
Zürich, Switzerland

eirikur@google.com

dminnen@google.com

gtoderici@google.com

mentzer@google.com

Abstract
By optimizing the rate-distortion-realism trade-off, generative compression approaches produce detailed, realistic images, even at low bit rates, instead of the blurry reconstructions produced by rate-distortion optimized models. However, previous methods do not explicitly control
how much detail is synthesized, which results in a common
criticism of these methods: users might be worried that a
misleading reconstruction far from the input image is generated. In this work, we alleviate these concerns by training a decoder that can bridge the two regimes and navigate
the distortion-realism trade-off. From a single compressed
representation, the receiver can decide to either reconstruct
a low mean squared error reconstruction that is close to
the input, a realistic reconstruction with high perceptual
quality, or anything in between. With our method, we set a
new state-of-the-art in distortion-realism, pushing the frontier of achievable distortion-realism pairs, i.e., our method
achieves better distortions at high realism and better realism at low distortion than ever before.

1. Introduction
Lossy image compression considers the trade-off between the number of bits used to store an input image and
how close the reconstruction (that we obtain from the bits)
is to that input image. As we use more bits, we will be
able to get closer to the input. This idea is formalized in
the fundamental rate-distortion trade-off [34], where “rate”
stands for bit-rate, and “distortion” is formalized as a pairwise metric between the input image and the reconstruction
(e.g., the mean-squared error, MSE).
While minimizing this trade-off has been the focus of
many works starting from JPEG [43] all the way to recent
neural [13] and non-neural [11] codecs, there has been a
surge of interest in additionally considering the “realism”
or “perceptual quality” of the reconstructions [6, 14, 23, 25,
35,37,39,41,45,48]. After all, as we move toward low rates,
purely rate-distortion optimized systems will produce arti-

β=0

β=2.56

...

28.1dB

27.0dB

Figure 1. Decoding two reconstructions from the same representation ŷ, which takes 2345 bytes to store: We use a low realism
weight = 0 for the left reconstruction, and a high = 2.56
for the right. Note that increasing leads to a much sharper reconstruction, but the PSNR drops by 1.1dB, consistent with ratedistortion-realism theory [6]. We only show two reconstructions,
but our generator G can produce any reconstruction in between
by changing . This allows the user to decide between viewing a
reconstruction that is close to the input (left, i.e., high PSNR), or
that looks realistic (right).

facts in the reconstructions, such as the well known block
artifacts of JPEG or blurry patches for neural approaches.
There is simply not enough bitrate available to store all
of the details, and if we target, e.g., MSE, the best reconstruction is the average image over all images that map to
the given representation since, inevitably, many images will
map to the same representation at low rates. Intuitively, instead of an average image reconstruction, we could prefer
a “realistic” reconstruction that is sharp and appropriately
textured. This reconstruction might have worse MSE than
the average image, but users might find it more perceptually
pleasing and less artificial. We can see from this argument
that there exists an additional trade-off here, between “realism” and “distortion”, and that distortion will increase as

22324

