This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shortcomings of Top-Down Randomization-Based Sanity Checks for Evaluations
of Deep Neural Network Explanations
Alexander Binder1,2,9 Leander Weber3 Sebastian Lapuschkin3,0000−0002−0762−7258
Grégoire Montavon4,5 Klaus-Robert Müller5,6,7,8 Wojciech Samek3,5,6,0000−0002−6283−3265
1
ICT Cluster, SIT Singapore, 2 UiO Oslo, 3 Fraunhofer HHI, 4 FU Berlin, 5 BIFOLD Berlin
6
TU Berlin, 7 Korea University Seoul, 8 MPI Saarbrücken, 9 SUTD Singapore

Abstract
While the evaluation of explanations is an important step
towards trustworthy models, it needs to be done carefully,
and the employed metrics need to be well-understood. Specifically model randomization testing can be overinterpreted
if regarded as a primary criterion for selecting or discarding explanation methods. To address shortcomings of this
test, we start by observing an experimental gap in the ranking of explanation methods between randomization-based
sanity checks [1] and model output faithfulness measures
(e.g. [20]). We identify limitations of model-randomizationbased sanity checks for the purpose of evaluating explanations. Firstly, we show that uninformative attribution maps
created with zero pixel-wise covariance easily achieve high
scores in this type of checks. Secondly, we show that topdown model randomization preserves scales of forward pass
activations with high probability. That is, channels with
large activations have a high probility to contribute strongly
to the output, even after randomization of the network on
top of them. Hence, explanations after randomization can
only be expected to differ to a certain extent. This explains
the observed experimental gap. In summary, these results
demonstrate the inadequacy of model-randomization-based
sanity checks as a criterion to rank attribution methods.

1. Introduction
Parallel to the progressively astounding performances
of machine learning techniques, especially deep learning
methods, in solving even the most complex tasks, the transparency, trustworthiness, and lack of interpretability of
these techniques has increasingly been called into question [11, 14, 15]. As potential solutions to these issues, a
vast number of XAI methods have been developed in recent years [21], that aim to explain a model’s behavior, for
instance, by (locally) attributing importance scores to features of singular input samples, indicating how (much) these

features influence a specific model decision [6, 22, 25, 27].
However, the scores obtained for different attribution map
methods tend to differ significantly, and the question arises
how well each explains model decisions. This is generally
not answered easily, as there are a number of desirable properties proposed to be fulfilled by these attributions, such
as localization on relevant objects [4, 5, 30] or faithfulness
to the model output [2, 8, 20], among others, with several
quantitative tests having been proposed for each.
In parallel to these empirical evaluations, several works
have proposed that explanations should fulfill a certain number of ‘axioms’ or ‘unit tests’ [1, 12, 16, 27], which need to
hold universally for a method to be considered good or valid.
We place our focus on the model-randomization-based sanity
checks [1], which state that the explanation should be sensitive to a random permutation of parameters at one or more
layers in the network. Specifically, the authors proposed to
apply measures such as Structural Similarity Index Measure
(SSIM) [28] between attribution maps obtained from the
original model and a derived model for which the top-layers
are randomized. The idea is to require that methods used
to compute attribution maps should exhibit a large change
when the neural network model — i.e., its defining/learned
parameter set — is randomized from the top. The authors
of [1,23] suggested to discard attribution map methods which
perform poorly under this test — i.e., have a high SSIM measure between attributions obtained with the original and the
randomized model — under the assumption that those XAI
methods are not affected by the model’s learned parameters.
However, we observe a significant experimental gap between top-down randomization checks when used as an evaluation measure, and occlusion-based evaluations of model
faithfulness such as region perturbation [20]. Concretely,
Guided Backpropagation (GB) [25] and Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [6] exhibit low randomization
scores under the first type of measure and yet clearly outperform several gradient-based methods in occlusion-based
evaluations. We are interested to resolve this discrepancy.
We identify two shortcomings of top-down randomiza-

16143

