This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniAL: A unified CNN framework for unsupervised anomaly localization
Ying Zhao
Ricoh Software Research Center (Beijing) Co., Ltd.
zy deepwhite zy@hotmail.com

Figure 1. OmniAL is a unified framework for unsupervised anomaly localization. As shown in (c), OmniAL not only simplifies
existing learning paradigm from (a) Separate: N models for N classes to (b) Unified: one model for N classes but also produces high
quality anomaly localization results. Results in (a) and (b) are from separate and unified models of JNLD [38] on MVTecAD [1] dataset.

Abstract
Unsupervised anomaly localization and detection is crucial for industrial manufacturing processes due to the lack
of anomalous samples. Recent unsupervised advances on
industrial anomaly detection achieve high performance by
training separate models for many different categories. The
model storage and training time cost of this paradigm is
high. Moreover, the setting of one-model-N-classes leads
to fearful degradation of existing methods. In this paper, we propose a unified CNN framework for unsupervised anomaly localization, named OmniAL. This method
conquers aforementioned problems by improving anomaly
synthesis, reconstruction and localization. To prevent the
model learning identical reconstruction, it trains the model
with proposed panel-guided synthetic anomaly data rather
than directly using normal data. It increases anomaly reconstruction error for multi-class distribution by using a
network that is equipped with proposed Dilated Channel
and Spatial Attention (DCSA) blocks. To better localize
the anomaly regions, it employs proposed DiffNeck between
reconstruction and localization sub-networks to explore
multi-level differences. Experiments on 15-class MVTecAD
and 12-class VisA datasets verify the advantage of proposed
OmniAL that surpasses the state-of-the-art of unified models. On 15-class-MVTecAD/12-class-VisA, its single unified

model achieves 97.2/87.8 image-AUROC, 98.3/96.6 pixelAUROC and 73.4/41.7 pixel-AP for anomaly detection and
localization respectively. Besides that, we make the first attempt to conduct a comprehensive study on the robustness
of unsupervised anomaly localization and detection methods against different level adversarial attacks. Experiential
results show OmniAL has good application prospects for its
superior performance.

1. Introduction
In real industrial scenarios, the location of anomaly
[22, 26] reveals important information, such as defective
types and degrees. It is essential not only to inspect whether
a sample is defective but also to know where the specific
anomaly regions are. Since anomaly appearance is inexhaustible, it is almost impossible and infeasible to collect
and manually annotate all kinds of abnormal data. Thus,
only normal samples are available for training a detector
that is robust enough to find out unseen anomalies during inference phase. Considering the diversity of classes and various types of one class, the conventional training paradigm
of N models for N classes, as shown in Fig.1a, may not
be the best solution. The model storage and training time
cost increase with the number of classes. As shown in
Fig.1b, existing method severely degrades anomaly local-

3924

