This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProD: Prompting-to-disentangle Domain Knowledge for
Cross-domain Few-shot Image Classification
Tianyi Ma1,2 , Yifan Sun2 , Zongxin Yang3 , Yi Yang3
University of Technology Sydney1 , Baidu Inc.2 , Zhejiang University3
tianyi.ma@student.uts.edu.au, sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn

backbone features

Few-shot image classification aims to use very limited
support samples to transfer the classifier from base training classes to novel test classes [10, 27, 28, 32, 34], which
meets the requirement in application scenarios when train-

domain B
domain C

feature tokens

DS prompt
(key point 3)

DG feature

DS feature

local classifier
for domain A

3 key points
1. Sharing a DG prompt
with all the domains

…

1. Introduction

global classifier
DG prompt
(key points 1&2)

…

This paper considers few-shot image classification under
the cross-domain scenario, where the train-to-test domain
gap compromises classification accuracy. To mitigate the
domain gap, we propose a prompting-to-disentangle (ProD)
method through a novel exploration with the prompting
mechanism. ProD adopts the popular multi-domain training scheme and extracts the backbone feature with a standard Convolutional Neural Network. Based on these two
common practices, the key point of ProD is using the
prompting mechanism in the transformer to disentangle the
domain-general (DG) and domain-specific (DS) knowledge
from the backbone feature. Specifically, ProD concatenates
a DG and a DS prompt to the backbone feature and feeds
them into a lightweight transformer. The DG prompt is
learnable and shared by all the training domains, while the
DS prompt is generated from the domain-of-interest on the
fly. As a result, the transformer outputs DG and DS features
in parallel with the two prompts, yielding the disentangling
effect. We show that: 1) Simply sharing a single DG prompt
for all the training domains already improves generalization towards the novel test domain. 2) The cross-domain
generalization can be further reinforced by making the DG
prompt neutral towards the training domains. 3) When inference, the DS prompt is generated from the support samples and can capture test domain knowledge through the
prompting mechanism. Combining all three benefits, ProD
significantly improves cross-domain few-shot classification.
For instance, on CUB, ProD improves the 5-way 5-shot accuracy from 73.56% (baseline) to 79.19%, setting a new
state of the art.

domain A

shallow transformer

Abstract

2. Making the DG prompt
neutral to all the domains
3. Getting a DS prompt
from the current domain

Figure 1. ProD flattens the CNN backbone feature into feature
tokens and concatenates them with the DG and DS prompt. The
DG prompt is learnable and shared by all the training domains
for general knowledge. In contrast, the DS prompt is generated
from same-domain features and thus can capture novel test domain
knowledge from the support images during the test. The output of
the DG/DS prompt is respectively supervised with a global/local
classification head during training and concatenated as the final
representation for inference.

ing data is scarce. However, besides the insufficient data,
in real-world applications, another critical challenge is the
cross-domain problem, i.e., there is usually a domain gap
between the training set and the test set. This train-to-test
domain gap further hinders the knowledge transfer between
the training and test data, significantly compromising the
classification accuracy [7, 12]. In this paper, we tackle the
cross-domain problem for few-shot image classification.
Generally, there are two approaches for mitigating the
domain gap, i.e., domain generalization, and domain adaptation. Domain generalization improves the inherent generalization ability of the learned feature and directly applies it to novel domains without further tuning. In contrast, the domain adaptation uses samples from the novel
domain to fine-tune the already-learned feature. For fewshot image classification, the domain generalization approach [14, 21, 29, 41] is more explored than the domain
adaptation approach [12], because limited support samples
hardly provide reliable clues for domain adaptation.

19754

