This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EXIF as Language: Learning Cross-Modal
Associations Between Images and Camera Metadata
Chenhao Zheng

Ayush Shrivastava
University of Michigan

Andrew Owens

https://hellomuffin.github.io/exif-as-language

Photo

EXIF
Metadata

Patch
Embedding

Model: NIKON D3200
Exposure Time: 1/500
Flash: Fired
Focal Length: 30.0mm
Exposure Program: Aperture

Contrastive
Learning

EXIF Text
Embedding

(a) Multimodal image-metadata embeddings

Manipulated image

Patch embeddings

Detected splice

Ground truth

(b) Detecting spliced images by spotting inconsistent patch embeddings

Figure 1. (a) We learn a joint embedding between image patches and the EXIF metadata that cameras automatically insert into image files.
Our model treats this metadata as a language-like modality: we convert the EXIF tags to text, concatenate them together, and then processes
the result with a transformer. (b) We apply our representation to tasks that require understanding camera properties. For example, we can
detect image splicing “zero shot” (and without metadata at test time) by finding inconsistent embeddings within an image. We show a
manipulated image that contains content from two source photos. Since these photos were captured with different cameras, the two regions
have dissimilar embeddings (visualized by PCA). We localize the splice by clustering the image’s patch embeddings.

Abstract
We learn a visual representation that captures information about the camera that recorded a given photo. To
do this, we train a multimodal embedding between image
patches and the EXIF metadata that cameras automatically
insert into image files. Our model represents this metadata by simply converting it to text and then processing it
with a transformer. The features that we learn significantly
outperform other self-supervised and supervised features
on downstream image forensics and calibration tasks. In
particular, we successfully localize spliced image regions
“zero shot” by clustering the visual embeddings for all of
the patches within an image.

1. Introduction
A major goal of the computer vision community has
been to use cross-modal associations to learn concepts that
would be hard to glean from images alone [2]. A particular
focus has been on learning high level semantics, such as

objects, from other rich sensory signals, like language and
sound [58, 62]. By design, the representations learned
by these approaches typically discard imaging properties,
such as the type of camera that shot the photo, its lens,
and the exposure settings, which are not useful for their
cross-modal prediction tasks [17].
We argue that obtaining a complete understanding of an
image requires both capabilities — for our models to perceive not only the semantic content of a scene, but also
the properties of the camera that captured it. This type of
low level understanding has proven crucial for a variety of
tasks, from image forensics [33, 52, 80] to 3D reconstruction [34, 35], yet it has not typically been a focus of representation learning. It is also widely used in image generation, such as when users of text-to-image tools specify
camera properties with phrases like “DSLR photo” [59,63].
We propose to learn low level imaging properties from
the abundantly available (but often neglected) camera metadata that is added to the image file at the moment of capture. This metadata is typically represented as dozens of
Exchangeable Image File Format (EXIF) tags that describe
the camera, its settings, and postprocessing operations that

6945

