This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Semantic Relationship among Instances for Image-Text Matching
Zheren Fu1 , Zhendong Mao1,2, * , Yan Song1 , Yongdong Zhang1,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
fzr@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zdmao, songyan, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-text matching, a bridge connecting image and
language, is an important task, which generally learns a
holistic cross-modal embedding to achieve a high-quality
semantic alignment between the two modalities. However, previous studies only focus on capturing fragmentlevel relation within a sample from a particular modality, e.g., salient regions in an image or text words in a
sentence, where they usually pay less attention to capturing instance-level interactions among samples and modalities, e.g., multiple images and texts. In this paper, we
argue that sample relations could help learn subtle differences for hard negative instances, and thus transfer
shared knowledge for infrequent samples should be promising in obtaining better holistic embeddings. Therefore,
we propose a novel hierarchical relation modeling framework (HREM), which explicitly capture both fragmentand instance-level relations to learn discriminative and robust cross-modal embeddings. Extensive experiments on
Flickr30K and MS-COCO show our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art ones by 4%-10% in terms of
rSum. Our code is available at https://github.com/
CrossmodalGroup/HREM .

1. Introduction
Image-text matching bridges the semantic gap between
visual and textual modalities and is a fundamental task for
various multi-modal learning applications, such as crossmodal retrieval [22] and text-to-image synthesis [17]. The
critical challenge is accurately and efficiently learning
cross-modal embeddings and their similarities for images
and texts, to achieve a high-quality semantic alignment.
In general, existing image-text matching methods can be
classified into two paradigms. The first embedding-based
matching [4, 10, 20, 35] separately encodes the whole images and texts into a holistic embedding space, then globally
* Corresponding author.

Visual local
features

Stage-one

Stage-two

Fragment-level
Interaction

Aggregation

Fragment-level
Interaction
Textual local
features

Loss

Stage-three
Instance-level
Interaction

Aggregation

Previous work

Holistic
embedding space

Loss Image-text
pairs

Our work

(a) Pipeline of embedding-based method
Man with ball

Surfer with surfboard
Hockey

A surfer is holding
on a surfboard to
stare out the wave.

A surfer is squating
on a surfboard to
break out the wave.

A surfer is riding on
a surfboard to wipe
out the wave.

with our
framework

(b) Semantic ambiguity

A man is playing
the ice hockey with
sticks to hit a ball..

Cricket

Polo

A man is playing
the cricket with bat
to hit a ball.

A man is playing
the polo with sticks
to hit a ball.

with our
framework

(c) Semantic scarcity

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. Sample relation modeling
improves the holistic representation of cross-modal learning. Colors and shapes indicate different modalities and image-text pairs,
respectively. Orange elements mark effective interactions: (a) The
pipeline of the previous and our work, we add the cross-modal relation interaction between samples. (b) For the identical theme of
“surfer with surfboard”, specific behaviors exist subtle differences,
like “hold/squat/ride on the surfboard” and “stare/break/wipe out
the wave”. Our method distinguishes these hard negative samples
from semantic ambiguities. (c) For similar themes under “man
play a ball”, corresponding behaviors usually are semantic similar, like ”play the hockey/cricket/polo” all need to “hit the ball”
with “sticks/bats”. Our method improves learning embeddings on
these infrequent samples with semantic scarcities for themselves.

measures the semantic similarity of the two modalities. The
second score-based matching [3,7,19,27] applies the crossmodal interaction between visual and textual local features,
then learns a cumulative similarity score.
Recently, embedding-based methods have served as the
mainstream solution owing to both accuracy and efficiency
in image-text matching, which contains two steps as shown
in Fig. 1 (a): (1) Capturing the intra-modal relation between visual fragments (e.g., regional features) or textual

15159

