This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAP-DETR: Bridging the Gap between Salient Points and Queries-Based
Transformer Detector for Fast Model Convergency
Yang Liu1,3 * Yao Zhang1,3 * Yixin Wang2 * Yang Zhang4 Jiang Tian4
Zhongchao Shi4 Jianping Fan4 Zhiqiang He1,3,5 †
1
Institute of Computing Technology (ICT), Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Stanford University
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 AI Lab, Lenovo Research 5 Lenovo Ltd.
{liuyang20c,zhangyao215}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

yxinwang@stanford.edu

{zhangyang20,tianjiang1,shizc2,jfan1,hezq}@lenovo.com

Abstract
Recently, the dominant DETR-based approaches apply
central-concept spatial prior to accelerating Transformer
detector convergency. These methods gradually refine the
reference points to the center of target objects and imbue object queries with the updated central reference information
for spatially conditional attention. However, centralizing reference points may severely deteriorate queries’ saliency and
confuse detectors due to the indiscriminative spatial prior.
To bridge the gap between the reference points of salient
queries and Transformer detectors, we propose SAlient
Point-based DETR (SAP-DETR) by treating object detection as a transformation from salient points to instance objects. Concretely, we explicitly initialize a query-specific
reference point for each object query, gradually aggregate
them into an instance object, and then predict the distance
from each side of the bounding box to these points. By
rapidly attending to query-specific reference regions and the
conditional box edges, SAP-DETR can effectively bridge the
gap between the salient point and the query-based Transformer detector with a significant convergency speed. Experimentally, SAP-DETR achieves 1.4× convergency speed with
competitive performance and stably promotes the SoTA approaches by ∼1.0 AP. Based on ResNet-DC-101, SAP-DETR
achieves 46.9 AP. The code will be released at https:
//github.com/liuyang-ict/SAP-DETR.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision, whose target is to recognize and localize each object from input images. In the last decade, various detec* This work was done when working as an intern at AI Lab, Lenovo
Research, Beijing, China.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of SAP-DETR and DAB-DETR under 3layer decoder model and 36-epoch training scheme. (a) Statistics
of the query count in different classification score intervals. (b)
and (c) Visualize the distribution of all reference points (pink) and
highlight the top-20 classification score queries with their bounding
boxes (blue) and reference points (red) in different decoder layers.
(d) Visualize the outputs of positive queries and ground truth (red)
during the training process, each query has a representative color
for its reference point and bounding box. Best viewed in color.

tors [6, 11, 14, 18, 20, 22] based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have received widespread attention and made
significant progress. Recently, Carion et al. [2] proposed a
new end-to-end paradigm for object detection based on the
Transformer [24], called DEtection TRansformer (DETR),
which treats object detection as a problem of set prediction.
In DETR, a set of learnable positional encodings, namely
object queries, are employed to aggregate instance features
from the context image in Transformer Decoder. The predictions of queries are finally assigned to the ground truth via
bipartite matching to achieve end-to-end detection.
Despite the promising results of DETR, its application
is largely limited by considerably longer training time compared to conventional CNNs. To address this problem, many

15539

