This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ResFormer: Scaling ViTs with Multi-Resolution Training
Rui Tian1,2
1

Zuxuan Wu1,2†

Qi Dai3

Han Hu3

Yu Qiao4

Yu-Gang Jiang1,2

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Research Asia 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract

1. Introduction
The strong track record of Transformers in a multitude of Natural Language Processing [53] tasks has motivated an extensive exploration of Transformers in the computer vision community. At its core, Vision Transformers
(ViTs) build upon the multi-head self-attention mechanisms
for feature learning through partitioning input images into
patches of identical sizes and processing them as sequences
for dependency modeling. Owing to their strong capabil† Corresponding author.

Note that we use resolution, scale and size interchangeably.

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved overwhelming
success, yet they suffer from vulnerable resolution scalability, i.e., the performance drops drastically when presented
with input resolutions that are unseen during training. We
introduce, ResFormer, a framework that is built upon the
seminal idea of multi-resolution training for improved performance on a wide spectrum of, mostly unseen, testing resolutions. In particular, ResFormer operates on replicated
images of different resolutions and enforces a scale consistency loss to engage interactive information across different scales. More importantly, to alternate among varying resolutions effectively, especially novel ones in testing,
we propose a global-local positional embedding strategy
that changes smoothly conditioned on input sizes. We conduct extensive experiments for image classification on ImageNet. The results provide strong quantitative evidence
that ResFormer has promising scaling abilities towards a
wide range of resolutions. For instance, ResFormer-B-MR
achieves a Top-1 accuracy of 75.86% and 81.72% when
evaluated on relatively low and high resolutions respectively (i.e., 96 and 640), which are 48% and 7.49% better
than DeiT-B. We also demonstrate, moreover, ResFormer is
flexible and can be easily extended to semantic segmentation, object detection and video action recognition.

DeiT-S
DeiT-B

Resformer-S-MR
Resformer-B-MR

Training Res Acc

83
81
79
77
75

96 128

224

288
384
Testing Resolution

512

Figure 1. Comparisons between ResFormer and vanilla ViTs. ResFormer achieves promising results on a wide range of resolutions.

ities in capturing relationships among patches, ViTs and
their variants demonstrate prominent results in versatile visual tasks, e.g., image classification [36, 50, 65, 70], object
detection [4, 30, 55], vision-language modeling [25, 40, 54]
and video recognition [3, 29, 37, 64].
While ViTs have been shown effective, it remains unclear how to scale ViTs to deal with inputs with varying
sizes for different applications. For instance, in image classification, the de facto training resolution of 224 is commonly adopted [36, 50, 51, 65]. However, among works in
pursuit of reducing the computational cost of ViTs [39, 43],
shrinking the spatial dimension of inputs is a popular strategy [6, 32, 56]. On the other hand, fine-tuning with higher
resolutions (e.g., 384) is widely used [15, 36, 48, 51, 59, 62]
to produce better results. Similarly, dense prediction tasks
such as semantic segmentation and object detection also require relatively high resolution inputs [1, 30, 35, 55].
Despite of the necessity for both low and high resolutions, limited effort has been made to equip ViTs with the
ability to handle different input resolutions. Given a novel
resolution that is different from that used during training, a
common practice adopted for inference is to keep the patch
size fixed and then perform bicubic interpolation on positional embeddings directly to the corresponding scale. As
shown in Sec. 3, while such a strategy is able to scale ViTs
to relatively larger input sizes, the results on low resolutions

22721

