This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structured Kernel Estimation for Photon-Limited Deconvolution
Yash Sanghvi, Zhiyuan Mao, Stanley H. Chan
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University
{ysanghvi, mao114, stanchan}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Images taken in a low light condition with the presence of camera shake suffer from motion blur and photon
shot noise. While state-of-the-art image restoration networks show promising results, they are largely limited to
well-illuminated scenes and their performance drops significantly when photon shot noise is strong.
In this paper, we propose a new blur estimation technique customized for photon-limited conditions. The proposed method employs a gradient-based backpropagation
method to estimate the blur kernel. By modeling the blur
kernel using a low-dimensional representation with the
key points on the motion trajectory, we significantly reduce the search space and improve the regularity of the
kernel estimation problem. When plugged into an iterative framework, our novel low-dimensional representation provides improved kernel estimates and hence significantly better deconvolution performance when compared to
end-to-end trained neural networks. The source code and
pretrained mdoels are available at https://github.
com / sanghviyashiitb / structured - kernel cvpr23

1. Introduction
Photon-Limited Blind Deconvolution: This paper
studies the photon-limited blind deconvolution problem.
Blind deconvolution refers to simultaneously recovering
both the blur kernel and latent clean image from a blurred
image and ”photon-limited” refers to presence of photonshot noise in images taken in low-illumination / short exposure. The corresponding forward model is as follows:
  \vy = \text {Poisson}(\alpha \vh \circledast \vx ).

(1)

In this equation, y ∈ RN is the blurred-noisy image, x ∈
RN is the latent clean image, and h ∈ RM is the blur kernel.
We assume that x is normalized to [0, 1] and the entries of h
are non-negative and sum up to 1. The constant α represents
the average number of photons per pixel and is inversely
proportional to the amount of Poisson noise.

Deep Iterative Kernel Estimation: Blind image deconvolution has been studied for decades with many successful algorithms including the latest deep neural networks
[8, 24, 34, 42, 43]. Arguably, the adaptation from the traditional Gaussian noise model to the photon-limited Poisson
noise model can be done by retraining the existing networks
with appropriate data. However, the restoration is not guaranteed to perform well because the end-to-end networks seldom explicitly take the forward image formation model into
account.
Recently, people have started to recognize the importance of blur kernel estimation for photon-limited conditions. One of these works is by Sanghvi et. al [30], where
they propose an iterative kernel estimation method to backpropagate the gradient of an unsupervised reblurring function, hence to update the blur kernel. However, as we can
see in Figure 1, their performance is still limited when the
photon shot noise is strong.
Structured Kernel Estimation: Inspired by [30], we
believe that the iterative kernel estimation process and the
unsupervised reblurring loss are useful. However, instead
of searching for the kernel directly (which can easily lead
to local minima because the search space is too big), we
propose to search in a low-dimensional space by imposing
structure to the motion blur kernel.
To construct such a low-dimensional space, we frame the
blur kernel in terms of trajectory of the camera motion. Motion trajectory is often a continuous but irregular path in the
two-dimensional plane. To specify the trajectory, we introduce the concept of key point estimation where we identify
a set of anchor points of the kernel. By interpolating the
path along these anchor points, we can then reproduce the
kernel. Since the number of anchor points is significantly
lower than the number of pixels in a kernel, we can reduce
the dimensionality of the kernel estimation problem.
The key contribution of this paper is as follows: We propose a new kernel estimation method called Kernel Trajectory Network (KTN). KTN models the blur kernel in
a low-dimensional and differentiable space by specifying
key points of the motion trajectory. Plugging this lowdimensional representation in an iterative framework im-

9863

