This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Movie Scene Detection using State-Space Transformers
Md Mohaiminul Islam1 * Mahmudul Hasan2 Kishan Shamsundar Athrey2
Tony Braskich2
Gedas Bertasius1
1
2
UNC Chapel Hill
Comcast Labs

Abstract
The ability to distinguish between different movie scenes
is critical for understanding the storyline of a movie. However, accurately detecting movie scenes is often challenging as it requires the ability to reason over very long movie
segments. This contrasts with most existing video recognition models, which are typically designed for short-range
video analysis. This work proposes a State-Space Transformer model that can efficiently capture dependencies in
long movie videos for accurate movie scene detection. Our
model, called TranS4mer, is built using a novel S4A building
block, combining the strengths of structured state-space sequence (S4) and self-attention (A) layers. Given a sequence
of frames divided into movie shots (uninterrupted periods
where the camera position does not change), the S4A block
first applies self-attention to capture short-range intra-shot
dependencies. Afterward, the state-space operation in the
S4A block aggregates long-range inter-shot cues. The final TranS4mer model, which can be trained end-to-end, is
obtained by stacking the S4A blocks one after the other multiple times. Our proposed TranS4mer outperforms all prior
methods in three movie scene detection datasets, including
MovieNet, BBC, and OVSD, while being 2× faster and requiring 3× less GPU memory than standard Transformer
models. We will release our code and models.

1. Introduction
Imagine watching The Godfather movie as illustrated in
Figure 1. The first scene starts in the office room of mafia
boss Don Vito Corleone, where he is discussing family business affairs with his eldest son Sonny Corleone and the family lawyer Tom Hagen. Then in the second scene, the family
meets Virgil Sollozzo to hear about his business proposition. Afterward, the movie transitions into a third scene,
where Don Vito chides his son Sonny for interfering. All
of these movie scenes are inherently connected and create
a complex storyline. Thus, the ability to recognize such
* Research done while MI was an intern at Comcast Labs.

movie scenes is essential for understanding the plot of a
movie. Moreover, identifying movie scenes enables broader
applications, such as content-driven video search, preview
generation, and minimally disruptive ad insertion.
Unlike standard video recognition tasks (e.g., action
recognition), which require a short-range analysis of video
clips lasting only 5–10 seconds, movie scene detection requires short- and long-range understanding, where videos
might last several minutes. For instance, to successfully
recognize the scenes in Figure 1, we need to identify the visual concepts in each frame, such as characters, objects, and
backgrounds (short-range modeling), while also reasoning
about complex temporal events and activities (long-range
modeling). For example, if we only look at the boundary frames of the first and second scenes of Figure 1 and
identify the local properties (e.g., characters, objects, and
backgrounds), it is quite difficult to determine the transition between the two scenes. However, considering longer
temporal windows with frames from both scenes, we can
recognize global events and identify their boundaries.
We also note that models that only use short-range temporal context typically produce many false positives due to
abrupt low-level changes in the scene dynamics (e.g., camera switching between characters). For example, if we look
at the middle two frames of scene 2 in Figure 1, we might
mistake them for a scene boundary since the frames contain
two characters. However, looking at all the frames in scene
2 makes it clear that they belong to the same scene. Therefore, a successful movie scene detection model should identify the short-range visual elements and also reason about
their long-range temporal dependencies in a movie segment.
However, most existing movie scene detection methods [11, 35] are built using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), which are inherently designed using local operators (i.e., convolution kernels) for short-range video analysis. Thus, such models often fail to capture the longrange dependencies crucial for accurate movie scene detection. Recently, transformers have been shown to effectively model short-range and long-range dependencies in
various Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks [1, 7, 14,
15, 32, 37, 47, 49]. Inspired by the success of transform-

18749

