This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TopNet: Transformer-based Object Placement Network for Image Compositing
Sijie Zhu1 , Zhe Lin2 , Scott Cohen2 , Jason Kuen2 , Zhifei Zhang2 , Chen Chen1
1
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida 2 Adobe Research
sizhu@knights.ucf.edu,{zlin,scohen,kuen,zzhang}@adobe.com,chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
We investigate the problem of automatically placing an
object into a background image for image compositing.
Given a background image and a segmented object, the goal
is to train a model to predict plausible placements (location and scale) of the object for compositing. The quality of
the composite image highly depends on the predicted location/scale. Existing works either generate candidate bounding boxes or apply sliding-window search using global representations from background and object images, which fail
to model local information in background images. However, local clues in background images are important to determine the compatibility of placing the objects with certain
locations/scales. In this paper, we propose to learn the correlation between object features and all local background
features with a transformer module so that detailed information can be provided on all possible location/scale configurations. A sparse contrastive loss is further proposed
to train our model with sparse supervision. Our new formulation generates a 3D heatmap indicating the plausibility of all location/scale combinations in one network forward pass, which is > 10× faster than the previous slidingwindow method. It also supports interactive search when
users provide a pre-defined location or scale. The proposed method can be trained with explicit annotation or in
a self-supervised manner using an off-the-shelf inpainting
model, and it outperforms state-of-the-art methods significantly. User study shows that the trained model generalizes
well to real-world images with diverse challenging scenes
and object categories.

1. Introduction
Object compositing [15, 25] is a common and important
workflow for image editing and creation. The goal is to
insert an object from an image into a given background image such that the resulting image appears visually pleasing
and realistic. Conventional workflows in object compositing rely on manual object placement, i.e. manually determining where the object should be placed (location) and

in what size the object is placed (scale). However, manual placement does not fulfill the growing need for image
creation for social sharing, advertising, education, etc., and
AI-assisted compositing with automatic object placement
is more desirable for future image creation applications.
While there have been several works on learning-based object placement for specific scenes, general object placement
with diverse scenes and objects still remains challenging
with limited exploration, as it involves a deeper understanding of common sense, objects, and local details of scenes.
Inaccurate object placement could lead to poor compositing
results, e.g. a person floating in the sky, a dog larger than
buildings, etc.
Existing works [7,10,12,26,29] formulate the problem in
very different ways, as shown in Fig. 1. [10,26] directly predict multiple transformations or bounding boxes indicating
the location and scale of the given objects. Such sparse predictions recommend the top candidate placements for users,
but they do not provide any information about other possible locations and scales. They also fail to leverage the local clues in background images, as the bounding boxes are
generated based on only global features. Another thread of
works [12, 24] considers object placement as binary classification, which evaluates the plausibility of input images
and placement of bounding boxes instead of generating candidate placements directly from input images. One recent
work [29] utilizes a retrieval model to assess the plausibility
of a given placement and evaluates a grid of locations and
scales in a sliding-window manner. However, it requires
multiple network forward passes to generate dense evaluation for one image, resulting in a slow inference speed.
In this paper, we propose TopNet, a Transformer-based
Object Placement Network for real-world object compositing applications. Different from previous works, TopNet
formulates object placement as a dense prediction problem: generating evaluation for a dense grid of locations
and scales in one network forward pass. Given a background image and an object, TopNet directly generates a
3D heatmap indicating the plausibility score of object location and scale, which is > 10× faster than the previous
sliding-window method [29]. Previous works [26, 29] com-

1838

