This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Restoration of Hand-Drawn Architectural Drawings using Latent Space
Mapping with Degradation Generator

1

Nakkwan Choi1 , Seungjae Lee2 , Yongsik Lee2 , Seungjoon Yang1∗
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Korea
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, Korea
{cvvc1997, syang}@unist.ac.kr, {seungjlee, ys.lee}@etri.re.kr

Abstract
This work presents the restoration of drawings of
wooden built heritage. Hand-drawn drawings contain the
most important original information but are often severely
degraded over time. A novel restoration method based on
the vector quantized variational autoencoders is presented.
Latent space representations of drawings and noise are
learned, which are used to map noisy drawings to clean
drawings for restoration and to generate authentic noisy
drawings for data augmentation. The proposed method is
applied to the drawings archived in the Cultural Heritage
Administration. Restored drawings show significant quality
improvement and allow more accurate interpretations of information.

1. Introduction
Cultural heritage is a valuable asset of humanity that
requires our efforts to preserve archaeological, historical,
cultural, and technological values. In particular, traditional
wooden buildings are vulnerable to deformation, earthquakes, and fires. We continuously collect and manage architectural drawings, photos, and 3D scan data of individual
buildings for preservation and restoration. Among them, architectural drawings in the past contain initial information
on traditional wooden builds, and their value is the most
significant. However, many archived drawings in the form
of scanned images are already degraded over time, making
it difficult to interpret information due to noise and damage.
There is a need to restore aged drawings to facilitate information interpretation. This work reports an effort to restore
aged drawings of wooden built heritage archived by the Cultural Heritage Administration.
Aged drawings in the archive often show compound
degradation with faded and deteriorated lines, smeared and
blurred complex parts, and the background in faded color
with smudged leakages from adjacent drawings. Restora-

tion requires removing noise in the background, linking broken lines, and clearing up complex parts. A learning-based
restoration method would be a good match since it can
model such complicated degradation. However, while clean
and noisy drawings are abundant, clean and noisy pairs
of the same drawings are scarce. Modeling and restoration by supervised learning would be problematic. Synthetically generated clean and degraded image pairs can be
used. [10, 16, 21–23] But the domain gap between the synthetically degraded drawings and the actual aged drawings
may cause inferior restoration performance.
In this work, we proposed a vector quantized variational
autoencoder [13] (VQ-VAE) based restoration method to
restore aged hand-drawn architectural drawings. The proposed method consists of two stages. In the first stage, a
VQ-VAE is trained to learn accurate latent space representations of clean drawings using a large set of clean drawings. In the second stage, a mapping of latent space variables of noisy drawings to those of clean drawings as well
as the generator that produces realistic degraded drawings
is learned. Degradation generator is trained to generate a
noisy drawing with the residual mapping error as an input.
The latent space mapping is learned using a set of drawing pairs, for which we use the outputs of the degradation
generator as data augmentation. Noisy drawings generated
by the degradation generator provide authentic variations of
degradations clean drawings can suffer. Hence, the latent
space mapping from noisy to clean drawings is more accurately learned, and the detrimental effect on the restoration
performance caused by the domain gap can be mitigated.
The proposed method is applied to restore archived
aged architectural drawings of traditional wooden buildings. Restoration performance was compared to other methods developed for heavy degradations of drawings and photographs. The proposed methods reported significant improvement in both quantitative measures and qualitative
evaluations. The performance gain is the most apparent
with actual aged drawings from the archives. The proposed
degradation generator produced more authentic degraded

14164

