This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EventNeRF: Neural Radiance Fields from a Single Colour Event Camera
Viktor Rudnev1, 2
1

Mohamed Elgharib1

Christian Theobalt1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC

2

Vladislav Golyanik1

Saarland University, SIC

Abstract
Asynchronously operating event cameras find many applications due to their high dynamic range, vanishingly low
motion blur, low latency and low data bandwidth. The field
saw remarkable progress during the last few years, and existing event-based 3D reconstruction approaches recover
sparse point clouds of the scene. However, such sparsity
is a limiting factor in many cases, especially in computer
vision and graphics, that has not been addressed satisfactorily so far. Accordingly, this paper proposes the first approach for 3D-consistent, dense and photorealistic novel
view synthesis using just a single colour event stream as input. At its core is a neural radiance field trained entirely in
a self-supervised manner from events while preserving the
original resolution of the colour event channels. Next, our
ray sampling strategy is tailored to events and allows for
data-efficient training. At test, our method produces results
in the RGB space at unprecedented quality. We evaluate
our method qualitatively and numerically on several challenging synthetic and real scenes and show that it produces
significantly denser and more visually appealing renderings
than the existing methods. We also demonstrate robustness
in challenging scenarios with fast motion and under low
lighting conditions. We release the newly recorded dataset
and our source code to facilitate the research field, see
https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/EventNeRF.

1. Introduction
Event cameras record an asynchronous stream of perpixel brightness changes. This is in contrast to conventional
RGB cameras that record the absolute intensity values at a
pre-defined framerate. Event cameras have several advantages over conventional cameras such as virtually no motion
blur, higher dynamic range, ultra low power consumption
and lower latency. Because of these advantages, event cameras have been applied to many computer vision problems,
including optical-flow estimation [11, 12], video interpolation [26, 38, 57, 62], deblurring [26, 68], 3D pose estimation [36, 46, 64, 75], geometry reconstruction [1, 6, 58, 61]

Figure 1. The original NeRF approach [35] (first row) produces
strong artefacts when processing RGB images undergoing fast
motion. Our approach (second row) operates purely on an event
stream and thus produces significantly better and sharper results,
capturing important details such as specularities (see yellow box).

and many more [4, 9, 51, 60, 62, 63, 71, 74].
Generating dense photorealistic rendering of a scene in
a 3D-consistent manner is a long-standing problem in computer vision and computer graphics [7,13,23,35,49]. There
is currently, however, no event-based method for solving
this problem. The closest work in literature usually addresses the problem either from a SLAM [21, 41, 59, 72] or
an odometry perspective [14,22,42,73,76]. Here, the aim is
to estimate the position of a moving camera, and to reconstruct the 3D scene to some extend. These methods usually
rely on explicit feature matching in the event space and reconstruct sparse 3D models of environments from a single
event stream. As a result, novel views generated by existing methods are usually sparse, mostly containing edges
and details causing events. The same observation applies to
methods using stereo event cameras, even though they aim
to densify the 3D reconstructions [72, 73].
The research question we are addressing in this work

4992

