This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Difficulty of Unpaired Infrared-to-Visible Video Translation:
Fine-Grained Content-Rich Patches Transfer
Zhenjie Yu1 Shuang Li1 Yirui Shen1 Chi Harold Liu1 Shuigen Wang2
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
Yantai IRay Technologies Lt. Co.
{zjyu, shuangli, yiruishen, chiliu}@bit.edu.cn

shuigen.wang@iraytek.com

1. Introduction
Visible light cameras have broad applicability in computer vision algorithms for the sufficient visual informaCorresponding author
1 The code and dataset are available at https://github.com/BIT-DA/I2V-

Processing

Output

Explicit visible videos can provide sufficient visual information and facilitate vision applications. Unfortunately,
the image sensors of visible cameras are sensitive to light
conditions like darkness or overexposure. To make up for
this, recently, infrared sensors capable of stable imaging
have received increasing attention in autonomous driving
and monitoring. However, most prosperous vision models are still trained on massive clear visible data, facing
huge visual gaps when deploying to infrared imaging scenarios. In such cases, transferring the infrared video to a
distinct visible one with fine-grained semantic patterns is
a worthwhile endeavor. Previous works improve the outputs by equally optimizing each patch on the translated visible results, which is unfair for enhancing the details on
content-rich patches due to the long-tail effect of pixel distribution. Here we propose a novel CPTrans framework
to tackle the challenge via balancing gradients of different
patches, achieving the fine-grained Content-rich Patches
Transferring. Specifically, the content-aware optimization
module encourages model optimization along gradients of
target patches, ensuring the improvement of visual details.
Additionally, the content-aware temporal normalization
module enforces the generator to be robust to the motions of
target patches. Moreover, we extend the existing dataset InfraredCity to more challenging adverse weather conditions
(rain and snow), dubbed as InfraredCity-Adverse1 . Extensive experiments show that the proposed CPTrans achieves
state-of-the-art performance under diverse scenes while requiring less training time than competitive methods.

GradCAM++

Abstract

(a)

ROMA

(b)

Ours

Figure 1. (a) Visualization of pixel category distribution on dataset
IRVI [25] and semantic examples in random selected frames. We
conduct semantic segmentation via a pre-trained SegFormer [47]
on all visible video frames of IRVI and predict all pixels according to the predefined categories in ADE20K [52]. (b) Outputs and
GradCAM++ results of different methods. ROMA pays equal attention on the whole output, and the long-tail effect of training
data leads to the generation optimization along prejudiced gradients caused by the large proportion of pixels (e.g., sky and road).
We can generate more vivid details for content-rich patches (e.g.,
cars and road signs) than other methods.

tion (e.g., structure, texture, and color) of their captured
results. Most state-of-the-art vision algorithms have been
observed to show admirable performance under clear visibility conditions [10, 16, 50]. Unfortunately, in most cases,
the real-world weather is unpredictable and diverse, leading
to complex and variable light conditions like overexposure
on snowing days. While image sensors of visible cameras
are sensitive to light conditions, their imaging results are
ambiguous in adverse weather. Under such circumstances,
people take infrared sensors to make up for the deficiencies of visible cameras. These infrared sensors can capture
stable structural information in diverse environments due to
the thermal imaging principle. In emergency avoidance or
hazard detection, they could be applied in autonomous driving and monitoring scenarios [28, 30]. However, most computer vision models are trained under visible data. Although
infrared videos outline surrounding objects all the time, the
existing huge gaps and semantic lacking problems hinder

1631

