This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Soma Segmentation Benchmark in Full Adult Fly Brain
Xiaoyu Liu1

Bo Hu1 Mingxing Li1 Wei Huang1 Yueyi Zhang1,2 Zhiwei Xiong1,2, *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

{liuxyu, hubosist, mxli, weih527}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Neuron reconstruction in a full adult fly brain from highresolution electron microscopy (EM) data is regarded as a
cornerstone for neuroscientists to explore how neurons inspire intelligence. As the central part of neurons, somas in
the full brain indicate the origin of neurogenesis and neural functions. However, due to the absence of EM datasets
specifically annotated for somas, existing deep learningbased neuron reconstruction methods cannot directly provide accurate soma distribution and morphology. Moreover, full brain neuron reconstruction remains extremely
time-consuming due to the unprecedentedly large size of
EM data. In this paper, we develop an efficient soma reconstruction method for obtaining accurate soma distribution and morphology information in a full adult fly brain.
To this end, we first make a high-resolution EM dataset
with fine-grained 3D manual annotations on somas. Relying on this dataset, we propose an efficient, two-stage
deep learning algorithm for predicting accurate locations
and boundaries of 3D soma instances. Further, we deploy a
parallelized, high-throughput data processing pipeline for
executing the above algorithm on the full brain. Finally,
we provide quantitative and qualitative benchmark comparisons on the testset to validate the superiority of the proposed method, as well as preliminary statistics of the reconstructed somas in the full adult fly brain from the biological perspective. We release our code and dataset at
https://github.com/liuxy1103/EMADS.

1. Introduction
Drosophila melanogaster, also known as the fruit fly, is
an organism with intelligent behaviors including perception, learning, and judgment [10, 34, 36]. It has a complete
and relatively simple neural system [6, 37]. The interactions among neurons in the system guide the drosophila’s
intelligent behaviors [8, 14, 23, 35]. Therefore, the study
* Corresponding author.

of drosophila neurons, which has fascinated neuroscientists
for more than a century [5, 7, 16, 40, 44], has key implications for understanding how the brains of living organisms
produce intelligence [2, 41].
As the central part of the neuron, the soma maintains
the neuron structure and controls the formation of neurites [22, 30]. Studies have shown that the location and
morphology of somas in the full brain are related to neural
development and the neural logic function [3, 17], and the
number of somas is related to the complexity of the brain
and the age of the living body [1, 25]. Therefore, it is of
great biological significance to investigate soma reconstruction in the full brain of model organisms such as drosophila.
Traditional studies in this field are mainly based on brain
images collected by optical microscopies [13, 38]. The
soma structure is first stained with specific staining proteins,
and the confocal images collected could show fluorescence
staining signals, so as to obtain the soma distribution of the
full brain of drosophila. However, the resolution of confocal images is low, making it difficult to obtain the exact
morphology of each soma. Based on the assumption that
each cell has only one nucleus, the isotropic fractionator
method [15, 18] is used to obtain the number of somas in
the full brain of drosophila. This method destroys the brain
structure during the production of cell suspension, so the
distribution of somas in the full brain cannot be obtained.
Recently, with the development of high-speed electron microscopy (EM) scanning technology, highresolution EM image datasets of different species including
drosophila [42], mouse [31], and human [39] have been
successfully acquired, and the full adult fly brain (FAFB)
dataset [47] imaged from a complete drosophila brain can
be regarded as a representative. Based on these datasets,
advanced deep learning algorithms are developed to automatically reconstruct neurons [12, 23] and cell nucleus [32]
in EM images for connectomics study. Meanwhile, parallel
and distributed data processing pipelines [39, 46] are
proposed to deploy these algorithms on large-scale EM
datasets. However, due to the lack of high-resolution EM
datasets specifically annotated for somas, existing works

7402

