This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EXCALIBUR
Encouraging and Evaluating Embodied Exploration
Hao Zhuk , Raghav Kapoork , So Yeon Mink ,
Winson Hann , Jiatai Lik , Kaiwen Gengk ,
Graham Neubigk , Yonatan Biskk , Aniruddha Kembhavin , Luca Weihsn
k
Carnegie Mellon University, n Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
zhuhao@cmu.edu
Phase I: Exploration

Phase III: Reentering

3

1
4
1

2

4

3

2

2

3

4

1

1

2

Questions Available Since Phase II

Phase II

Phase IV

Q1: How many eggs are there in the glass bowl
in the fridge?

A1: 3

A1: 1

Q2: What is the sculpture on the bedroom table
made of?

A2: Plastic

A2: Metal

Q3: What is the color of the scrub in the larger
bathroom?

A3: Blue

A3: Green and
yellow

Q4: Is there a pot lighter than the laptop in the
living room?

A4: Yes

A4: Yes

3

4

Figure 1. Episode in EXCALIBUR played by a human annotator. An episode is divided into four sequential phases: in Phase I, the agent
explores the house for 2,500 steps (each action takes a step); in Phase II the agent needs to answer 20 questions (5 shown) about the
explored environment; in Phase III the agent is given a second chance to reenter the house, now with knowledge of the questions; in Phase
IV the agent answers the questions again. Performance is evaluated with the answer accuracy in Phases II&IV and the time spent in Phase
III. The observation space is egocentric (see left and right panels). The action space includes navigation and manipulation actions (Fig. 2).

Abstract
Experience precedes understanding. Humans constantly
explore and learn about their environment out of curiosity,
gather information, and update their models of the world.
On the other hand, machines are either trained to learn passively from static and fixed datasets, or taught to complete
specific goal-conditioned tasks. To encourage the development of exploratory interactive agents, we present the EXCALIBUR benchmark. EXCALIBUR allows agents to explore their environment for long durations and then query

their understanding of the physical world via inquiries like:
“is the small heavy red bowl made from glass?” or “is
there a silver spoon heavier than the egg?”. This design
encourages agents to perform free-form home exploration
without myopia induced by goal conditioning. Once the
agents have answered a series of questions, they can renter
the scene to refine their knowledge, update their beliefs,
and improve their performance on the questions. Our experiments demonstrate the challenges posed by this dataset
for the present-day state-of-the-art embodied systems and

14931

