This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Confidence-aware Personalized Federated Learning via
Variational Expectation Maximization
Junyi Zhu∗
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven

Xingchen Ma∗†
Amazon Web Services

Matthew B. Blaschko
ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven

junyi.zhu@esat.kuleuven.be

xgchenma@amazon.de

matthew.blaschko@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning
scheme to train a shared model across clients. One common and fundamental challenge in FL is that the sets of data
across clients could be non-identically distributed and have
different sizes. Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) attempts to solve this challenge via locally adapted models.
In this work, we present a novel framework for PFL based
on hierarchical Bayesian modeling and variational inference. A global model is introduced as a latent variable to
augment the joint distribution of clients’ parameters and
capture the common trends of different clients, optimization is derived based on the principle of maximizing the
marginal likelihood and conducted using variational expectation maximization. Our algorithm gives rise to a closedform estimation of a confidence value which comprises the
uncertainty of clients’ parameters and local model deviations from the global model. The confidence value is used to
weigh clients’ parameters in the aggregation stage and adjust the regularization effect of the global model. We evaluate our method through extensive empirical studies on multiple datasets. Experimental results show that our approach
obtains competitive results under mild heterogeneous circumstances while significantly outperforming state-of-theart PFL frameworks in highly heterogeneous settings.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed learning framework, in which clients optimize a shared model with their
local data and send back parameters after training, and a
central server aggregates locally updated models to obtain
a global model that it re-distributes to clients [24]. FL
is expected to address privacy concerns and to exploit the
computational resources of a large number of edge devices.
Despite these strengths, there are several challenges in the
* Authors with equal contribution.
† Work was done at KU Leuven prior to joining Amazon.

application of FL. One of them is the statistical heterogeneity of client data sets since in practice clients’ data
correlate with local environments and deviate from each
other [13,18,19]. The most common types of heterogeneity
are defined as:
Label distribution skew. Let J be the number of clients
and the data distribution of client j be Pj (x, y) and rewrite
it as Pj (x|y)Pj (y), two kinds of non-identical scenarios
can be identified. One of them is label distribution skew,
that is, the label distributions {Pj (y)}Jj=1 are varying in
different clients but the conditional generating distributions
{Pj (x|y)}Jj=1 are assumed to be the same. This could happen when certain types of data are underrepresented in the
local environment.
Label concept drift. Another common type of non-IID
scenario is label concept drift, in which the label distributions {Pj (y)}Jj=1 are the same but the conditional generating distributions {Pj (x|y)}Jj=1 are different across different
clients. This could happen when features of the same type
of data differ across clients and correlates with their environments, e.g. the Labrador Retriever (most popular dog in
the United States) and the Border Collie (most popular dog
in Europe) look different, thus the dog pictures taken by the
clients in these two areas contain label concept drift.
Data quantity disparity. Additionally, clients may possess different amounts of data. Such data quantity disparity
can lead to inconsistent uncertainties of the locally updated
models and heterogeneity in the number of local updates. In
practice, the amount of data could span a large range across
clients, for example large hospitals usually have many more
medical records than clinics. In particular, data quantity distributions often exhibit that large datasets are concentrated
in a few locations, whereas a large amount of data is scattered across many locations with small dataset sizes [11,32].
It has been proven that if federated averaging (FedAvg
[24]) is applied, the aforementioned heterogeneity will slow
down the convergence of the global model and in some
cases leads to arbitrary deviation from the optimum [19,33].
Several works have been proposed to alleviate this problem [4, 18, 33]. Another stream of work is personalized fed-

24542

