This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging per Image-Token Consistency for Vision-Language Pre-training
Yunhao Gou1,2 *
1

Tom Ko3

Hansi Yang2
Mingxuan Wang3

James Kwok2

Yu Zhang1,4†

Southern University of Science and Technology, 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
ByteDance AI Lab, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{ygou, hyangbw}@connect.ust.hk
{tom.ko, wangmingxuan.89}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Most existing vision-language pre-training (VLP) approaches adopt cross-modal masked language modeling
(CMLM) to learn vision-language associations. However,
we find that CMLM is insufficient for this purpose according to our observations: (1) Modality bias: a considerable
amount of masked tokens in CMLM can be recovered with
only the language information, ignoring the visual inputs.
(2) Under-utilization of the unmasked tokens: CMLM primarily focuses on the masked token but it cannot simultaneously leverage other tokens to learn vision-language
associations. To handle those limitations, we propose
EPIC (lEveraging Per Image-Token Consistency for visionlanguage pre-training). In EPIC, for each image-sentence
pair, we mask tokens that are salient to the image (i.e.,
Saliency-based Masking Strategy) and replace them with
alternatives sampled from a language model (i.e., Inconsistent Token Generation Procedure), and then the model is required to determine for each token in the sentence whether
it is consistent with the image (i.e., Image-Token Consistency Task). The proposed EPIC method is easily combined with pre-training methods. Extensive experiments
show that the combination of the EPIC method and stateof-the-art pre-training approaches, including ViLT, ALBEF,
METER, and X-VLM, leads to significant improvements
on downstream tasks. Our coude is released at https:
//github.com/gyhdog99/epic

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) [5, 12, 21, 29, 30, 33,
37] aims to learn multi-modal representations from largescale image-text pairs. A pre-trained vision-language model

jamesk@cse.ust.hk
yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com

(VLM) fine-tuned with only a small amount of labeled
data has shown state-of-the-art performance in many downstream tasks such as visual question answering and imagetext retrieval.
A primary concern in developing pre-training objectives
for VLP models is how to learn better vision-language
associations. In addition to coarse-grained approaches
such as image-text matching/contrasting [10, 14, 27] that
align concepts from two modalities at the sample level,
fine-grained approaches such as cross-modal masked language/image modeling (CMLM/CMIM) [16, 19, 32] learn
vision-language associations at the token-object level. For
example, Fig. 1 shows a picture paired with the sentence
“Blue and yellow hydrant on the grass”. When the word
“hydrant” is masked, in order to correctly recover the token, the model has to find the actual object in the image and
associate it with the word “hydrant”.
While effective, CMLM is insufficient for learning
vision-language associations because of (1) modality bias;
and (2) under-utilization of unmasked tokens. In visionlanguage understanding, modality bias refers to leveraging
only one modality for training/inference and so cross-modal
knowledge is not well explored [23]. We argue that modality bias exists in CMLM, and prevents the model from learning sufficient vision-language associations. Specifically, in
the CMLM task, we expect to mask salient1 tokens (such
as “blue”, “yellow”, “fire-hydrant”, and “grass”) as shown
in the left of Fig. 1. These tokens are informative for learning vision-language association because masking them enforces the model to find the answer from the visual modality. However, in practice, whether a token is salient is unknown as we only have access to image-sentence level annotations. Given a fixed and relatively small masking ratio (typically 15% in CMLM), we might end up masking
tokens that are less informative. For example, as shown

* Work was done when the author interned at ByteDance AI Lab.
† The corresponding author.

1 The definition of “saliency” is given in Sec. 4.4.

19155

