This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Large-scale Training Data Search for Object Re-identification
Yue Yao1
Tom Gedeon2
Liang Zheng1
1
Australian National University 2 Curtin University
{first name.second name}@{anu | curtin}.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
The success of a deep learning-based object re-ID relies
on one of its critical prerequisites: the labeled training data.
To achieve high accuracy, typically a massive amount of
data needs to be used to train deep learning models. However, creating large-scale object re-ID training data with
manual labels is expensive. Furthermore, collecting training
data that contributes to the high test accuracy of the trained
model is even more challenging. Recent years have seen a
large amount of datasets proposed and a significant increase
in the data size of a single dataset. For example, the RandPerson [37] dataset has 8000 identities, which is more than

Rank-1 accuracy (%)

We consider a scenario where we have access to the target domain, but cannot afford on-the-fly training data annotation, and instead would like to construct an alternative
training set from a large-scale data pool such that a competitive model can be obtained. We propose a search and
pruning (SnP) solution to this training data search problem, tailored to object re-identification (re-ID), an application aiming to match the same object captured by different cameras. Specifically, the search stage identifies and
merges clusters of source identities which exhibit similar
distributions with the target domain. The second stage,
subject to a budget, then selects identities and their images from the Stage I output, to control the size of the resulting training set for efficient training. The two steps
provide us with training sets 80% smaller than the source
pool while achieving a similar or even higher re-ID accuracy. These training sets are also shown to be superior to
a few existing search methods such as random sampling
and greedy sampling under the same budget on training
data size. If we release the budget, training sets resulting
from the first stage alone allow even higher re-ID accuracy. We provide interesting discussions on the specificity
of our method to the re-ID problem and particularly its role
in bridging the re-ID domain gap. The code is available at
https://github.com/yorkeyao/SnP

Source pool
SnP (Proposed)

Market

MSMT
# identities

Duke
1K

7K

15K

PersonX

Number of training samples (× 103 )

Figure 1. We present a search and pruning (SnP) solution to the
training data search problem in object re-ID. The source data pool
is 1 order of magnitude larger than existing re-ID training sets in
terms of the number of images and the number of identities. When
the target is AlicePerson [1], from the source pool, our method
(SnP) results in a training set 80% smaller than the source pool
while achieving a similar or even higher re-ID accuracy. The
searched training set is also superior to existing individual training sets such as Market-1501 [54], Duke [55], and MSMT [45].

6× larger than the previous PersonX [37] dataset.
However, these datasets generally have their own dataset
bias, making the model trained on one dataset unable to
generalize well to another. For example, depending on the
filming scenario, different person re-ID datasets generally
have biases on camera positions, human races, and clothing style. Such dataset biases usually lead to model bias,
which results in the model’s difficulty performing well in
an unseen filming scenario. To address this, many try to
improve learning algorithms, including domain adaptation
and domain generalization methods [2, 10, 27, 33, 35, 56].
Whereas these algorithms are well-studied and have proven
successful in many re-ID applications, deciding what kind
of data to use for training the re-ID model is still an open
research problem, and has received relatively little attention
in the community. We argue that this is a crucial problem

15568

