This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Glocal Energy-based Learning for Few-Shot Open-Set Recognition
Haoyu Wang1 * Guansong Pang2 * Peng Wang3 * Lei Zhang1 Wei Wei1 Yanning Zhang1†
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
3
Singapore Management University
University of Wollonong

Abstract
Few-shot open-set recognition (FSOR) is a challenging
task of great practical value. It aims to categorize a sample to one of the pre-defined, closed-set classes illustrated
by few examples while being able to reject the sample from
unknown classes. In this work, we approach the FSOR
task by proposing a novel energy-based hybrid model. The
model is composed of two branches, where a classification
branch learns a metric to classify a sample to one of closedset classes and the energy branch explicitly estimates the
open-set probability. To achieve holistic detection of openset samples, our model leverages both class-wise and pixelwise features to learn a glocal energy-based score, in which
a global energy score is learned using the class-wise features, while a local energy score is learned using the pixelwise features. The model is enforced to assign large energy
scores to samples that are deviated from the few-shot examples in either the class-wise features or the pixel-wise features, and to assign small energy scores otherwise. Experiments on three standard FSOR datasets show the superior
performance of our model.1

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has flourished in various
fields with the ever-increasing scale of the training data under the closed-world learning settings, i.e., the training and
test sets share exactly the same set of classes. However,
such settings often do not hold in many real applications.
This is because 1) it is difficult or costly to obtain a large
amount of labeled data, and 2) models deployed in openworld environments need to constantly deal with samples
from unknown classes. For example, in the application of
deep learning for diagnosing rare diseases, the number of
samples is limited. In this case, the model is prone to overfitting, resulting in a significant degradation in performance.
Further, there can be unknown variants of those diseases due
* H. Wang, G. Pang and P. Wang contributed equally in this work.
† Corresponding author.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/00why00/Glocal

support: linnet

support: cliff

query: robin

query: Arctic wolf

GT
- Unknown
PEELER[18] - linnet
SnaTCHer[15] - linnet
ATT-G[13] - Unknown
Ours
- Unknown

GT
- Unknown
PEELER[18] - cliff
SnaTCHer[15] - cliff
ATT-G[13] - cliff
Ours
- Unknown

Figure 1. Two typical errors with existing methods. Our method
can detect unknown open-set samples that are similar to the
closed-set samples in either the global class level or the local feature level.

to our limited understanding of the diseases. Thus, the models are required to perform the classification accurately for
the classes illustrated by limited samples, while at the same
time detecting the samples from unknown classes. The latter ability is important, especially for healthcare or safetycritical applications, e.g., to alert the unknown cases for human investigation in the disease diagnosis example, or to
request human intervention for handling unknown objects
in autonomous driving.
Few shot learning [16, 23, 28, 32, 35, 36] (FSL) and open
set recognition [3, 7, 9, 22, 29, 30] (OSR) are two techniques

7507

