This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correspondence Transformers with Asymmetric Feature Learning and
Matching Flow Super-Resolution
Yixuan Sun1 , Dongyang Zhao2 , Zhangyue Yin2 , Yiwen Huang2 ,
Tao Gui2 , Wenqiang Zhang1,2 and Weifeng Ge2,†
1
Academy of Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
wfge@fudan.edu.cn

Figure 1. Dense visual correspondence generated by state-of-the-art algorithms, including SCOT [30], CATs [8], MMNet [49] and our
asymmetric correspondence transformer. Images are warped with predicted key points using thin-plate splines algorithm [4].

Abstract
This paper solves the problem of learning dense visual
correspondences between different object instances of the
same category with only sparse annotations. We decompose
this pixel-level semantic matching problem into two easier
ones: (i) First, local feature descriptors of source and target images need to be mapped into shared semantic spaces
to get coarse matching flows. (ii) Second, matching flows
in low resolution should be refined to generate accurate
point-to-point matching results. We propose asymmetric
feature learning and matching flow super-resolution based

on vision transformers to solve the above problems. The
asymmetric feature learning module exploits a biased crossattention mechanism to encode token features of source images with their target counterparts. Then matching flow in
low resolutions is enhanced by a super-resolution network
to get accurate correspondences. Our pipeline is built upon
vision transformers and can be trained in an end-to-end
manner. Extensive experimental results on several popular
benchmarks, such as PF-PASCAL, PF-WILLOW, and SPair71K, demonstrate that the proposed method can catch subtle semantic differences in pixels efficiently. Code is available on https://github.com/YXSUNMADMAX/ACTR.

†: Corresponding Authors

17787

