This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Weak-to-Strong Consistency
in Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Lihe Yang1
Lei Qi2
1
Nanjing University

Litong Feng3
Wayne Zhang3
Yinghuan Shi1 *
2
3
Southeast University
SenseTime Research

https://github.com/LiheYoung/UniMatch

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to provide pixel-level predictions to images, which can be deemed as a dense classification task and is fundamental to real-world applications,
e.g., autonomous driving. Nevertheless, conventional fullysupervised scenario [43, 73, 77] is extremely hungry for delicately labeled images by human annotators, greatly hindering its broad application to some fields where it is costly
and even infeasible to annotate abundant images. Therefore,
semi-supervised semantic segmentation [56] has been proposed and is attracting increasing attention. Generally, it
wishes to alleviate the labor-intensive process via leverag* Corresponding author.

mIOU (%)

77

In this work, we revisit the weak-to-strong consistency
framework, popularized by FixMatch from semi-supervised
classification, where the prediction of a weakly perturbed image serves as supervision for its strongly perturbed version.
Intriguingly, we observe that such a simple pipeline already
achieves competitive results against recent advanced works,
when transferred to our segmentation scenario. Its success
heavily relies on the manual design of strong data augmentations, however, which may be limited and inadequate to
explore a broader perturbation space. Motivated by this,
we propose an auxiliary feature perturbation stream as a
supplement, leading to an expanded perturbation space. On
the other, to sufficiently probe original image-level augmentations, we present a dual-stream perturbation technique,
enabling two strong views to be simultaneously guided by
a common weak view. Consequently, our overall Unified
Dual-Stream Perturbations approach (UniMatch) surpasses
all existing methods significantly across all evaluation protocols on the Pascal, Cityscapes, and COCO benchmarks. Its
superiority is also demonstrated in remote sensing interpretation and medical image analysis. We hope our reproduced
FixMatch and our results can inspire more future works.

74
PseudoSeg [ICLR'2021]
CPS [CVPR'2021]
PC2Seg [ICCV'2021]
ReCo [ICLR'2022]
ST++ [CVPR'2022]
U2PL [CVPR'2022]
Reproduced FixMatch

71
68
65

183

366
732
# labeled images (10582 in total)

1464

Figure 1. Comparison between state-of-the-art methods and our
reproduced FixMatch [55] on the Pascal dataset.

ing a large quantity of unlabeled images, accompanied by a
handful of manually labeled images.
Following closely the research line of semi-supervised
learning (SSL), advanced methods in semi-supervised semantic segmentation have evolved from GANs-based adversarial training paradigm [21, 47, 56] into the widely adopted
consistency regularization framework [13, 19, 28, 29, 49, 61,
81] and reborn self-training pipeline [23, 27, 68, 70]. In this
work, we focus on the weak-to-strong consistency regularization framework, which is popularized by FixMatch [55] from
the field of semi-supervised classification, and then impacts
many other relevant tasks [42, 45, 57, 62, 66, 67]. The weakto-strong approach supervises a strongly perturbed unlabeled
image xs with the prediction yielded from its corresponding weakly perturbed version xw , as illustrated in Figure 2a.
Intuitively, its success lies in that the model is more likely
to produce high-quality prediction on xw , while xs is more
effective for our model to learn, since the strong perturbations introduce additional information as well as mitigate
confirmation bias [2]. We surprisingly notice that, so long
as coupled with appropriate strong perturbations, FixMatch
can indeed still exhibit powerful generalization capability in
our scenario, obtaining superior results over state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods, as compared in Figure 1. Thus, we select
this simple yet effective framework as our baseline.
Through investigation of image-level strong perturbations,

7236

