This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointListNet: Deep Learning on 3D Point Lists
Hehe Fan1,2
1

A

sentence

is

a

Linchao Zhu1

Zhejiang University

list

of

(a) text: 1D word list

Yi Yang1
2

Mohan Kankanhalli2

National University of Singapore

words.

(b) image: 2D pixel grid

(c) 3D point cloud/set

(d) protein: 3D point list

Figure 1. Data structure comparison of text, image, point cloud and protein. (a) Texts are regular 1D lists of words. The position is the
word’s sequential order in the text and the feature is the word itself. (b) Images are regular 2D grids of pixels. The position is the row and
column where the pixel is located and the feature is the color. (c) Point clouds are irregular 3D point sets. The position is the 3D coordinate
and the feature is the point attributes. (d) Proteins can be seen as 3D point lists. The position of an amino acid involves a regular 1D
sequential order and an irregular 3D coordinate. The feature is the amino acid (residue) type.

Abstract
Deep neural networks on regular 1D lists (e.g., natural
languages) and irregular 3D sets (e.g., point clouds) have
made tremendous achievements. The key to natural language processing is to model words and their regular order dependency in texts. For point cloud understanding, the
challenge is to understand the geometry via irregular point
coordinates, in which point-feeding orders do not matter.
However, there are a few kinds of data that exhibit both regular 1D list and irregular 3D set structures, such as proteins
and non-coding RNAs. In this paper, we refer to them as
3D point lists and propose a Transformer-style PointListNet
to model them. First, PointListNet employs non-parametric
distance-based attention because we find sometimes it is the
distance, instead of the feature or type, that mainly determines how much two points, e.g., amino acids, are correlated in the micro world. Second, different from the vanilla
Transformer that directly performs a simple linear transformation on inputs to generate values and does not explicitly
model relative relations, our PointListNet integrates the 1D
order and 3D Euclidean displacements into values. We conduct experiments on protein fold classification and enzyme
reaction classification. Experimental results show the effec-

tiveness of the proposed PointListNet.

1. Introduction
The essence of deep learning is to capture the structure
of a certain kind of data via artificial neural networks. Usually, an element of data includes a position part and a feature
part. According to the type of element position, data exhibit
different structures. Various deep neural networks are proposed to model those structures and have made tremendous
achievements.
For example, texts are 1D lists of words. As shown in
Fig. 1(a). The position of a word is its order in the text
and the feature is the word itself. To capture the structure
of texts or the dependency of words, 1D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [3, 30, 58], recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) [9, 26, 39] and Transformers [13, 49] are widely
used. A digital image can be seen as a 2D rectangular grid
or matrix of pixels, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Each pixel has
a 2D position and is associated with a feature of color or
other attributes. In this case, 2D CNNs are usually used to
model image structure [23, 33, 46]. Recently, Transformers
are also employed for image understanding [15].
Recently, 3D point cloud/set processing is attracting

17692

