This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transfer4D: A framework for frugal motion capture and deformation transfer
Shubh Maheshwari1
1
TCS Research, India

Rahul Narain2 Ramya Hebbalaguppe1,2
2
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India

Figure 1. Transfer4D is an unsupervised technique for intra-category motion transfer from monocular depth videos (highlighted in
the green box) to virtual characters of varying shapes (blue). It is category-agnostic, permitting motion transfer between quadrupeds
(left), between bipeds (center and right), and in general between any characters with similar topology. Skeletons shown in yellow are
extracted using our proposed unsupervised skeletonization algorithm. Please refer to the demo video on the project webpage: https:
//transfer4d.github.io/ and Fig. 3 for diverse animation sequences ranging bipeds and quadrupeds.

Abstract
Animating a virtual character based on a real performance of an actor is a challenging task that currently requires expensive motion capture setups and additional effort
by expert animators, rendering it accessible only to large production houses. The goal of our work is to democratize this
task by developing a frugal alternative termed “Transfer4D”
that uses only commodity depth sensors and further reduces
animators’ effort by automating the rigging and animation
transfer process. Our approach can transfer motion from an
incomplete, single-view depth video to a semantically similar
target mesh, unlike prior works that make a stricter assumption on the source to be noise-free and watertight. To handle
sparse, incomplete videos from depth video inputs and variations between source and target objects, we propose to use
skeletons as an intermediary representation between motion
capture and transfer. We propose a novel unsupervised skeleton extraction pipeline from a single-view depth sequence
that incorporates additional geometric information, resulting in superior performance in motion reconstruction and
transfer in comparison to the contemporary methods and
making our approach generic. We use non-rigid reconstruction to track motion from the depth sequence, and then we rig
the source object using skinning decomposition. Finally, the

rig is embedded into the target object for motion retargeting.

1. Introduction
The growing demand for immersive animated content
originates primarily from its widespread applications in entertainment, metaverse, education, and augmented/virtual
reality to name a few. Production of animation content requiring modeling the geometry of the characters of interest,
rigging a skeleton to determine each character’s degrees
of freedom, and then animating their motion. The latter
step is often performed by transferring the motion captured
from a real performer, whether a human actor, an animal,
or even a puppet. The intermediate rigging step is tedious
and labor-intensive, while motion capture requires an expensive multi-camera system; both factors hinder the large-scale
adoption of 3D content creation. We aim to democratize
content creation by (i) replacing expensive motion capture
setups with a single monocular depth sensor, and (ii) by automatically generating character rigs to transfer motion to
non-isometric objects.
By the term animation transfer we refer to the process of
transferring the motion captured from a real performer to an
articulated character modelled as a polygon mesh. Specif-

12836

