This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Open-World Segmentation of Parts
Qing Liu2
Wei-Lun Chao1
Brian Price2
Tai-Yu Pan1, *
1
2
The Ohio State University
Adobe Research
{pan.667, chao.209}@osu.edu

{qingl, bprice}@adobe.com

Abstract

deeper into their compositions, i.e., “parts”; for example, to
segment cup handle, bird wing, vehicle wheel, etc.
Arguably, the most straightforward way to tackle this
problem is to perform part “instance” segmentation, treating each object part as a separate class; each appearance as a separate instance. A model then must localize
parts, classify them, and demarcate their boundaries. In
object-level instance segmentation [15], these three subtasks are usually approached simultaneously, or at least,
share a model backbone. Such a multi-task nature enables
the model to benefit from the complementary cues among
sub-tasks to attain higher accuracy. For instance, the shapes
of segments often entail the class labels and vice versa.
Segmenting parts in this way, however, limits their scope
to the closed world. That is, the learned model may not, or
by default should not1 , generalize to object categories (and
their corresponding parts) that are unseen during training.
Although the largest dataset nowadays for part segmentation, PartImageNet [14], has covered more than a hundred
object categories, a scale similar to representative objectlevel datasets like MSCOCO [30] and OpenImages [22], it
is arguable not enough to cover the need in the wild.
To equip the model with the open-world capability — the
ability to segment parts for unseen objects — we propose to
chop off the “classification” function from the model, as it is
simply not applicable to unseen parts. Namely, we remove
the pre-defined fences among different object parts and instead assign a single part class to them (i.e., class-agnostic).
At first glance, this design choice may seem like a purely
simplified version of the original problem or an unavoidable compromise. However, we argue that it indeed helps
improve the model’s open-world generalizability.
Concretely, in training a model to correctly classify seen
object parts, we implicitly force the model to classify future
unseen object parts into the background, suppressing their
chances to be detected and segmented. By treating all the
seen object parts as a single class, we remove the competition tension among them and in turn encourage the model

Segmenting object parts such as cup handles and animal
bodies is important in many real-world applications but requires more annotation effort. The largest dataset nowadays contains merely two hundred object categories, implying the difficulty to scale up part segmentation to an unconstrained setting. To address this, we propose to explore
a seemingly simplified but empirically useful and scalable
task, class-agnostic part segmentation. In this problem, we
disregard the part class labels in training and instead treat
all of them as a single part class. We argue and demonstrate
that models trained without part classes can better localize
parts and segment them on objects unseen in training. We
then present two further improvements. First, we propose to
make the model object-aware, leveraging the fact that parts
are “compositions”, whose extents are bounded by the corresponding objects and whose appearances are by nature
not independent but bundled. Second, we introduce a novel
approach to improve part segmentation on unseen objects,
inspired by an interesting finding — for unseen objects, the
pixel-wise features extracted by the model often reveal highquality part segments. To this end, we propose a novel selfsupervised procedure that iterates between pixel clustering
and supervised contrastive learning that pulls pixels closer
or pushes them away. Via extensive experiments on PartImageNet and Pascal-Part, we show notable and consistent
gains by our approach, essentially a critical step towards
open-world part segmentation.

1. Introduction
Segmenting “objects” from images, such as cup, bird,
vehicle, etc., is a fundamental task in computer vision
and has experienced a series of breakthroughs in recent
years thanks to deep learning [6, 15, 18] and large-scale
data [12, 22, 30]. In many real-world applications like object grasping, behavior analysis, and image editing, however, there is often a need to go beyond “objects” and dive
* This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.

1 The need to assign a “seen-class” label to every detected segment discourages the model from detecting segments that correspond to “unseenclass” classes in the first place.

15392

