This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Unsupervised Object Detection from LiDAR Point Clouds
Lunjun Zhang Anqi Joyce Yang Yuwen Xiong Sergio Casas
Bin Yang† Mengye Ren† Raquel Urtasun
Waabi, University of Toronto
{lzhang, jyang, yxiong, sergio, urtasun}@waabi.ai

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of unsupervised object detection from 3D point clouds in self-driving scenes.
We present a simple yet effective method that exploits (i)
point clustering in near-range areas where the point clouds
are dense, (ii) temporal consistency to filter out noisy unsupervised detections, (iii) translation equivariance of CNNs
to extend the auto-labels to long range, and (iv) selfsupervision for improving on its own. Our approach, OYSTER (Object Discovery via Spatio-Temporal Refinement),
does not impose constraints on data collection (such as
repeated traversals of the same location), is able to detect objects in a zero-shot manner without supervised finetuning (even in sparse, distant regions), and continues to
self-improve given more rounds of iterative self-training. To
better measure model performance in self-driving scenarios, we propose a new planning-centric perception metric
based on distance-to-collision. We demonstrate that our
unsupervised object detector significantly outperforms unsupervised baselines on PandaSet and Argoverse 2 Sensor dataset, showing promise that self-supervision combined with object priors can enable object discovery in
the wild. For more information, visit the project website:
https://waabi.ai/research/oyster.

1. Introduction
When a large set of annotations are available, supervised
learning can solve the task of 3D object detection remarkably well thanks to the power of neural networks, as proven
by many successful object detectors developed in the past
decade [24,36,47,70]. However, since most existing data is
unlabeled, human annotations are currently the bottleneck
for data-driven learning algorithms, as they require tedious
manual effort that is very costly in practice. While there has
been some effort on using weaker supervision to train object detectors [4, 57, 68], it is worth noting that human and
animal brains are able to perceive objects without explicit
† Work done at Waabi. Mengye is now at New York University.

Long-range: sparse point cloud

Near-range: dense point cloud with clear clusters

Figure 1. Visualization of a sequence of five 3D point clouds. At
near range, the point clouds are very dense and we can clearly
distinguish clusters, motivating us to use prior knowledge. At far
range, the point clouds are quite sparse and the objects do not appear as obvious, leading us to explore zero-shot generalization.

labels at all [2]. This naturally inspires us to ask whether
we can design unsupervised learning algorithms that discover objects from raw streams of sensor data on their own.
Unsupervised object detection has long been studied in
computer vision, albeit in various forms. For instance, numerous ways of unsupervised object proposals were considered as the first stage of an object detector [20]. These methods leverage a variety of cues including colors and edge
boundaries [1], graph structures [18], and motion cues [50].
While those methods are no longer popular in today’s object
detectors due to end-to-end supervised training, they offer
important intuitions of what an object is.
In recent years, unsupervised object detection has made
a comeback under the name of object-centric models [6, 15,
33, 34, 38, 39, 58]. The essential idea is to train an autoencoder with a structured decoder such that the network
is forced to decompose the scene into a set of individual
objects during reconstruction. Most of those models only
show experiments on synthetic toy datasets, where the back-

9317

