This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Representing Volumetric Videos as Dynamic MLP Maps
Sida Peng∗

Yunzhi Yan∗

Qing Shuai

Hujun Bao

Xiaowei Zhou†

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel representation of volumetric videos for real-time view synthesis of dynamic scenes.
Recent advances in neural scene representations demonstrate their remarkable capability to model and render complex static scenes, but extending them to represent dynamic
scenes is not straightforward due to their slow rendering
speed or high storage cost. To solve this problem, our key
idea is to represent the radiance field of each frame as a
set of shallow MLP networks whose parameters are stored
in 2D grids, called MLP maps, and dynamically predicted
by a 2D CNN decoder shared by all frames. Representing 3D scenes with shallow MLPs significantly improves
the rendering speed, while dynamically predicting MLP parameters with a shared 2D CNN instead of explicitly storing them leads to low storage cost. Experiments show that
the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art rendering
quality on the NHR and ZJU-MoCap datasets, while being
efficient for real-time rendering with a speed of 41.7 fps for
512 × 512 images on an RTX 3090 GPU. The code is available at https://zju3dv.github.io/mlp maps/.

1. Introduction
Volumetric video captures a dynamic scene in 3D which
allows users to watch from arbitrary viewpoints with immersive experience. It is a cornerstone for the next generation media and has many important applications such as
video conferencing, sport broadcasting, and remote learning. The same as 2D video, volumetric video should be capable of high-quality and real-time rendering as well as being compressed for efficient storage and transmission. Designing a proper representation for volumetric video to satisfy these requirements remains an open problem.
Traditional image-based rendering methods [1,12,25,74]
build free-viewpoint video systems based on dense camera
arrays. They record dynamic scenes with many cameras
and then synthesize novel views by interpolation from input nearby views. For these methods, the underlying scene
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

+

latent vector

2D CNN decoder

MLP parameters
MLP maps

Figure 1. The basic idea of dynamic MLP maps. Instead of
modeling the volumetric video with a big MLP network [26], we
exploit a 2D convolutional neural network to dynamically generate 2D MLP maps at each video frame, where each pixel storing
the parameter vector of a small MLP network. This enables us
to represent volumetric videos with a set of small MLP networks,
thus significantly improving the rendering speed.

representation is the original multi-view video. While there
have been many multi-view video coding techniques, the
storage and transmission cost is still huge which cannot
satisfy real-time video applications. Another line of work
[11, 13] utilizes RGB-D sensors to reconstruct textured
meshes as the scene representation. With mesh compression
techniques, this representation can be very compact and enable streamable volumetric videos, but these methods can
only capture humans and objects in constrained environments as reconstructing a high-quality renderable mesh for
general dynamic scenes is still a very challenging problem.
Recent advances in neural scene representations [26, 33,
61] provide a promising solution for this problem. They
represent 3D scene with neural networks, which can be effectively learned from multi-view images through differentiable renderers. For instance, Neural Volumes [33] represents volumetric videos with a set of RGB-density volumes predicted by 3D CNNs. Since the volume prediction
easily consumes large amount of GPU memory, it struggles to model high-resolution 3D scenes. NeRF [37] instead represent 3D scenes with MLP networks regressing
density and color for any 3D point, thereby enabling it to
synthesize high-resolution images. DyNeRF [26] extends
NeRF to model volumetric videos by introducing a temporal latent code as additional input of the MLP network. A
major issue of NeRF models is that their rendering is gen-

4252

