This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Event Guided High Dynamic Range Video Reconstruction
Yixin Yang1,2 Jin Han3,4 Jinxiu Liang1,2 Imari Sato3,4 Boxin Shi∗1,2
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

3

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo 4 National Institute of Informatics
{yangyixin93, cssherryliang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

(a) LDR images

(b) Events

(c) E2VID [60]

{jinhan, imarik}@nii.ac.jp

(d) Han et al. [24]

(e) Ours

Figure 1. Given hybrid inputs of (a) LDR video and (b) stacked events, the HDR video can be reconstructed using different methods shown
in (c) E2VID [60], (d) Han et al. [24], and (e) the proposed HDRev-Net. The samples here are tested on synthetic data (top row) and
real data (bottom row) respectively. The proposed method is able to generate the HDR video with more details and less ﬂickering effects.
Please view our project page for corresponding animations.

Abstract
Limited by the trade-off between frame rate and exposure
time when capturing moving scenes with conventional cameras, frame based HDR video reconstruction suffers from
scene-dependent exposure ratio balancing and ghosting artifacts. Event cameras provide an alternative visual representation with a much higher dynamic range and temporal
resolution free from the above issues, which could be an
effective guidance for HDR imaging from LDR videos. In
this paper, we propose a multimodal learning framework
for event guided HDR video reconstruction. In order to
better leverage the knowledge of the same scene from the
two modalities of visual signals, a multimodal representation alignment strategy to learn a shared latent space and a
fusion module tailored to complementing two types of signals for different dynamic ranges in different regions are
proposed. Temporal correlations are utilized recurrently
to suppress the ﬂickering effects in the reconstructed HDR
video. The proposed HDRev-Net demonstrates state-of-theart performance quantitatively and qualitatively for both
synthetic and real-world data.

1. Introduction
The dynamic range of the real world usually exceeds
what a conventional camera and 8-bit image can record by a
large margin. High dynamic range (HDR) imaging, which
expands the luminance range limited by low dynamic range
(LDR) images or videos, is a broadly used technique with
extensive applications in photography/videography, video
games, and high-end display.
Most HDR imaging methods for conventional cameras
rely on capturing and merging multiple snapshots with different exposure times [9, 49], which is challenging for capturing videos. There have been enduring efforts for sophisticated modiﬁcation on conventional frame based cameras to
capture multi-exposure sequences (nearly) simultaneously,
e.g., beam splitting with three or more sensors [69,70], temporally [7, 30, 32] or spatially [1, 8, 22, 28, 53, 54] varying
exposure. Nevertheless, their abilities for HDR video reconstruction are limited by the trade-off between a higher
frame rate (for a smooth viewing experience) and a higher
dynamic range (for capturing details in dark regions with
∗ Corresponding author

Project page: https://yixinyang-00.github.io/HDRev/

13924

