This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Co-Salient Object Detection with Uncertainty-aware Group Exchange-Masking
Yang Wu1 Huihui Song1∗ Bo Liu2 Kaihua Zhang1 Dong Liu3
1
B-DAT and CICAEET, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Walmart Global Tech, Sunnyvale, CA, 94086, USA
3
Netflix Inc, Los Gatos, CA, 95032, USA
songhuihui@nuist.edu.cn

Abstract
The traditional definition of co-salient object detection
(CoSOD) task is to segment the common salient objects in
a group of relevant images. Existing CoSOD models bydefault adopt the group consensus assumption. This brings
about model robustness defect under the condition of irrelevant images in the testing image group, which hinders
the use of CoSOD models in real-world applications. To
address this issue, this paper presents a group exchangemasking (GEM) strategy for robust CoSOD model learning. With two group of image containing different types of
salient object as input, the GEM first selects a set of images
from each group by the proposed learning based strategy,
then these images are exchanged. The proposed feature extraction module considers both the uncertainty caused by
the irrelevant images and group consensus in the remaining relevant images. We design a latent variable generator branch which is made of conditional variational autoencoder to generate uncertainly-based global stochastic features. A CoSOD transformer branch is devised to capture
the correlation-based local features that contain the group
consistency information. At last, the output of two branches
are concatenated and fed into a transformer-based decoder,
producing robust co-saliency prediction. Extensive evaluations on co-saliency detection with and without irrelevant
images demonstrate the superiority of our method over a
variety of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Co-salient object detection (CoSOD) is to segment the
common salient objects in a group of relevant images.
By detecting the co-salient object in a group of images,
the images’ background and redundant content are re∗ Corresponding author.

This work is supported in part by National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2018AAA0100400, in part by the NSFC under Grant Nos. 62276141,
61872189.

Inputs

Rearrange

GT
Trains
OURS
DCFM
GCoNet

(a) Comparison results

Learn to select
top-k noisy images

Rearrange
Dogs

(b) Group exchange-masking

Figure 1. (a) When there exists an irrelevant image in the test
group, the state-of-the-art CoSOD models such as DCFM [39] and
GCoNet [9] tend to generate false positive predictions for the noisy
image, yet our method can achieve an accurate prediction due to
the use of group exchange-masking strategy in (b).

moved, which helps the downstream tasks such as object tracking [38], co-segmentation [48] and video colocalization [14], to name a few.
Group consensus assumption is widely used by existing CoSOD models, i.e., these models presume that all images in the same group contain the common salient targets. The widely-used CoSOD benchmark datasets, such as
COCO-SEG [33], CoCA [50], and CoSOD3k [8] organize
the training and testing images that contain the same object as a group. Many existing CoSOD models consider the
group consensus characteristic in modeling. For example,
early works such as [2, 10, 13] extract hand-crafted features
for inter-image co-object correspondence discovery. The
deep learning models proposed in [15, 20, 36, 39, 44, 46, 48]
use one group of relevant images as training data input
for consensus representation learning. Among them, a variety of novel model design techniques have been developed to make full use of the group consistency characteristic, such as the low-rank feature learning [46], co-attention
model [20] and intra-saliency correlation learning [15]. The
issues of the group consensus assumption are partially studied in recent literature [9], which further models the inter19639

