This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScanDMM: A Deep Markov Model of Scanpath Prediction for 360◦ Images
Xiangjie Sui1 , Yuming Fang1 *, Hanwei Zhu2 , Shiqi Wang2 , Zhou Wang3
1
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics,
2
City University of Hong Kong, 3 University of Waterloo
https://github.com/xiangjieSui/ScanDMM

Abstract
Scanpath prediction for 360◦ images aims to produce dynamic gaze behaviors based on the human visual perception
mechanism. Most existing scanpath prediction methods for
360◦ images do not give a complete treatment of the timedependency when predicting human scanpath, resulting in
inferior performance and poor generalizability. In this paper, we present a scanpath prediction method for 360◦ images by designing a novel Deep Markov Model (DMM)
architecture, namely ScanDMM. We propose a semanticsguided transition function to learn the nonlinear dynamics of time-dependent attentional landscape. Moreover, a
state initialization strategy is proposed by considering the
starting point of viewing, enabling the model to learn the
dynamics with the correct “launcher”. We further demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance
on four 360◦ image databases, and exhibit its generalizability by presenting two applications of applying scanpath prediction models to other visual tasks – saliency detection and
image quality assessment, expecting to provide profound insights into these fields.

1. Introduction
360◦ images, also referred to as omnidirectional, sphere
or virtual reality (VR) images, have been a popular type of
visual data in many applications, providing us with immersive experiences. Nevertheless, how people explore virtual
environments in 360◦ images has not been well understood.
The scanpath prediction model that aims at generating realistic gaze trajectories has obtained increasing attention due
to its significant influence in understanding users’ viewing
behaviors in VR scenes, as well as in developing VR rendering, display, compression, and transmission [51].
Scanpath prediction has been explored for many years in
2D images [29]. However, 360◦ images are different greatly
from 2D images, as a larger space is offered to interact with
* Corresponding author (email: fa0001ng@e.ntu.edu.sg)

Image

GT

Saliency-based models

Generative models

Noise

Our model
𝐳𝟏

𝐳𝟎
𝐒෠

𝐒෠

Semantics

𝐳𝟐
···

𝐒෠

𝐱෤ 𝟏

𝐱෤ 𝟐

Figure 1. Existing scanpath prediction models for 360◦ images
could be classified to two types: saliency-based models [2, 70, 71]
and generative models [42, 43]. The scanpaths produced by
saliency-based models, taking the study [2] as an example, commonly exhibits unstable behavior with large displacements and
scarce focal regions. Generative models, taking the study [43] as
an example, shows less attention to regions of interest. The proposed ScanDMM can produce more realistic scanpaths that focus
on regions of interests.

– humans are allowed to use both head and gaze movements to explore viewports of interest in the scene. In such a
case, viewing conditions, e.g., the starting point of viewing,
has an important impact on humans’ scanpaths [20, 21, 52],
and leads to complex and varied scanpaths among humans.
This is inherently different from what happens in 2D visuals since humans can directly guide their attention to the
regions of interest. Therefore, scanpath prediction for 360◦
images is a more complex task.
Current 360◦ image scanpath prediction methods could

6989

