This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DartBlur: Privacy Preservation with Detection Artifact Suppression
Baowei Jiang*, Bing Bai*, Haozhe Lin*, Yu Wang, Yuchen Guo, Lu Fang†
Tsinghua University
fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Nowadays, privacy issue has become a top priority when
training AI algorithms. Machine learning algorithms are
expected to benefit our daily life, while personal information must also be carefully protected from exposure. Facial information is particularly sensitive in this regard.
Multiple datasets containing facial information have been
taken offline, and the community is actively seeking solutions to remedy the privacy issues. Existing methods for
privacy preservation can be divided into blur-based and
face replacement-based methods. Owing to the advantages
of review convenience and good accessibility, blur-based
based methods have become a dominant choice in practice. However, blur-based methods would inevitably introduce training artifacts harmful to the performance of downstream tasks. In this paper, we propose a novel De-artifact
Blurring (DartBlur) privacy-preserving method, which capitalizes on a DNN architecture to generate blurred faces.
DartBlur can effectively hide facial privacy information
while detection artifacts are simultaneously suppressed. We
have designed four training objectives that particularly
aim to improve review convenience and maximize detection artifact suppression. We associate the algorithm with
an adversarial training strategy with a second-order optimization pipeline. Experimental results demonstrate that
DartBlur outperforms the existing face-replacement method
from both perspectives of review convenience and accessibility, and also shows an exclusive advantage in suppressing the training artifact compared to traditional blur-based
methods. Our implementation is available at https:
//github.com/JaNg2333/DartBlur.

1. Introduction
Computer vision (CV) technology has been influencing
our daily life in many ways. However, successful CV models often have to rely on large-scale datasets collected from
real-world scenes, which raises concerning privacy issues.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Lu Fang is the corresponding author (www.luvision.net).

Original
FAIL

CIAGAN
FAIL

DeepPrivacy

Block

Gaussian Blur

Pixelation

DartBlur

Figure 1. Example faces and anonymized versions by existing
methods and DartBlur. As presented, blur-based methods facilitate review convenience, and face replacement-based methods
may fail when the keypoint detector does not work as expected.
Best viewed in color.

The CV community has started to take privacy issues
seriously. Existing privacy-preserving methods can be divided into blur-based methods (e.g., Block, Gaussian blur,
Pixelation) and face replacement-based methods (e.g., CIAGAN [24], DeepPrivacy [13], DeIdGAN [18]). Blur-based
methods are simple to implement but inevitably introduce
additional noise and artifacts into the actual CV task [37].
For example, Gaussian blur patterns are easier to recognize. Therefore, face detectors trained on Gaussian blurred

16479

