This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HypLiLoc: Towards Effective LiDAR Pose Regression with Hyperbolic Fusion
Sijie Wang1*

Qiyu Kang1* Rui She1 Wei Wang2 Kai Zhao1 Yang Song3 Wee Peng Tay1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 University of Oxford 3 C3.AI
{wang1679;qiyu.kang;rui.she;kai.zhao;wptay}@ntu.edu.sg
peter.wang1221@gmail.com

Abstract
LiDAR relocalization plays a crucial role in many fields,
including robotics, autonomous driving, and computer vision. LiDAR-based retrieval from a database typically incurs
high computation storage costs and can lead to globally
inaccurate pose estimations if the database is too sparse.
On the other hand, pose regression methods take images
or point clouds as inputs and directly regress global poses
in an end-to-end manner. They do not perform database
matching and are more computationally efficient than retrieval techniques. We propose HypLiLoc, a new model
for LiDAR pose regression. We use two branched backbones to extract 3D features and 2D projection features,
respectively. We consider multi-modal feature fusion in
both Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces to obtain more effective feature representations. Experimental results indicate that HypLiLoc achieves state-of-the-art performance
in both outdoor and indoor datasets. We also conduct extensive ablation studies on the framework design, which
demonstrate the effectiveness of multi-modal feature extraction and multi-space embedding. Our code is released at:
https://github.com/sijieaaa/HypLiLoc

1. Introduction
Visual relocalization aims at estimating the 6-degree of
freedom (DoF) pose of an agent using perception sensors,
such as LiDARs and cameras. It plays a crucial role in many
fields that include robot navigation [12], autonomous driving [23], and scene recognition [22]. Image-based relocalization methods have achieved good performance in various
applications [15, 33, 36]. However, images taken from cameras can only capture RGB color information and are easily
influenced by environmental conditions, including low illumination and light reflections. By contrast, LiDARs, which
cast active beams to estimate the depth of surrounding objects, are more robust against those changes.
* These authors contribute equally.

yang.song@c3.ai

In recent years, the LiDAR has become an important
sensor in smart robots, autonomous vehicles, and mobile
devices. LiDAR-based relocalization, which is a basic and
important module impacting other perception tasks, has attracted more attention [8, 19, 20, 27, 37, 46]. One of the classical approaches, LiDAR odometry, estimates the relative
poses among successive LiDAR frames to obtain locally
accurate pose estimation. However, errors accumulate over
the trajectory, resulting in unsatisfactory global pose estimation. To compensate for the error, LiDAR odometry is
usually treated as a component in a complete simultaneous
localization and mapping system (SLAM), where the global
pose estimated by a global positioning method or detected
loop closure is used to correct the accumulated error in the
LiDAR odometry [32, 43].
LiDAR-based retrieval is also used for relocalization [34].
It first constructs a database of LiDAR features learned from
all candidate LiDAR frames. During inference, given a query
LiDAR scan, the similarities between the query feature and
all features stored in the database are computed so that the
top-matched poses can be obtained. Although this approach
provides accurate global pose estimation, it inherently suffers from high computation cost and storage burden [38].
Therefore, it is more appropriate for offline scenarios rather
than for real-time mobile applications.
Pose regression is favored as a relocalization method due
to its lower computation and storage cost during inference.
The pose regression network is still trained on a database
containing LiDAR frames in an end-to-end manner to obtain
a regression model. During inference, taking the LiDAR scan
as input, the pose regression network directly regresses the
global pose without any pre-constructed candidate database
or map. It can mitigate the high computation and storage
burden that occurs in the LiDAR-based retrieval methods.
As a result, pose regression can be operated in real-time to
satisfy various relocalization requirements in robotics, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), mobile relocalization APPs,
autonomous vehicles, and SLAM systems.
In this paper, we propose a relocalization method called
HypLiLoc, which is a pose regression network with LiDAR

5176

