This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flow supervision for Deformable NeRF
Chaoyang Wang1

Lachlan Ewen MacDonald2
Laszlo A. Jeni1
Simon Lucey12
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Adelaide

{chaoyanw,laszlojeni}@cs.cmu.edu

{lachlan.macdonald, simon.lucey}@adelaide.edu.au

https://mightychaos.github.io/projects/fsdnerf

Abstract
In this paper we present a new method for deformable
NeRF that can directly use optical flow as supervision. We
overcome the major challenge with respect to the computationally inefficiency of enforcing the flow constraints to
the backward deformation field, used by deformable NeRFs.
Specifically, we show that inverting the backward deformation function is actually not needed for computing scene
flows between frames. This insight dramatically simplifies
the problem, as one is no longer constrained to deformation
functions that can be analytically inverted. Instead, thanks
to the weak assumptions required by our derivation based
on the inverse function theorem, our approach can be extended to a broad class of commonly used backward deformation field. We present results on monocular novel view
synthesis with rapid object motion, and demonstrate significant improvements over baselines without flow supervision.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing dynamic scenes from monocular videos
is a significantly more challenging task compared to its
static-scene counterparts, due to lack of epipolar constraints
for finding correspondences and ambiguities between motion and structure. Recent advances in differentiable rendering have lead to various solutions using an analysis-bysynthesis strategy – solving the non-rigid deformation and
structure by minimizing the difference between synthesized
images and input video frames. Among those, deformable
neural radiance fields [14, 21, 25, 31] has been a notable
technique to represent dynamic scenes and shows plausible space-time view synthesis results. However, the current
implementations only warrant success on teleporting-like
videos whose camera motions are significantly more rapid
than object motions. Quality of their results significantly
decrease on videos with more rapid object motions [6].
In this work, we conjecture the deficiency of these deformable NeRF-based methods is mainly due to lack of

inputs

with flow supervision

w/o flow supervision

Figure 1. We propose a method to use optical flow supervision
for deformable NeRF. It noticeably improves novel view synthesis
for monocular videos with rapid object motions. In the figure, we
visualize rendered novel view images and depth maps for the first
and last frame of the input video.

temporal regularization. As they represent deformation as
backward warping from the sampled frames to some canonical space, the motions or scene flows between temporally
adjacent frames is not directly modeled nor supervised. Another deficiency is that these methods minimize photometric error alone, which is insufficient for gradient descent to
overcome poor local minima when the canonical and other
frames has little spatial overlap. This deficiency is severe
for non-object-centric videos with large translations.
The community has explored optical flow as an additional cue to help supervise the temporal transitions of other
motion representations, such as scene flow fields [4, 5, 13,
43] and blend skinning fields [40]. However, enforcing
flow constraints with respect to a generic backward warping field as in Nerfies [21] is non-trivial. Intuitively, to compute scene flows, it requires inverting the backward warp by
having a forward warp which maps points from canonical
space to other frames. Then scene flows can be computed
either by taking time derivative of the forward warp or predicting the next position of a point through evaluating the
forward warp. But this can be problematic since analytical
inverse of a complicated non-bijective function (e.g. neural networks) is impossible, and an approximate solution by

21128

