This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DARE-GRAM : Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Regression by Aligning
Inverse Gram Matrices
Ismail Nejjar
EPFL, Switzerland

Qin Wang
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Olga Fink
EPFL, Switzerland

ismail.nejjar@epfl.ch

qwang@ethz.ch

olga.fink@epfl.ch

Abstract

1. Introduction
Regression problems, in which models learn to predict continuous variables, are one fundamental paradigm
in machine learning. Regression problems are omnipresent
in many different applications, including computer vision
tasks, such as head-pose estimation [76], facial landmark
detection [37], human pose estimation [80], depth estimation [20] and eye-tracking problems [58], and also widely
in industrial applications, such as product quality prediction
and condition monitoring [69]. Nevertheless, real-world applications are often subject to the environmental conditions
under which the data are collected and other influencing factors, hence domain gaps between datasets are inevitable.

Linear Regressor

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Regression (DAR)
aims to bridge the domain gap between a labeled source
dataset and an unlabelled target dataset for regression
problems. Recent works mostly focus on learning a deep
feature encoder by minimizing the discrepancy between
source and target features. In this work, we present a different perspective for the DAR problem by analyzing the
closed-form ordinary least square (OLS) solution to the
linear regressor in the deep domain adaptation context.
Rather than aligning the original feature embedding space,
we propose to align the inverse Gram matrix of the features, which is motivated by its presence in the OLS solution and the Gram matrix’s ability to capture the feature
correlations. Specifically, we propose a simple yet effective DAR method which leverages the pseudo-inverse lowrank property to align the scale and angle in a selected subspace generated by the pseudo-inverse Gram matrix of the
two domains. We evaluate our method on three domain
adaptation regression benchmarks. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at https://github.
com/ismailnejjar/DARE-GRAM .

OLS Regression
Solution

Deep
Encoder

(a)
Source
Target

Align

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of the UDA for regression setup and our main
motivation. (a) Deep domain adaptation networks commonly use
a shared deep feature encoder and a shared linear regression layer.
We propose to pay close attention to the linear regressor, where
the ordinary least square (OLS) solution is well-known. (b) Given
a trained source linear regressor βs , the target features Zt may
not be calibrated to βs . (c) Unlike previous adaptation methods
which align in the original feature embedding space, we propose
to align the inverse Gram matrix of the features (Z T Z)−1 , which
is motivated by its presence in the OLS solution and the Gram
matrix’s ability to capture the feature correlations.

Unsupervised Domain adaptation (UDA) aims to overcome the distributional shift between a labeled source domain and an unlabelled target domain. Many UDA methods have been proposed to alleviate the domain shift problem. One common UDA direction is feature alignment by
adversarial learning [45] or explicit losses such as maximum mean discrepancy [44] to learn domain-invariant representations. Input alignment [77] and self-training using pseudo-label refinement [41] are also popular UDA directions. While many DA methods have been developed
and evaluated for classification and segmentation problems, some are not directly transferable to DA regression [10]. Pioneer works in Domain Adaptation Regression (DAR) [12, 46] introduced theoretical analysis for the
problem. A few algorithms were proposed to tackle DAR.

11744

