This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning a Deep Color Difference Metric for Photographic Images
Haoyu Chen1

Zhihua Wang1,2, * Yang Yang3

Qilin Sun4

Kede Ma1

1

3

City University of Hong Kong 2 Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
Shenzhen Transsion Holdings Co., Ltd. 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
{haoychen3-c,zhihua.wang}@my.cityu.edu.hk, kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk,
yang.yang6@transsion.com, sunqilin@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Most well-established and widely used color difference (CD) metrics are handcrafted and subject-calibrated
against uniformly colored patches, which do not generalize well to photographic images characterized by natural
scene complexities. Constructing CD formulae for photographic images is still an active research topic in imaging/illumination, vision science, and color science communities. In this paper, we aim to learn a deep CD metric for
photographic images with four desirable properties. First,
it well aligns with the observations in vision science that
color and form are linked inextricably in visual cortical
processing. Second, it is a proper metric in the mathematical sense. Third, it computes accurate CDs between photographic images, differing mainly in color appearances.
Fourth, it is robust to mild geometric distortions (e.g., translation or due to parallax), which are often present in photographic images of the same scene captured by different
digital cameras. We show that all four properties can be
satisfied at once by learning a multi-scale autoregressive
normalizing flow for feature transform, followed by the Euclidean distance which is linearly proportional to the human perceptual CD. Quantitative and qualitative experiments on the large-scale SPCD dataset demonstrate the
promise of the learned CD metric. Source code is available
at https://github.com/haoychen3/CD-Flow.

1. Introduction
For a long time in vision science community, the modular and segregated view of cortical color processing predominated [46]: the visual perception/processing of colorrelated quantities is separate from and in parallel with the
perception/processing of form (i.e., object shape and structure), motion direction, and depth order in natural scenes.
As a result, vision scientists preferred to investigate color
* Corresponding author.

perception under minimal conditions on form [20, 46], for
example, using uniformly colored patches.
The idea that color as a visual sensation can be analyzed
separately had a profound impact on the development of
computational formulae for color difference (CD) assessment. Till now, the most well-established and widely used
CD metrics are primarily built upon the three-dimensional
spatially-isotropic CIELAB coordinate system [32], recommended by the International Commission on Illumination
(abbreviated as CIE from its French name Commission Internationale de l’Èclairage) in 1976. However, the uniformity1 of the CIELAB space is not as ideal as intended [28],
even for uniformly colored patches. Thus, more complex
and parametric formulae are proposed to rectify different aspects of perceptual non-uniformity. Representative methods
include JPC79 [33], CMC(l:c)2 [9], BFD(l:c) [31], CIE94
[34], and CIEDE2000 [29], in which the parameters are calibrated by fitting the human perceptual CD measurements
of uniformly colored patches. A naïve application of these
metrics to photographic images is to compute the mean of
the CDs between co-located pixels, which has been empirically shown to correlate poorly to human perception of
CDs [38].
Back to the vision science community, with more supporting evidence from psychophysical and perceptual studies [2, 6, 27, 47], vision scientists have gradually come to
agree on an alternative and more persuasive view of color
perception: color and form (and motion) are inextricably
interdependent as a unitary process of perceptual organization [19,46]. Even the primary visual cortex (i.e., V1) plays
a significant role in color perception through two types
of color-sensitive neurons: single-opponent and doubleopponent cells. The single-opponent cells are sensitive to
large areas of color, while the double-opponent cells respond to color patterns, textures, and boundaries [24, 46].
1 A system is perceptually uniform if a small perturbation to a component value is approximately equally perceptible across the range of that
value [43].
2 l and c are two multiplicative parameters in the model to be fitted.

22242

