This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Referring Multi-Object Tracking
Dongming Wu1∗‡ , Wencheng Han2∗ , Tiancai Wang3 , Xingping Dong4 , Xiangyu Zhang3,5 , Jianbing Shen2†
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau, 3 MEGVII Technology,
4
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, 5 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{wudongming97, wenchenghan, shenjiangbingcg}@gmail.com, wangtiancai@megvii.com

Abstract
Existing referring understanding tasks tend to involve
the detection of a single text-referred object. In this paper,
we propose a new and general referring understanding task,
termed referring multi-object tracking (RMOT). Its core
idea is to employ a language expression as a semantic cue
to guide the prediction of multi-object tracking. To the best
of our knowledge, it is the first work to achieve an arbitrary
number of referent object predictions in videos. To push
forward RMOT, we construct one benchmark with scalable
expressions based on KITTI, named Refer-KITTI. Specifically, it provides 18 videos with 818 expressions, and each
expression in a video is annotated with an average of 10.7
objects. Further, we develop a transformer-based architecture TransRMOT to tackle the new task in an online manner,
which achieves impressive detection performance and outperforms other counterparts. The Refer-KITTI dataset and
the code are released at https://referringmot.github.io.

1. Introduction
Recently, referring understanding [5, 17, 33, 55], integrating natural language processing into scene perception,
has raised great attention in computer vision community.
It aims to localize regions of interest in images or videos
under the instruction of human language, which has many
applications, such as video editing and autonomous driving.
For referring understanding, several significant benchmarks
have been published. Flickr30k [53], ReferIt [15], and RefCOCO/+/g [55] have greatly encouraged the development
of image-based referring tasks. More datasets (e.g., Lingual OTB99 [19], Cityscapes-Ref [42], Talk2Car [5], ReferDAVIS17 [17], and Refer-Youtube-VOS [38]) are further
∗Equal contribution. †Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. This
work was supported in part by the FDCT grant SKL-IOTSC(UM)-20212023, the Grant MYRG-CRG2022-00013-IOTSC-ICI, and the Start-up
Research Grant (SRG) of University of Macau (SRG2022-00023-IOTSC).
‡The work is done during the internship at MEGVII Technology.

(a) Query: the cars in the right

(b) Query: the cars which are turning

Figure 1. Representative examples from RMOT. The expression
query can refer to multiple objects of interest (a), and captures the
short-term status with accurate labels (b).

proposed to cover the application in videos.
Despite these advanced progress, previous benchmarks
have two typical limitations. First, each expression tends
to correspond to only one target. However, many objects
have the same semantics in an open world, i.e., one single expression could refer to multiple objects. From this
side, existing datasets lack flexible simulation on the multiobject scenarios, causing referring understanding tasks far
from satisfactory. Second, the given expression may only
describe part of frames for the video referring task, making the correspondence inaccurate. For example, given the
expression ‘the car which is turning’, we have to predict
the overall trajectory even if the car has finished the turning action. Obviously, a single expression cannot cover all
short-term status of one target. Overall, existing datasets
fail to provide an accurate evaluation under the situations of
multiple referent targets and temporal status variances.
To address these problems, we propose a novel video understanding task guided by the language description, named
referring multi-object tracking (RMOT). Given a language
expression as a reference, it targets to ground all semantically matched objects in a video. Unlike previous tasks, our
proposed RMOT is much closer to the real environment,
as each expression can involve multiple objects. For instance, the expression query ‘the cars in the right’ corresponds to one object at the 20th frame but two objects at the

14633

