This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LVQAC: Lattice Vector Quantization Coupled with Spatially Adaptive
Companding for Efficient Learned Image Compression
Xi Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Xiaolin Wu
McMaster University

zhangxi 19930818@sjtu.edu.cn

xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca

Abstract
Recently, numerous end-to-end optimized image compression neural networks have been developed and proved
themselves as leaders in rate-distortion performance. The
main strength of these learnt compression methods is in
powerful nonlinear analysis and synthesis transforms that
can be facilitated by deep neural networks. However, out of
operational expediency, most of these end-to-end methods
adopt uniform scalar quantizers rather than vector quantizers, which are information-theoretically optimal. In this paper, we present a novel Lattice Vector Quantization scheme
coupled with a spatially Adaptive Companding (LVQAC)
mapping. LVQ can better exploit the inter-feature dependencies than scalar uniform quantization while being computationally almost as simple as the latter. Moreover, to
improve the adaptability of LVQ to source statistics, we
couple a spatially adaptive companding (AC) mapping with
LVQ. The resulting LVQAC design can be easily embedded
into any end-to-end optimized image compression system.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that for any end-to-end
CNN image compression models, replacing uniform quantizer by LVQAC achieves better rate-distortion performance
without significantly increasing the model complexity.

1. Introduction
In the past five years, the research on end-to-end CNN
image compression has made steady progress and led to
the birth of a new class of image compression methods
[1, 3, 4, 8, 21, 25, 26, 34–36, 40–44]. The CNN compression can now match and even exceed the rate-distortion
performance of the previous best image compression methods [6,33,37,45], which operate in the traditional paradigm
of linear transform, quantization and entropy coding.
The advantages of the CNN approach of data compression come from the nonlinearity of its analysis and synthesis transforms of the autoencoder architecture, the endto-end joint optimization of the nonlinear transforms, uni-

form quantization of the latent space and conditional entropy coding (context-based arithmetic coding) of quantized
features.
Apparently, using uniform scalar quantizer in the above
CNN image compression framework is motivated by operational expediency more than other considerations. Only at
very high bit rate uniform quantization can approach the
rate-distortion optimality [15]. It is very difficult to directly adopt and optimize a vector quantizer (VQ) in the
end-to-end CNN architecture design for data compression,
because VQ is a discrete decision process and it is not compatible with variational backpropagation that is necessary to
the end-to-end CNN training. In [1], Agustsson et al. tried
to circumvent the difficulty by a so-called soft-to-hard vector quantization scheme. Their technique is a soft (continuous) relaxation of discrete computations of VQ and entropy
so that their effects can be approximated in the end-to-end
training. However, in [1] the quantization centers are optimized along with the other modules, which make the whole
system quite cumbersome and more difficult to train. In
this paper, we p ropose a novel Lattice Vector Quantization scheme coupled with a spatially Adaptive Companding
(LVQAC) mapping. LVQ can better exploit the inter-feature
dependencies than scalar uniform quantization while being computationally almost as simple as the latter. Even if
the features to be compressed are statistically independent,
LVQ is still a more efficient coding strategy than scalar uniform quantization. This is because the former offers a more
efficient covering of high-dimensional space than the latter, as proven by the theory of sphere packings, lattices and
groups [11]. Moreover, to improve the adaptability of LVQ
to source statistics, we couple a spatially adaptive companding mapping with LVQ. The resulting LVQAC design is
computationally as simple and as amenable to the end-toend training of the CNN compression model as in the originally proposed framework of [3].
Consequently, for any end-to-end CNN image compression models, replacing uniform quantizer by LVQAC
achieves better rate-distortion performance without significantly increasing the model complexity; the simpler

10239

