This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Video Loops from Asynchronous Input
Li Ma1
1

Xiaoyu Li2

Jing Liao3

Pedro V. Sander1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
3
Tencent AI Lab
City University of Hong Kong

(a) Reconstructed 3D Video Representation

(b) View and Time Control

(c) Real Time Demo

Figure 1. Given a set of asynchronous multi-view videos, we propose a pipeline to construct a novel 3D looping video representation
(a), which consists of a static texture atlas, a dynamic texture atlas, and multiple tiles as the geometry proxy. The 3D video loops allow
both view and time control (b), and can be rendered in real time even on mobile devices (c). We strongly recommend readers refer to the
supplementary material for video results.

Abstract
Looping videos are short video clips that can be looped
endlessly without visible seams or artifacts. They provide
a very attractive way to capture the dynamism of natural scenes. Existing methods have been mostly limited to
2D representations. In this paper, we take a step forward
and propose a practical solution that enables an immersive experience on dynamic 3D looping scenes. The key
challenge is to consider the per-view looping conditions
from asynchronous input while maintaining view consistency for the 3D representation. We propose a novel sparse
3D video representation, namely Multi-Tile Video (MTV),
which not only provides a view-consistent prior, but also
greatly reduces memory usage, making the optimization of
a 4D volume tractable. Then, we introduce a two-stage
pipeline to construct the 3D looping MTV from completely
asynchronous multi-view videos with no time overlap. A
novel looping loss based on video temporal retargeting algorithms is adopted during the optimization to loop the 3D
scene. Experiments of our framework have shown promise
in successfully generating and rendering photorealistic 3D
looping videos in real time even on mobile devices. The
code, dataset, and live demos are available in https:
//limacv.github.io/VideoLoop3D_web/.

1. Introduction
Endless looping videos are fascinating ways to record
special moments. These video loops are compact in terms
of storage and provide a much richer experience for scenes
that exhibit looping behavior. One successful commercial
use of this technique is the live photo [19] feature in the
Apple iPhone, which tries to find an optimal looping period
and fade in/out short video clips to create looping videos.
There have been several works on automatically constructing 2D looping videos from non-looping short video clips.
Liao et al. [24] first propose to create 2D video loops from
videos captured with static cameras. They solve for the
optimal starting frame and looping period for each pixel
in the input video to composite the final video. Later on,
several methods are proposed to improve the computation
speed [23], or extend to panoramas [1, 36], and gigapixel
videos [16]. However, few attempts have been made to extend video loops to a 3D representation. One existing work
that shares a similar setting as ours is VBR [46], which
generates plausible video loops in novel views. However,
it comes with some limitations: It builds on top of ULR
[5], which can produce ghosting artifacts due to inaccurate
mesh reconstruction, as shown in [30]. Besides, VBR generates looping videos and reduces the inconsistency from
asynchronous input by adaptively blending in different frequency domains, which tends to blur away details.
1310

