This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unbiased Scene Graph Generation in Videos
Sayak Nag1, Kyle Min2, Subarna Tripathi2, Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1
University of California, Riverside, USA, 2Intel Corporation, USA
snag005@ucr.edu, kyle.min@intel.com, subarna.tripathi@intel.com, amitrc@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract
The task of dynamic scene graph generation (SGG) from
videos is complicated and challenging due to the inherent
dynamics of a scene, temporal fluctuation of model predictions,
and the long-tailed distribution of the visual relationships in
addition to the already existing challenges in image-based SGG.
Existing methods for dynamic SGG have primarily focused on
capturing spatio-temporal context using complex architectures
without addressing the challenges mentioned above, especially
the long-tailed distribution of relationships. This often leads
to the generation of biased scene graphs. To address these
challenges, we introduce a new framework called TEMPURA:
TEmporal consistency and Memory Prototype guided UnceRtainty Attenuation for unbiased dynamic SGG. TEMPURA
employs object-level temporal consistencies via transformerbased sequence modeling, learns to synthesize unbiased
relationship representations using memory-guided training, and
attenuates the predictive uncertainty of visual relations using
a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method achieves significant (up to 10% in
some cases) performance gain over existing methods highlighting its superiority in generating more unbiased scene graphs.
Code: https://github.com/sayaknag/unbiasedSGG.git

1. Introduction
Scene graphs provide a holistic scene understanding that can
bridge the gap between vision and language [25, 31]. This has
made image scene graphs very popular for high-level reasoning
tasks such as captioning [14, 37], image retrieval [49, 60],
human-object interaction (HOI) [40], and visual question
answering (VQA) [23]. Although significant strides have
been made in scene graph generation (SGG) from static
images [12, 31, 33, 37, 39, 42, 56, 62–64], research on dynamic
SGG is still in its nascent stage.
Dynamic SGG involves grounding visual relationships
jointly in space and time. It is aimed at obtaining a structured
representation of a scene in each video frame along with
learning the temporal evolution of the relationships between
each pair of objects. Such a detailed and structured form of
video understanding is akin to how humans perceive real-world

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Long-tailed distribution of the predicate classes in Action Genome [25]. (b) Visual relationship or predicate classification
performance of two state-of-the-art dynamic SGG methods, namely
STTran [10] and TRACE [57], falls off significantly for the tail classes.

activities [4, 25, 43] and with the exponential growth of video
data, it is necessary to make similar strides in dynamic SGG.
In recent years, a handful of works have attempted to
address dynamic SGG [10, 16, 24, 38, 57], with a majority of
them leveraging the superior sequence processing capability
of transformers [1, 5, 19, 26, 44, 53, 58]. These methods simply
focused on designing more complex models to aggregate
spatio-temporal contextual information in a video but fail
to address the data imbalance of the relationship/predicate
classes, and although their performance is encouraging under
the Recall@k metric, this metric is biased toward the highly
populated classes. An alternative metric was proposed in [7, 56]
called mean-Recall@k which quantifies how SGG models
perform over all the classes and not just the high-frequent ones.
Fig 1a shows the long-tailed distribution of predicate classes
in the benchmark Action Genome [25] dataset and Fig 1b
highlights the failure of some existing state-of-the-art methods
is classifying the relationships/predicates in the tail of the
distribution. The high recall values in prior works suggest that
they may have a tendency to overfit on popular predicate classes
(e.g. in front of / not looking at), without considering how the
performances on rare classes (e.g. eating/wiping) are getting
impacted [12]. Predicates lying in the tails often provide more
informative depictions of underlying actions and activities in
the video. Thus, it is important to be able to measure a model’s
long-term performance not only on the frequently occurring
relationships but also on the infrequently occurring ones.
Data imbalance is, however, not the only challenge in
dynamic SGG. As shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, several other
factors, including noisy annotations, motion blur, temporal
fluctuations of predictions, and a need to focus on only

22803

