This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparsifiner: Learning Sparse Instance-Dependent Attention
for Efficient Vision Transformers
*

*

Cong Wei1,3 Brendan Duke1,3 Ruowei Jiang3 Parham Aarabi1,3 Graham W. Taylor2,4 Florian Shkurti1,4
1

University of Toronto

2

3

University of Guelph

Modiface, Inc.

4

Vector Institute

Abstract
Query Patch

Vision Transformers (ViT) have shown competitive advantages in terms of performance compared to convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), though they often come with high
computational costs. To this end, previous methods explore
different attention patterns by limiting a fixed number of
spatially nearby tokens to accelerate the ViT’s multi-head
self-attention (MHSA) operations. However, such structured attention patterns limit the token-to-token connections
to their spatial relevance, which disregards learned semantic connections from a full attention mask. In this work,
we propose an approach to learn instance-dependent attention patterns, by devising a lightweight connectivity predictor module that estimates the connectivity score of each
pair of tokens. Intuitively, two tokens have high connectivity scores if the features are considered relevant either spatially or semantically. As each token only attends to a small
number of other tokens, the binarized connectivity masks
are often very sparse by nature and therefore provide the
opportunity to reduce network FLOPs via sparse computations. Equipped with the learned unstructured attention
pattern, sparse attention ViT (Sparsifiner) produces a superior Pareto frontier between FLOPs and top-1 accuracy on
ImageNet compared to token sparsity. Our method reduces
48% ∼ 69% FLOPs of MHSA while the accuracy drop is
within 0.4%. We also show that combining attention and
token sparsity reduces ViT FLOPs by over 60%.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [15] have emerged as a dominant model for fundamental vision tasks, such as image
classification [15], object detection [3], and semantic segmentation [6, 7]. However, scaling ViTs to a large number
of tokens is challenging due to the quadratic computational
complexity of multi-head self-attention (MHSA) [37].
This is particularly disadvantageous for large-scale vision tasks because processing high-resolution and high* Equal contribution.

Attended Patch

Input Image

(a) Local Attention Pattern (Fixed)

(b) Window Attention Pattern (Fixed)

(c) Axial Attention Pattern (Fixed)

(d) Proposed Instance-Dependent
Attention Pattern (Dynamic)

Figure 1. Comparison of Sparsifiner and fixed attention patterns.
Twins [10] (a), Swin [24] (b), and Axial [18] (c) address quadratic
MHSA complexity using fixed attention patterns, which does not
consider the instance-dependent nature of semantic information in
images. To address this, we propose Sparsifiner (d): an efficient
module for sparse instance-dependent attention pattern prediction.

dimensionality inputs is desirable. For example, input
modalities such as video frames and 3D point clouds have a
large number of tokens even for basic use cases. New algorithms are needed to continue to scale ViTs to larger, more
complex vision tasks.
Prior works have largely taken two approaches to improve the computational efficiency of ViTs: token pruning
and using fixed sparse attention patterns in MHSA. Token pruning methods [29] reduce the number of tokens by
a fixed ratio called the keep rate, but accuracy degrades
quickly when pruning early layers in the network [17, 32,
33]. For example, introducing token pruning into shallower
layers of EViT [17] causes a significant 3.16% top-1 accuracy drop on ImageNet [14]. This issue is due to the restric-

22680

