This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Graph Enhanced Contrastive Learning for Chest X-ray Report
Generation
Mingjie Li1 Bingqian Lin2 Zicong Chen5 Haokun Lin2 Xiaodan Liang2,3,4 Xiaojun Chang1 *
1
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 School of ISE, Sun Yat-Sen University
3
Department of Computer Vision, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
Peng Cheng National Lab 5 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Automatic radiology reporting has great clinical potential to relieve radiologists from heavy workloads and improve diagnosis interpretation. Recently, researchers have
enhanced data-driven neural networks with medical knowledge graphs to eliminate the severe visual and textual bias
in this task. The structures of such graphs are exploited
by using the clinical dependencies formed by the disease
topic tags via general knowledge and usually do not update during the training process. Consequently, the fixed
graphs can not guarantee the most appropriate scope of
knowledge and limit the effectiveness. To address the limitation, we propose a knowledge graph with Dynamic structure and nodes to facilitate chest X-ray report generation
with Contrastive Learning, named DCL. In detail, the fundamental structure of our graph is pre-constructed from
general knowledge. Then we explore specific knowledge extracted from the retrieved reports to add additional nodes
or redefine their relations in a bottom-up manner. Each image feature is integrated with its very own updated graph
before being fed into the decoder module for report generation. Finally, this paper introduces Image-Report Contrastive and Image-Report Matching losses to better represent visual features and textual information. Evaluated on
IU-Xray and MIMIC-CXR datasets, our DCL outperforms
previous state-of-the-art models on these two benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Recently, automatic report generation has received growing attentions from both machine learning and automatic
medicine fields. It aims to generate semantically coherent and informative reports to describe the referring examination images, such as Chest X-Ray [8, 18], Lung CT
Scan [26] or funds angiography [23]. Such techniques have
great clinical potential in relieving junior radiologists from
heavy workloads and reducing diagnosis errors by improv* Corresponding author. https://github.com/mlii0117/DCL

Figure 1. An illustration of one sample from MIMIC-CXR [18]
and the pre-constructed graph in [46], where the blue circle, orange boxes and black boxes refer to the global node, organ-level
entities and key findings, respectively. The red dash line here represents the unconnected relation.

ing the interpretation [7, 30].
Witnessed the great progress in artificial intelligence, especially deep learning methods [12,25,39], researchers have
proposed various data-driven neural networks for radiology
reporting and achieved promising performances in metrics
that measure descriptive accuracy [7, 44] and clinical correctness [11, 46]. Compared with the similar task generic
image captioning [14], the key challenges in chest X-ray
report generation (CRG) task are the severe visual and textual data bias [19, 26]. On the one hand, medical images
are highly similar to each other due to the imaging methods
and human tissues themselves. However, abnormal regions
or lesions that should acquire more attentions usually locate at a small part and lack detailed annotations in existing
CRG benchmarks. On the other hand, sentences that describe normal regions are likely to appear repeatedly among
each dataset which disables the model to describe specific
crucial abnormalities. Two concepts have been proved ef-

3334

