This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stitchable Neural Networks
Zizheng Pan

Jianfei Cai

Bohan Zhuang†

ZIP Lab, Monash University
https://snnet.github.io

...

...
Small Net
Subnets

Supernet

Large Net

(a) Network Compression
(One-to-One)

(b) One-shot Neural Architecture Search
(One-to-Many)

Model Family

Stitched Nets

(c) Stitchable Neural Networks
(Many-to-Many)

Figure 1. Compared with previous scalable deep learning frameworks. (a) Network compression shrinks a large network into a small one by
techniques such as pruning, quantization and knowledge distillation, etc., which is a one-to-one mapping. (b) One-shot neural architecture
search first trains a supernet that supports diverse architectural settings and then specializes a subnet given the target resource constraint
during deployment, which is a case of one-to-many. (c) Our proposed Stitchable Neural Network directly stitches the off-the-rack family
of pretrained models and quickly obtains new networks for efficient model design and deployment in a novel many-to-many paradigm.

Abstract
The public model zoo containing enormous powerful
pretrained model families (e.g., ResNet/DeiT) has reached
an unprecedented scope than ever, which significantly contributes to the success of deep learning. As each model family consists of pretrained models with diverse scales (e.g.,
DeiT-Ti/S/B), it naturally arises a fundamental question of
how to efficiently assemble these readily available models
in a family for dynamic accuracy-efficiency trade-offs at
runtime. To this end, we present Stitchable Neural Networks (SN-Net), a novel scalable and efficient framework
for model deployment. It cheaply produces numerous networks with different complexity and performance trade-offs
given a family of pretrained neural networks, which we call
anchors. Specifically, SN-Net splits the anchors across the
blocks/layers and then stitches them together with simple
stitching layers to map the activations from one anchor to
another. With only a few epochs of training, SN-Net effectively interpolates between the performance of anchors with
varying scales. At runtime, SN-Net can instantly adapt to
dynamic resource constraints by switching the stitching positions. Extensive experiments on ImageNet classification
demonstrate that SN-Net can obtain on-par or even better performance than many individually trained networks
† Corresponding author. E-mail: bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

while supporting diverse deployment scenarios. For example, by stitching Swin Transformers, we challenge hundreds
of models in Timm model zoo with a single network. We believe this new elastic model framework can serve as a strong
baseline for further research in wider communities.

1. Introduction
The vast computational resources available and large
amount of data have driven researchers to build tens of thousands of powerful deep neural networks with strong performance, which have largely underpinned the most recent
breakthroughs in machine learning and much broader artificial intelligence. Up to now, there are ∼81k models on
HuggingFace [53] and ∼800 models on Timm [52] that
are ready to be downloaded and executed without the overhead of reproducing. Despite the large model zoo, a model
family (e.g., DeiT-Ti/S/B [48]) that contains pretrained
models with functionally similar architectures but different
scales only covers a coarse-grained level of model complexity/performance, where each model only targets a specific
resource budget (e.g., FLOPs). Moreover, the model family is not flexible to adapt to dynamic resource constraints
since each individual model is not re-configurable due to the
fixed computational graph. In reality, we usually need to
deploy models to diverse platforms with different resource

16102

