This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceLit: Neural 3D Relightable Faces
Anurag RanjanN

Kwang Moo YiNR
Jen-Hao Rick ChangN
N
R
Apple
The University of British Columbia

Oncel TuzelN

Figure 1. Generated samples from our model. Left: 3D reconstruction visualization. Center and Right: Rendered faces using 2 different
illumination conditions under 3 different poses. Illumination visualization using spherical harmonics [26].

Abstract
We propose a generative framework, FaceLit, capable of
generating a 3D face that can be rendered at various userdefined lighting conditions and views, learned purely from
2D images in-the-wild without any manual annotation. Unlike existing works that require careful capture setup or human labor, we rely on off-the-shelf pose and illumination
estimators. With these estimates, we incorporate the Phong
reflectance model in the neural volume rendering framework. Our model learns to generate shape and material
properties of a face such that, when rendered according
to the natural statistics of pose and illumination, produces
photorealistic face images with multiview 3D and illumination consistency. Our method enables photorealistic generation of faces with explicit illumination and view controls on
multiple datasets – FFHQ, MetFaces and CelebA-HQ. We
show state-of-the-art photorealism among 3D aware GANs
on FFHQ dataset achieving an FID score of 3.5.
corresponding authors: {anuragr, otuzel}@apple.com.

1. Introduction
Learning a 3D generative model from 2D images has recently drawn much interest [13, 23, 32]. Since the introduction of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [21], the quality
of images rendered from a 3D model [6, 13] has improved
drastically, becoming as photorealistic as those rendered by
a 2D model [19]. While some of them [7,28] rely purely on
3D representations to deliver 3D consistency and pay the
price of decreased photorealism, more recent work [6] has
further shown that this can be avoided and extreme photorealism can be obtained through a hybrid setup. However,
even so, a shortcoming of these models is that the components that constitute the scene—the geometry, appearance,
and the lighting—are all entangled and are thus not controllable using user defined inputs.
Methods have been proposed to break this entanglement [2, 4, 35], however, they require multiview image collections of the scene being modeled and are thus inappliR work done while at Apple.

8619

