This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Bias for Robust Visual Question Answering
Jae Won Cho1

Dong-Jin Kim2
1

KAIST

2

Hyeonggon Ryu1

In So Kweon1

Hanyang University

Abstract
What color is…

The task of Visual Question Answering (VQA) is known
to be plagued by the issue of VQA models exploiting biases within the dataset to make its final prediction. Various
previous ensemble based debiasing methods have been proposed where an additional model is purposefully trained to
be biased in order to train a robust target model. However, these methods compute the bias for a model simply
from the label statistics of the training data or from single
modal branches. In this work, in order to better learn the
bias a target VQA model suffers from, we propose a generative method to train the bias model directly from the target
model, called GenB. In particular, GenB employs a generative network to learn the bias in the target model through
a combination of the adversarial objective and knowledge
distillation. We then debias our target model with GenB as
a bias model, and show through extensive experiments the
effects of our method on various VQA bias datasets including VQA-CP2, VQA-CP1, GQA-OOD, and VQA-CE, and
show state-of-the-art results with the LXMERT architecture
on VQA-CP2.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) [5] is a challenging
multi-modal task that requires a model to correctly understand and predict an answer given an input pair of image and
question. Various studies have shown that VQA is prone to
biases within the dataset and tend to rely heavily on language biases that exists within the dataset [2, 17, 51], and
VQA models tend to predict similar answers only depending on the question regardless of the image. In response
to this, recent works have developed various bias reduction
techniques, and recent methods have exploited ensemble
based debiasing methods [7, 13, 19, 41] extensively.
Among ensemble based methods, additional models are
introduced to concurrently learn biases that might exist
within each modality or dataset. For example, in works
such as [7, 19], the Question-Answer model is utilized to
determine the language prior biases that exist when a model
is asked to give an answer based solely off of the question.

What color is…

Dataset Label Average

black
blue
brown
gray
pink

QA
Model

brown
black & white
gray
cake
skateboarding

VQA
Model

black
blue
brown
pink
orange

What color is…

Figure 1. Given a Question Type (“What color is...”), we show all
of the averaged answers within the training dataset. The answer
computed from the entire training dataset is the known dataset
label average or dataset bias as in [13, 19]. We see that the
averaged model predictions of the Question-Answer Model and
Visual-Question-Answer Model are significantly different.

This Question-Answer model is then utilized to train a robust “target” model, which is used for inference. The key
purpose of an ensemble “bias” model is to capture the biases
that are formed with its given inputs (i.e., language prior biases from the Question-Answer model). In doing so, if this
model is able to represent the bias well, this bias model can
be used to teach the target model to avoid such biased answers. In other words, the better the bias model can learn
the biases, the better the target model can avoid such biases.
Existing ensemble based methods either use precomputed label statistics of training data (GGE-D [19] and
LMH [13]), or single modal branches that compute the answer from either the question or image [7,13,19,37]. However, we conjecture that there is a limit to the bias representation that can be obtained from such methods, as the
model’s representative capacity is limited by its inputs. In
addition, pre-computed label statistics represents only part
of the bias [19]. As shown in Fig. 1, given a question type,
the pre-computed label statistics (or known dataset bias) are
noticeably different to the predictions of a model trained
with the question or with the image and question. This discrepancy signifies that there is a part of the bias that we cannot fully model simply with the previous methods. Therefore, we propose a novel stochastic bias model that learns

11681

