This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PATS: Patch Area Transportation with Subdivision for Local Feature Matching
Junjie Ni1,2 ,* Yijin Li1,2 * , Zhaoyang Huang3 , Hongsheng Li3 , Hujun Bao1,2 ,
Zhaopeng Cui1 and Guofeng Zhang1,2†
1
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision
3
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Local feature matching aims at establishing sparse correspondences between a pair of images. Recently, detectorfree methods present generally better performance but are
not satisfactory in image pairs with large scale differences.
In this paper, we propose Patch Area Transportation with
Subdivision (PATS) to tackle this issue. Instead of building an expensive image pyramid, we start by splitting the
original image pair into equal-sized patches and gradually resizing and subdividing them into smaller patches with
the same scale. However, estimating scale differences between these patches is non-trivial since the scale differences are determined by both relative camera poses and
scene structures, and thus spatially varying over image
pairs. Moreover, it is hard to obtain the ground truth for
real scenes. To this end, we propose patch area transportation, which enables learning scale differences in a selfsupervised manner. In contrast to bipartite graph matching, which only handles one-to-one matching, our patch
area transportation can deal with many-to-many relationships. PATS improves both matching accuracy and coverage, and shows superior performance in downstream tasks,
such as relative pose estimation, visual localization, and
optical flow estimation. The source code is available at
https://zju3dv.github.io/pats/.

1. Introduction
Local feature matching between images is essential in
many computer vision tasks which aim to establish correspondences between a pair of images. In the past decades,
local feature matching [3, 40] has been widely used in a
large number of applications such as structure from motion (SfM) [44, 64], simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [30,36,62], visual localization [19,41], object pose
estimation [22, 61], etc. The viewpoint change from the
* Junjie Ni and Yijin Li contributed equally to this work.
† Guofeng Zhang is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Two-view reconstruction results of LoFTR [49],
ASpanFormer [7], PDC-Net+ [58] and our approach on
MegaDepth dataset [27]. PATS can extract high-quality matches
under severe scale variations and in indistinctive regions with
repetitive patterns, which allows semi-dense two-view reconstruction by simply triangulating the matches in a image pair. In contrast, other methods either obtain fewer matches or even obtain
erroneous results.

source image to the target image may lead to scale variations, which is a long-standing challenge in local feature
matching. Large variations in scale leads to two severe
consequences: Firstly, the appearance is seriously distorted,
which makes learning the feature similarity more challenging and impacts the correspondence accuracy. Secondly,
there may be several pixels in the source image corresponding to pixels in a local window in the target image. However, existing methods [33, 40] only permit one potential
target feature to be matched in the local window, and the
following bipartite graph matching only allows one source
pixel to win the matching. The coverage of correspondences
derived from such feature matches is largely suppressed and
will impact the downstream tasks.
Before the deep learning era, SIFT [33] is a milestone
that tackles the scale problem by detecting local features
on an image pyramid and then matching features crossing
pyramid levels, called scale-space analysis. This technique
is also adopted in the inference stage of learning-based local features [39]. Recently, LoFTR abandons feature detection stage and learns to directly draw feature matches via
simultaneously encoding features from both images based

17776

