This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic-Promoted Debiasing and Background Disambiguation
for Zero-Shot Instance Segmentation

1

Shuting He1†
Henghui Ding2†
Wei Jiang1
2
Zhejiang University
Nanyang Technological University
https://henghuiding.github.io/D2Zero

Abstract
Image

Zero-shot instance segmentation aims to detect and precisely segment objects of unseen categories without any
training samples. Since the model is trained on seen
categories, there is a strong bias that the model tends
to classify all the objects into seen categories. Besides,
there is a natural confusion between background and novel
objects that have never shown up in training. These
two challenges make novel objects hard to be raised in
the final instance segmentation results. It is desired to
rescue novel objects from background and dominated seen
categories. To this end, we propose D2 Zero with SemanticPromoted Debiasing and Background Disambiguation to
enhance the performance of Zero-shot instance segmentation. Semantic-promoted debiasing utilizes inter-class semantic relationships to involve unseen categories in visual
feature training and learns an input-conditional classifier
to conduct dynamical classification based on the input image. Background disambiguation produces image-adaptive
background representation to avoid mistaking novel objects
for background. Extensive experiments show that we significantly outperform previous state-of-the-art methods by
a large margin, e.g., 16.86% improvement on COCO.

1. Introduction
Existing fully supervised instance segmentation methods [4, 23, 52] are commonly benchmarked on predefined
datasets with an offline setting, where all categories are
defined beforehand and learned at once, thus can neither
handle novel concepts outside training datasets nor scale the
model’s ability after training. Perception errors inevitably
arise when applying a trained instance segmentation model
to scenarios that contain novel categories. To address these
challenges, zero-shot instance segmentation (ZSIS) [65] is
introduced to segment instances of unseen categories with
no training images but semantic information only.
† Equal contribution.

Corresponding author (henghui.ding@gmail.com).

1) Bias issue
Ground Truth
ZSI
dog

Ours

horse

dog

2) Background ambiguation
Image

Ground Truth

car

Image

Ground Truth

car

Figure 1. Two key challenges in generalized zero-shot instance
segmentation. 1) Bias issue: the model tends to label novel objects
with seen categories, e.g., ZSI [65] incorrectly classifies unseen
class dog as training class horse. 2) Background ambiguation:
objects that do not belong to any training categories are considered
background, e.g., parking meter and fire hydrant.

Since scene images typically contain several objects of
different categories, it is more realistic for ZSIS to segment
both seen and unseen objects, which is termed Generalized
ZSIS (GZSIS). In this work, we focus on two key challenges
under GZSIS setting, bias issue and background ambiguation (see Figure 1), and propose D2 Zero with semanticpromoted Debiasing and background Disambiguation to enhance the performance of Zero-shot instance segmentation.
Bias towards seen categories imposes a significant challenge to GZSIS. Since the model is trained on data of
seen categories, it tends to classify all objects into seen
categories, e.g., novel object dog is labeled as seen class
horse in Figure 1. Previous work ZSI [65] introduces
semantic embedding to build a mapping from seen classes
to unseen ones then segments novel objects by sharing
instance proposals of seen group and re-labeling these
proposals within unseen group. Such a “sharing” strategy
brings many false positives by assigning each instance
two labels. Some zero-shot semantic segmentation methods [5,21,35] employ a generator to synthesize fake unseen

19498

