This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backdoor Cleansing with Unlabeled Data
Lu Pang, Tao Sun, Haibin Ling, Chao Chen
Stony Brook University
{luppang,tao,hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu, chao.chen.1@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Due to the increasing computational demand of Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs), companies and organizations
have begun to outsource the training process. However,
the externally trained DNNs can potentially be backdoor
attacked. It is crucial to defend against such attacks, i.e.,
to postprocess a suspicious model so that its backdoor behavior is mitigated while its normal prediction power on
clean inputs remain uncompromised. To remove the abnormal backdoor behavior, existing methods mostly rely
on additional labeled clean samples. However, such requirement may be unrealistic as the training data are often unavailable to end users. In this paper, we investigate
the possibility of circumventing such barrier. We propose
a novel defense method that does not require training labels. Through a carefully designed layer-wise weight reinitialization and knowledge distillation, our method can
effectively cleanse backdoor behaviors of a suspicious network with negligible compromise in its normal behavior.
In experiments, we show that our method, trained without labels, is on-par with state-of-the-art defense methods
trained using labels. We also observe promising defense
results even on out-of-distribution data. This makes our
method very practical. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/luluppang/BCU .

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive performance in many tasks, e.g., image classification [6], 3D point cloud generation [21] and object tracking [45]. However, the success usually relies on abundant
training data and computational resources. Companies and
organizations thus often outsource the training process to
cloud computing or utilize pretrained models from thirdparty platforms. Unfortunately, the untrustworthy providers
may potentially introduce backdoor attacks to the externally
trained DNNs [9, 19]. During the training stage of a backdoor attack, an adversary stealthily injects a small portion of
poisoned training data to associate a particular trigger with

In-distribution, Labeled
trunk
plane

dog

-

(a)

In-distribution, Unlabeled
?

?

?

-

(b)

Out-of-distribution, Unlabeled
?

(c)

?

?

-

Figure 1. (a) Previous works use labeled in-distribution data to
cleanse backdoor. Our work uses unlabeled in-distribution (b) or
out-of-distribution data (c).

target class labels. During the inference stage, backdoor
models predict accurately on clean samples but misclassify
samples with triggers to the target class. Common triggers include black-white checkerboard [9], random noise
pattern [5], physical object [37], etc.
To defend against backdoor attacks, one needs to postprocess a suspicious model so that its backdoor behavior is
mitigated, and meanwhile, its normal prediction power on
clean inputs remains uncompromised. To remove the abnormal backdoor behavior, existing methods mostly rely on
additional labeled in-distribution clean samples [16, 18, 38,
40, 43, 44]. For example, Fine-Pruning [18] first prunes the
dormant neurons for clean samples and then finetunes the
model using ground-truth labels. Neural Attention Distillation (NAD) [16], a knowledge distillation-based method,
uses labeled clean data to supervise the learning of a student model. Adversarial Neuron Pruning (ANP) [38] learns
a mask to prune sensitive neurons with labeled clean data.
These methods require 1%−5% labeled clean training samples to effectively remove backdoor. Such requirement,
however, is unrealistic in practice as the training data are
often unavailable to end-users.
In this paper, we explore the possibility of circumventing
such barrier with unlabeled data. As shown in Figure 1,

12218

