This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class Adaptive Network Calibration
Bingyuan Liu*1 , Jérôme Rony⇤1 , Adrian Galdran2 , Jose Dolz1 , Ismail Ben Ayed1
1

ÉTS Montreal, Canada

2

Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
Recent studies have revealed that, beyond conventional
accuracy, calibration should also be considered for training modern deep neural networks. To address miscalibration during learning, some methods have explored different
penalty functions as part of the learning objective, alongside a standard classification loss, with a hyper-parameter
controlling the relative contribution of each term. Nevertheless, these methods share two major drawbacks: 1) the
scalar balancing weight is the same for all classes, hindering the ability to address different intrinsic difficulties or
imbalance among classes; and 2) the balancing weight is
usually fixed without an adaptive strategy, which may prevent from reaching the best compromise between accuracy
and calibration, and requires hyper-parameter search for
each application. We propose Class Adaptive Label Smoothing (CALS) for calibrating deep networks, which allows
to learn class-wise multipliers during training, yielding a
powerful alternative to common label smoothing penalties.
Our method builds on a general Augmented Lagrangian
approach, a well-established technique in constrained optimization, but we introduce several modifications to tailor it
for large-scale, class-adaptive training. Comprehensive evaluation and multiple comparisons on a variety of benchmarks,
including standard and long-tailed image classification, semantic segmentation, and text classification, demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed method. The code is available at
https://github.com/by-liu/CALS .

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become the prevailing model in machine learning, particularly for computer
vision [13] and natural language processing applications [44].
Increasingly powerful architectures [3,13,24], learning methods [4, 12] and a large body of other techniques [15, 27] are
constantly introduced. Nonetheless, recent studies [11, 31]
have shown that regardless of their superior discriminative
* Equal Contributions. Correspondence to: {liubingyuan1988@
gmail.com, jerome.rony.1@etsmtl.net}

performance, high-capacity modern DNNs are poorly calibrated, i.e. failing to produce reliable predictive confidences.
Specifically, they tend to yield over-confident predictions,
where the probability associated with the predicted class
overestimates the actual likelihood. Since this is a critical issue in safety-sensitive applications like autonomous driving
or computational medical diagnosis, the problem of DNN
calibration has been attracting increasing attention in recent
years [11, 31, 38].
Current calibration methods can be categorized into two
main families. The first family involves techniques that perform an additional post-processing parameterized operation
on the output logits (or pre-softmax activations) [11], with
the calibration parameters of that operation obtained from a
validation set by either learning or grid-search. Despite the
simplicity and low computational cost, these methods have
empirically proven to be highly effective [8, 11]. However,
their main drawback is that the choice of the optimal calibration parameters is highly sensitive to the trained model
instance and validation set [22, 31].
The second family of methods attempts to simultaneously
optimize for accuracy and calibration during network training. This is achieved by introducing, explicitly or implicitly,
a secondary optimization goal involving the model’s predictive uncertainty, alongside the main training objective. As
a result, a scalar balancing hyper-parameter is required to
tune the relative contribution of each term in the overall loss
function. Some examples of this type of approaches include:
Explicit Confidence Penalty (ECP) [38], Label Smoothing
(LS) [32], Focal Loss (FL) [21] and its variant, SampleDependent Focal Loss (FLSD) [31]. It has been recently
demonstrated in [22] that all these methods can be formulated as different penalty terms that enforce the same equality constraint on the logits of the DNN: driving the logit
distances towards zero. Here, logit distances refers to the
vector of L1 distances between the highest logit value and the
rest. Observing the non-informative nature of this equality
constraint, [22] proposed to use a generalized inequality constraint, only penalizing those logits for which the distance is
larger than a pre-defined margin, achieving state-of-the-art
calibration performance on many different benchmarks.
Although learning based methods achieve greater calibra-

16070

