This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TriDet: Temporal Action Detection with Relative Boundary Modeling
Dingfeng Shi∗
VRLab, Beihang University, China

Yujie Zhong
Meituan Inc.

Qiong Cao†
JD Explore Academy

shidingfeng@buaa.edu.cn

jaszhong@hotmail.com

mathqiong2012@gmail.com

Lin Ma
Meituan Inc.

Jia Li†
VRLab, Beihang University, China

Dacheng Tao
JD Explore Academy

forest.linma@gmail.com

jiali@buaa.edu.cn

dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Segment-level

Abstract
In this paper, we present a one-stage framework TriDet
for temporal action detection. Existing methods often suffer from imprecise boundary predictions due to the ambiguous action boundaries in videos. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel Trident-head to model the action
boundary via an estimated relative probability distribution
around the boundary. In the feature pyramid of TriDet, we
propose an efficient Scalable-Granularity Perception (SGP)
layer to mitigate the rank loss problem of self-attention that
takes place in the video features and aggregate information
across different temporal granularities. Benefiting from the
Trident-head and the SGP-based feature pyramid, TriDet
achieves state-of-the-art performance on three challenging benchmarks: THUMOS14, HACS and EPIC-KITCHEN
100, with lower computational costs, compared to previous methods. For example, TriDet hits an average mAP of
69.3% on THUMOS14, outperforming the previous best by
2.5%, but with only 74.6% of its latency. The code is released to https://github.com/dingfengshi/TriDet.

Temporal
Feature

Global
Feature

Start

End

Instant-level
Temporal
Feature

Ours
Temporal
Feature

Start

Other
Feature

End

Refine

Start
Bin Set

End
Bin Set

Figure 1. Illustration of different boundary modeling. Segmentlevel: these methods locate the boundaries based on the global feature of a predicted temporal segment. Instant-level: they directly
regress the boundaries based on a single instant, potentially with
some other features. Ours: the action boundaries are modeled via
an estimated relative probability distribution of the boundary.

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection (TAD) aims to detect all start
and end instants and corresponding action categories from
an untrimmed video, which has received widespread attention. TAD has been significantly improved with the help
of the deep learning. However, TAD remains to be a very
challenging task due to some unresolved problems.
A critical problem in TAD is that action boundaries are
usually not obvious. Unlike the situation in object detection where there are usually clear boundaries between the
*: This work is done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.
† : Corresponding authors.

objects and the background, the action boundaries in videos
can be fuzzy. A concrete manifestation of this is that the instants (i.e. temporal locations in the video feature sequence)
around the boundary have relatively higher predicted response value from the classifier.
Some previous works attempt to locate the boundaries
based on the global feature of a predicted temporal segment [21,22,29,46,51], which may ignore detailed information at each instant. As another line of work, they directly
regress the boundaries based on a single instant [32,47], potentially with some other features [20, 33, 49], which do not
consider the relation between adjacent instants (e.g. the rel-

18857

