This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffRF: Rendering-Guided 3D Radiance Field Diffusion
Norman Müller1,2

Yawar Siddiqui1,2 Lorenzo Porzi2 Samuel Rota Bulò2
Peter Kontschieder2 Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich1

Meta Reality Labs Zurich2

Figure 1. Our method performs denoising of a probabilistic diffusion process applied to 3D radiance fields. Guided by 3D supervision
and volumetric rendering, our model enables the unconditional synthesis of high-fidelity 3D assets (left). We further introduce the novel
application of masked completion (right), i.e., the task of recovering shape and appearance from incomplete objects (highlighted in lightblue on the top right chair), solved by our model as conditional inference without task-specific training.

Abstract
We introduce DiffRF, a novel approach for 3D radiance
field synthesis based on denoising diffusion probabilistic
models. While existing diffusion-based methods operate on
images, latent codes, or point cloud data, we are the first
to directly generate volumetric radiance fields. To this end,
we propose a 3D denoising model which directly operates
on an explicit voxel grid representation. However, as radiance fields generated from a set of posed images can be ambiguous and contain artifacts, obtaining ground truth radiance field samples is non-trivial. We address this challenge
by pairing the denoising formulation with a rendering loss,
enabling our model to learn a deviated prior that favours
good image quality instead of trying to replicate fitting er-

rors like floating artifacts. In contrast to 2D-diffusion models, our model learns multi-view consistent priors, enabling
free-view synthesis and accurate shape generation. Compared to 3D GANs, our diffusion-based approach naturally
enables conditional generation such as masked completion
or single-view 3D synthesis at inference time.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [37]
have emerged as a powerful representation for fitting individual 3D scenes from posed 2D input images. The ability
to photo-realistically synthesize novel views from arbitrary
viewpoints while respecting the underlying 3D scene geomProject page: https://sirwyver.github.io/DiffRF/.

4328

