This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning a Practical SDR-to-HDRTV Up-conversion using New Dataset and
Degradation Models

1

Cheng Guo1,2 , Leidong Fan3,2 , Ziyu Xue4,1 and Xiuhua Jiang2,1
State Key Laboratory of Media Convergence and Communication, Communication University of China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Peking University
4
Academy of Broadcasting Science, National Radio and Television Administration
{guocheng,jiangxiuhua}@cuc.edu.cn, fanleidong@stu.pku.edu.cn, xueziyu@abs.ac.cn

Input SDR
79.74nit

36.08nit

Brightness Index:

Y
(luminance)

x (color)

Deep SR-ITM (ICCV’19)

3D Yxy
chromaticity
diagram

incomparable
Saturation Level:

(-0.28)10.30%

JSI-GAN (AAAI’20)

HDRTVNet (ICCV’21)

FMNet (ACM MM’22)

34.31nit

33.52nit

34.22nit

Brightness Index:

Brightness Index:
Brightness Index:
defined in
Tab.4 ‘HDRBQ’

(-2.99)1.51%

Saturation Level:

(-3.69)6.89%

y (color)

Saturation Level:
defined in
Tab.4 ‘ASL’

(-2.99)1.51%

Saturation Level:

(-2.45)8.13%

Criteria:
For better viewing
experience, brightness
of output HDR should
≥ GT, and saturation
should ≥ both GT
and input SDR.

Brightness Index:

(-2.91)1.59%

Saturation Level:

(-2.10)8.48%

Current Methods:
Result’s brightness
and saturation are
far less than GT,
which will deteriorate
viewing experience.

Ours

GT-HDR
141.69nit

135.97nit

Brightness Index:

(-2.98)1.52%

Saturation Level:

(-2.13)8.45%

Our Method:
Able to reasonably
improve brightness
and saturation, and
recover more details
in bright and dark
regions.

Brightness Index:

Brightness Index:

Saturation Level:

Saturation Level:

(+1.32)5.82%

(+0.46)11.04%

4.50%

10.58%

Figure 1. Up-converting SDR content for HDR-WCG TV display. To ensure better viewing experience [1], we use (1) 3D Yxy chromaticity diagram (vertical axis Y for HDR/lumiannce, xy plane for WCG/color) to see how HDRTV’s advance on HDR&WCG volume is
recovered, and (2) detailed visuals (yellow and blue boxes) to assess method’s recover ability. Note that HDR is dimer here in print version
since its large luminance&color container is interpreted by small SDR capacity, and will appear normal if correctly visualized (top Fig.7).
Still, from (3) ‘Brightness Index’ & ’Saturation Level’ we know that result from current methods is more dim and desaturated than GT.

Abstract
In media industry, the demand of SDR-to-HDRTV upconversion arises when users possess HDR-WCG (high dynamic range-wide color gamut) TVs while most off-the-shelf
footage is still in SDR (standard dynamic range). The research community has started tackling this low-level vision
task by learning-based approaches. When applied to real
SDR, yet, current methods tend to produce dim and desaturated result, making nearly no improvement on viewing
experience. Different from other network-oriented methods, we attribute such deficiency to training set (HDRSDR pair). Consequently, we propose new HDRTV dataset
(dubbed HDRTV4K) and new HDR-to-SDR degradation
models. Then, it’s used to train a luminance-segmented
network (LSN) consisting of a global mapping trunk, and
two Transformer branches on bright and dark luminance
range. We also update assessment criteria by tailored metrics and subjective experiment. Finally, ablation studies are
conducted to prove the effectiveness. Our work is available

at: https://github.com/AndreGuo/HDRTVDM .

1. Introduction
The dynamic range of image is defined as the maximum recorded luminance to the minimum. Larger luminance container endows high dynamic range (HDR) a better expressiveness of scene. In media and film industry, the
superiority of HDR is further boosted by advanced electrooptical transfer function (EOTF) e.g. PQ/HLG [2], and wide
color-gamut (WCG) RGB primaries e.g. BT.2020 [3].
While WCG-HDR displays are becoming more readily
available in consumer market, most commercial footage is
still in standard dynamic range (SDR) since WCG-HDR
version is yet scarce due to exorbitant production workflow.
Hence, there raise the demand of converting vast existing
SDR content for HDRTV service. Such SDR may carry irreproducible scenes, but more likely, imperfections brought
by old imaging system and transmission. This indicates that
SDR-to-HDRTV up-conversion is an ill-posed low-level vi-

22231

