This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoFocusFormer: Image Segmentation off the Grid
*

Chen Ziwen1 , Kaushik Patnaik2 , Shuangfei Zhai2 , Alvin Wan2
Zhile Ren2 , Alex Schwing2 , Alex Colburn2 , Li Fuxin1,2
1
Oregon State University, 2 Apple Inc.
{chenziw, lif}@oregonstate.edu
{kaushik patnaik,szhai,alvinwan,zhile ren,aschwing,alexcolburn,fli26}@apple.com

Abstract

Real world images often have highly imbalanced content
density. Some areas are very uniform, e.g., large patches of
Image
blue sky, while other areas are scattered with many small
objects. Yet, the commonly used successive grid downsampling strategy in convolutional deep networks treats all areas equally. Hence, small objects are represented in very
Swin
AFF
few spatial locations, leading to worse results in tasks such
as segmentation. Intuitively, retaining more pixels repreRemaining tokens
Stage 2
senting small objects during downsampling helps to preserve important information. To achieve this, we propose
AutoFocusFormer (AFF), a local-attention transformer imRemaining tokens
age recognition backbone, which performs adaptive downStage 4
sampling by learning to retain the most important pixels for
the task. Since adaptive downsampling generates a set of
pixels irregularly distributed on the image plane, we abanPrediction
don the classic grid structure. Instead, we develop a novel
point-based local attention block, facilitated by a balanced
clustering module and a learnable neighborhood merging
Figure 1. Comparison between on-grid model Swin [16] and offgrid model AFF. The red pixels indicate the locations of the remodule, which yields representations for our point-based
maining
tokens.model
AFF Swin
downsamples
non-uniformly,
automatically
versions of state-of-the-art segmentation heads.
Experi- between
Comparison
on-grid
and oﬀ-grid
model AFF.
AFF downsamples non
focusing
moretextured,
textured, important
regions,
which
lead
automatically
onon
more
importantimage
image
regions,
and
successfully captu
ments show that our AutoFocusFormer (AFF) improves
sig- focusing
to better
on small
in the
red performance
pixels indicate
the objects
locations
ofscene.
the remaining tokens.
nificantly over baseline models of similar sizes.the background. The

1. Introduction
Typical real-world images distribute content unevenly.
Consider the photo of a typical outdoor scene in Fig. 1:
Large swaths of the image contain textureless regions like
the ground, while a few regions contain many small objects. Despite this, most computer vision neural networks
distribute computation evenly across the image; every pixel,
regardless of texture or importance, is processed with the
same computational cost. Popular convolutional neural networks operate on regularly-arranged square patches. Al* Work done while Chen Ziwen was an intern at Apple Inc.

though recent transformer architectures do not strictly depend on a grid structure, many transformer-based methods adopt grid-based techniques such as stride-16 convolutions [5] and 7 × 7 square windows for local attention [16].
Despite its popularity, uniform downsampling is less
effective for tasks that require pixel-level details such as
segmentation. Here, uniform downsampling unfortunately
makes tiny objects even tinier – possibly dropping needed,
pixel-level information. To combat this, many techniques
increase the input resolution [6,31] to obtain better segmentation performance. This intuitively helps, as larger input
will lead to higher resolution after downsampling. However, increasing input resolution is costly in memory and
computation, as this brute-force bandaid neglects the under-

18227

