This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DivClust: Controlling Diversity in Deep Clustering
Ioannis Maniadis Metaxas,* Georgios Tzimiropoulos, Ioannis Patras
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End road, E1 4NS London, UK
{i.maniadismetaxas, g.tzimiropoulos, i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Clustering has been a major research topic in the field
of machine learning, one to which Deep Learning has recently been applied with significant success. However, an
aspect of clustering that is not addressed by existing deep
clustering methods, is that of efficiently producing multiple, diverse partitionings for a given dataset. This is particularly important, as a diverse set of base clusterings are
necessary for consensus clustering, which has been found
to produce better and more robust results than relying on
a single clustering. To address this gap, we propose DivClust, a diversity controlling loss that can be incorporated
into existing deep clustering frameworks to produce multiple clusterings with the desired degree of diversity. We
conduct experiments with multiple datasets and deep clustering frameworks and show that: a) our method effectively
controls diversity across frameworks and datasets with very
small additional computational cost, b) the sets of clusterings learned by DivClust include solutions that significantly outperform single-clustering baselines, and c) using
an off-the-shelf consensus clustering algorithm, DivClust
produces consensus clustering solutions that consistently
outperform single-clustering baselines, effectively improving the performance of the base deep clustering framework. Code is available at https://github.com/
ManiadisG/DivClust.

1. Introduction
The exponentially increasing volume of visual data,
along with advances in computing power and the development of powerful Deep Neural Network architectures, have
revived the interest in unsupervised learning with visual
data. Deep clustering in particular has been an area where
significant progress has been made in the recent years. Existing works focus on producing a single clustering, which
is evaluated in terms of how well that clustering matches
* Corresponding author

the ground truth labels of the dataset in question. However,
consensus, or ensemble, clustering remains under-studied
in the context of deep clustering, despite the fact that it has
been found to consistently improve performance over single
clustering outcomes [3, 17, 45, 73].
Consensus clustering consists of two stages, specifically
generating a set of base clusterings, and then applying a
consensus algorithm to aggregate them. Identifying what
properties ensembles should have in order to produce better
outcomes in each setting has been an open problem [18].
However, research has found that inter-clustering diversity within the ensemble is an important, desirable factor [14,20,24,34,51], along with individual clustering quality, and that diversity should be moderated [15,22,51]. Furthermore, several works suggest that controlling diversity
in ensembles is important toward studying its impact and
determining its optimal level in each setting [22, 51].
The typical way to produce diverse clusterings is to promote diversity by clustering the data multiple times with
different initializations/hyperparameters or subsets of the
data [3, 17]. This approach, however, does not guarantee or control the degree of diversity, and is computationally costly, particularly in the context of deep clustering,
where it would require the training of multiple models.
Some methods have been proposed that find diverse clusterings by including diversity-related objectives to the clustering process, but those methods have only been applied
to clustering precomputed features and cannot be trivially
incorporated into Deep Learning frameworks. Other methods tackle diverse clustering by creating and clustering diverse feature subspaces, including some that apply this approach in the context of deep clustering [48, 61]. Those
methods, however, do not control inter-clustering diversity.
Rather, they influence it indirectly through the properties
of the subspaces they create. Furthermore, typically, existing methods have been focusing on producing orthogonal
clusterings or identifying clusterings based on independent
attributes of relatively simple visual data (e.g. color/shape).
Consequently, they are oriented toward maximizing interclustering diversity, which is not appropriate for consensus

3418

