This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-DETR: Semi-Supervised Object Detection with Detection Transformers
Jiacheng Zhang1,2 * Xiangru Lin2∗ Wei Zhang2 Kuo Wang1 Xiao Tan2
Junyu Han2 Errui Ding2 Jingdong Wang2 Guanbin Li1,3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., China
3
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
{zhangjch58, wangk229}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
{linxiangru,zhangwei99,tanxiao01,hanjunyu,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

DETR

Strong Aug

DETR

…

(a) DETR-SSOD vanilla

Cross-view query
Consistency

Student

…

Bipartite Matching

EMA

Supervision

Supervision

DETR

…

Work done during an internship at

Student
Strong Aug

Teacher

…

* Equally-contributed authors.
Baidu.
† Corresponding author.

EMA

…

Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) aims to boost
the performance of a fully-supervised object detector by ex-

…

1. Introduction

Weak Aug

DETR

…

Teacher

Weak Aug

We analyze the DETR-based framework on semisupervised object detection (SSOD) and observe that (1) the
one-to-one assignment strategy generates incorrect matching when the pseudo ground-truth bounding box is inaccurate, leading to training inefficiency; (2) DETR-based detectors lack deterministic correspondence between the input query and its prediction output, which hinders the applicability of the consistency-based regularization widely
used in current SSOD methods. We present Semi-DETR,
the first transformer-based end-to-end semi-supervised object detector, to tackle these problems. Specifically, we
propose a Stage-wise Hybrid Matching strategy that combines the one-to-many assignment and one-to-one assignment strategies to improve the training efficiency of the first
stage and thus provide high-quality pseudo labels for the
training of the second stage. Besides, we introduce a Crossview Query Consistency method to learn the semantic feature invariance of object queries from different views while
avoiding the need to find deterministic query correspondence. Furthermore, we propose a Cost-based Pseudo Label Mining module to dynamically mine more pseudo boxes
based on the matching cost of pseudo ground truth bounding boxes for consistency training. Extensive experiments
on all SSOD settings of both COCO and Pascal VOC benchmark datasets show that our Semi-DETR method outperforms all state-of-the-art methods by clear margins.

…

Abstract

Stage-wise Hybrid Matching
(b) Semi-DETR

Figure 1. Comparisons between the vanilla DETR-SSOD framework based on the Teacher-Student architecture and our proposed
Semi-DETR framework. Semi-DETR consists of Stage-wise Hybrid Matching, Cross-view Query Consistency powered by a costbased pseudo label mining strategy.

ploiting a large amount of unlabeled data. Current state-ofthe-art SSOD methods are primarily based on object detectors with many hand-crafted components, e.g., rule-based
label assigner [9, 26, 27, 31] and non-maximum suppression
(NMS) [1] post-processing. We term this type of object detector as a traditional object detector. Recently, DETR [2],
a simple transformer-based end-to-end object detector, has
received growing attention. Generally, the DETR-based
framework builds upon transformer [32] encoder-decoder
architecture and generates unique predictions by enforcing a
set-based global loss via bipartite matching during training.
It eliminates the need for various hand-crafted components,
achieving state-of-the-art performance in fully-supervised
object detection. Although the performance is desirable,
how to design a feasible DETR-based SSOD framework remains under-explored. There are still no systematic ways to
fulfill this research gap.
Designing an SSOD framework for DETR-based detectors is non-trivial. Concretely, DETR-based detectors
take a one-to-one assignment strategy where the bipartitematching algorithm forces each ground-truth (GT) bound-

23809

