This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Backdoors in Pre-trained Encoders
Shiwei Feng, Guanhong Tao, Siyuan Cheng, Guangyu Shen,
Xiangzhe Xu, Yingqi Liu, Kaiyuan Zhang, Shiqing Ma† , Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University, † Rutgers University
{feng292, taog, cheng535, shen447, xu1415, liu1751, zhan4057, xyzhang}@cs.purdue.edu
†

sm2283@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised learning in computer vision trains on
unlabeled data, such as images or (image, text) pairs, to
obtain an image encoder that learns high-quality embeddings for input data. Emerging backdoor attacks towards
encoders expose crucial vulnerabilities of self-supervised
learning, since downstream classifiers (even further trained
on clean data) may inherit backdoor behaviors from encoders. Existing backdoor detection methods mainly focus on supervised learning settings and cannot handle pretrained encoders especially when input labels are not available. In this paper, we propose DECREE, the first backdoor detection approach for pre-trained encoders, requiring neither classifier headers nor input labels. We evaluate DECREE on over 400 encoders trojaned under 3
paradigms. We show the effectiveness of our method on image encoders pre-trained on ImageNet and OpenAI’s CLIP
400 million image-text pairs. Our method consistently has
a high detection accuracy even if we have only limited or
no access to the pre-training dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/GiantSeaweed/DECREE.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL), specifically contrastive
learning [5, 10, 15], is becoming increasingly popular as it
does not require labeling training data that entails substantial
manual efforts [12] and yet can provide close to the stateof-the-art performance. It has a wide range of application
scenarios, e.g., similarity-based search [18], linear probe [1],
and zero-shot classification [4, 24, 25]. Similarity-based
search queries data based on their semantic similarity. Linear
probe utilizes an encoder trained by contrastive learning to
project inputs to an embedding space, and then trains a
linear classifier on top of the encoder to map embeddings
to downstream classification labels. Zero-shot classification
trains an image encoder and a text encoder (by contrastive

Launch Attack in Downstream Applications

Inject Backdoor in Encoders
Attack Targets
(Image or Text Captions)

Linear probe
Truck

Wrong
‘a photo of truck’

Linear
Ship
Classifier Correct

𝐸’
Input Images

Attack

𝐸

Inject
Backdoor

Clean Encoder

Zero-shot Prediction
𝐸’
Backdoored
Encoder

Image Embeddings

Prediction
𝐸’
Input Images
Correct

‘a photo of ship’
‘a photo of truck’

Pre-training
Dataset/Subset

Trigger Pattern

Captions

𝑇

Wrong

Text Encoder Text Embeddings

Figure 1. Illustration of Backdoor Attack on Self-Supervised Learning (SSL). The adversary first injects backdoor into a clean encoder
and launches attack when the backdoored encoder is leveraged to
train downstream tasks. The backdoored encoder produces similar
embeddings for the attack target and any input image with trigger,
causing misbehaviors in downstream applications.

learning) that map images and texts to the same embedding
space. The similarity of the two embeddings from an image
and a piece of text is used for prediction.
The performance of SSL heavily relies on the large
amount of unlabeled data, which indicates high computational cost. Regular users hence tend to employ pre-trained
encoders published online by third parties. Such a production chain provides opportunities for adversaries to implant
malicious behaviors. Particularly, backdoor attack or trojan
attack [8, 13, 32] injects backdoors in machine learning
models, which can only be activated (causing targeted
misclassification) by stamping a specific pattern, called
trigger, to an input sample. It is highly stealthy as the backdoored/trojaned model functions normally on clean inputs.
While existing backdoor attacks mostly focus on classifiers in the supervised learning setting, where the attacker induces the model to predict the target label for inputs stamped
with the trigger, recent studies demonstrate the feasibility
of conducting backdoor attacks in SSL scenarios [3, 20, 46].

16352

Similar
Dissimilar

