This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class-Balancing Diffusion Models
Yiming Qin1

Huangjie Zheng2
1

Jiangchao Yao1,3

Mingyuan Zhou2

Ya Zhang1,3

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University
2
University of Texas, Austin
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Diffusion-based models have shown the merits of generating high-quality visual data while preserving better diversity in recent studies. However, such observation is only justified with curated data distribution, where the data samples
are nicely pre-processed to be uniformly distributed in terms
of their labels. In practice, a long-tailed data distribution
appears more common and how diffusion models perform
on such class-imbalanced data remains unknown. In this
work, we first investigate this problem and observe significant degradation in both diversity and fidelity when the diffusion model is trained on datasets with class-imbalanced
distributions. Especially in tail classes, the generations
largely lose diversity and we observe severe mode-collapse
issues. To tackle this problem, we set from the hypothesis
that the data distribution is not class-balanced, and propose Class-Balancing Diffusion Models (CBDM) that are
trained with a distribution adjustment regularizer as a solution. Experiments show that images generated by CBDM
exhibit higher diversity and quality in both quantitative and
qualitative ways. Our method benchmarked the generation
results on CIFAR100/CIFAR100LT dataset and shows outstanding performance on the downstream recognition task.

1. Introduction
In recent years, log-likelihood-based diffusion models
have evolved rapidly and established new benchmarks on a
range of generation tasks [1, 7]. Based on them, researchers
have been able to further control the model generation process and the generation quality. This improves the applications of generative models in numerous domains including
text-image generation [31], image editing [28, 38], speech
synthesis [17], medical imaging [26, 44], video generation
[13] and adversarial learning [18, 33], etc.
Although diffusion models are known for the power of
high fidelity and diversity in generation, most of the existing diffusion models are trained with the hypothesis that the
data are uniformly distributed w.r.t. their labels. However,

Figure 1. Generation degrades along with class frequency. Semantics of generated images become less recognizable when class
frequency decreases, while the FID score increases significantly.

in the real world, the distribution is often very skewed. Especially for many domain-specific generation tasks such as
medical images [14], fine-grained dataset for taxology [15]
and data grabbed from the web [24], it is difficult to collect large amounts of data for each class equally, and the
size of the training set for head and tail categories can differ
by a factor of hundred or more. For such datasets, unconditional diffusion models tend to produce a significant portion of low-quality images. Conditional models, as shown
in Figure 1, generate head class images with satisfying performance, while conversely the generated images on tail
classes are very likely to show unrecognizable semantics.
Concerning training generative models with limited data,
there already exist several methods [21, 37, 50] based on
GAN models [2]. However, quite few studies examine the
impact of imbalanced class distribution [34] especially on
diffusion models, which is practical yet under-explored.
Our work first introduces diffusion models to imbalance
generation tasks on several long-tailed datasets [19], and
then build some straightforward baselines according to the
common methods used in long-tailed recognition [27, 29].

18434

