This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TMO: Textured Mesh Acquisition of Objects with a Mobile Device by using
Differentiable Rendering
Jaehoon Choi 1,2 Dongki Jung 1 Taejae Lee 1 Sangwook Kim 1 Youngdong Jung 1
Dinesh Manocha 2 Donghwan Lee 1
1
NAVER LABS 2 University of Maryland

Abstract
We present a new pipeline for acquiring a textured mesh
in the wild with a single smartphone which offers access to
images, depth maps, and valid poses. Our method first introduces an RGBD-aided structure from motion, which can
yield filtered depth maps and refines camera poses guided
by corresponding depth. Then, we adopt the neural implicit surface reconstruction method, which allows for highquality mesh and develops a new training process for applying a regularization provided by classical multi-view stereo
methods. Moreover, we apply a differentiable rendering
to fine-tune incomplete texture maps and generate textures
which are perceptually closer to the original scene. Our
pipeline can be applied to any common objects in the real
world without the need for either in-the-lab environments
or accurate mask images. We demonstrate results of captured objects with complex shapes and validate our method
numerically against existing 3D reconstruction and texture
mapping methods.

1. Introduction
Recovering the 3D geometry of objects and scenes is a
longstanding challenge in computer vision and is essential
to a broad range of applications. Depth sensing technologies range from highly specialized and expensive turn-table
3D scanners and structured-light scanners to commodity
depth sensors. More recently, advances in mobile devices
have developed a new method for 3D capture of real-world
environments with high-resolution imaging and miniaturized LiDAR. Specifically, the modern smartphone such as
iPhone 13 Pro are equipped with RGB camera, accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetometer, and LiDAR scanner. These
various sensors can provide high-resolution images, lowresolution depth from the LiDAR scanner, and associated
camera poses offered by off-the-shelf visual-inertial odometry (VIO) systems such as ARKit [1] and ARCore [2].
Today’s smartphones offer low-resolution depth maps

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Example reconstruction results collected from a smartphone in the wild. (a) Data acquisition setup. (b) Images captured
from a smartphone. (c) A reconstructed mesh. (d) A novel view
of textured mesh. Our proposed method can reconstruct the highquality geometric mesh with a visually realistic texture.

[5] and valid poses. However, depth maps are very noisy
and suffer from the limited range of depth sensors. Although this depth sensor can build a simple 3D structure
such as a wall or floor, it cannot reconstruct objects with
complex and varying shapes. Thus, the RGBD scanning
methods [9, 23, 42, 57] are not suitable for these objects.
Instead of the depth sensor, multi-view stereo (MVS) algorithms [13, 47, 62] reconstruct high-quality 3D geometry
by matching feature correspondences across different RGB
images and optimizing photometric consistency. While this
pipeline is very robust in real-world environments, it misses
the surface of low-textured areas [62]. Additionally, the resulting mesh generated by post-processing like Poisson reconstruction [27] heavily depends on the quality of matching, and the accumulated errors in correspondence matching
often cause severe artifacts and missing surfaces. Because
of the cumulative error from the above pipeline, the texture
mapping process [53, 69] leads to undesirable results. Reconstructing high-fidelity texture and 3D geometry of realworld 3D objects remains an open challenge.
Main Results: In this paper, we present a practical method
to capture a high-quality textured mesh of a 3D object in
the wild, shown in Fig. 1. We first develop a smartphone
app based on ARKit [1] to collect images, LiDAR depths,
and poses. Although the smartphone provides quite valid
pose estimates, acquiring fine detail geometry and realis-

16674

