This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Probabilistic Framework for Lifelong Test-Time Adaptation
Dhanajit Brahma
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur

Piyush Rai
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur

dhanajit@cse.iitk.ac.in

piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) is the problem of updating
a pre-trained source model at inference time given test input(s) from a different target domain. Most existing TTA
approaches assume the setting in which the target domain
is stationary, i.e., all the test inputs come from a single
target domain. However, in many practical settings, the
test input distribution might exhibit a lifelong/continual
shift over time. Moreover, existing TTA approaches also
lack the ability to provide reliable uncertainty estimates,
which is crucial when distribution shifts occur between the
source and target domain. To address these issues, we
present PETAL (Probabilistic lifElong Test-time Adaptation with seLf-training prior), which solves lifelong TTA using a probabilistic approach, and naturally results in (1) a
student-teacher framework, where the teacher model is an
exponential moving average of the student model, and (2)
regularizing the model updates at inference time using the
source model as a regularizer. To prevent model drift in
the lifelong/continual TTA setting, we also propose a datadriven parameter restoration technique which contributes
to reducing the error accumulation and maintaining the
knowledge of recent domains by restoring only the irrelevant parameters. In terms of predictive error rate as well as
uncertainty based metrics such as Brier score and negative
log-likelihood, our method achieves better results than the
current state-of-the-art for online lifelong test-time adaptation across various benchmarks, such as CIFAR-10C,
CIFAR-100C, ImageNetC, and ImageNet3DCC datasets.
The source code for our approach is accessible at https:
//github.com/dhanajitb/petal.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models exhibit excellent performance in
settings where the model is evaluated on data from the same
distribution as the training data. However, the performance
of such models degrades drastically when the distribution of
the test inputs at inference time is different from the distribution of the train data (source) [11, 16, 36]. Thus, there is

a need to robustify the network to handle such scenarios. A
particularly challenging setting is when we do not have any
labeled target domain data to finetune the source model, and
unsupervised adaptation must happen at test time when the
unlabeled test inputs arrive. This problem is known as testtime adaptation (TTA) [28, 35, 38]. Moreover, due to the
difficulty of training a single model to be robust to all potential distribution changes at test time, standard fine-tuning
is infeasible, and TTA becomes necessary. Another challenge in TTA is that the source domain training data may
no longer be available due to privacy/storage requirements,
and we only have access to the source pre-trained model.
Current approaches addressing the problem of TTA
[28, 35, 38, 41] are based on techniques like self-training
based pseudo-labeling or entropy minimization in order to
enhance performance under distribution shift during testing. One crucial challenge faced by existing TTA methods
is that real-world machine learning systems work in nonstationary and continually changing environments. Even
though the self-training based approaches perform well
when test inputs are from a different domain but all still
i.i.d., it has been found that the performance is unstable
when target test inputs come from a continually changing
environment [32]. Thus, it becomes necessary to perform
test-time adaptation in a continual manner.
Such a setting is challenging because the continual adaptation of the model in the long term makes it more difficult to preserve knowledge about the source domain. Continually changing test distribution causes pseudo-labels to
become noisier and miscalibrated [10] over time, leading
to error accumulation [3] which is more likely to occur if
early predictions are incorrect. When adapting to new test
input, the model tends to forget source domain knowledge,
triggering catastrophic forgetting [27, 31, 33]. Moreover,
existing TTA methods do not account for model/predictive
uncertainty, which can result in miscalibrated predictions.
Recently, [41] proposed CoTTA, an approach to address
the continual/lifelong TTA setting using a stochastic parameter reset mechanism to prevent forgetting. Their reset
mechanism however is based on randomly choosing a subset of weights to reset and is not data-driven. Moreover,

3582

