This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Channel Sparsity for Federated Learning under System Heterogeneity
Dongping Liao*
State Key Lab of IoTSC, CIS Dept,
University of Macau, Macau SAR, China.

Xitong Gao*
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.

yb97428@um.edu.mo

xt.gao@siat.ac.cn

Yiren Zhao
Imperial College London,
London, UK.

Chengzhong Xu†
State Key Lab of IoTSC, CIS Dept,
University of Macau, Macau SAR, China.

a.zhao@imperial.ac.uk

czxu@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Owing to the non-i.i.d. nature of client data, channel neurons in federated-learned models may specialize to distinct
features for different clients. Yet, existing channel-sparse
federated learning (FL) algorithms prescribe fixed sparsity
strategies for client models, and may thus prevent clients
from training channel neurons collaboratively. To minimize
the impact of sparsity on FL convergence, we propose Flado
to improve the alignment of client model update trajectories
by tailoring the sparsities of individual neurons in each client.
Empirical results show that while other sparse methods are
surprisingly impactful to convergence, Flado can not only attain the highest task accuracies with unlimited budget across
a range of datasets, but also significantly reduce the amount
of floating-point operations (FLOPs) required for training
more than by 10⇥ under the same communications budget,
and push the Pareto frontier of communication/computation
trade-off notably further than competing FL algorithms.

1. Introduction
In the light of the importance of personal data and recent
privacy regulations, e.g. the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) of the European Union [28,31,34], there is now
a great amount of risk, responsibility [7, 10] and technical
challenges for securing private data centrally [30]; it is often
impractical to upload, store and use data on central servers.
To this end, federated learning (FL) [21,24] enables multiple
edge devices to learn a global shared model collaboratively
in a communication-efficient way without collecting their
local training data. Federated averaging (FedAvg) [24] and
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

subsequent FL algorithms [16, 22] can notably reduce the
burden of data transmission.
These FL algorithms, however, neglected that the clients
exhibit a high degree of system heterogeneity. That is, the
clients may occupy a wide spectrum of different hardware
training capabilities [12]. Yet, dropping stragglers (i.e., the
slowest clients) inherently increases statistical heterogeneity,
which causes a negative impact on convergence [22]. Motivated by this, recent FL methods, e.g., Federated Dropout [5],
and FjORD [13], thus prescribe fixed channel sparsity strategies for each client, depending on their corresponding computational capabilities (Figure 1a).
Yet, owing to the non-i.i.d. nature of client data, a fixed
sparsity strategy is suboptimal, as neurons may specialize to
distinct features [3, 37] for different clients (Figure 2). Intuitively, clients may waste computational effort on neurons
that lead to conflicting update trajectories “canceling out”
each other. Since neuron training is heavily dependent on
the clients’ data, it presents us an opportunity: can we adapt
neuron sparsities such that clients can focus their computational efforts to collaborate more effectively? Inspired by
the observation above, an optimal model sparsity strategy
should thus adapt to clients’ model training, and make clients
collaborate on similar model update trajectories by making
such neurons denser, while sparsifying neurons that conflict
in update directions.
Adaptive channel sparsity for FL clients is, however, a
nontrivial endeavor. First, naı̈vely pruning channel neurons
i.e., setting to 0, would cause them to make no contribution in training after pruning. It is thus difficult to decide if
and when a pruned channel should be recovered. Second,
as neurons tend to extract distinct features from data, data
heterogeneous clients thus specialize to training different
neurons. Third, prescribing sparsities to channels is suboptimal, it may be desirable to allow certain clients to collaborate

20432

