This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Transformation-Predictive Representations for Detection and
Description of Local Features
Zihao Wang1
Chunxu Wu2
Yifei Yang2
Zhen Li2 *
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology
zhwang@stu.pku.edu.cn, {3120200960, 3120220892, zhenli}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
The task of key-points detection and description is to estimate the stable location and discriminative representation of local features, which is a fundamental task in visual applications. However, either the rough hard positive
or negative labels generated from one-to-one correspondences among images may bring indistinguishable samples,
like false positives or negatives, which acts as inconsistent supervision. Such resultant false samples mixed with
hard samples prevent neural networks from learning descriptions for more accurate matching. To tackle this challenge, we propose to learn the transformation-predictive
representations with self-supervised contrastive learning.
We maximize the similarity between corresponding views of
the same 3D point (landmark) by using none of the negative sample pairs and avoiding collapsing solutions. Furthermore, we adopt self-supervised generation learning and
curriculum learning to soften the hard positive labels into
soft continuous targets. The aggressively updated soft labels contribute to overcoming the training bottleneck (derived from the label noise of false positives) and facilitating the model training under a stronger transformation
paradigm. Our self-supervised training pipeline greatly decreases the computation load and memory usage, and outperforms the sota on the standard image matching benchmarks by noticeable margins, demonstrating excellent generalization capability on multiple downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Local visual descriptors are fundamental to various computer vision applications such as camera calibration [37],
3D reconstruction[19], visual simultaneous localization and
mapping (VSLAM) [33], and image retrieval [38]. The
descriptors indicate the representation vector of the patch
around the key-points and can be used to generate dense
* Corresponding author

correspondences between images.
The discriptors are highly dependent on the effective representation, which has been always trained with the Siamese
architecture and contrastive learning loss [12, 29, 39]. The
core idea of contrastive learning is “learn to compare”:
given an anchor key-point, distinguish a similar (or positive) sample from a set of dissimilar (or negative) samples, in a projected embedding space. The induced representations present two key properties: 1) alignment of features from positive pairs, 2) and uniformity of representation
on the hypersphere [51]. Negative samples are thus introduced to keep the uniformity property and avoid model collapse, i.e., preventing the convergence to one constant solution [13]. Therefore, various methods have been proposed
to mine hard negatives [6, 21, 55]. However, these methods
raise the computational load and memory resources usage
heavily [17]. More Importantly, within the hard negatives,
some samples are labeled as negatives, but actually have
the identical semantics of the anchor (i.e., false negatives).
These false negatives act as inconsistent supervision and
prevent the learning-based models from achieving higher
accuracy[4]. More concretely, the false negatives represent
the instance located on the repetitive texture in the structural
dataset, as shown in Figure 1. It is challenging to recognize
such false negatives from true negatives[39].
The recent active self-supervised learning methods [5, 8,
9, 15] motivate us to rethink the effectiveness of negatives
in descriptors learning. We propose to learn the transformation predictive representations (TPR) for visual descriptors only with the positives and avoids collapsing solutions.
Furthermore, using none of negatives greatly improves the
training efficiency by reducing the scale of the similarity
matrix from O(n2 ) to O(n), and reduces the computation
load and memory usage.
To further improve the generalization performance of
descriptors, hard positives (i.e., corresponding pairs with
large-scale transformation) are encouraged as training data
to expose novel patterns. However, recent experiments
have shown that directly contrastive learning on stronger

11464

