This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SINE: Semantic-driven Image-based NeRF Editing
with Prior-guided Editing Field
Chong Bao1 * Yinda Zhang2 * Bangbang Yang1 * Tianxing Fan1
Zesong Yang1 Hujun Bao1 Guofeng Zhang1† Zhaopeng Cui1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Google
https://zju3dv.github.io/sine/
Object-Centric Editing

360° Scene Editing
Text-Prompt
Editing

Stretching Back

Shining
Diamond
Vasedeck

Adding Cookie Tires

Text-Prompt
Editing
Silver
Round
Table

Adding Plate

Original View

2D Editing

Edited Novel View

Original View

Edited Novel View

Figure 1. We propose a novel semantic-driven image-based editing approach, which allows users to edit a photo-realistic NeRF with a
single-view image or with text prompts, and renders edited novel views with vivid details and multi-view consistency.

Abstract
Despite the great success in 2D editing using userfriendly tools, such as Photoshop, semantic strokes, or even
text prompts, similar capabilities in 3D areas are still limited, either relying on 3D modeling skills or allowing editing within only a few categories. In this paper, we present
a novel semantic-driven NeRF editing approach, which enables users to edit a neural radiance field with a single image, and faithfully delivers edited novel views with high fidelity and multi-view consistency. To achieve this goal, we
propose a prior-guided editing field to encode fine-grained
geometric and texture editing in 3D space, and develop a
series of techniques to aid the editing process, including
cyclic constraints with a proxy mesh to facilitate geometric supervision, a color compositing mechanism to stabilize semantic-driven texture editing, and a feature-clusterbased regularization to preserve the irrelevant content unchanged. Extensive experiments and editing examples on
both real-world and synthetic data demonstrate that our
method achieves photo-realistic 3D editing using only a
single edited image, pushing the bound of semantic-driven
editing in 3D real-world scenes.

1. Introduction
Semantic-driven editing approaches, such as strokebased scene editing [34, 39, 66], text-driven image synthesis and editing [1, 50, 53], and attribute-based face editing [27, 60], have greatly improved the ease of artistic creation. However, despite the great success of 2D image edit* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.

ing and neural rendering techniques [14, 42], similar editing abilities in the 3D area are still limited: (1) they require laborious annotation such as image masks [27, 71]
and mesh vertices [69, 74] to achieve the desired manipulation; (2) they conduct global style transfer [12,13,16,20,75]
while ignoring the semantic meaning of each object part
(e.g., windows and tires of a vehicle should be textured
differently); (3) they can edit on categories by learning
a textured 3D latent representation (e.g., 3D-aware GANs
with faces and cars etc.) [6, 8, 9, 17, 45, 56, 59, 60], or at a
coarse level [35, 64] with basic color assignment or objectlevel disentanglement [30], but struggle to conduct texture
editing on objects with photo-realistic textures or out-ofdistribution characteristics.
Based on this observation, we believe that, on the way
toward semantic-driven 3D editing, the following properties should be ensured. First, the operation of editing
should be effortless, i.e., users can edit 3D scenes on a single 2D image in convenient ways, e.g., using off-the-shelf
tools such as GAN-based editing [28, 34], text-driven editing [1, 53], Photoshop, or even a downloaded Internet image without pixel-wise alignment, rather than steering 3D
modeling software with specific knowledge [69], or repeatedly editing from multi-view images. Second, the editing
method should be applicable to real-world scenes or objects
and preserve vivid appearances, which is beyond existing
3D-aware generative models [8, 9] due to the limited categories and insufficient data diversity on real-world objects.
To fulfill this goal, we propose a novel Semantic-driven
Image-based Editing approach for Neural radiance field in
real-world scenes, named SINE. Specifically, our method
allows users to edit a neural radiance field with a sin-

20919

