This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Intrinsic Embedding for Non-rigid Point Cloud Matching
Puhua Jiang1,2 Mingze Sun1 Ruqi Huang1
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{jph21, smz22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

ruqihuang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. Given a point cloud, we select 5 landmarks (see red points on the right-most one) and assign each of the rest points to the
cluster represented by its nearest neighbor among the landmarks in the respective embedded space. We compare our method to Euclidean
coordinates, LIE [28], and GPS [40]. Our method takes in only the point cloud and produces segmentation that is intrinsic geometry-aware.

Abstract
As a primitive 3D data representation, point clouds
are prevailing in 3D sensing, yet short of intrinsic structural information of the underlying objects. Such discrepancy poses great challenges in directly establishing correspondences between point clouds sampled from deformable
shapes. In light of this, we propose Neural Intrinsic Embedding (NIE) to embed each vertex into a high-dimensional
space in a way that respects the intrinsic structure. Based
upon NIE, we further present a weakly-supervised learning framework for non-rigid point cloud registration. Unlike the prior works, we do not require expansive and sensitive off-line basis construction (e.g., eigen-decomposition
of Laplacians), nor do we require ground-truth correspondence labels for supervision. We empirically show that our
framework performs on par with or even better than the
state-of-the-art baselines, which generally require more supervision and/or more structural geometric input.

1. Introduction
Estimating correspondences between non-rigidly
aligned point clouds serves as a critical building block in

many computer vision and graphics applications, including
animation [21, 34], robotics [15, 44], autonomous driving [10, 54], to name a few. In contrast to the well-known
rigid case, more sophisticated deformation models are in
demand to characterize the non-rigid motions, for instance,
articulation movements of human shapes.
To address this challenge, extrinsic methods in principle approximate a complex global non-rigid deformation
with a set of local rigid and/or affine transformations, e.g.,
point-wise affine transformation [24, 50, 53], deformation
graph [6, 7, 25], and patch-based deformation [23, 52]. Being intuitive and straightforward, the extrinsic deformation
models are in general redundant and lack global structures.
On the other hand, intrinsic methods [2, 8, 19, 29, 30, 33]
first transform extrinsic coordinates into an alternative representation, in which shape alignment is performed. For instance, the seminal functional maps framework [32] utilizes
eigenbasis of the Laplace-Beltrami operator as spectral embeddings and turns non-rigid 3D shapes matching into rigid
alignment of high-dimensional spectral embeddings, under
the isometric deformation assumption. However, spectral
embeddings are generally obtained by an inefficient, nondifferentiable off-line eigen-decomposition of the Laplacian
operator defined on shapes, either represented as polygonal
meshes [36] or point clouds [42]. Moreover, spectral em-

21835

