This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Listening Human Behavior:
3D Human Pose Estimation with Acoustic Signals
Yuto Shibata
Keio University

Yutaka Kawashima
Keio University

Mariko Isogawa
Keio University, JST Presto

yuto071508@keio.jp

ykawashima@aoki-medialab.jp

mariko.isogawa@keio.jp

Akisato Kimura
NTT Corporation

Yoshimitsu Aoki
Keio University

goirie@ieee.org

akisato@ieee.org

aoki@elec.keio.ac.jp

3D Human Pose
(output)

Acoustic Signal
(input)
Amplitude

RGB Reference
(Not used
in our method)

Go Irie
Tokyo University of Science

0

1

2 [sec]
t

Figure 1. We propose 3D human pose estimation given only low-level acoustic signals with a single pair of microphones and loudspeakers.
Given an audio feature frame (right-middle), our method estimates 3D human pose sequences (right-bottom).

Abstract
Given only acoustic signals without any high-level information, such as voices or sounds of scenes/actions, how
much can we infer about the behavior of humans? Unlike
existing methods, which suffer from privacy issues because
they use signals that include human speech or the sounds of
specific actions, we explore how low-level acoustic signals
can provide enough clues to estimate 3D human poses by
active acoustic sensing with a single pair of microphones
and loudspeakers (see Fig. 1). This is a challenging task
since sound is much more diffractive than other signals and
therefore covers up the shape of objects in a scene. Accordingly, we introduce a framework that encodes multichannel audio features into 3D human poses. Aiming to capture
subtle sound changes to reveal detailed pose information,
we explicitly extract phase features from the acoustic signals together with typical spectrum features and feed them
into our human pose estimation network. Also, we show

that reflected or diffracted sounds are easily influenced by
subjects’ physique differences e.g., height and muscularity,
which deteriorates prediction accuracy. We reduce these
gaps by using a subject discriminator to improve accuracy. Our experiments suggest that with the use of only
low-dimensional acoustic information, our method outperforms baseline methods. The datasets and codes used in this
project will be publicly available.

1. Introduction
The ability to capture human behavior, such as 3D poses,
has many potential applications. Over the last decade,
many different technologies have been proposed to infer
human poses, including conventional cameras [4, 8], transient light [16], radio frequency (RF) or WiFi measurements [22, 33]. However, the optical signals are easily occluded and restricted by poor lighting conditions, such as

13323

