This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ref-NPR: Reference-Based Non-Photorealistic Radiance Fields for
Controllable Scene Stylization
Yuechen Zhang1,2
Zexin He1
Jinbo Xing1
Xufeng Yao1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SmartMore

Jiaya Jia1,2

{yczhang21, zxhe22, jbxing, xfyao, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

(

)

:

ARF

Ref-NPR

ARF

(

)

:

Ref-NPR

Reference view Stylized reference view

stylized novel views

Figure 1. Given a pair of one reference view from a radiance field and its stylization, Ref-NPR propagates style more faithfully to novel
views with semantic correspondence compared with state-of-the-art scene stylization method ARF [45].

Abstract
Current 3D scene stylization methods transfer textures
and colors as styles using arbitrary style references, lacking meaningful semantic correspondences. We introduce
Reference-Based Non-Photorealistic Radiance Fields (RefNPR) to address this limitation. This controllable method
stylizes a 3D scene using radiance fields with a single stylized 2D view as a reference. We propose a ray registration process based on the stylized reference view to obtain pseudo-ray supervision in novel views. Then we exploit semantic correspondences in content images to fill occluded regions with perceptually similar styles, resulting in
non-photorealistic and continuous novel view sequences.
Our experimental results demonstrate that Ref-NPR outperforms existing scene and video stylization methods regarding visual quality and semantic correspondence. The
code and data are publicly available on the project page at
https://ref-npr.github.io.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, there has been a rising demand for
stylizing and editing 3D scenes and objects in various fields,
including augmented reality, game scene design, and digital

artwork. Traditionally, professionals achieve these tasks by
creating 2D reference images and converting them into stylized 3D textures. However, establishing direct cross-modal
correspondence is challenging and often requires significant
time and effort to obtain stylized texture results similar to
the 2D reference schematics.
A critical challenge in the 3D stylization problem is to
ensure that stylized results are perceptually similar to the
given style reference. Benefiting from radiance fields [2,
10, 28, 29, 37, 46], recent novel-view stylization methods [5,8,15,16,30,45] greatly facilitated style transfer from
an arbitrary 2D style reference to 3D implicit representations. However, these methods do not provide explicit control over the generated results, making it challenging to
specify the regions where certain styles should be applied
and ensure the visual quality of the results. On the other
hand, reference-based video stylization methods allow for
the controllable generation of stylized novel views with better semantic correspondence between content and style reference, as demonstrated in works like [17, 38]. However,
these methods may diverge from the desired style when stylizing a frame sequence with unseen content, even with the
assistance of stylized keyframes.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose

4242

