This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wavelet Diffusion Models are fast and scalable Image Generators
Hao Phung† , Quan Dao† , Anh Tran
VinAI Research
{v.haopt12, v.quandm7, v.anhtt152}@vinai.io

Abstract
Diffusion models are rising as a powerful solution for
high-fidelity image generation, which exceeds GANs in
quality in many circumstances. However, their slow training and inference speed is a huge bottleneck, blocking them
from being used in real-time applications. A recent DiffusionGAN method significantly decreases the models’ running time by reducing the number of sampling steps from
thousands to several, but their speeds still largely lag behind the GAN counterparts. This paper aims to reduce
the speed gap by proposing a novel wavelet-based diffusion scheme. We extract low-and-high frequency components from both image and feature levels via wavelet decomposition and adaptively handle these components for faster
processing while maintaining good generation quality. Furthermore, we propose to use a reconstruction term, which
effectively boosts the model training convergence. Experimental results on CelebA-HQ, CIFAR-10, LSUN-Church,
and STL-10 datasets prove our solution is a stepping-stone
to offering real-time and high-fidelity diffusion models. Our
code and pre-trained checkpoints are available at https:
//github.com/VinAIResearch/WaveDiff.git.

1. Introduction
Despite being introduced recently, diffusion models have
grown tremendously and drawn many research interests.
Such models revert the diffusion process to generate clean,
high-quality outputs from random noise inputs. These techniques are applied in various data domains and applications
but show the most remarkable success in image-generation
tasks. Diffusion models can beat the state-of-the-art generative adversarial networks (GANs) in generation quality
on various datasets [4, 37]. More notably, diffusion models provide a better mode coverage [14, 22, 40] and a flexible way to handle different types of conditional inputs such
as semantic maps, text, representations, and images [36].
†

Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Comparisons between our method and other GAN and
diffusion techniques in terms of FID and sampling time the on
CIFAR-10 (32 × 32) dataset. Our method is 2.5× faster than
DDGAN [49], the fastest up-to-date diffusion method, and approaches the real-time speed of StyleGAN methods [19, 20, 56]
while still achieving comparable FID scores.

Thanks to this capability, they offer various applications
such as text-to-image generation, image-to-image translation, image inpainting, image restoration, and more. Recent
diffusion-based text-to-image generative models [1, 34, 37]
allow users to generate unbelievably realistic images just
by text inputs, opening a new era of AI-based digital art and
promising applications to various other domains.
While showing great potential, diffusion models have a
very slow running speed, a critical weakness blocking them
from being widely adopted like GANs. The foundation
work Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
[13] requires a thousand sampling steps to produce the desired output quality, taking minutes to generate a single image. Many techniques have been proposed to reduce the
inference time [25, 39], mainly via reducing the sampling
steps. However, the fastest algorithm before DiffusionGAN still takes seconds to produce a 32×32 image, which
is about 100 times slower than GAN. DiffusionGAN [49]
made a break-though in fastening inference speed by combining Diffusion and GANs in a single system, which ul-

10199

