This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlatFormer: Flattened Window Attention for Efficient Point Cloud Transformer
Zhijian Liu1,∗
1
MIT

Xinyu Yang1,2,∗
Haotian Tang1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Shang Yang1,3
Song Han1
3
Tsinghua University
Transformer

Convolution

https://flatformer.mit.edu

Point Cloud Transformers

Abstract
74

1. Introduction
Transformer [75] has become the model of choice in natural language processing (NLP), serving as the backbone
of many successful large language models (LLMs) [2, 17].
Recently, its impact has further been expanded to the vision
community, where vision transformers (ViTs) [18, 45, 74]
have demonstrated on-par or even superior performance compared with CNNs in many visual modalities (e.g., image and
video). 3D point cloud, however, is not yet one of them.
∗ indicates equal contributions.

4x faster
FlatFormer
(Ours)

72

Mean mAPH L2

Transformer, as an alternative to CNN, has been proven
effective in many modalities (e.g., texts and images). For 3D
point cloud transformers, existing efforts focus primarily on
pushing their accuracy to the state-of-the-art level. However,
their latency lags behind sparse convolution-based models
(3× slower), hindering their usage in resource-constrained,
latency-sensitive applications (such as autonomous driving).
This inefficiency comes from point clouds’ sparse and irregular nature, whereas transformers are designed for dense,
regular workloads. This paper presents FlatFormer to close
this latency gap by trading spatial proximity for better computational regularity. We first flatten the point cloud with
window-based sorting and partition points into groups of
equal sizes rather than windows of equal shapes. This effectively avoids expensive structuring and padding overheads.
We then apply self-attention within groups to extract local
features, alternate sorting axis to gather features from different directions, and shift windows to exchange features across
groups. FlatFormer delivers state-of-the-art accuracy on
Waymo Open Dataset with 4.6× speedup over (transformerbased) SST and 1.4× speedup over (sparse convolutional)
CenterPoint. This is the first point cloud transformer that
achieves real-time performance on edge GPUs and is faster
than sparse convolutional methods while achieving on-par
or even superior accuracy on large-scale benchmarks.

Sparse Convolutional Models

3x faster

CenterPoint++
SST
(Center)

70

SST

68
CenterPoint

VoxSet

66

64

0

13

26

39

52

65

Latency (ms)

Figure 1. Previous point cloud transformers (⋆) are 3-4× slower
than sparse convolution-based models (•) despite achieving similar
detection accuracy. FlatFormer is the first point cloud transformer
that is faster than sparse convolutional methods with on-par accuracy. Latency is measured on an NVIDIA Quadro RTX A6000.

Different from images and videos, 3D point clouds are
intrinsically sparse and irregular. Most existing point cloud
models [94] are based on 3D sparse convolution [24], which
computes convolution only on non-zero features. They require dedicated system support [14, 71, 91] to realize high
utilization on parallel hardware (e.g., GPUs).
Many efforts have been made toward point cloud transformers (PCTs) to explore their potential as an alternative to
sparse convolution. Global PCTs [26] benefit from the regular computation pattern of self-attention but suffer greatly
from the quadratic computational cost (w.r.t. the number of
points). Local PCTs [50, 98] apply self-attention to a local
neighborhood defined in a similar way to point-based models [57] and are thus bottlenecked by the expensive neighbor
gathering [47]. These methods are only applicable to single
objects or partial indoor scans (with <4k points) and cannot
be efficiently scaled to outdoor scenes (with >30k points).
Inspired by Swin Transformer [45], window PCTs [19,70]
compute self-attention at the window level, achieving im-

1200

