This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLAMP: Prompt-based Contrastive Learning for Connecting Language and
Animal Pose
Xu Zhang1

Wen Wang2
1

Zhe Chen1

Yufei Xu1
2

The University of Sydney, Australia

{xzha0930,yuxu7116}@uni.sydney.edu.au

Animal pose estimation is challenging for existing
image-based methods because of limited training data
and large intra- and inter-species variances. Motivated
by the progress of visual-language research, we propose
that pre-trained language models (e.g., CLIP) can facilitate animal pose estimation by providing rich prior
knowledge for describing animal keypoints in text. However, we found that building effective connections between
pre-trained language models and visual animal keypoints
is non-trivial since the gap between text-based descriptions and keypoint-based visual features about animal pose
can be significant. To address this issue, we introduce
a novel prompt-based Contrastive learning scheme for
connecting Language and AniMal Pose (CLAMP) effectively. The CLAMP attempts to bridge the gap by adapting the text prompts to the animal keypoints during network training. The adaptation is decomposed into spatialaware and feature-aware processes, and two novel contrastive losses are devised correspondingly. In practice,
the CLAMP enables the first cross-modal animal pose estimation paradigm. Experimental results show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance under the supervised, few-shot, and zero-shot settings, outperforming
image-based methods by a large margin. The code is available at https://github.com/xuzhang1199/CLAMP.

1. Introduction
Animal pose estimation aims to locate and identify a series of animal body keypoints from an input image. It plays
a key role in animal behavior understanding, zoology, and
wildlife conservation which can help study and protect animals better. Although the animal pose estimation task is
analogous to human pose estimation [2] to some extent, we
argue that the two tasks are very different. For example, animal pose estimation involves multiple animal species, while

Dacheng Tao1

Zhejiang University, China

{zhe.chen1,jing.zhang1}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

Jing Zhang1
wwen@zju.edu.cn

dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Text Prompt: ‘left front paw’
CLAMP
Spatial-aware Adaptation
Feature-aware Adaptation

CLAMP
Spatial-aware Adaptation
Feature-aware Adaptation

Effective Animal
Pose Estimation

Figure 1. Conceptualized visualization of our CLAMP method.
Regarding the animal pose estimation task, we proposed to exploit
rich language information from texts to facilitate the visual identification of animal keypoints. To better connect texts and animal
images, we devise the CLAMP to adapt pre-trained language models via a spatial-aware and a feature-aware process. As a result, the
CLAMP helps deliver better animal pose estimation performance.

human pose estimation only focuses on one category. Besides, it is much more difficult to collect and annotate animal pose data covering different animal species, thus existing animal pose datasets are several times smaller than the
human pose datasets [20] regarding the number of samples
per species. Recently, Yu et al. [38] attempted to alleviate
this problem by presenting the largest animal pose estimation dataset, i.e., AP-10K, which contains 10K images from
23 animal families and 54 species and provides the baseline performance of SimpleBaseline [32] and HRNet [31].
Despite this progress, the volume of this dataset is still far
smaller than the popular human pose dataset, such as MS
COCO [20] with 200K images.
With diverse species and limited data, current animal
pose datasets usually have large variances in animal poses
which include both intra-species and inter-species vari-

23272

