This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Scene Contrast: A Scalable Framework for
Unsupervised 3D Representation Learning
Xiaoyang Wu

Xin Wen Xihui Liu Hengshuang Zhao*
The University of Hong Kong

https://github.com/Pointcept/Pointcept

Abstract
As a pioneering work, PointContrast conducts unsupervised 3D representation learning via leveraging contrastive
learning over raw RGB-D frames and proves its effectiveness on various downstream tasks. However, the trend of
large-scale unsupervised learning in 3D has yet to emerge
due to two stumbling blocks: the inefficiency of matching RGB-D frames as contrastive views and the annoying
mode collapse phenomenon mentioned in previous works.
Turning the two stumbling blocks into empirical stepping
stones, we first propose an efficient and effective contrastive
learning framework, which generates contrastive views directly on scene-level point clouds by a well-curated data
augmentation pipeline and a practical view mixing strategy. Second, we introduce reconstructive learning on the
contrastive learning framework with an exquisite design of
contrastive cross masks, which targets the reconstruction
of point color and surfel normal. Our Masked Scene Contrast (MSC) framework is capable of extracting comprehensive 3D representations more efficiently and effectively. It
accelerates the pre-training procedure by at least 3× and
still achieves an uncompromised performance compared
with previous work. Besides, MSC also enables largescale 3D pre-training across multiple datasets, which further boosts the performance and achieves state-of-the-art
fine-tuning results on several downstream tasks, e.g., 75.5%
mIoU on ScanNet semantic segmentation validation set.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised visual representation learning aims at
learning visual representations from vast amounts of unlabeled data. The learned representations are proved to be
beneficial for various downstream tasks like segmentation
and detection. It has attracted lots of attention and achieved
remarkable progress in 2D image understanding, exceeding
the upper bound of human supervision [20, 25].
* Corresponding Author. Email: hszhao@cs.hku.hk

PointContrast

Masked Scene Contrast

RGB-D Camera

Random Crop

Visible Region

Figure 1. Comparison of unsupervised 3D representation learning.
The previous method [56] (top) relies on raw RGB-D frames with
restricted views for contrastive learning, resulting in low efficiency
and inferior versatility. Our approach (bottom) directly operates
on scene-level views with contrastive learning and masked point
modeling, leading to high efficiency and superior generality, further enabling large-scale pre-training across multiple datasets.

Despite the impressive success of unsupervised visual
representation learning in 2D, it is underexplored in 3D.
Modern 3D scene understanding algorithms [10, 52] are focused on supervised learning, where models are trained directly from scratch on targeted datasets and tasks. Well-pretrained visual representations can undoubtedly boost the
performance of these algorithms and are currently in urgent demand. Recent work PointContrast [56] conducts a
preliminary exploration in 3D unsupervised learning. However, it is limited to raw RGB-D frames with an inefficient
learning paradigm, which is not scalable and applicable to
large-scale unsupervised learning. To address this essential
and inevitable challenge, we focus on building a scalable
framework for large-scale 3D unsupervised learning.
One technical stumbling block towards large-scale pretraining is the inefficient learning strategy introduced by

9415

