This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Expressive Prompting With Residuals for Vision Transformers
Rajshekhar Das1,2∗ , Yonatan Dukler2 , Avinash Ravichandran2∗∗ , Ashwin Swaminathan2
Carnegie Mellon University1
AWS AI Labs2
rajshekd@andrew.cmu.edu, dukler@amazon.com, swashwin@amazon.com

Abstract
Prompt learning is an efficient approach to adapt transformers by inserting learnable set of parameters into the
input and intermediate representations of a pre-trained
model. In this work, we present Expressive Prompts with
Residuals (EXPRES) which modifies the prompt learning paradigm specifically for effective adaptation of vision transformers (ViT). Our method constructs downstream representations via learnable “output” tokens (shallow prompts), that are akin to the learned class tokens of the
ViT. Further for better steering of the downstream representation processed by the frozen transformer, we introduce
residual learnable tokens that are added to the output of
various computations. We apply EXPRES for image classification and few-shot semantic segmentation, and show our
method is capable of achieving state of the art prompt tuning on 3/3 categories of the VTAB benchmark. In addition
to strong performance, we observe that our approach is an
order of magnitude more prompt efficient than existing visual prompting baselines. We analytically show the computational benefits of our approach over weight space adaptation techniques like finetuning. Lastly we systematically
corroborate the architectural design of our method via a
series of ablation experiments.

1. Introduction
Scaling up of neural nets in the past few years has steadily
improved performance on wide variety of downstream visual tasks. However, model adaptation is often necessary
to achieve the best performance in downstream tasks like
fine-grained recognition [89], semantic segmentation [8] or
object recognition [34]. While traditional techniques like
full-model finetuning have become the de-facto approach
to adaptation, they are not well suited for many scenarios.
For example, finetuning is susceptible to catastrophic forgetting [37] as it modifies model parameters without the
knowledge of future domains, and potentially losing prior
∗ Work conducted while interning at AWS AI Labs.
∗∗ Work conducted while at AWS AI Labs.

Figure 1. Adapting large vision models is crucial to solving downstream tasks with wide variety of semantics (e.g., image classification, semantic segmentation etc.) as well as dataset sizes (few-shot,
low-shot, full-shot). In this work, we propose a novel adaptation
technique for large vision models that is capable of achieving the
desired goal.

knowledge of current adaptation. Moreover, finetuning all
of the model parameters of a large vision model with just a
few training examples can lead to poor generalization. This
is in contrast to human intelligence that is capable of solving wide variety of downstream tasks with extremely few
exemplars.
Motivated by the need for better adaptation, parameter efficient techniques like partial-finetuning or adapters [64,101]
have been developed to constructively adapt large models
without significant parameter overhead. While serving as
effective alternatives to finetuning, most parameter efficient
techniques have been designed with convolutional architectures in mind. In light of recent works [15] that demonstrate
that Vision Transformers are more suitable for scaling up
than CNNs, designing adaptation techniques that exploit the
Transformer architecture can be extremely useful. To that
end, visual prompt tuning (VPT) [32] has been proposed as
a way to constructively adapt transformers by introducing
learnable tokens at every layer that interact with the patch
and class tokens and are optimized together with a classi-

3366

