This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GazeNeRF: 3D-Aware Gaze Redirection with Neural Radiance Fields
Alessandro Ruzzi1∗ Xiangwei Shi2∗ Xi Wang1 Gengyan Li1 Shalini De Mello3
Hyung Jin Chang4 Xucong Zhang2 Otmar Hilliges1
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 2 Computer Vision Lab, Delft University of Technology
4
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham

3

NVIDIA

Abstract

Gaze redirection is the task of manipulating an input image of a face such that the face in the output
image appears to look at a given target direction, without changing the identity or other latent parameters
of the subject. Gaze redirection finds applications in
video conferencing [31], image and movie editing [3],
human-computer interaction [23], and holds the potential to enhance life-likeness of avatars for the metaverse
(e.g., [2,42]). It has furthermore been shown that gazeredirected images can be used to synthesize training
data for downstream tasks such as person-specific gaze
estimation [7, 41].
Existing gaze redirection methods formulate this
task as a 2D image manipulation problem. Either by
∗ These two authors contributed equally to this work.

Latent
Code

Gaze redirection

MLP

1. Introduction

Gaze
Label

MLP

We propose GazeNeRF, a 3D-aware method for the
task of gaze redirection. Existing gaze redirection methods operate on 2D images and struggle to generate
3D consistent results. Instead, we build on the intuition that the face region and eyeballs are separate 3D
structures that move in a coordinated yet independent
fashion. Our method leverages recent advancements in
conditional image-based neural radiance fields and proposes a two-stream architecture that predicts volumetric
features for the face and eye regions separately. Rigidly
transforming the eye features via a 3D rotation matrix
provides fine-grained control over the desired gaze angle. The final, redirected image is then attained via differentiable volume compositing. Our experiments show
that this architecture outperforms naı̈vely conditioned
NeRF baselines as well as previous state-of-the-art 2D
gaze redirection methods in terms of redirection accuracy and identity preservation. Code and models will
be released for research purposes.

∗R
Head redirection

Figure 1. GazeNeRF consists of a NeRF-based two-streamMLP structure conditioned on a target gaze label to generate the photo-realistic face images. A 3D rotation transformation R is applied on eyes stream of GazeNeRF.

warping select pixels of the input image [3,35,36,38], or
by synthesizing new images via deep generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[7, 10], encoder-decoder networks [22], or Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) [41]. Image warping methods
can not model large changes due to the inability to generate new pixels. While 2D generative models can produce high-quality images and allow for large gaze direction changes, they do not take the 3D nature of the task
into consideration. This can lead to spatio-temporal or
identity inconsistencies where other latent variables are
entangled with the gaze direction. Some 2D methods
attempt to simulate the eyeball rotation by applying a
3D rotation matrix in latent space [22, 41]. However,
these injected implicit priors are weak and do not explicitly model the 3D nature of the task.
In this paper, we address these issues by reformulating gaze redirection as a 3D task and propose a novel
3D-aware gaze redirection method GazeNeRF. Our approach leverages recent advances in image-based conditional neural radiance fields [8] to inherit the ability
to generate images of excellent quality. The physical
face and eyes are not a monolithic 3D structure but

9676

