This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuralPCI: Spatio-temporal Neural Field for 3D Point Cloud Multi-frame
Non-linear Interpolation
Zehan Zheng∗ , Danni Wu∗ , Ruisi Lu, Fan Lu, Guang Chen† , Changjun Jiang
Tongji University
{zhengzehan, woodannie, lrs910, lufan, guangchen, cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, there has been a significant increase in
focus on the interpolation task of computer vision. Despite
the tremendous advancement of video interpolation, point
cloud interpolation remains insufficiently explored. Meanwhile, the existence of numerous nonlinear large motions
in real-world scenarios makes the point cloud interpolation
task more challenging. In light of these issues, we present
NeuralPCI: an end-to-end 4D spatio-temporal Neural field
for 3D Point Cloud Interpolation, which implicitly integrates multi-frame information to handle nonlinear large
motions for both indoor and outdoor scenarios. Furthermore, we construct a new multi-frame point cloud interpolation dataset called NL-Drive for large nonlinear motions
in autonomous driving scenes to better demonstrate the superiority of our method. Ultimately, NeuralPCI achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both DHB (Dynamic Human Bodies) and NL-Drive datasets. Beyond the interpolation task, our method can be naturally extended to point
cloud extrapolation, morphing, and auto-labeling, which
indicates its substantial potential in other domains. Codes
are available at https:// github.com/ ispc-lab/ NeuralPCI.

1. Introduction
In the field of computer vision, sequential point clouds
are frequently utilized in many applications, such as VR/AR
techniques [11, 38, 49] and autonomous driving [4, 32, 46].
The relatively low frequency of LiDAR compared to other
sensors, i.e., 10–20 Hz, impedes exploration for high temporal resolution point clouds [47]. Therefore, interpolation
tasks for point cloud sequences, which have not been substantially investigated, are receiving increasing attention.
With the similar goal of obtaining a smooth sequence
with high temporal resolution, we can draw inspiration from
the video frame interpolation (VFI) task. Several VFI methods [6,8,20,35,45,48] concentrate on nonlinear movements
in the real world. They take multiple frames as input and
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Common cases of nonlinear motions in autonomous
driving scenarios. Spatially uniform linear interpolation ( ) using
the middle two frames of the point cloud differs significantly from
the actual situation ( ), so it is necessary to take multiple point
clouds into consideration for nonlinear interpolation.

generate explicit multi-frame fusion results based on flow
estimation [6, 8, 20, 45, 48] or transformer [35]. Nonetheless, due to the unique structure of point clouds [31], it is
non-trivial to extend VFI methods to the 3D domain.
Some early works [18,19] rely on stereo images to generate pseudo-LiDAR point cloud interpolation. For pure point
cloud input, previous methods [22,47] take two consecutive
frames as input and output the point cloud at a given intermediate moment. However, with limited two input frames,
these approaches can only produce linear interpolation results [22], or perform nonlinear compensation by fusing input frames in the feature dimension linearly [47], which is
inherently a data-driven approach to learning the datasetspecified distribution of nonlinear motions rather than an
actual nonlinear interpolation. Only when the frame rate of
the input point cloud sequence is high enough or the object
motion is small enough, can the two adjacent point clouds
satisfy the linear motion assumption. Nonetheless, there
are numerous nonlinear motions in real-world cases. For
instance, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the result of linear interpolation between two adjacent point cloud frames has a large
deviation from the actual situation. A point cloud sequence
rather than just two point cloud frames allows us to view
further into the past and future. Neighboring multiple point

909

