This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Lens Modeling
Wenqi Xian1,∗

Aljaž Božič2 Noah Snavely3 Christoph Lassner4
Meta Reality Labs Research1,2,4
Cornell University1,3

wx97@cornell.edu1 , aljaz@meta.com2 , snavely@cs.cornell.edu3 , classner@meta.com4

Abstract
Recent methods for 3D reconstruction and rendering increasingly benefit from end-to-end optimization of the entire
image formation process. However, this approach is currently limited: effects of the optical hardware stack and in
particular lenses are hard to model in a unified way. This
limits the quality that can be achieved for camera calibration and the fidelity of the results of 3D reconstruction. In
this paper, we propose NeuroLens, a neural lens model for
distortion and vignetting that can be used for point projection and ray casting and can be optimized through both
operations. This means that it can (optionally) be used to
perform pre-capture calibration using classical calibration
targets, and can later be used to perform calibration or refinement during 3D reconstruction, e.g., while optimizing a
radiance field. To evaluate the performance of our proposed
model, we create a comprehensive dataset assembled from
the Lensfun database with a multitude of lenses. Using this
and other real-world datasets, we show that the quality of
our proposed lens model outperforms standard packages
as well as recent approaches while being much easier to
use and extend. The model generalizes across many lens
types and is trivial to integrate into existing 3D reconstruction and rendering systems. Visit our project website at:
https://neural-lens.github.io.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is essential for many computer vision
applications: it is the crucial component mapping measurements and predictions between images and the real world.
This makes calibration a fundamental building block of 3D
reconstruction and mapping applications, and of any system
that relies on spatial computing, such as autonomous driving
or augmented and virtual reality. Whereas camera extrinsics and the parameters of a pinhole model can be easily
described and optimized, this often does not hold for other
parameters of an optical system and, in particular, lenses. Yet
* Work done during an internship at RLR.
1 The approach is visualized on FisheyeNeRF recordings [23].

Figure 1. Method Overview. The optical stack leads to light ray
distortion and vignetting. We show that invertible residual networks
are a powerful tool to model the distortion for projection and ray
casting across many lenses and in many scenarios. Additionally,
we propose a novel type of calibration board (top left) that can
optionally be used to improve calibration accuracy. For evaluation,
we propose the ‘SynLens’ dataset to evaluate lens models at scale.1

lenses have a fundamental influence on the captured image
through distortion and vignetting effects.
Recent results in 3D reconstruction and rendering suggest that end-to-end modeling and optimization of the image formation process leads to the highest fidelity scene
reproductions [33, 34]. Furthermore, per-pixel gradients are
readily available in this scenario and could serve as a means
to optimize a model of all components of the optical stack
to improve reconstruction quality. However, modeling and
optimizing lens parameters in full generality and also differentiably is hard: camera lenses come in all kinds of forms
and shapes (e.g., pinhole, fisheye, catadioptric) with quite
different optical effects.
So how can we create a flexible and general and differentiable lens model with enough parameters to approximate
any plausible distortion? In classical parametric models, the
internals of the camera are assumed to follow a model with a
limited number of parameters (usually a polynomial approximation). These approaches work well when the distortion
is close to the approximated function, but cannot general-

8435

