This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral Bayesian Uncertainty for Image Super-resolution
Tao Liu, Jun Cheng, Shan Tan*
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
{hust liutao, jcheng24, shantan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently deep learning techniques have significantly advanced image super-resolution (SR). Due to the black-box
nature, quantifying reconstruction uncertainty is crucial
when employing these deep SR networks. Previous approaches for SR uncertainty estimation mostly focus on capturing pixel-wise uncertainty in the spatial domain. SR
uncertainty in the frequency domain which is highly related to image SR is seldom explored. In this paper, we
propose to quantify spectral Bayesian uncertainty in image SR. To achieve this, a Dual-Domain Learning (DDL)
framework is first proposed. Combined with Bayesian approaches, the DDL model is able to estimate spectral uncertainty accurately, enabling a reliability assessment for
high frequencies reasoning from the frequency domain perspective. Extensive experiments under non-ideal premises
are conducted and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed spectral uncertainty. Furthermore, we propose a
novel Spectral Uncertainty based Decoupled Frequency
(SUDF) training scheme for perceptual SR. Experimental
results show the proposed SUDF can evidently boost perceptual quality of SR results without sacrificing much pixel
accuracy.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a basic computer vision
task that aims to recover an underlying high-resolution
(HR) image from its degraded low-resolution (LR) observation. Image SR is widely used in many applications
where high-frequency (HF) information is required, such
as medical imaging [38], microscopy imaging [36], surveillance [46], etc. In recent years, learning-based approaches
with convolutional neural networks (CNN) have become the
primary workhorse for image SR. Starting from the pioneering work SRCNN [9], various CNN-based SR models [7,21,24,31,43,49] have been proposed and significantly
pushed the frontier of image SR research.
* Corresponding author.

Despite the impressive success in image SR benchmarks,
most of these CNN-based SR models tend to overfit the
training data so that their reliability and generalizability
may not be guaranteed in practice. A well-trained SR
model often makes inaccurate reasoning for HF details
when it receives LR images away from its training distribution, thereby making the downstream processing unreliable. Therefore, it is quite crucial to quantify reconstruction uncertainty when employing these SR models, especially in some high risk applications (e.g. medical imaging)
or when under some harmful adversarial attacks. Bayesian
neural networks (BNNs) which combine deep neural networks with Bayesian learning open up the possibility to
capture model uncertainty, by placing distributions over the
network weights and then obtaining the predictive distribution through marginalization over posterior. Since the exact
Bayesian inference is usually intractable for deep networks,
various stochastic techniques that are compatible with modern deep learning are widely used for posterior approximation, such as dropout [11], batch normalization [41], weight
initialization [22], etc.
However, existing Bayesian models for image SR are
mostly developed in the spatial domain to capture pixelwise uncertainty [40, 41]. The uncertainty in the frequency
domain which is highly related to image SR is seldom explored. From the frequency domain perspective, image SR
is essentially a task of recovering HF components given
low-frequency (LF) ones. Thus the uncertainty of HF components directly characterizes the reliability of the SR results. Besides, the common pixel-wise uncertainty is sensitive to local mismatch of spatial structures, where a slight
pixel shift among Monte Carlo (MC) samples may result
in high uncertainty. So it is also desirable to quantify the
reconstruction uncertainty in a global way. Moreover, image HF components in the frequency domain usually play
an important role in some specific areas. For instance, the
calculation of imaging resolution in optical imaging heavily depends on the HF components of objects [8]. The uncertainty of HF components directly reveals the credibility
of the imaging resolution. Therefore, estimating frequency
spectral uncertainty for image SR is valuable.

18166

