This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Best of Both Worlds: Multimodal Contrastive Learning with Tabular and
Imaging Data

1

Paul Hager1,2
Martin J. Menten1,2,3
Daniel Rueckert1,2,3
2
Technical University of Munich, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, 3 Imperial College London
{paul.hager, martin.menten, daniel.rueckert}@tum.de

Abstract
Medical datasets and especially biobanks, often contain
extensive tabular data with rich clinical information in addition to images. In practice, clinicians typically have less
data, both in terms of diversity and scale, but still wish to
deploy deep learning solutions. Combined with increasing
medical dataset sizes and expensive annotation costs, the
necessity for unsupervised methods that can pretrain multimodally and predict unimodally has risen.
To address these needs, we propose the first selfsupervised contrastive learning framework that takes advantage of images and tabular data to train unimodal encoders. Our solution combines SimCLR and SCARF, two
leading contrastive learning strategies, and is simple and
effective. In our experiments, we demonstrate the strength
of our framework by predicting risks of myocardial infarction and coronary artery disease (CAD) using cardiac MR
images and 120 clinical features from 40,000 UK Biobank
subjects. Furthermore, we show the generalizability of our
approach to natural images using the DVM car advertisement dataset.
We take advantage of the high interpretability of tabular data and through attribution and ablation experiments
find that morphometric tabular features, describing size
and shape, have outsized importance during the contrastive
learning process and improve the quality of the learned
embeddings. Finally, we introduce a novel form of supervised contrastive learning, label as a feature (LaaF), by appending the ground truth label as a tabular feature during
multimodal pretraining, outperforming all supervised contrastive baselines.1

1. Introduction
Modern medical datasets are increasingly multimodal,
often incorporating both imaging and tabular data. Images
1 https : / / github . com / paulhager / MMCL - Tabular Imaging

can be acquired by computed tomography, ultrasound, or
magnetic resonance scanners, while tabular data commonly
originates from laboratory tests, medical history and patient
lifestyle questionnaires. Clinicians have the responsibility
to combine and interpret this tabular and imaging data to
diagnose, treat, and monitor patients. For example, cardiologists may ask about a patients’ family history and record
their weight, cholesterol levels, and blood pressure to better
inform diagnoses when examining images of their heart.
Beyond diagnostics, multimodal data is also crucial to
advance the understanding of diseases motivating the creation of biobanks. Going far beyond the scale of typical
datasets in hospitals, biobanks pool vast amount of information from large populations. Multimodal biobanks include
the German National Cohort [21] with 200,000 subjects,
Lifelines [52] with 167,000 subjects, and the UK Biobank
[54] with 500,000 subjects. The UK Biobank includes thousands of data fields from patient questionnaires, laboratory
tests, and medical examinations, in addition to imaging and
genotyping information. Biobanks have already proven useful in the training of machine learning models to predict
many diseases such as anaemia [39], early brain aging [32]
and cardiovascular disease [1, 51].
There is a substantial interest in deploying algorithms
that have been developed using these large-scale population
studies in clinical practice. However, acquiring the same
quality of data, both in terms of diversity of modalities and
number of features, is not feasible in a busy clinical workflow [20]. Furthermore, low disease frequencies make supervised solutions hard to train. Consequently, there is a
clear need for unsupervised strategies that can learn from
biobank scale datasets and be applied in the clinic where
considerably less data, in size and dimension, is available.
Our contribution To address these needs, we propose the
first contrastive framework that utilizes imaging and tabular
data, shown in figure 1. Our framework is based on SimCLR [13] and SCARF [6], two leading contrastive learning
solutions, and is simple and effective. We demonstrate the
utility of our pretraining strategy on the challenging task of

23924

