This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototype-based Embedding Network for Scene Graph Generation
Xinyu Lyu∗
Lianli Gao†
Bo Dai
Jingkuan Song
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China

Chaofan Zheng*

zheng chaofan@foxmail.com, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Current Scene Graph Generation (SGG) methods explore contextual information to predict relationships among
entity pairs. However, due to the diverse visual appearance
of numerous possible subject-object combinations, there
is a large intra-class variation within each predicate category, e.g., “man-eating-pizza, giraffe-eating-leaf”, and
the severe inter-class similarity between different classes,
e.g., “man-holding-plate, man-eating-pizza”, in model’s latent space. The above challenges prevent current SGG
methods from acquiring robust features for reliable relation prediction. In this paper, we claim that the predicate’s category-inherent semantics can serve as class-wise
prototypes in the semantic space for relieving the challenges. To the end, we propose the Prototype-based Embedding Network (PE-Net), which models entities/predicates
with prototype-aligned compact and distinctive representations and thereby establishes matching between entity pairs
and predicates in a common embedding space for relation
recognition. Moreover, Prototype-guided Learning (PL)
is introduced to help PE-Net efficiently learn such entitypredicate matching, and Prototype Regularization (PR) is
devised to relieve the ambiguous entity-predicate matching caused by the predicate’s semantic overlap. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method gains superior relation recognition capability on SGG, achieving
new state-of-the-art performances on both Visual Genome
and Open Images datasets. The codes are available at
https://github.com/VL-Group/PENET.

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) is a fundamental computer vision task that involves detecting the entities and
predicting their relationships in an image to generate a
scene graph, where nodes indicate entities and edges in* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a)man-holding-plate

(b)person-holding-rocket

(d)man-eating-pizza

(c)man-eating-pizza

(e)giraffe-eating-leaf

Figure 1. The illustration of relation representations with large
intra-class variation and severe inter-class similarity. Left: the
feature distribution of “eating” (in red) and “holding” (in blue)
obtained by Motifs [39]. Right: some instances of “eating” and
“holding”. Examples (c) and (e) illustrate that relation instances
from the same class have diverse appearance. Moreover, examples
(a) and (c) demonstrate that similar-looking relation instances may
belong to different categories.

dicate relationships between entity pairs. Such a graphstructured representation is helpful for downstream tasks
such as Visual Question Answering [5, 15, 41], Image Captioning [4, 38, 42, 45], and Image Retrieval [10, 25, 40].
Existing SGG models [1, 3, 7, 13, 18, 29, 39] typically
start with an object detector that generates a set of entity
proposals and corresponding features. Then, entity features are enhanced by exploring the contextual information taking advantage of message-passing modules. Finally, these refined entity features are used to predict pairwise relations. Although many works have made great efforts to explore the contextual information for robust relation recognition, they still suffer from biased-prediction
problems, preferring common predicates (e.g.,“on”, “of”)
instead of fine-grained ones (e.g.,“walking on”, “covering”). To address the problem, various de-biasing frameworks [6, 14, 21, 28, 34, 37, 46, 47] have been proposed to
obtain balanced prediction results. While alleviating the
long-tailed issue to some extent, most of them only achieve
a trade-off between head and tail predicates. In other words,
they sacrifice the robust representations learned on head

22783

