This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cloud-Device Collaborative Adaptation to Continual Changing Environments
in the Real-world
Yulu Gan1 *, Mingjie Pan1* , Rongyu Zhang2 , Zijian Ling3 ,
Lingran Zhao1 , Jiaming Liu1 , Shanghang Zhang1†
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University,
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 3 Imperial College London

Device

Cloud

Up-link

+

Uncertain samples
Uncertainty

Down-link
Data flow
Visual prompts

Teacher model
(Large model)

Processed prompts

Uncertainty
Guided Sampling

VPLU strategy

Visual Prompts
Model parameters

Student model
(Small model)

Uncertain sample

...

Changing
environment

(a) The problem and our main idea

1st round

...
5th round

10th round

(b) Comparison of our method with others on continuous domain shifts

Figure 1. (a) Models deployed on devices are preferably lightweight. However, device models will suffer from severe performance
degradation when facing continual distribution shift data. Our main idea is to improve the continual domain adaptation capability of the
device model by performing our proposed Cloud-Device Collaborative Adaptation paradigm. (b) We compare our method with previous
works [16, 34, 35]. Our method surpasses the state-of-the-art approach and exhibits a solid ability when facing continual distribution shifts.

Abstract
When facing changing environments in the real world,
the lightweight model on client devices suffers from severe performance drops under distribution shifts. The main
limitations of the existing device model lie in (1) unable
to update due to the computation limit of the device, (2)
the limited generalization ability of the lightweight model.
Meanwhile, recent large models have shown strong generalization capability on the cloud while they can not be
deployed on client devices due to poor computation constraints. To enable the device model to deal with changing environments, we propose a new learning paradigm of
Cloud-Device Collaborative Continual Adaptation, which
encourages collaboration between cloud and device and improves the generalization of the device model. Based on
this paradigm, we further propose an Uncertainty-based
Visual Prompt Adapted (U-VPA) teacher-student model to
transfer the generalization capability of the large model on
the cloud to the device model. Specifically, we first de* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

sign the Uncertainty Guided Sampling (UGS) to screen out
challenging data continuously and transmit the most outof-distribution samples from the device to the cloud. Then
we propose a Visual Prompt Learning Strategy with Uncertainty guided updating (VPLU) to specifically deal with the
selected samples with more distribution shifts. We transmit the visual prompts to the device and concatenate them
with the incoming data to pull the device testing distribution closer to the cloud training distribution. We conduct
extensive experiments on two object detection datasets with
continually changing environments. Our proposed U-VPA
teacher-student framework outperforms previous state-ofthe-art test time adaptation and device-cloud collaboration
methods. The code and datasets will be released.

1. Introduction
Real-world usually contains various environmental
changes along with continual distribution shifts [35]. People usually deploy economically lightweight models on
devices to boost the scalability and practicability. The
lightweight model can suffer severe performance degrada12157

