This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Visual Grounding by Encouraging Consistent Gradient-based
Explanations
Ziyan Yang
Rice University

Kushal Kafle
Adobe Research

Franck Dernoncourt
Adobe Research

Vicente Ordonez
Rice University

zy47@rice.edu

kkafle@adobe.com

dernonco@adobe.com

vicenteor@rice.edu

Abstract
We propose a margin-based loss for tuning joint visionlanguage models so that their gradient-based explanations
are consistent with region-level annotations provided by
humans for relatively smaller grounding datasets. We refer to this objective as Attention Mask Consistency (AMC)
and demonstrate that it produces superior visual grounding results than previous methods that rely on using visionlanguage models to score the outputs of object detectors.
Particularly, a model trained with AMC on top of standard
vision-language modeling objectives obtains a state-of-theart accuracy of 86.49% in the Flickr30k visual grounding
benchmark, an absolute improvement of 5.38% when compared to the best previous model trained under the same
level of supervision. Our approach also performs exceedingly well on established benchmarks for referring expression comprehension where it obtains 80.34% accuracy in
the easy test of RefCOCO+, and 64.55% in the difficult split.
AMC is effective, easy to implement, and is general as it can
be adopted by any vision-language model, and can use any
type of region annotations.

1. Introduction
Vision-language pretraining using images paired with
captions has led to models that can transfer well to an array of tasks such as visual question answering, image-text
retrieval and visual commonsense reasoning [6, 18, 22]. Remarkably, some of these models are also able to perform visual grounding by relying on gradient-based explanations.
While Vision-Language Models (VLMs) take advantage of
the vast amounts of images and text that can be found on
the web, carefully curated data with grounding annotations
in the form of boxes, regions, or segments is considerably more limited. Our work aims to improve the grounding or localization capabilities of vision-language models
further by tuning them under a training objective that encourages their gradient-based explanations to be consistent
with human-provided region-based annotations from visually grounded data when those are available.

Input Image + Text

Regular V-L Model Explanation

A picture of a cathedral next to a park

A picture of a cathedral next to a park

Human Explanation

w/ Attention Mask Consistency (Ours)

A picture of a cathedral next to a park

A picture of a cathedral next to a park

Figure 1. Gradient-based methods can generate heatmaps that explain the match between images and text for a Vision-language
model (VLM). Our work aims to improve their ability to produce
visual groundings by directly optimizing their gradient-based explanations so that they are consistent with human annotations provided for a reduced set of images.

Vision-language transformers extend the success of
masked language modeling (MLM) to multi-modal problems. In vision-language transformers, objectives such
as image-text matching (ITM), and image-text contrastive
losses (ITC) are used in addition to MLM to exploit commonalities between images and text [6, 17, 18, 22]. We further extend these objectives to include our proposed Attention Mask Consistency (AMC) objective. Our formulation
is based on the observation that gradient-based explanation
maps obtained using methods such as GradCAM [30], can
be used to explain the image-text matching of a VLM. Our
AMC objective explicitly optimizes these explanations during training so that they are consistent with region annotations. Figure 1 illustrates an example input image and text

19165

