This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DINER: Depth-aware Image-based NEural Radiance fields
Malte Prinzler1,3

Otmar Hilliges2

malte.prinzler@tuebingen.mpg.de

otmar.hilliges@inf.ethz.ch

Justus Thies1
justus.thies@tuebingen.mpg.de
1

4 Input Views

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
ETH Zürich 3 Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems

Depth + Features

Volumetric Reconstruction

Figure 1. Based on sparse input views, we predict depth and feature maps to infer a volumetric scene representation in terms of a radiance
field which enables novel viewpoint synthesis. The depth information allows us to use input views with high relative distance such that the
scene can be captured more completely and with higher synthesis quality compared to previous state-of-the-art methods.

Abstract
We present Depth-aware Image-based NEural Radiance
fields (DINER). Given a sparse set of RGB input views, we
predict depth and feature maps to guide the reconstruction
of a volumetric scene representation that allows us to render 3D objects under novel views. Specifically, we propose
novel techniques to incorporate depth information into feature fusion and efficient scene sampling. In comparison to
the previous state of the art, DINER achieves higher synthesis quality and can process input views with greater disparity. This allows us to capture scenes more completely without changing capturing hardware requirements and ultimately enables larger viewpoint changes during novel view
synthesis. We evaluate our method by synthesizing novel
views, both for human heads and for general objects, and
observe significantly improved qualitative results and increased perceptual metrics compared to the previous state
of the art. The code is publicly available through the Project
Webpage.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, we have seen immense progress in
digitizing humans for virtual and augmented reality applica-

12449

tions. Especially with the introduction of neural rendering
and neural scene representations [43, 44], we see 3D digital
humans that can be rendered under novel views while being
controlled via face and body tracking [3, 11, 14, 15, 24, 32,
37, 47, 50, 51, 58]. Another line of research reproduces general 3D objects from few input images without aiming for
control over expressions and poses [5,25,38,41,46,56]. We
argue that this offers significant advantages in real-world
applications like video-conferencing with holographic displays: (i) it is not limited to heads and bodies but can also
reproduce objects that humans interact with, (ii) even for
unseen extreme expressions, fine texture details can be synthesized since they can be transferred from the input images, (iii) only little capturing hardware is required e.g.
four webcams suffice, and (iv) the approach can generalize
across identities such that new participants could join the
conference ad hoc without requiring subject-specific optimization. Because of these advantages, we study the scenario of reconstructing a volumetric scene representation
for novel view synthesis from sparse camera views. Specifically, we assume an input of four cameras with high relative distances to observe large parts of the scene. Based
on these images, we condition a neural radiance field [27]
which can be rendered under novel views including viewdependent effects. We refer to this approach as image-based
neural radiance fields. It implicitly requires estimating the

