This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hard Sample Matters a Lot in Zero-Shot Quantization
Huantong Li1 6 * Xiangmiao Wu1 Fanbing Lv2 Daihai Liao2
Thomas H. Li7 Yonggang Zhang3 * † Bo Han3 Mingkui Tan1 4 5 †
1
3

South China University of Technology, 2 Changsha Hisense Intelligent System Research Institute Co., Ltd

Hong Kong Baptist University, 4 Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
5

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China

100

Zero-shot quantization (ZSQ) is promising for compressing and accelerating deep neural networks when the data
for training full-precision models are inaccessible. In ZSQ,
network quantization is performed using synthetic samples,
thus, the performance of quantized models depends heavily
on the quality of synthetic samples. Nonetheless, we find
that the synthetic samples constructed in existing ZSQ methods can be easily fitted by models. Accordingly, quantized
models obtained by these methods suffer from significant
performance degradation on hard samples. To address this
issue, we propose HArd sample Synthesizing and Training
(HAST). Specifically, HAST pays more attention to hard samples when synthesizing samples and makes synthetic samples
hard to fit when training quantized models. HAST aligns
features extracted by full-precision and quantized models to
ensure the similarity between features extracted by these two
models. Extensive experiments show that HAST significantly
outperforms existing ZSQ methods, achieving performance
comparable to models that are quantized with real data.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve great success in
many domains, such as image classification [28, 43, 44], object detection [15, 16, 39], semantic segmentation [13, 53],
and embodied AI [3,4,11]. These achievements are typically
paired with the rapid growth of parameters and computational complexity, making it challenging to deploy DNNs
on resource-constrained edge devices. In response to the
challenge, network quantization proposes to represent the
full-precision models, i.e., floating-point parameters and activations, using low-bit integers, resulting in a high compression rate and an inference-acceleration rate [24]. These meth* Equal contribution. Email: 202021046173@mail.scut.edu.cn
† Corresponding author. Email: mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Top-1 Accuracy(%)

Abstract

80

IntraQ
HAST(Ours)
IntraQ(Real Data)

60
40

CIFAR-10 CIFAR-100 ImageNet

(a) 3-bit quantization.

100

Top-1 Accuracy(%)

7

PengCheng Laboratory, 6 Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University

IntraQ
HAST(Ours)
IntraQ(Real Data)

80

60

CIFAR-10 CIFAR-100 ImageNet

(b) 4-bit quantization.

Figure 1. Performance of the proposed HAST on three datasets
compared with the state-of-the-art method IntraQ [50] and the
method fine-tuning with real data [50]. HAST quantizes ResNet-20
on CIFAR-10/CIFAR-100 and ResNet-18 on ImageNet to 3-bit
(left) and 4-bit (right), achieving performance comparable to the
method fine-tuning with real data.

ods implicitly assume that the training data of full-precision
models are available for the process of network quantization.
However, the training data, e.g., medical records, can be
inaccessible due to privacy and security issues. Such a practical and challenging scenario has led to the development
of zero-shot quantization (ZSQ) [2], quantizing networks
without accessing the training data.
Many efforts have been devoted to ZSQ [2, 19, 38, 46, 48,
50]. In ZSQ, some works perform network quantization by
weight equalization [38], bias correction [1], or weight rounding strategy [19], at the cost of some performance degradation. To promote the performance of quantized models, advanced works propose to leverage synthetic data for network
quantization [2, 7, 46, 48, 50]. Specifically, they fine-tune
quantized models with data synthesized using full-precision
models, achieving promising improvement in performance.
Much attention has been paid to the generation of synthetic sample, since high-quality synthetic samples lead to
high-performance quantized models [2, 46]. Recent works
employ generative models to synthesize data with fruitful
approaches, considering generator design [51], boundary
sample generation [6], adversarial training scheme [35], and

24417

