This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rawgment: Noise-Accounted RAW Augmentation Enables Recognition in a
Wide Variety of Environments
Masakazu Yoshimura

Junji Otsuka Atsushi Irie
Sony Group Corporation

Takeshi Ohashi

{masakazu.yoshimura, junji.otsuka, atsushi.irie, takeshi.a.ohashi}@sony.com

Abstract
Image recognition models that work in challenging environments (e.g., extremely dark, blurry, or high dynamic
range conditions) must be useful. However, creating training datasets for such environments is expensive and hard
due to the difficulties of data collection and annotation. It
is desirable if we could get a robust model without the need
for hard-to-obtain datasets. One simple approach is to apply data augmentation such as color jitter and blur to standard RGB (sRGB) images in simple scenes. Unfortunately,
this approach struggles to yield realistic images in terms of
pixel intensity and noise distribution due to not considering the non-linearity of Image Signal Processors (ISPs) and
noise characteristics of image sensors. Instead, we propose
a noise-accounted RAW image augmentation method. In
essence, color jitter and blur augmentation are applied to a
RAW image before applying non-linear ISP, resulting in realistic intensity. Furthermore, we introduce a noise amount
alignment method that calibrates the domain gap in the
noise property caused by the augmentation. We show that
our proposed noise-accounted RAW augmentation method
doubles the image recognition accuracy in challenging environments only with simple training data.

1. Introduction
Although image recognition has been actively studied,
its performance in challenging environments still needs improvement [15]. Sensitive applications such as mobility
sensing and head-mounted wearables need to be robust to
various kinds of difficulties, including low light, high dynamic range (HDR) illuminance, motion blur, and camera shake. One possible solution is to use image enhancement and restoration methods. A lot of DNN-based lowlight image enhancement [12, 20, 29, 30, 46, 54], denoising [32, 43, 53], and deblurring [43, 48, 52] methods are
proposed to improve the pre-captured sRGB image quality. While they are useful for improving pre-captured image

unrealistic intensity
unrealistic noise
RAW image
luminance+noise

ISP

(Contrast)
augmentation

(a) Usual training pipeline
Noise correction

realistic intensity
realistic noise
(Contrast)
RAW image
ISP
luminance+noise augmentation
(b) Noise-accounted RAW augmentation pipeline

Figure 1. The concept of the proposed noise-accounted RAW augmentation. Conventional augmentation (a) is applied to the output
of an ISP; due to the nonlinear operations in the ISP, it produces
images that cannot be captured at any ambient light intensities.
Instead, ours (b) applies augmentation before an ISP. It generates
realistic pixel intensity distribution that can be captured when the
light intensity is different. Moreover, the noise amount is also corrected to minimize the domain gap between real and augmented
ones.

quality, a recent work [15] shows that using them as preprocessing for image recognition models has limited accuracy
gains since they already lost some information, and restoring the lost information is difficult.
Another possible solution is to prepare a dataset for difficult environments [3, 33]. However, these datasets only
cover one or a few difficulties, and creating datasets in
various environments is too expensive. Especially, manual annotation of challenging scenes is difficult and timeconsuming. For example, we can see almost nothing in
usual sRGB images under extremely low-light environments due to heavy noise. In addition, some regions in HDR
scenes suffer from halation or blocked-up shadows because
the 8-bit range of usual sRGB images cannot fully preserve
the real world, which is 0.000001 [cd/m2 ] under starlight
and 1.6 billion [cd/m2 ] under direct sunlight [37]. Heavy

14007

