This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Preset for Color Style Transfer
Zhanghan Ke1

Yuhao Liu1
Lei Zhu1
Nanxuan Zhao2
Rynson W.H. Lau1†
1
2
City University of Hong Kong
Adobe Research

Figure 1. Our Color Style Transfer Results. (a) State-of-the-art methods PhotoNAS [1] and PhotoWCT2 [6] produce distort textures
(e.g., text in green box) and dissonant colors (e.g., content in orange box). Besides, they have long inference time even on the latest Nvidia
RTX3090 GPU (red numbers in brackets). In contrast, our method avoids artifacts and is ∼28× faster. (b) Our method can produce faithful
results on 8K images, but both PhotoNAS and PhotoWCT2 run into the out-of-memory problem. Zoom in for better visualization.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a Neural Preset technique to
address the limitations of existing color style transfer methods, including visual artifacts, vast memory requirement,
and slow style switching speed. Our method is based on two
core designs. First, we propose Deterministic Neural Color
Mapping (DNCM) to consistently operate on each pixel via
an image-adaptive color mapping matrix, avoiding artifacts
and supporting high-resolution inputs with a small memory
footprint. Second, we develop a two-stage pipeline by dividing the task into color normalization and stylization, which
allows efficient style switching by extracting color styles as
presets and reusing them on normalized input images. Due
to the unavailability of pairwise datasets, we describe how
to train Neural Preset via a self-supervised strategy. Various advantages of Neural Preset over existing methods are
demonstrated through comprehensive evaluations. Besides,
we show that our trained model can naturally support multiple applications without fine-tuning, including low-light
image enhancement, underwater image correction, image
dehazing, and image harmonization. The project page is:
https://ZHKKKe.github.io/NeuralPreset.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of social media (e.g., Instagram and
Facebook), people are increasingly willing to share photos in public. Before sharing, color retouching becomes
an indispensable operation to help express the story captured in images more vividly and leave a good first impression. Photo editing tools usually provide color style presets,
such as image filters or Look-Up Tables (LUTs), to help
users explore efficiently. However, these filters/LUTs are
handcrafted with pre-defined parameters, and are not able
to generate consistent color styles for images with diverse
appearances. Therefore, careful adjustments by the users is
still necessary. To address this problem, color style transfer techniques have been introduced to automatically map
the color style from a well-retouched image (i.e., the style
image) to another (i.e., the input image).
Earlier color style transfer methods [41–43, 49] focus
on retouching the input image according to low-level feature statistics of the style image. They disregard high-level
information, resulting in unexpected changes in image in† Corresponding author. This project is in part supported by a General
Research Fund from RGC of Hong Kong (RGC Ref.: 11205620).

14173

