This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Command-driven Articulated Object Understanding and Manipulation
Ruihang Chu1
Zhengzhe Liu1
Xiaoqing Ye2
Xiao Tan2
Xiaojuan Qi3 *
Chi-Wing Fu1
Jiaya Jia1,4
1
2
3
4
CUHK
Baidu Inc.
HKU
SmartMore

We present Cart, a new approach towards articulatedobject manipulations by human commands. Beyond the
existing work that focuses on inferring articulation structures, we further support manipulating articulated shapes
to align them subject to simple command templates. The
key of Cart is to utilize the prediction of object structures
to connect visual observations with user commands for
effective manipulations. It is achieved by encoding command messages for motion prediction and a test-time adaptation to adjust the amount of movement from only command supervision. For a rich variety of object categories,
Cart can accurately manipulate object shapes and outperform the state-of-the-art approaches in understanding the
inherent articulation structures. Also, it can well generalize to unseen object categories and real-world objects. We
hope Cart could open new directions for instructing machines to operate articulated objects. Code is available at
https:// github.com/ dvlab-research/ Cart.

1. Introduction
Articulated objects such as doors, cabinets, and laptops
are ubiquitous in our daily life. Enabling machines to manipulate them under human instructions will pave the way for
many applications, such as robotic work, human-computer
interaction, and augmented reality. Recent research majorly
focuses on understanding the structural properties of articulated objects, e.g., discovering the movable parts [51,61] and
estimating the articulations between connected parts [19, 28].
Despite their success, the way from understanding objects to
user-controllable manipulation remains challenging.
First, the model should be able to interpret the user instruction and determine the corresponding object part for
performing the manipulation action. To do so requires understanding not only the object’s articulated structure but
also the operational properties (see Fig. 1). If a part is
movable, the action type and current state should be rec* Corresponding Author

Movable Parts (A-D) and Joints

Single Point Cloud

Abstract

Motion
Parameter
Understanding

n
Motio

eters
Param

Motion
Parameter
Manipulation

open
Check Target States

half-open
closed
User Command

Manipulation Result

Figure 1. Given a single point cloud of an articulated object and
a user command, Cart accordingly manipulates the object shape,
based on understanding object structure and connecting the command to predict the motion parameters. The command gives the
desired state and we use it to check if the manipulation succeeds.

ognized ahead. Second, to achieve successful manipulation,
the model should know the target configuration or state of
the object so as to determine the associated manipulation
parameters, such as the rotation orientation and angle, for
achieving the user instruction (see Fig. 1).
In this work, we study the above challenges by formulating a new task called command-driven articulated object
manipulation. Given a visual observation of an articulated
object and a simple user command that specifies how to
manipulate the object, our objective is to manipulate the
associated object part to reach the target articulation state
given by the command. Specifically, this task combines the
needs of understanding the object structure (which part to
move), recognizing the associated articulation property (how
it moves), and predicting the amount of motion subject to the
user command (how much to move). To this end, we propose
a novel learning-based framework called Command-driven
articulation modeling, or Cart for short; see Fig. 1.
In particular, Cart is powerful in both structure understanding and shape manipulation for articulated objects. The
former acts as a critical building block, where we jointly

8813

