This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Layout-based Causal Inference for Object Navigation
Sixian Zhang1,2 , Xinhang Song1,2 , Weijie Li1,2 , Yubing Bai1,2 , Xinyao Yu1,2 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing

{sixian.zhang, xinhang.song, weijie.li, yubing.bai, xinyao.yu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Previous works for ObjectNav task attempt to learn the
association (e.g. relation graph) between the visual inputs
and the goal during training. Such association contains
the prior knowledge of navigating in training environments,
which is denoted as the experience. The experience performs a positive effect on helping the agent infer the likely
location of the goal when the layout gap between the unseen environments of the test and the prior knowledge obtained in training is minor. However, when the layout gap is
significant, the experience exerts a negative effect on navigation. Motivated by keeping the positive effect and removing the negative effect of the experience, we propose
the layout-based soft Total Direct Effect (L-sTDE) framework based on the causal inference to adjust the prediction of the navigation policy. In particular, we propose to
calculate the layout gap which is defined as the KL divergence between the posterior and the prior distribution of
the object layout. Then the sTDE is proposed to appropriately control the effect of the experience based on the layout gap. Experimental results on AI2THOR, RoboTHOR,
and Habitat demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
The code is available at https://github.com/sxzhang/Layout-based-sTDE.git.

1. Introduction
The visual object-oriented navigation task (i.e. ObjectNav) [3] requires the agent to navigate to a user-specified
goal (e.g. laptop) based on the egocentric visual observations. A typical challenge is navigating in unseen environments, where the goal is invisible most of the time, i.e. the
partial observable problem, which typically results in the
agent’s meaningless actions (e.g. back-tracking or getting
lost at dead-ends). Although encouraging the exploration in
the unseen environment (until the goal is visible) is an intuitive solution, the lack of environment layout information
still limits the efficiency of goal-oriented navigation.

Intervention

S

S̄
S

Z

A

G

Z

Z

Ā

Counterfactual

G

Ḡ
Intervention

S : Observation

G : Goal

(a) The factual prediction

Z : Experience A : Action
(b) The counterfactual prediction

Figure 1. The proposed causal graph. (a) represents the fact prediction a, i.e. the original prediction of the trained model. (b)
refers to the counter-fact prediction ā, i.e. the prediction is only
affected by the experience Z. (b) is realized by applying the intervention and counterfactual operations to the original model.

Recently, the learning-based methods attempt to model
the prior knowledge of the spatial relationships among the
objects, so the agent could infer the likely locations of the
goal based on the current observation (which objects are
observed currently) and the prior knowledge (the spatial
relationships between the goal and the observed objects)
learned in the training stage. Some works utilize additional
modules to construct the objects graph [15, 59, 60], the region graph [63] and the attention mechanism [32], while
others [16, 56] employ a network that implicitly learns the
spatial relationships end-to-end. All these methods attempt
to establish prior knowledge in training environments, so
that the agent would utilize the prior knowledge to associate
the real-time observations with the goal, and infer the likely
locations of the goal during the inference. The underlying
assumption of these methods is that all of the object layouts in unseen environments should be exactly consistent
with those in training environments. However, the layout
consistency assumption is only partially correct due to the
limited training data. Thus, those methods typically suffer
from poor generalization [31] in unseen environments.
To reveal the causes of poor generalization, we propose
to use the casual graph (i.e. Structural Causal Model, SCM

10792

