This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shakes on a Plane: Unsupervised Depth Estimation
from Unstabilized Photography
Ilya Chugunov

Yuxuan Zhang

Felix Heide

Princeton University

1. Introduction
Over the last century we saw not only the rise and
fall in popularity of film and DSLR photography, but of
standalone cameras themselves. We’ve moved into an era
of ubiquitous multi-sensor, multi-core, multi-use, mobileimaging platforms [12]. Modern cellphones offer doubledigit megapixel image streams at high framerates; optical
image stabilization; on-board motion measurement devices
such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers;
and, most recently, integrated active depth sensors [43].
This latest addition speaks to a parallel boom in the field
of depth imaging and 3D reconstruction [22, 84]. As users
often photograph people, plants, food items, and other complex 3D shapes, depth can play a key role in object understanding tasks such as detection, segmentation, and tracking [32, 63, 80]. 3D information can also help compensate for non-ideal camera hardware and imaging settings
through scene relighting [20, 55, 79], simulated depth-offield effects [1, 71, 72], and frame interpolation [2]. Beyond

re
Cap
tu

Modern mobile burst photography pipelines capture and
merge a short sequence of frames to recover an enhanced
image, but often disregard the 3D nature of the scene they
capture, treating pixel motion between images as a 2D aggregation problem. We show that in a “long-burst”, fortytwo 12-megapixel RAW frames captured in a two-second sequence, there is enough parallax information from natural
hand tremor alone to recover high-quality scene depth. To
this end, we devise a test-time optimization approach that
fits a neural RGB-D representation to long-burst data and
simultaneously estimates scene depth and camera motion.
Our plane plus depth model is trained end-to-end, and performs coarse-to-fine refinement by controlling which multiresolution volume features the network has access to at
what time during training. We validate the method experimentally, and demonstrate geometrically accurate depth reconstructions with no additional hardware or separate data
pre-processing and pose-estimation steps.

Motion

Data

Abstract

Depth
x42
Long Burst

Scene

Depth

MLP

Plane Mask

Composite

Figure 1. Our neural RGB-D model fits to a single long-burst image stack to distill high quality depth and camera motion. The
model’s depth-on-a-plane decomposition can facilitate easy background masking, segmentation, and image compositing.

helping improve or understand RGB content, depth itself is
a valuable output for simulating objects in augmented reality [5, 13, 44, 64] and interactive experiences [26, 36].
Depth reconstruction can be broadly divided into passive and active approaches. Passive monocular depth estimation methods leverage training data to learn shape priors [6, 30, 59] – e.g., what image features imply curved
versus flat objects or occluding versus occluded structures
– but have a hard time generalizing to out-of-distribution
scenes [48,60]. Multi-view depth estimation methods lower
this dependence on learned priors by leveraging parallax information from camera motion [16, 69] or multiple cameras [45, 67] to recover geometrically-guided depth. The
recent explosion in neural radiance field approaches [49,50,
66, 81] can be seen a branch of multi-view stereo where a
system of explicit geometric constraints is swapped for a
more general learned scene model. Rather than classic feature extraction and matching, these models are fit directly
to image data to distill dense implicit 3D information.

13240

