This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Semi-supervised Metric Learning with Mixed Label Propagation
Furen Zhuang1,2,∗ , Pierre Moulin1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Dept of ECE, Urbana, Illinois 61801
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R),A*STAR, Singapore 138632
zhuang furen@i2r.a-star.edu.sg,moulin@ifp.uiuc.edu

Abstract
Metric learning requires the identification of far-apart
similar pairs and close dissimilar pairs during training, and
this is difficult to achieve with unlabeled data because pairs
are typically assumed to be similar if they are close. We
present a novel metric learning method which circumvents
this issue by identifying hard negative pairs as those which
obtain dissimilar labels via label propagation (LP), when
the edge linking the pair of data is removed in the affinity
matrix. In so doing, the negative pairs can be identified
despite their proximity, and we are able to utilize this information to significantly improve LP’s ability to identify farapart positive pairs and close negative pairs. This results
in a considerable improvement in semi-supervised metric
learning performance as evidenced by recall, precision and
Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) performance metrics on Content-based Information Retrieval (CBIR) applications.

1. Introduction
Image data have proliferated owing to ubiquitous camera ownership, widespread internet connectivity, and broad
availability of software applications. The design of efficient
CBIR systems is imperative in managing information content. Traditional image retrieval systems use textual annotations, but such an approach require manual labor which may
be not be cost-effective. On the other hand, CBIR retrieves
relevant content from an image query, alleviating the need
for human annotation.
Metric learning learns a transformation mapping similar
data closer than dissimilar ones. This makes it easier to
cluster data [37] and also to shortlist similar data by their
proximity to the query. As such, metric learning algorithms
are at the cornerstone of most state-of-the-art CBIR designs
[23]. As the amount of data handled in CBIR systems is
very large, there is interest in utilizing the vast quantities
* Work done while a student at UIUC.

of readily available unlabeled data to improve the metric
learning training process.
Recent advances have asserted the importance of retaining within-class variance in training generalizable representations [27], particularly because the information encapsulated in representations which are irrelevant in discriminating between training labels may be important in discriminating between unseen test classes. Since close positive
pairs results in little loss, there is a need to identify farapart positive pairs for training. The paper [43] uses the
method from [9] to propagate labels along manifolds in
order to identify such points, by assuming data which are
nearest neighbor pairs but not mutual nearest neighbors as
close dissimilar pairs. However this method does not utilize label information and may not accurately identify hard
negatives [3, 17, 39, 40], which are pairs of data which are
close but have different labels. Label propagation (LP) using mis-identified edges would lead to inaccuracies in the
model trained.
This paper proposes a novel method to identify hard negative pairs in a semi-supervised setting. Specifically, given a
few labeled points from each class and an abundance of unlabeled data, we propose to identify hard negative pairs as
those which obtain dissimilar labels via LP when the edge
linking the two elements of the pair is removed in the affinity matrix. We obtain the dissimilarity weights of edges
under this assumption quickly and efficiently, without the
costly use of repeated LP to calculate these weights.
We use this negative edge information in a novel mixed
LP algorithm which is able to utilize both positive and negative edge information. Specifically, the method encourages
data linked by positive edges to have the same pseudolabel
and data linked by negative edges to have different pseudolabels. Like LP, our mixed LP optimization problem can
be solved with conjugate gradient (CG), allowing it to scale
to large datasets.
As our obtained pseudolabels capture information on farapart positive pairs and close negative pairs, they yield a
significant improvement in semi-supervised metric learning. We showcase this in a CBIR setting under recall, pre-

3429

