This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GamutMLP: A Lightweight MLP for Color Loss Recovery
Hoang M. Le1

Brian Price2
1
York University

Scott Cohen2
Michael S. Brown1
2
Adobe Research

{hminle,mbrown}@yorku.ca, {bprice,scohen}@adobe.com

Original wide-gamut
ProPhoto image

Abstract
Cameras and image-editing software often process images in the wide-gamut ProPhoto color space, encompassing 90% of all visible colors. However, when images are
encoded for sharing, this color-rich representation is transformed and clipped to fit within the small-gamut standard
RGB (sRGB) color space, representing only 30% of visible colors. Recovering the lost color information is challenging due to the clipping procedure. Inspired by neural implicit representations for 2D images, we propose a
method that optimizes a lightweight multi-layer-perceptron
(MLP) model during the gamut reduction step to predict
the clipped values. GamutMLP takes approximately 2 seconds to optimize and requires only 23 KB of storage. The
small memory footprint allows our GamutMLP model to be
saved as metadata in the sRGB image—the model can be
extracted when needed to restore wide-gamut color values.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for color
recovery and compare it with alternative strategies, including pre-trained DNN-based gamut expansion networks and
other implicit neural representation methods. As part of
this effort, we introduce a new color gamut dataset of 2200
wide-gamut/small-gamut images for training and testing.

1. Introduction
The RGB values of our color images do not represent
the entire range of visible colors. The span of visible colors
that can be reproduced by a particular color space’s RGB
primaries is called a gamut. Currently, the vast majority of
color images are encoded using the standard RGB (sRGB)
color space [7]. The sRGB gamut is capable of reproducing
approximately 30% of the visible colors and was optimized
for the display hardware of the 1990s. Close to 30 years
later, this small-gamut color space still dominates how images are saved, even though modern display hardware is capable of much wider gamuts.
Interestingly, most modern DSLR and smartphone cameras internally encode images using the ProPhoto color
space [12]. ProPhoto RGB primaries define a wide gamut
capable of representing 90% of all visible colors [33].

sRGB image with
color clipping

Clipped color
values

𝑥
𝑦
𝑅′
G′
B′
ProPhoto
gamut

Predict
original colors

Lightweight
MLP

sRGB
gamut

𝑅෠
𝐺෠
𝐵෠

Embedded MLP
as metadata in sRGB image

(A) Input ProPhoto image and saved sRGB image with MLP embedded (requires 23 KB).
Conversion back to
ProPhoto

Error map w.r.t.
original ProPhoto

PSNR: 40.11

Conversion back to
ProPhoto with MLP

Error map w.r.t.
original ProPhoto

0.01

PSNR: 54.77
0.00

Original ProPhoto RGB
values remain clipped inside
the sRGB gamut.

(B) Current approach converting
sRGB back to ProPhoto.

Recovered colors using the
embedded MLP to restore
clipped wide-gamut RGB
values.

(C) Our approach converting sRGB back to
ProPhoto using the embedded MLP.

Figure 1. (A) shows a wide-gamut (ProPhoto) image that has
been converted and saved as a small-gamut (sRGB) image; color
clipping is required to fit the smaller sRGB gamut (as shown in
the chromaticity diagrams). (B) Standard color conversion back
to the wide-gamut color space is not able to recover the clipped
colors. (C) Conversion back to the wide-gamut RGB using our
lightweight GamutMLP (23 KB) can recover the clipped color values back to their original values.

Image-processing software, such as Adobe Photoshop, also
uses this color-rich space to manipulate images, especially
when processing camera RAW-DNG files. By processing images in the wide-gamut ProPhoto space, cameras
and editing software allow users the option to save an
image in other color spaces—such as AdobeRGB, UHD,
and Display-P3—that have much wider color gamuts than
sRGB. However, these color spaces are still rare, and most
images are ultimately saved in sRGB. To convert color values between ProPhoto and sRGB, a gamut reduction step
is applied that clips the wide-gamut color values to fit the
smaller sRGB color gamut. Once gamut reduction is applied, it is challenging to recover the original wide-gamut
values. As a result, when images are converted back to a
wide-gamut color space for editing or display, much of the
color fidelity is lost, as shown in Figure 1.

18268

