This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instant Domain Augmentation for LiDAR Semantic Segmentation
Kwonyoung Ryu1∗
1

POSTECH

Soonmin Hwang2∗
2

Jaesik Park1

Carnegie Mellon University

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/LiDomAug

Abstract
Despite the increasing popularity of LiDAR sensors, perception algorithms using 3D LiDAR data struggle with
the sensor-bias problem. Specifically, the performance of
perception algorithms significantly drops when an unseen
specification of the LiDAR sensor is applied at test time
due to the domain discrepancy. This paper presents a fast
and flexible LiDAR augmentation method for the semantic segmentation task called LiDomAug. It aggregates raw
LiDAR scans and creates a LiDAR scan of any configurations with the consideration of dynamic distortion and occlusion, resulting in instant domain augmentation. Our ondemand augmentation module runs at 330 FPS, so it can
be seamlessly integrated into the data loader in the learning
framework. In our experiments, learning-based approaches
aided with the proposed LiDomAug are less affected by the
sensor-bias issue and achieve new state-of-the-art domain
adaptation performances on SemanticKITTI and nuScenes
dataset without the use of the target domain data. We also
present a sensor-agnostic model that faithfully works on the
various LiDAR configurations.

1. Introduction
LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) is a modern sensor that provides reliable range measurements of environments sampled from 3D worlds and has become crucial for
intelligent systems such as robots [3,56], drones [48], or autonomous vehicles [16, 32]. Therefore, developing resilient
3D perception algorithms for LiDAR data [21, 27, 49] is becoming more crucial.
With the growing interest in LiDAR sensors, various
LiDAR sensors from multiple manufacturers have become
prevalent. As a result, popular 3D datasets [5, 7, 16, 17, 22]
are captured by different LiDAR configurations, which are
defined by vertical/horizontal resolutions, a field of view,
and a mounting pose. Due to the difference in sampling patterns from various LiDAR configurations, the sensor-bias
problem arises in 3D perception algorithms [46, 54]. For
example, as shown in Figure 1, we observe a severe per* Equal contribution

Ours

Baseline
Car

Drivable

Motorcycle

Sidewalk

Terrain

Vegetation

Pedestrian

Figure 1. Data-driven LiDAR semantic segmentation methods often show an accuracy drop when they are applied to unseen LiDAR
configurations. (Left) A result of a baseline approach, where inaccurate predictions are highlighted with orange arrows. (Right)
A result of the baseline approach aided with the proposed LiDomAug. For both results, we use nuScenes [5] (32 ch.) for the
training and use SemanticKITTI [2] (64 ch.) for the testing.

formance drop in LiDAR semantic segmentation task if the
LiDAR used to collect the test set differs from the LiDAR
used for the training set.
Although the sensor-bias problem is crucial, an existing solution, such as domain adaptation, is tuned for a specific LiDAR configuration, which is suboptimal to designing a sensible 3D perception method. Specifically, Supervised Domain Adaptation requires massive labeling costs
to learn to adapt to the new data captured with a target sensor. Hence, such an approach is often not viable in practice.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation [23,24,54] aims to make
a model adapt to a target domain without using direct annotations. However, there is an accuracy degradation, and
such approaches require enough collection of target domain
data. Thus, it is demanding to design a new approach that
can be applied instantly to an unseen target domain without
requesting any target domain data.
By focusing on the widely used cylindrical LiDARs, this
paper presents a new approach to alleviate the sensor-bias
problem. The proposed method, called LiDomAug, augments the training data based on arbitrary cylindrical LiDAR configurations, mounting pose, and motion distortions. The proposed on-demand augmentation module runs
at 330 FPS, which can be regarded as an instant domain

9350

