This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TeSLA: Test-Time Self-Learning With Automatic Adversarial Augmentation
Devavrat Tomar1

Guillaume Vray1 Behzad Bozorgtabar1,2
1
EPFL 2 CHUV
1

Jean-Philippe Thiran1,2

{firstname}.{lastname}@epfl.ch

Soft-pseudo Label
Unaugmented

Abstract

Soft-Pseudo Label
Augmented

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) perform exceptionally
well when the training (source) and test (target) data follow the same distribution. However, distribution shifts are
inevitable in real-world settings and propose a major challenge to the performance of deep networks after deployment.
Also, access to the labeled training data may be infeasible
at test time due to privacy concerns or transmission bandwidth. In such scenarios, source-free domain adaptation
(SFDA) [1, 23, 25] and test-time adaptation (TTA) methods [19, 28, 39] aim to adapt the pre-trained source model
to the unlabeled distributionally shifted target domain while
easing access to source data. While SFDA methods have
access to all full target data through multiple training epochs

Augmentation
Direction

(a) Easy Image to
Hard Augmentation

Decision
Boundary

Correctly
Classiﬁed

Decision
Boundary

Most recent test-time adaptation methods focus on only
classification tasks, use specialized network architectures,
destroy model calibration or rely on lightweight information
from the source domain. To tackle these issues, this paper
proposes a novel Test-time Self-Learning method with automatic Adversarial augmentation dubbed TeSLA for adapting a pre-trained source model to the unlabeled streaming
test data. In contrast to conventional self-learning methods based on cross-entropy, we introduce a new test-time
loss function through an implicitly tight connection with
the mutual information and online knowledge distillation.
Furthermore, we propose a learnable efficient adversarial
augmentation module that further enhances online knowledge distillation by simulating high entropy augmented images. Our method achieves state-of-the-art classification
and segmentation results on several benchmarks and types
of domain shifts, particularly on challenging measurement
shifts of medical images. TeSLA also benefits from several desirable properties compared to competing methods in terms
of calibration, uncertainty metrics, insensitivity to model
architectures, and source training strategies, all supported
by extensive ablations. Our code and models are available
at https://github.com/devavratTomar/TeSLA.

(b) Hard Image to
Hard Augmentation

Incorrectly
Classiﬁed
Augmented
Image
Uncertainty
Region

Figure 1. Knowledge distillation with adversarial augmentations. (a) Easy images with confident soft-pseudo labels and (b)
Hard images with unconfident soft-pseudo labels are adversarially
augmented and pushed to the uncertainty region (high entropy) near
the decision boundary. The model is updated for (a) to match its
output on the augmented views with non-augmented views of Easy
test images using KL-Divergence Lkd ̸= 0, while not updated for
(b) as Lkd ∼ 0 between Hard images and their augmented views.

(offline setup), TTA methods usually process test images in
an online streaming fashion and represent a more realistic
domain adaptation. However, most of these methods are
applied: (i) only to classification tasks, (ii) evaluated on the
non-real-world domain shifts, e.g., the non-measurement
shift; (iii) destroy model calibration—entropy minimizing
with overconfident predictions [45] on incorrectly classified
samples, and (iv) use specialized network architectures or
rely on the source dataset feature statistics [28].
We address these issues by proposing a new test-time
adaptation method with automatic adversarial augmentation
called TeSLA, under which we further define realistic TTA
protocols. Self-learning methods often supervise the model
adaptation on the unlabeled test images using their predicted
pseudo-labels. As the model can easily overfit on its own
pseudo-labels, a weight-averaged teacher model (slowly updated by the student model) is employed for obtaining the
pseudo-labels [41, 47]. The student model is then trained
with cross-entropy (CE) loss between the one-hot pseudolabels and its predictions on the test images. In this paper, we
instead propose to minimize flipped cross-entropy between
the student model’s predictions and the soft pseudo-labels
(notice the reverse order) with the negative entropy of its
marginalized predictions over the test images. In Sec. 3,
we show that the proposed formulation is an equivalence
to mutual information maximization implicitly corrected

20341

