This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Hierarchical Entropy Model for Learned Point Cloud Compression
Rui Song1 , Chunyang Fu1 , Shan Liu2 , Ge Li1 *
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate Scool, Peking University1
Tencent America2
rsong@stu.pku.edu.cn, fuchy@stu.pku.edu.cn, shanl@tencent.com, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Learning an accurate entropy model is a fundamental
way to remove the redundancy in point cloud compression.
Recently, the octree-based auto-regressive entropy model
which adopts the self-attention mechanism to explore dependencies in a large-scale context is proved to be promising. However, heavy global attention computations and
auto-regressive contexts are inefficient for practical applications. To improve the efficiency of the attention model,
we propose a hierarchical attention structure that has a linear complexity to the context scale and maintains the global
receptive field. Furthermore, we present a grouped context
structure to address the serial decoding issue caused by the
auto-regression while preserving the compression performance. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed entropy
model achieves superior rate-distortion performance and
significant decoding latency reduction compared with the
state-of-the-art large-scale auto-regressive entropy model.

1. Introduction
Point cloud is a fundamental data structure to represent
3D scenes. It has been widely applied in 3D vision systems
such as autonomous driving and immersive applications.
The large-scale point cloud typically contains millions of
points [36]. It is challenging to store and transmit such
massive data. Hence, efficient point cloud compression that
reduces memory footprints and transmission bandwidth is
necessary to develop practical point cloud applications.
Recently, deep learning methods have promoted the development of point cloud compression [4, 9, 10, 16, 31, 36,
40,43]. It is a common pipeline to learn an octree-based entropy model to estimate octree node symbol (i.e., occupancy
symbol) distributions. The point cloud is first organized as
an octree, and occupancy symbols are then encoded into
the bitstream losslessly by an entropy coder (e.g., arithmetic
* Corresponding author.

45

Bitrate Reduction over G-PCC (%)

Abstract

40
35
30

EHEM
Light EHEM

25

SparsePCGC

20
15

OctAttention

10
5
0

G-PCC
OctSqueeze

-5
-10
0.1

1

10

100

Decoding Latency (s)

1000

Figure 1. Bitrate and decoding speed in the log scale for lossless
compression on 16-bit quantized SemanticKITTI. The proposed
method EHEM yields state-of-the-art performance with a comparable decoding latency to the efficient traditional method G-PCC.

coder [47]). An accurate entropy model is required since it
reduces the cross entropy between the estimated distribution
and ground truth, which is corresponding to actual bitrates.
Various attempts have been made to improve the accuracy
by designing different context structures [4, 10, 16, 37]. The
key of these advances is to increase the context capacity and
introduce references from high-resolution octree representations. For example, the context in OctAttention [10] includes hundreds of previously decoded siblings (i.e., nodes
at the same octree level). The large-scale context incorporates more references for the entropy coder, and the highresolution context preserves detailed features of the point
cloud. Both of them contribute to building informative contexts and effective entropy models.
However, large-scale context requires heavy computations to model dependencies among numerous references.
The previous work [10] uses the global self-attention mechanism to model long-range dependencies within the context, and its complexity is quadratic to the length of the

14368

