This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-View Stereo Representation Revist: Region-Aware MVSNet
Yisu Zhang1 , Jianke Zhu1,2 * Lixiang Lin1 ,
1
Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
{zhyisu, jkzhu, lxlin}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning-based multi-view stereo has emerged
as a powerful paradigm for reconstructing the complete
geometrically-detailed objects from multi-views. Most of
the existing approaches only estimate the pixel-wise depth
value by minimizing the gap between the predicted point
and the intersection of ray and surface, which usually ignore the surface topology. It is essential to the textureless
regions and surface boundary that cannot be properly reconstructed. To address this issue, we suggest to take advantage of point-to-surface distance so that the model is
able to perceive a wider range of surfaces. To this end,
we predict the distance volume from cost volume to estimate the signed distance of points around the surface. Our
proposed RA-MVSNet is patch-awared, since the perception range is enhanced by associating hypothetical planes
with a patch of surface. Therefore, it could increase the
completion of textureless regions and reduce the outliers at
the boundary. Moreover, the mesh topologies with fine details can be generated by the introduced distance volume.
Comparing to the conventional deep learning-based multiview stereo methods, our proposed RA-MVSNet approach
obtains more complete reconstruction results by taking advantage of signed distance supervision. The experiments on
both the DTU and Tanks & Temples datasets demonstrate
that our proposed approach achieves the state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is able to efficiently recover
geometry from multiple images, which makes use of the
matching relationship and stereo correspondences of overlapping images.
To achieve the promising reconstruction results, the conventional patch-based and PatchMatch-based methods [2,
11, 27] require rich textures and restricted lighting condi* Corresponding author is Jianke Zhu.

Hypothetical plane point
Associated surface point

Baseline

RA-MVSNet

Figure 1. Comparison on reconstruction results between baseline and RA-MVSNet. Our RA-MVSNet enables the model to
perceive a wider range of surfaces so as to achieve the promising
performance in complementing textureless regions and removing
outliers at boundaries. Furthermore, our model is able to generate correct mesh topologies with fine details based on estimated
point-to-surface distances of spatially sampled points.

tions. Alternatively, the deep learning-based approaches [4,
14,15,40] try to take advantage of global scene semantic information, including environmental illumination and object
materials, to maintain high performance in complex lighting. The key of these methods is to warp deep image features into the reference camera frustum so that the 3D cost
volume can be built via differentiable homographies. Then,
the depth map is predicted by regularizing cost volume with
3D CNNs.
Despite the encouraging results, the pixel-wise depth estimation suffers from two intractable flaws. One is the low
estimation confidence in the textureless area. The other
is many outliers near the boundary of the object. This is
mainly because the surface is usually treated as a set of uncorrelated sample points rather than the one with topology.
As each ray is only associated with a single surface sampling point, it is impossible to pay attention to the adjacent
area of the surface. As shown in Fig. 1, the estimation of
each depth value is constrained by only one surface sample
point, which makes it unable to use the surrounding surface
for inference. Unfortunately, it is difficult to infer without

17376

