This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Art or Digital Forgery? Investigating Data Replication
in Diffusion Models
Gowthami Somepalli 1 , Vasu Singla 1 , Micah Goldblum 2 , Jonas Geiping 1 , Tom Goldstein 1 ,
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

goldblum@nyu.edu

LAION-A Match

Generation

{gowthami, vsingla, jgeiping, tomg}@cs.umd.edu

New York University

Figure 1. Stable Diffusion is capable of reproducing training data, creating images by piecing together foreground and background objects
that it has memorized. Furthermore, the system sometimes exhibits reconstructive memory, in which recalled objects are semantically
equivalent to their source object without being pixel-wise identical. Here, we show this behavior occurring with a range of prompts
sampled from LAION, and with a hand-crafted prompt (rightmost pair). The presence of such images raises questions about the nature
of data memorization and the ownership of diffusion images. Top row: generated images. Bottom row: closest matches in the LAIONAesthetics v2 6+ set. Sometimes source and match prompts are quite similar, and sometimes they are quite different. See Fig. 6 for more
examples with prompts, or the Appendix for prompts from this figure.

Abstract

Cutting-edge diffusion models produce images with high
quality and customizability, enabling them to be used for
commercial art and graphic design purposes. But do diffusion models create unique works of art, or are they replicating content directly from their training sets? In this
work, we study image retrieval frameworks that enable us
to compare generated images with training samples and detect when content has been replicated. Applying our frameworks to diffusion models trained on multiple datasets including Oxford flowers, Celeb-A, ImageNet, and LAION, we
discuss how factors such as training set size impact rates of
content replication. We also identify cases where diffusion
models, including the popular Stable Diffusion model, blatantly copy from their training data. Project page: https:
//somepago.github.io/diffrep.html

1. Introduction
The rapid rise of diffusion models has led to new generative tools with the potential to be used for commercial art and graphic design. The power of the diffusion
paradigm stems in large part from its reliance on simple denoising networks that maintain their stability when trained
on huge web-scale datasets containing billions of imagecaption pairs. These mega-datasets have the power to forge
commercial models like DALL·E [54] and Stable Diffusion
[56], but also bring with them a number of legal and ethical
risks [7]. Because these datasets are too large for careful human curation, the origins and intellectual property rights of
the data sources are largely unknown. This fact, combined
with the ability of large models to memorize their training
data [9, 10, 22], raises questions about the originality of diffusion outputs. There is a risk that diffusion models might,
without notice, reproduce data from the training set directly,
or present a collage of multiple training images.
We informally refer to the reproduction of training

6048

