This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Better “CMOS” Produces Clearer Images:
Learning Space-Variant Blur Estimation for Blind Image Super-Resolution
Xuhai Chen1

Jiangning Zhang2 * Chao Xu1
1

Yabiao Wang2

APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University

2

Chengjie Wang2

Yong Liu1†

Youtu Lab, Tencent

{22232044, 21832066}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
{vtzhang, caseywang, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Most of the existing blind image Super-Resolution (SR)
methods assume that the blur kernels are space-invariant.
However, the blur involved in real applications are usually space-variant due to object motion, out-of-focus, etc.,
resulting in severe performance drop of the advanced SR
methods. To address this problem, we firstly introduce two
new datasets with out-of-focus blur, i.e., NYUv2-BSR and
Cityscapes-BSR, to support further researches of blind SR
with space-variant blur. Based on the datasets, we design a
novel Cross-MOdal fuSion network (CMOS) that estimate
both blur and semantics simultaneously, which leads to improved SR results. It involves a feature Grouping Interactive Attention (GIA) module to make the two modalities interact more effectively and avoid inconsistency. GIA can
also be used for the interaction of other features because
of the universality of its structure. Qualitative and quantitative experiments compared with state-of-the-art methods
on above datasets and real-world images demonstrate the
superiority of our method, e.g., obtaining PSNR/SSIM by
+1.91↑/+0.0048↑ on NYUv2-BSR than MANet1 .

1. Introduction
Blind image SR, with the aim of reconstructing HighResolution (HR) images from Low-Resolution (LR) images
with unknown degradations, has attracted great attention
due to its significance for practical use [2,5,6,12,15,22–24,
29]. Two degradation models, bicubic downsampling [35]
and traditional degradation [26,32], are usually used to generate LR images from HR images. The latter can be modeled by:
O
y = (x
k) ↓s +n.
(1)
It assumes the LR image y is obtained by first convolving
the HR image x with a blur kernel k, followed by a down* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/ByChelsea/CMOS.git

LR

KernelGAN

DCLS

CMOS (Ours)

GT

Figure 1. SR results of KernelGAN [1], DCLS [28] and the proposed CMOS on a space-variant blurred LR image. For KernelGAN and DCLS, patches are blurry in the first row and have artifacts in the second row, while CMOS performs well in both cases.

sampling operation with scale factor s and an addition of
noise n. On top of that, some works [38, 48] propose more
complex and realistic degradation models, which also assume that blur is space-invariant. However, in real-world
applications, blur usually changes spatially due to factors
such as out-of-focus and object motion, so that the mismatches will greatly degrade the performance of existing
SR methods. Fig. 1 gives an example when the LR image
suffers from space-variant blur. Since both KernelGAN [1]
and DCLS [28] estimate only one blur kernel for an image,
there are a lot of mismatches. In the first row of Fig. 1,
where the kernel estimated by the two methods are sharper
than the real one of the patch, SR results are over smoothing
and high frequency textures are significantly blurred. In the
second row, where the kernels estimated are smoother than
the correct one, SR results show ringing artifacts caused by
over-enhancing high-frequency edges. This phenomenon illustrates that mismatch of blur will significantly affect SR
results, leading to unnatural outputs. In this paper, we focus on the space-variant blur estimation to ensure that the
estimated kernel is correct for each pixel in the images.
A few recent works [15, 23, 43] have taken space-variant
blur into account. Among them, MANet [23] is the most
representative model, which assumes that blur is spaceinvariant within a small patch. Based on this, MANet uses a
moderate receptive field to keep the locality of degradations.
However, there are still two critical issues. 1) Because there

1651

