This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Visibility Field for Detailed 3D Human Reconstruction and Relighting
Ruichen Zheng∗,1,2 , Peng Li∗,1 , Haoqian Wang1 , Tao Yu1
1
Tsinghua University, China 2 Weilan Tech, Beijing, China

Figure 1. Given sparse-view RGBD input (left), our method reconstructs detailed geometry (middle left), albedo (middle right), and
visibility for realistic 3D human relighting under different illuminations (right).

Abstract
Detailed 3D reconstruction and photo-realistic relighting of digital humans are essential for various applications.
To this end, we propose a novel sparse-view 3d human reconstruction framework that closely incorporates the occupancy field and albedo field with an additional visibility field–it not only resolves occlusion ambiguity in multiview feature aggregation, but can also be used to evaluate light attenuation for self-shadowed relighting. To enhance its training viability and efficiency, we discretize visibility onto a fixed set of sample directions and supply it
with coupled geometric 3D depth feature and local 2D image feature. We further propose a novel rendering-inspired
loss, namely TransferLoss, to implicitly enforce the alignment between visibility and occupancy field, enabling endto-end joint training. Results and extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, as
it surpasses state-of-the-art in terms of reconstruction accuracy while achieving comparably accurate relighting to
ray-traced ground truth.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction and relighting are of great importance in human digitization, especially in supporting realistic rendering in varying virtual environments, that can be
widely applied in AR/VR [32, 37], holographic communi-

cation [24, 63], movie and gaming industry [7].
Traditional methods often require dense camera setups
using multi-view stereo, non-rigid registration and texture
mapping [9, 13]. To enhance capture realism, researchers
have extended them with additional synchronous variable
illumination systems, which aid photometric stereo for detail reconstruction and material acquisition [12]. However,
these systems are often too complex, expensive and difficult
to maintain, thus preventing widespread applications.
By leveraging deep prior and neural representation, sophisticated dense camera setups can be reduced to a single camera, leading to blossoms in learning-based human
reconstruction. In particular, encoding human geometry
and appearance as continuous fields using Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) has emerged as a promising lead. Starting
from Siclope [36] and PIFu [43], a series of methods [15]
improve the reconstruction performance in speed [11, 25],
quality [44], robustness [65, 66] and light decoupling [1].
However, single-view reconstruction quality is restricted by
its inherent depth ambiguity, thus limiting its application
under view-consistent high-quality requirements.
Therefore, as the trade-off between view coverage and
system accessibility, sparse-view reconstruction has become a research hotpot. The predominant practice is to
project the query point onto each view to interpolate local features, which are then aggregated and fed to MLP
for inference [6, 16, 43, 47, 52, 61]. This method suffers
from occlusion ambiguity, where some views may well

216

