This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Loopback Network for Explainable Microvascular Invasion Classification
Shengxuming Zhang1 , Tianqi Shi2 , Yang Jiang2 , Xiuming Zhang1 , Jie Lei3 , Zunlei Feng1,4,5, ,* Mingli Song1,4,5
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 Zhejiang University of Technology,
4
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University,
5
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Service Robot
{zsxm1998, 1508056, zunleifeng, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
{tianqi.tianqishi, yangjiang.yj}@alibaba-inc.com, jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Microvascular invasion (MVI) is a critical factor for prognosis evaluation and cancer treatment. The current diagnosis
of MVI relies on pathologists to manually find out cancerous cells from hundreds of blood vessels, which is timeconsuming, tedious, and subjective. Recently, deep learning
has achieved promising results in medical image analysis
tasks. However, the unexplainability of black box models and
the requirement of massive annotated samples limit the clinical application of deep learning based diagnostic methods.
In this paper, aiming to develop an accurate, objective,
and explainable diagnosis tool for MVI, we propose a Loopback Network (LoopNet) for classifying MVI efficiently. With
the image-level category annotations of the collected Pathologic Vessel Image Dataset (PVID), LoopNet is devised to
be composed binary classification branch and cell locating
branch. The latter is devised to locate the area of cancerous cells, regular non-cancerous cells, and background. For
healthy samples, the pseudo masks of cells supervise the
cell locating branch to distinguish the area of regular noncancerous cells and background. For each MVI sample, the
cell locating branch predicts the mask of cancerous cells.
Then the masked cancerous and non-cancerous areas of
the same sample are input back to the binary classification
branch separately. The loopback between two branches enables the category label to supervise the cell locating branch
to learn the locating ability for cancerous areas. Experiment
results show that the proposed LoopNet achieves 97.5% accuracy on MVI classification. Surprisingly, the proposed
loopback mechanism not only enables LoopNet to predict
the cancerous area but also facilitates the classification backbone to achieve better classification performance.

* Corresponding author

117140×273140 px

(a)

(b)
vessels

healthy/MVI vessels

(c)
healthy/cancerous cells

Figure 1. Examples of MVI and healthy vessels extracted from
a pathological image of liver cancer. (a) The super large sample
contains numerous blood vessels of varied sizes. (b) The healthy
vessels are composed of a variety of cells with similar appearances.
(c) The cancerous cells have varied types and similar appearances
to parts of healthy cells.

1. Introduction
Microvascular invasion (MVI), referring to the appearance of cancerous cells within microscopic venules or veins,
is a histological feature of cancer-related to aggressive
biological behavior [27, 56]. In clinical, MVI is usually
used as a reference standard for assessing cancer spreading, which is a critical factor for prognosis evaluation and
treatment [8, 15, 43]. Accurate prognosis evaluation along
with appropriate treatment can effectively improve patient’s
life quality and prolong their life-span.
Currently, the diagnosis of MVI relies on pathologists to
manually find out cancerous cells from hundreds of blood
vessels, each of which usually contains dozens of cells. As
shown in Fig.1, each pathological sample is an image of

7443

