This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Devil is in the Queries: Advancing Mask Transformers for Real-world Medical
Image Segmentation and Out-of-Distribution Localization
Mingze Yuan1,2,† , Yingda Xia1,∗ , Hexin Dong1,2 , Zifan Chen2 , Jiawen Yao1 , Mingyan Qiu1 , Ke Yan1 ,
Xiaoli Yin4 , Yu Shi4 , Xin Chen3 , Zaiyi Liu3 , Bin Dong2,5 , Jingren Zhou1 , Le Lu1 , Ling Zhang1 , Li Zhang2
1
Alibaba Group 2 Peking University 3 Guangdong Province People’s Hospital
4
Shengjing Hospital 5 Peking University Changsha Institute for Computing and Digital Economy

Abstract

(Near) Out-of-distribution

In-distribution

Unseen Diseases

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental task in medical image analysis. With the recent advancements in computer
* Corresponding author. (yingda.xia@alibaba-inc.com)
† Work was done during an internship at Alibaba DAMO Academy

SCN

IPMN

PNET

SPT

CP

MCN

Inlier Segmentation

Rare Diseases Peri-pancreatic
Diseases

PDAC

AC

DC

…

Real-world medical image segmentation has tremendous long-tailed complexity of objects, among which tail
conditions correlate with relatively rare diseases and are
clinically significant. A trustworthy medical AI algorithm should demonstrate its effectiveness on tail conditions to avoid clinically dangerous damage in these out-ofdistribution (OOD) cases. In this paper, we adopt the concept of object queries in Mask Transformers to formulate
semantic segmentation as a soft cluster assignment. The
queries fit the feature-level cluster centers of inliers during training. Therefore, when performing inference on a
medical image in real-world scenarios, the similarity between pixels and the queries detects and localizes OOD regions. We term this OOD localization as MaxQuery. Furthermore, the foregrounds of real-world medical images,
whether OOD objects or inliers, are lesions. The difference between them is less than that between the foreground
and background, possibly misleading the object queries to
focus redundantly on the background. Thus, we propose
a query-distribution (QD) loss to enforce clear boundaries
between segmentation targets and other regions at the query
level, improving the inlier segmentation and OOD indication. Our proposed framework is tested on two realworld segmentation tasks, i.e., segmentation of pancreatic
and liver tumors, outperforming previous state-of-the-art
algorithms by an average of 7.39% on AUROC, 14.69% on
AUPR, and 13.79% on FPR95 for OOD localization. On
the other hand, our framework improves the performance
of inlier segmentation by an average of 5.27% DSC when
compared with the leading baseline nnUNet.

Data Distribution

Common Pancreatic Diseases

OOD Localization

Real-world Trustworthy Medical AI

Figure 1. Real-world medical image segmentation. Real-world
medical outliers (unseen, usually rare, tumors) are “near” to the
inliers (labeled lesions), forming a typical near-OOD problem. A
real-world medical OOD detection/localization model should focus more on subtle differences between outliers and inliers than
the significant difference between foreground and background..

vision and deep learning, automated medical image segmentation has reached expert-level performance in various
applications [3, 28, 54]. Most medical image segmentation methods are based on supervised machine learning that
heavily relies on collecting and annotating training data.
However, real-world medical images are long-tailed distributed. The tail conditions are outliers and inadequate (or
even unable) to train a reliable model [35, 61, 63]. Yet, the
model trained with inliers is risky for triggering failures or
errors in real-world clinical deployment [43]. For example, in pancreatic tumor image analysis, a miss-detection
of metastatic cancer will directly threaten life; an erroneous
recognition of a benign cyst as malignant will lead to unnecessary follow-up tests and patient anxiety. Medical image
segmentation models should thus demonstrate the ability
to detect and localize out-of-distribution (OOD) conditions,
especially in some safety-critical clinical applications.
Previous studies have made valuable attempts on medical OOD localization [48, 65], including finding lesions

23879

