This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Equiangular Basis Vectors
Yang Shen
Xuhao Sun
Xiu-Shen Wei*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{shenyang 98,sunxh,weixs}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

‫ݐ‬௖
σ௝ ‫ݐ‬௝

‫ݔݐ‬௖

…

݄
‫ݔ‬ே

‫ݐ‬ଵ
σ௝ ‫ݐ‬௝

‫ݔݐ‬ଶ

݁ ௙೎

‫݂ݔ‬௖

݄ଷ
‫ݔ‬

‫ݔ‬ௗ

௙భ

…

The pattern classiﬁcation ﬁeld developed around the end
of the twentieth century aims to deal with the speciﬁc problem of assigning input signals to two or more classes [56].
In recent years, deep learning models have brought breakthroughs in processing image, video, audio, text, and other

݄
‫ݔ‬ଶ

…

1. Introduction

݁

‫݂ݔ‬ଵ

‫ݔ‬ଶ

…

We propose Equiangular Basis Vectors (EBVs) for classiﬁcation tasks. In deep neural networks, models usually
end with a k-way fully connected layer with softmax to
handle different classiﬁcation tasks. The learning objective of these methods can be summarized as mapping the
learned feature representations to the samples’ label space.
While in metric learning approaches, the main objective is
to learn a transformation function that maps training data
points from the original space to a new space where similar points are closer while dissimilar points become farther
apart. Different from previous methods, our EBVs generate
normalized vector embeddings as “predeﬁned classiﬁers”
which are required to not only be with the equal status between each other, but also be as orthogonal as possible. By
minimizing the spherical distance of the embedding of an input between its categorical EBV in training, the predictions
can be obtained by identifying the categorical EBV with
the smallest distance during inference. Various experiments
on the ImageNet-1K dataset and other downstream tasks
demonstrate that our method outperforms the general fully
connected classiﬁer while it does not introduce huge additional computation compared with classical metric learning
methods. Our EBVs won the ﬁrst place in the 2022 DIGIX
Global AI Challenge, and our code is open-source and available at https://github.com/NJUST-VIPGroup/
Equiangular-Basis-Vectors.

݄ଵ
‫ݔ‬

࢞
‫ݔ‬ଵ

‫݂ݔ‬௖ᇱ

݁ ௙೎ᇲ ‫ݐ‬

‫ݔ‬௖ᇱ

‫ݐ‬௖ᇱ
σ௝ ‫ݐ‬௝

‫݌ݔ‬ଶ
‫݌‬௖
‫ݔ‬
‫ݔ݌‬௖ᇱ

Add category ܿԢ

(a) Fully Connected Layers with Softmax
ෝଶ = ȣ ࢝
ෝଷ = ȣ ࢝
ෝଷ
ෝ ଵ, ࢝
ෝ ଵ, ࢝
ෝ ଶ, ࢝
ȣ࢝

Positive Sample

ෝ ௖ᇱ = ȣ ࢝
ෝଶ
ෝ ଵ, ࢝
ෝ ଵ, ࢝
ȣ࢝
Anchor

Add category
ܿԢ

Negative Sample
g
Add category ܿԢ with ݉ᇱ samples:

ෝଷ
࢝

ෝଵ
࢝

ෝଶ
࢝

ෝ ௖ᇱ
࢝

ࣩ ‫ܯ‬ଷ ՜ ࣩ((‫ ܯ‬+ ݉Ԣ)ଷ )

(b) Metric Learning

(c) Equiangular Basis Vectors

Figure 1. Comparisons between typical classiﬁcation paradigms
and our proposed Equiangular Basis Vectors (EBVs). (a) A general
classiﬁer ends with k-way fully connected layers with softmax.
When adding more categories, the trainable parameters of the classiﬁer grow linearly. (b) Taking triplet embedding [60] as an example
of classical metric learning methods, the complexity is O(M 3 )
when given M images and it will grows to O((M + m )3 ) when
adding a new category with m images. (c) Our proposed EBVs.
EBVs predeﬁne ﬁxed normalized vector embeddings for different
categories and these embeddings will not be changed during the
training stage. The trainable parameters of the network will not
be changed with the growth of the number of categories while the
complexity only grows from O(M ) to O(M + m ).

* Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2021YFA1001100), National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant (62272231), Natural Science Foundation
of Jiangsu Province of China under Grant (BK20210340), the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. NJ2022028), and CAAIHuawei MindSpore Open Fund.

11755

data [10, 19, 27, 58]. Aided by the rapid gains in hardware,
deep learning methods today can easily overﬁt one million
images [9] and easily overcomes the obstacle to the quality of handcrafted features in previous pattern classiﬁcation
tasks. Many approaches based on deep learning spring up
like mushrooms and had been used to solve classiﬁcation
problems in various scenarios and settings such as remote
sensing [38], few-shot [52], long-tailed [72], etc.

