This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BKinD-3D: Self-Supervised 3D Keypoint Discovery from Multi-View Videos
Jennifer J. Sun*
Caltech

Lili Karashchuk*
U Washington

John C. Tuthill
U Washington

Amil Dravid*
Northwestern

Aggelos Katsaggelos
Northwestern
Ann Kennedy
Northwestern

Sonia Fereidooni
U Washington

Serim Ryou
SAIT†

Bingni W. Brunton
U Washington

Yisong Yue
Caltech

Georgia Gkioxari
Caltech

Pietro Perona
Caltech

Code & Project Website: https://sites.google.com/view/b-kind/3d

Previous Self-Supervised Keypoints

Abstract
Quantifying motion in 3D is important for studying the
behavior of humans and other animals, but manual pose annotations are expensive and time-consuming to obtain. Selfsupervised keypoint discovery is a promising strategy for
estimating 3D poses without annotations. However, current
keypoint discovery approaches commonly process single 2D
views and do not operate in the 3D space. We propose a
new method to perform self-supervised keypoint discovery
in 3D from multi-view videos of behaving agents, without
any keypoint or bounding box supervision in 2D or 3D. Our
method, BKinD-3D, uses an encoder-decoder architecture
with a 3D volumetric heatmap, trained to reconstruct spatiotemporal differences across multiple views, in addition to
joint length constraints on a learned 3D skeleton of the subject. In this way, we discover keypoints without requiring
manual supervision in videos of humans and rats, demonstrating the potential of 3D keypoint discovery for studying
behavior.

1. Introduction
All animals behave in 3D, and analyzing 3D posture and
movement is crucial for a variety of applications, including the study of biomechanics, motor control, and behavior [27]. However, annotations for supervised training of
3D pose estimators are expensive and time-consuming to
obtain, especially for studying diverse animal species and
varying experimental contexts. Self-supervised keypoint
discovery has demonstrated tremendous potential in discovering 2D keypoints from video [19,20,40], without the need
for manual annotations. These models have not been wellexplored in 3D, which is more challenging compared to 2D
* Equal contribution
† Work done outside of SAIT

Self-Supervised 3D from 2D

2D pose
(single or multi-view)

3D pose

Self-Supervised 2D Discovery

2D pose

Images or videos

Self-Supervised 3D Keypoint Discovery (Ours)

Multi-view video

3D pose

Figure 1. Self-supervised 3D keypoint discovery. Previous work
studying self-supervised keypoints either requires 2D supervision
for 3D pose estimation or focuses on 2D keypoint discovery. Currently, self-supervised 3D keypoint discovery is not well-explored.
We propose methods for discovering 3D keypoints directly from
multi-view videos of different organisms, such as human and rats,
without 2D or 3D supervision. The 3D keypoint discovery examples demonstrate the results from our method.

due to depth ambiguities, a larger search space, and the need
to incorporate geometric constraints. Our goal is to enable
3D keypoint discovery of humans and animals from synchronized multi-view videos, without 2D or 3D supervision.
Self-Supervised 3D Keypoint Discovery. Previous
works for self-supervised 3D keypoints typically start from
a pre-trained 2D pose estimator [25,42], and thus do not perform keypoint discovery (Figure 1). These models are suitable for studying human poses because 2D human pose estimators are widely available and the pose and body structure

9001

