This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayesian posterior approximation with stochastic ensembles
Oleksandr Balabanov1 , Bernhard Mehlig2 , Hampus Linander2,3
1
Stockholm University 2 University of Gothenburg 3 Chalmers University of Technology
oleksandr.balabanov@fysik.su.se, bernhard.mehlig@physics.gu.se, hampus.linander@gu.se
Code:

github.com/oleksandr-balabanov/stochastic-ensembles

Abstract
We introduce ensembles of stochastic neural networks to
approximate the Bayesian posterior, combining stochastic
methods such as dropout with deep ensembles. The stochastic ensembles are formulated as families of distributions and
trained to approximate the Bayesian posterior with variational inference. We implement stochastic ensembles based
on Monte Carlo dropout, DropConnect and a novel nonparametric version of dropout and evaluate them on a toy
problem and CIFAR image classiﬁcation. For both tasks,
we test the quality of the posteriors directly against Hamiltonian Monte Carlo simulations. Our results show that
stochastic ensembles provide more accurate posterior estimates than other popular baselines for Bayesian inference.

1. Introduction
Bayesian neural networks provide a principled way of
reasoning about model selection and assessment with posterior distributions of model parameters [6, 8, 35, 49]. Although the analytical Bayesian posteriors can answer questions about model parameter uncertainty, the immense computational challenge for commonly used neural network architectures makes them practically infeasible1 . Instead, we
are forced to resign to approximation methods that makes
a trade-off between posterior accuracy and computational
complexity [27].
A prominent method to approximate the Bayesian posterior is deep ensembles [20, 31, 55], that can be shown to
correspond to a variational inference approximation with a
delta distribution family [24]. This method is implemented
by simply training an ensemble of models and treating them
as samples from the model posterior. In the variational inference formulation, this corresponds to approximating the
posterior by sampling from many sets of maximum a posteriori parameters.
1 There
are examples
architectures [56].

of

closed-form

solutions

for

small

To further reduce the computational effort in evaluating the approximate posterior, stochastic methods such as
Monte Carlo dropout [47] and DropConnect [51] inference
have also been used extensively [13, 14, 40]. They beneﬁt
from computationally cheaper inference by virtue of sampling stochastically from a single model. Formulated as a
variational approximation to the posterior, dropout samples
from a family of parameter distributions where parameters
can be randomly set to zero. Although this particular family of distributions might seem unnatural [11], it turns out
that the stochastic property can help to ﬁnd more robust regions of the parameter space, a fact well-known from a long
history of using dropout as a regularization method.
Recently, there has been great progress towards understanding the analytical posteriors of larger neural networks
by means of direct Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling
of the parameter posterior [26]. Through impressive computational efforts, the posteriors for models as large as
ResNet-20 have been sampled using Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) simulations. The sampled posterior has been
shown to provide more accurate predictions that are surprisingly sensitive to data distribution shift as compared to standard maximum likelihood estimation training procedures.
These HMC computations have made it possible to compare
approximation methods such as dropout inference and deep
ensembles directly to the Bayesian posterior. Ensembling
and stochastic methods such as dropout have been used successfully to ﬁnd posterior approximations in many settings,
but without a Bayesian formulation that includes both ensembling and stochastic methods it is difﬁcult to understand
if and how the two approaches can complement each other.
Recent work have shown that uncertainty quantiﬁcation
is subjective to neural network architectures, and that the
accuracy of posterior approximations depend non-trivially
on model architecture and dataset complexity [33]. To ﬁnd
computationally efﬁcient methods that can accurately approximate the Bayesian posterior, for different data domains
and architectures, is therefore an important goal with practical implications for applications that require accurate uncertainty quantiﬁcation to assess network predictions [1, 17].

13701

