This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiplicative Fourier Level of Detail
Yishun Dou2 Zhong Zheng2 Qiaoqiao Jin1 Bingbing Ni1,2 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 2 Huawei
yishun.dou@gmail.com

nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Fourier Level of Detail

…
~500K

We develop a simple yet surprisingly effective implicit
representing scheme called Multiplicative Fourier Level of
Detail (MFLOD) motivated by the recent success of multiplicative filter network. Built on multi-resolution feature
grid/volume (e.g., the sparse voxel octree), each level’s feature is first modulated by a sinusoidal function and then
element-wisely multiplied by a linear transformation of previous layer’s representation in a layer-to-layer recursive
manner, yielding the scale-aggregated encodings for a subsequent simple linear forward to get final output. In contrast to previous hybrid representations relying on interleaved multilevel fusion and nonlinear activation-based decoding, MFLOD could be elegantly characterized as a linear combination of sine basis functions with varying amplitude, frequency, and phase upon the learned multilevel
features, thus offering great feasibility in Fourier analysis.
Comprehensive experimental results on implicit neural representation learning tasks including image fitting, 3D shape
representation, and neural radiance fields well demonstrate
the superior quality and generalizability achieved by the
proposed MFLOD scheme.

1. Introduction
Classical geometric modeling techniques in computer
graphics represent signals by storing discrete samples in
array- or grid-based formats. It is nontrivial to adapt them
to learning-based framework due to the lack of differentiability. Recently, neural implicit functions have emerged as
an attractive alternative, which parameterize the continuous mapping between low dimensional coordinates and image/object domain signals using neural network, for example, as the representation of 3D shapes [5, 23, 29, 42] and
radiance fields [16, 25].
Prior works commonly use a large multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to parameterize the learning function. To circumvent the well-known low frequency spectral bias of neu* Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

2.7K

4.1K

smooth

(a) Global Support Methods

5.8K

high-fidelity

(b) Our Multiscale Support Method

Figure 1. Implicit Neural Representations from Spectral Perspective. (a) Most implicit neural representations can be categorized into global support-based method. A large network is
required to enrich the basis coefficients for representing highfrequency details. (b) Our method can also be well-characterized
like the global method, enabling explicit bandwidth control for
each LOD. This allows for representing high-fidelity details at fine
levels and smooth overall shape at coarse levels.

ral networks [31], frequency encoding [15, 25, 33, 34, 40] is
usually adopted to map input coordinates to a higher dimensional space. A useful property of these pure MLP methods
is that the entire function can be theoretically characterized
as a linear combination of Fourier bases [6, 49], facilitating
the design of neural representation from the spectral point
of view, such as explicitly manipulating the bandwidth [15],
representing overall signal and details separately [46], balancing representation generalization and spectrum coverage [40]. However, solely relying on the Fourier bases to express local high-frequency details is inefficient since these
bases normally have (infinite) global support [49], resulting
in the requirement of employing over-sized MLP to accommodate a large set of basis coefficients.
Most recently, hybrid representations [27,38,39] emerge
for their efficiency and high-fidelity. They employ a multilevel feature grid/volume to capture local details, and thus
allow the use of a much smaller MLP as decoder. Yet, the
interleaved multilevel fusion and nonlinear activation-based
decoding make the entire function hard to characterize and
not amenable to Fourier analysis like pure MLP methods.
Specifically, little is known of how multilevel features are
combined to get the final output.
We address the above limitations with our proposed implicit feature representation framework named Multiplica-

1808

