This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distribution Shift Inversion for Out-of-Distribution Prediction
Runpeng Yu

Songhua Liu Xingyi Yang Xinchao Wang:
National University of Singapore

{r.yu,songhua.liu,xyang}@u.nus.edu

xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Figure 1. Transformed OoD samples from PACS dataset. Odd rows show the original OoD images, and even rows show their transformation
results to the source distribution, obtained by the proposed DSI. Please zoom in for better visualization.

Abstract
Machine learning society has witnessed the emergence
of a myriad of Out-of-Distribution (OoD) algorithms, which
address the distribution shift between the training and the
testing distribution by searching for a unified predictor or
invariant feature representation. However, the task of directly mitigating the distribution shift in the unseen testing
set is rarely investigated, due to the unavailability of the
testing distribution during the training phase and thus the
impossibility of training a distribution translator mapping
between the training and testing distribution. In this paper, we explore how to bypass the requirement of testing
distribution for distribution translator training and make
the distribution translation useful for OoD prediction. We
propose a portable Distribution Shift Inversion (DSI) algorithm, in which, before being fed into the prediction model,
the OoD testing samples are first linearly combined with additional Gaussian noise and then transferred back towards
the training distribution using a diffusion model trained only
on the source distribution. Theoretical analysis reveals the
feasibility of our method. Experimental results, on both
multiple-domain generalization datasets and single-domain
generalization datasets, show that our method provides a
general performance gain when plugged into a wide range
of commonly used OoD algorithms. Our code is available at
https://github.com/yu-rp/Distribution-Shift-Iverson.

1. Introduction
The ubiquity of the distribution shift between the training
and testing data in the real-world application of machine
† Corresponding author.

learning systems induces the study of Out-of-Distribution
(OoD) generalization (or domain generalization). [18, 64,
71, 79] Within the scope of OoD generalization, machine
learning algorithms are required to generalize from the seen
training domain to the unseen testing domain without the
independent and identically distributed assumption. The
bulk of the OoD algorithms in previous literature focuses
on promoting the generalization capability of the machine
learning models themselves by utilizing the domain invariant
feature [2, 13, 36], context-based data augmentation [47,
74], distributionally robust optimization [59], subnetwork
searching [81], neural network calibration [70], etc.
In this work, orthogonal to enhancing the generalization
capability of the model, we consider a novel pathway to
OoD prediction. On the way, the testing(target) distribution
is explicitly transformed towards the training(source) distribution to straightforwardly mitigate the distribution shift
between the testing and the training distribution. Therein,
the OoD prediction can be regarded as a two-step procedure,
(1) transferring testing samples back towards training distribution, and (2) drawing prediction. The second step can
be implemented by any OoD prediction algorithm. In this
paper, we concentrate on the exploration of the first step, the
distribution transformation.
Unlike previous works on distribution translation and domain transformation, in which certain target distribution is
accessible during the training phase, here the target distribution is arbitrary and unavailable during the training. We
term this new task as Unseen Distribution Transformation
(UDT), in which a domain translator is trained on the source
distribution and works to transform unseen target distribution towards the source distribution. The uniqueness, as well
as the superiority, of UDT is listed as followings.

3592

