This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simultaneously Short- and Long-Term Temporal Modeling for Semi-Supervised
Video Semantic Segmentation
Jiangwei Lao, Weixiang Hong, Xin Guo, Yingying Zhang, Jian Wang, Jingdong Chen, Wei Chu
Ant Group
wenshuo.ljw@antgroup.com

Abstract

GT

w/o Distant Frame

w/ Distant Frame

First
Labeled
Frame

In order to tackle video semantic segmentation task at
a lower cost, e.g., only one frame annotated per video,
lots of efforts have been devoted to investigate the utilization of those unlabeled frames by either assigning pseudo
labels or performing feature enhancement. In this work,
we propose a novel feature enhancement network to simultaneously model short- and long-term temporal correlation. Compared with existing work that only leverage
short-term correspondence, the long-term temporal correlation obtained from distant frames can effectively expand
the temporal perception field and provide richer contextual prior. More importantly, modeling adjacent and distant frames together can alleviate the risk of over-fitting,
hence produce high-quality feature representation for the
distant unlabeled frames in training set and unseen videos
in testing set. To this end, we term our method SSLTM,
short for Simultaneously Short- and Long-Term Temporal
Modeling. In the setting of only one frame annotated per
video, SSLTM significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods by 2% ∼ 3% mIoU on the challenging VSPW
dataset. Furthermore, when working with a pseudo label
based method such as MeanTeacher, our final model only
exhibits 0.13% mIoU less than the ceiling performance (i.e.,
all frames are manually annotated).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been the de-facto solution
for many vision tasks such as image recognition [12], object detection [15] and semantic segmentation [21]. These
state-of-the-art results are generally achieved by training
very deep networks on large-scale labeled datasets, e.g., ImageNet [27], COCO [16] and Cityscapes [4], etc. However,
building such labeled datasets is labor-intensive and complicated. Hence, it is very appealing to explore less labeldependent alternatives that only requires a (small) portion
of the dataset to be annotated [14, 24–26, 37].

Distant
Unlabeled
Frame

(a) The model trained with distant frames demonstrates better segmentation
output for distant unlabeled frames in the training set.
Distant Frame

w/o Distant Frame

Current Frame

GT

w/ Distant Frame

(b) The adjacent frames do not contain sufficient visual clues to segment the
car in current frame, while the distant frame can provide richer context to
guide the segmentation model.

Figure 1. The importance of involving distant frames in training. The exploitation of distant frames not only reduces the risk
of over-fitting to the labeled frame and its adjacent ones, but also
provides temporally long-term context to enhance the feature representation.

In this work, we aim to train the video semantic segmentation model under an extreme setting of annotation
availability, i.e., each video in the training set only has its
first frame annotated. The significance of this problem is
twofold: 1). Video semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision, with wide applications in many
scenarios like autonomous driving [9], robot controlling [7];
2). Compared with dense annotations, it takes much less (if
not the least) cost to label one frame per video. More importantly, given the information redundancy [18, 41] within
a video, it seems intuitively unnecessary to annotate every frame at all costs. Thus, it is of great practical and
theoretical interests to explore the feasibility of conducting video semantic segmentation with one-frame-per-video-

14763

