This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFInvertor: High Fidelity NeRF-GAN Inversion
for Single-shot Real Image Animation
Yu Yin1 , Kamran Ghasedi2 , HsiangTao Wu2 , Jiaolong Yang2 , Xin Tong2 , Yun Fu1
1

Northeastern University

yin.yu1@northeastern.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
2

Microsoft

{kamrang,musclewu,jiaoyan,xtong}@microsoft.com

Input

Abstract
Nerf-based Generative models have shown impressive
capacity in generating high-quality images with consistent
3D geometry. Despite successful synthesis of fake identity
images randomly sampled from latent space, adopting these
models for generating face images of real subjects is still a
challenging task due to its so-called inversion issue. In this
paper, we propose a universal method to surgically fine-tune
these NeRF-GAN models in order to achieve high-fidelity
animation of real subjects only by a single image. Given
the optimized latent code for an out-of-domain real image,
we employ 2D loss functions on the rendered image to reduce the identity gap. Furthermore, our method leverages
explicit and implicit 3D regularizations using the in-domain
neighborhood samples around the optimized latent code to
remove geometrical and visual artifacts. Our experiments
confirm the effectiveness of our method in realistic, highfidelity, and 3D consistent animation of real faces on multiple NeRF-GAN models across different datasets.

1. Introduction
Animating a human with a novel view and expression
sequence from a single image opens the door to a wide
range of creative applications, such as talking head synthesis [22, 34], augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) [19],
image manipulation [24, 32, 45], as well as data augmentation for training of deep models [25, 42, 43]. Early works of
image animation mostly employed either 2D-based image
generation models [14, 26, 31, 37], or 3D parametric models [4, 11, 40, 41] (e.g. 3DMM [6]), but they mostly suffer
from artifacts, 3D inconsistencies or unrealistic visuals.
Representing scenes as Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [23] has recently emerged as a breakthrough
Project page:
https : / / yuyin1 . github . io /
NeRFInvertor_Homepage/

Novel Expressions

Novel Views

Novel Views & Expressions

Figure 1. Image animation results of our method. NeRFInvertor achieves 3D-consistent and ID-preserving animation (i.e. novel
views and expressions) of real subjects given only a single image.

approach for generating high-quality images of a scene in
novel views. However, the original NeRF models [5,33,44]
only synthesize images of a static scene and require extensive multi-view data for training, restricting its application
to novel view synthesis from a single image. Several studies
have shown more recent advances in NeRFs by extending
it to generate multi-view face images with single-shot data
even with controllable expressions [7, 8, 12, 27, 38, 46].
These Nerf-based Generative models (NeRF-GANs) are
able to embed attributes of training samples into their latent

8539

