This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEV@DC: Bird’s-Eye View Assisted Training for Depth Completion
Wending Zhou1,2 , Xu Yan1,2 , Yinghong Liao1,2 , Yuankai Lin3 , Jin Huang4 ,
Gangming Zhao5 , Shuguang Cui2,1 , Zhen Li2,1 *
1
2
FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen, SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen, 3 Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
4
Cardiff University, 5 The University of Hong Kong
{wendingzhou@link.,lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn
Training Phase

1. Introduction
Dense depth estimation plays an essential role in various
3D vision tasks and self-driving applications, e.g., 3D object detection and tracking, simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM), and structure-from-motion (SFM) [14,
17,19,33,37]. With the aid of outdoor LiDAR sensors or indoor RGBD cameras, 3D vision applications acquire depth
maps for further industrial usage. However, the depth sensors cannot provide dense pixel-wise depth maps since their
output is sparse and has numerous blank regions, especially
* Corresponding author

(c) Ours

Depth completion plays a crucial role in autonomous
driving, in which cameras and LiDARs are two complementary sensors. Recent approaches attempt to exploit spatial
geometric constraints hidden in LiDARs to enhance imageguided depth completion. However, only low efficiency and
poor generalization can be achieved. In this paper, we propose BEV@DC, a more efficient and powerful multi-modal
training scheme, to boost the performance of image-guided
depth completion. In practice, the proposed BEV@DC
model comprehensively takes advantage of LiDARs with
rich geometric details in training, employing an enhanced
depth completion manner in inference, which takes only images (RGB and depth) as input. Specifically, the geometricaware LiDAR features are projected onto a unified BEV
space, combining with RGB features to perform BEV completion. By equipping a newly proposed point-voxel spatial
propagation network (PV-SPN), this auxiliary branch introduces strong guidance to the original image branches via
3D dense supervision and feature consistency. As a result,
our baseline model demonstrates significant improvements
with the sole image inputs. Concretely, it achieves state-ofthe-art on several benchmarks, e.g., ranking Top-1 on the
challenging KITTI depth completion benchmark.

(b) Fusion-based (a) Camera-based

Abstract

Inference Phase

RGB and Depth

Various 3D input

BEV and Voxels

Camera-based
Single-modal
Model
Model

Camera-based
Single-modal
Model
Model

Fusion-based
Model

Fusion-based
Model

Fusion-based
Model

Camera-based
Single-modal
Model
Model

Training and inference

BEV assisted training

Figure 1. BEV assisted training. (a) Previous camera-based
methods that take RGB and depth input. (b) Previous fusion-based
methods introduce extra inputs and computation in both training
and inference. (c) Our method takes additional LiDAR as input
for assisted training. Only the 2D inputs are used during the inference, which reduces the computational burden.

in outdoor scenes. Therefore, it is necessary to fill the void
areas of the depth maps in practice.
Recent depth completion methods [4, 12, 21, 47] leverage the RGB information as guidance since the RGB images contain scene structures, e.g., textures, and monocular features, e.g., vanishing points, to provide the cues
for the missing pixels. However, the camera-based methods apply the 2D convolution on the irregularly distributed
depth values, resulting in an implicit yet ineffective exploration of underlying 3D geometry, i.e., over-smooth at
the boundary of objects. Considering the deployment of
cameras and LiDAR in commercial cars and the recent
trend of cross-modal learning in the vision community,
some methods [2, 3, 28, 41] introduce explicit 3D representations, i.e., LiDAR point clouds generated by sparse depth,

9233

