This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Finetuning: Exploiting Annotation Budget
in the Pretraining-Finetuning Paradigm
Yichen Xie1 , Han Lu2 , Junchi Yan2 , Xiaokang Yang2 , Masayoshi Tomizuka1 , Wei Zhan1
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yichen xie,tomizuka,wzhan}@berkeley.edu,{sjtu luhan,yanjunchi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Stage 1: Unsupervised Pretraining
Unlabeled Pool

Given the large-scale data and the high annotation cost,
pretraining-ﬁnetuning becomes a popular paradigm in multiple computer vision tasks. Previous research has covered
both the unsupervised pretraining and supervised ﬁnetuning
in this paradigm, while little attention is paid to exploiting
the annotation budget for ﬁnetuning. To ﬁll in this gap, we
formally deﬁne this new active ﬁnetuning task focusing on
the selection of samples for annotation in the pretrainingﬁnetuning paradigm. We propose a novel method called ActiveFT for active ﬁnetuning task to select a subset of data
distributing similarly with the entire unlabeled pool and
maintaining enough diversity by optimizing a parametric
model in the continuous space. We prove that the Earth
Mover’s distance between the distributions of the selected
subset and the entire data pool is also reduced in this process. Extensive experiments show the leading performance
and high efﬁciency of ActiveFT superior to baselines on
both image classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation. Our
code is released at https://github.com/yichen928/ActiveFT.

1. Introduction
Recent success of deep learning heavily relies on abundant training data. However, the annotation of large-scale
datasets often requires intensive human labor. This dilemma
inspires a popular pretraining-ﬁnetuning paradigm where
models are pretrained on a large amount of data in an unsupervised manner and ﬁnetuned on a small labeled subset.
Existing literature pays signiﬁcant attention to both the
unsupervised pretraining [7, 13, 14, 18] and supervised ﬁnetuning [26]. In spite of their notable contributions, these
researches build upon an unrealistic assumption that we already know which samples should be labeled. As shown in
Fig. 1, given a large unlabeled data pool, it is necessary to
pick up the most useful samples to exploit the limited annotation budget. In most cases, this selected subset only
23715

Encoder

Stage 2: Supervised Finetuning

Task
Module

Encoder

Finetune
Data
Selection

Selected
Samples

Oracle
Our Focus: Active Finetuning Task

giraffe

horse

Labeled Pool

Figure 1. Pretraining-Finetuning Paradigm: We focus on the
selection strategy of a small subset from a large unlabeled data
pool for annotation, named as active ﬁnetuning task, which is
under-explored for a long time.

counts a small portion (e.g. <10%) of this large unlabeled
pool. Despite the long-standing under-exploration, the selection strategy is still crucial since it may signiﬁcantly affect the ﬁnal results.
Active learning algorithms [34, 38, 39] seem to be a
potential solution, which aims to select the most suitable samples for annotation when models are trained
from scratch. However, their failures in this pretrainingﬁnetuning paradigm are revealed in both [4] and our experiments (Sec. 4.1). A possible explanation comes from
the batch-selection strategy of most current active learning methods. Starting from a random initial set, this strategy repeats the model training and data selection processes
multiple times until the annotation budget runs out. Despite their success in from-scratch training, it does not ﬁt
this pretraining-ﬁnetuning paradigm well due to the typically low annotation budget, where too few samples in each
batch lead to harmful bias inside the selection process.
To ﬁll in this gap in the pretraining-ﬁnetuning paradigm,
we formulate a new task called active ﬁnetuning, concentrating on the sample selection for supervised ﬁnetuning. In
this paper, a novel method, ActiveFT, is proposed to deal
with this task. Starting from purely unlabeled data, ActiveFT fetches a proper data subset for supervised ﬁnetuning
in a negligible time. Without any redundant heuristics, we

