This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Object Manipulation via Object-Centric Neural Scattering Functions
Stephen Tian1∗

Yancheng Cai1∗

Katherine Liu2
1

Hong-Xing Yu1

Adrien Gaidon2

Stanford University

Abstract
Learned visual dynamics models have proven effective
for robotic manipulation tasks. Yet, it remains unclear how
best to represent scenes involving multi-object interactions.
Current methods decompose a scene into discrete objects,
but they struggle with precise modeling and manipulation
amid challenging lighting conditions as they only encode
appearance tied with specific illuminations. In this work,
we propose using object-centric neural scattering functions
(OSFs) as object representations in a model-predictive control framework. OSFs model per-object light transport, enabling compositional scene re-rendering under object rearrangement and varying lighting conditions. By combining this approach with inverse parameter estimation and
graph-based neural dynamics models, we demonstrate improved model-predictive control performance and generalization in compositional multi-object environments, even in
previously unseen scenarios and harsh lighting conditions.

Yunzhu Li 1
2

Sergey Zakharov 2
Jiajun Wu1

Toyota Research Institute

Typical visual
manipulation setting

Our settings
Simulated

Real

Figure 1. While typically studied visual manipulation settings
are carefully controlled environments, we consider scenarios with
varying and even harsh lighting, in addition to novel object configurations, that are more similar to real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Predictive models are the core components of many
robotic systems for solving inverse problems such as planning and control. Physics-based models built on first principles have shown impressive performance in domains such
as drone navigation [3] and robot locomotion [28]. However, such methods usually rely on complete a priori knowledge of the environment, limiting their use in complicated
manipulation problems where full-state estimation is complex and often impossible. Therefore, a growing number of
approaches alternatively propose to learn dynamics models
directly from raw visual observations [2, 12, 14, 17, 21, 48].
Although using raw sensor measurements as inputs to
predictive models is an attractive paradigm as they are
readily available, visual data can be challenging to work
with directly due to its high dimensionality. Prior methods proposed to learn dynamics models over latent vec∗ indicates equal contribution. Yancheng is affiliated with Fudan University; this work was done while he was a summer intern at Stanford.

tors, demonstrating promising results in a range of robotics
tasks [17, 18, 44, 52]. However, with multi-object interactions, the underlying physical world is 3D and compositional. Encoding everything into a single latent vector fails
to consider the relational structure within the environment,
limiting its generalization outside the training distribution.
Another promising strategy is to build more structured
visual representations of the environment, including the use
of particles [31, 33, 36], keypoints [32, 37, 38], and object
meshes [22]. Among the structured representations, Driess
et al. [10] leveraged compositional neural implicit representations in combination with graph neural networks (GNNs)
for the dynamic modeling of multi-object interactions. The
inductive bias introduced by GNNs captures the environment’s underlying structure, enabling generalization to scenarios containing more objects than during training, and the
neural implicit representations allow precise estimation and
modeling of object geometry and interactions. However,
Driess et al. [10] only considered objects of uniform color

9021

