This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Slimmable Dataset Condensation
Songhua Liu, Jingwen Ye, Runpeng Yu, Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
songhua.liu@u.nus.edu, jingweny@nus.edu.sg, r.yu@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

RAM
Small

* Corresponding Author.

Synthetic Dataset

Large

RAM

(a). Adaptive Deployment
Task 1
Slim
Task 2
Slim
Task 3
…

…

Dataset
Condensation

Synthetic Buffer
with a Fixed Size

(b). Continual Learning
Participant 1

Participant 2

Slim
Slim

…
Participant N

Shared
Bandwidth

The success of deep learning is largely attributed to the
enormous amount of training data [5,8,12,15,21,36,37,41,
50]. However, the massive data not only inevitably introduces heavy burdens on storage and transmission but also
incommodes many applications that require training over
datasets multiple times, such as hyper-parameter optimization [3, 9, 16, 29, 30] and neural architecture search [10,
24, 43, 49]. Moreover, it raises concerns on privacy and
copyright if raw datasets are published and accessed di-

RAM

Medium

…

Dynamic Number of
Participants

1. Introductions

Slim

Continual Task Stream

Dataset distillation, also known as dataset condensation,
aims to compress a large dataset into a compact synthetic
one. Existing methods perform dataset condensation by assuming a fixed storage or transmission budget. When the
budget changes, however, they have to repeat the synthesizing process with access to original datasets, which is
highly cumbersome if not infeasible at all. In this paper,
we explore the problem of slimmable dataset condensation,
to extract a smaller synthetic dataset given only previous
condensation results. We first study the limitations of existing dataset condensation algorithms on such a successive
compression setting and identify two key factors: (1) the inconsistency of neural networks over different compression
times and (2) the underdetermined solution space for synthetic data. Accordingly, we propose a novel training objective for slimmable dataset condensation to explicitly account for both factors. Moreover, synthetic datasets in our
method adopt a significance-aware parameterization. Theoretical derivation indicates that an upper-bounded error
can be achieved by discarding the minor components without training. Alternatively, if training is allowed, this strategy can serve as a strong initialization that enables a fast
convergence. Extensive comparisons and ablations demonstrate the superiority of the proposed solution over existing
methods on multiple benchmarks.

Slim
Data Center

(c). Federated Learning

Figure 1. Scenarios where slimmable dataset condensation is useful: (a) adapting to devices with different storage budgets, (b) continual learning using a synthetic buffer with a fixed size, and (c)
federated learning with synthetic data where a dynamic number of
participants share the network bandwidth.

rectly [7, 40, 51]. These issues can be largely alleviated
by using smaller datasets containing only a few synthetic
samples but with performance similar to the original ones.
How to compress a given real dataset into such a synthetic
dataset is the main focus of dataset distillation, also known
as dataset condensation (DC), whose concept is introduced
by Wang et al. [45] and further developed by a series of
following works recently [2,17,28,33,34,44,54,55,57,58].
Specifically, existing DC approaches work under a predefined storage budget, e.g., the number of images per class.
Although it has been demonstrated that most performance
of original datasets can be recovered by the synthetic ones
with only a few synthetic samples, the fixed storage budget
does not take the variations of the storage budget into consideration. Some examples are shown in Fig. 1. On the
one hand, different devices may have different storage and
transmission resources. On the other hand, in applications

3759

