This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parallel Diffusion Models of Operator and Image for Blind Inverse Problems
Hyungjin Chung1 *

Jeongsol Kim1∗
Sehui Kim2
Dept. of Bio & Brain Engineering,
2
Kim Jae Chul Graduate School of AI,
KAIST

Jong Chul Ye2

1

{hj.chung, jeongsol, sehui.kim, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Representative results and overall concept of the proposed method. (a) Results of blind deblurring. Both the image and the kernel
in the bottom right corner are jointly estimated with the proposed method. (b) Results of imaging through turbulence. (c) Evolution of
joint reconstruction with the proposed method. 1st , 2nd row illustrate the change of x̂0 (xt ) and k̂0 (kt ) through time as t = 1 → 0, with
the measurement and the kernel initialization given on the first column.

Abstract
Diffusion model-based inverse problem solvers have
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in cases where
the forward operator is known (i.e. non-blind). However,
the applicability of the method to blind inverse problems
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea under Grant NRF-2020R1A2B5B03001980, by the KAIST Key Research Institute (Interdisciplinary Research Group) Project, by the Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation
(IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2021-0-02068,
Artificial Intelligence Innovation Hub), and by the IITP grant funded by
the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2022-0-00984, Development of Artificial Intelligence Technology for Personalized Plug-and-Play Explanation
and Verification of Explanation).

has yet to be explored. In this work, we show that we
can indeed solve a family of blind inverse problems
by constructing another diffusion prior for the forward
operator. Specifically, parallel reverse diffusion guided
by gradients from the intermediate stages enables joint
optimization of both the forward operator parameters as
well as the image, such that both are jointly estimated at the
end of the parallel reverse diffusion procedure. We show
the efficacy of our method on two representative tasks —
blind deblurring, and imaging through turbulence — and
show that our method yields state-of-the-art performance,
while also being flexible to be applicable to general blind
inverse problems when we know the functional forms. Code
available: https://github.com/BlindDPS/blind-dps

6059

