This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PREIM3D: 3D Consistent Precise Image Attribute Editing from a Single Image
Jianhui Li1,2 , Jianmin Li1 ∗ , Haoji Zhang1 , Shilong Liu1 , Zhengyi Wang1 ,
Zihao Xiao3 , Kaiwen Zheng1 , Jun Zhu1 ∗ .
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for AI, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
3
State Key Laboratory of Astronautic dynamics, Xi’an Satellite Control Center
RealAI

input

inversion

smile

black hair

age

eyeglasses

shape

Figure 1. 3D consistent precise inversion and editing. Our method enables reconstructing texture and geometry from a single real image and
allows one to perform a list of attributes editing sequentially. The yaw angles of the second to sixth columns are [−30◦ , −20◦ , 0◦ , 20◦ , 30◦ ].
The last column is the shape of the sixth column.

Abstract
We study the 3D-aware image attribute editing problem
in this paper, which has wide applications in practice. Recent methods solved the problem by training a shared encoder to map images into a 3D generator’s latent space or
by per-image latent code optimization and then edited images in the latent space. Despite their promising results
near the input view, they still suffer from the 3D inconsistency of produced images at large camera poses and imprecise image attribute editing, like affecting unspecified
attributes during editing. For more efficient image inversion, we train a shared encoder for all images. To alleviate 3D inconsistency at large camera poses, we propose
two novel methods, an alternating training scheme and a
multi-view identity loss, to maintain 3D consistency and
subject identity. As for imprecise image editing, we attribute the problem to the gap between the latent space of
real images and that of generated images. We compare
the latent space and inversion manifold of GAN models
and demonstrate that editing in the inversion manifold can
achieve better results in both quantitative and qualitative
* Corresponding authors.

evaluations. Extensive experiments show that our method
produces more 3D consistent images and achieves more
precise image editing than previous work. Source code
and pretrained models can be found on our project page:
https://mybabyyh.github.io/Preim3D/.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the well-disentangled latent space of
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12], many
works study GAN inversion [1, 2, 11, 28, 35, 36, 40] as well
as real image editing in the latent space [14, 15, 22, 31, 32].
With the popularity of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24],
some works start to incorporate it into GAN frameworks for
unconditional 3D-aware image generation [6, 7, 13, 25–27,
30]. In particular, EG3D [6], the state-of-the-art 3D GAN,
is able to generate high-resolution multi-view-consistent
images and high-quality geometry conditioned on gaussian noise and camera pose. Similar to 2D GANs, 3D
GANs also have a well semantically disentangled latent
space [6, 13, 21, 33], which enables realistic yet challenging 3D-aware image editing.
Achieving 3D-aware image editing is much more chal-

8549

