This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pix2Map: Cross-modal Retrieval for Inferring Street Maps from Images
Xindi Wu 1 *

KwunFung Lau1
Francesco Ferroni2
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Aljoša Ošep1
2
Argo AI

Deva Ramanan1,2

{aosep, deva}@andrew.cmu.edu, xindiw@princeton.edu, kwun.fung.lau@intel.com
pix2map.github.io

Abstract
Self-driving vehicles rely on urban street maps for autonomous navigation. In this paper, we introduce Pix2Map,
a method for inferring urban street map topology directly
from ego-view images, as needed to continually update and
expand existing maps. This is a challenging task, as we
need to infer a complex urban road topology directly from
raw image data. The main insight of this paper is that this
problem can be posed as cross-modal retrieval by learning
a joint, cross-modal embedding space for images and existing maps, represented as discrete graphs that encode the
topological layout of the visual surroundings. We conduct
our experimental evaluation using the Argoverse dataset
and show that it is indeed possible to accurately retrieve
street maps corresponding to both seen and unseen roads
solely from image data. Moreover, we show that our retrieved maps can be used to update or expand existing maps
and even show proof-of-concept results for visual localization and image retrieval from spatial graphs.

1. Introduction
We propose Pix2Map, a method for inferring road maps
directly from images. More precisely, given camera images, Pix2Map generates a topological map of the visible
surroundings, represented as a spatial graph. Such maps encode both geometric and semantic scene information such
as lane-level boundaries and locations of signs [52] and
serve as powerful priors in virtually all autonomous vehicle stacks. In conjunction with on-the-fly sensory measurements from lidar or camera, such maps can be used for localization [3] and path planning [39]. As map maintenance
and expansion to novel areas are challenging and expensive, often requiring manual effort [38, 50], automated map
maintenance and expansion has been gaining interest in the
community [9, 10, 27, 32, 33, 35, 38, 40].
Why is it hard? To estimate urban street maps, we need to
* Work done while at Carnegie Mellon University.

Global Street Map

Street Map

Adjacency Matrix

Camera
Data

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed Pix2Map for crossmodal retrieval. Given unseen 360◦ ego-view images collected
from seven ring cameras (left), our Pix2Map predicts the local street map by retrieving from the existing street map library
(right), represented as an adjacency matrix. The local street maps
can be further used for global high-definition map maintenance
(top).

learn to map continuous images from ring cameras to discrete graphs with varying numbers of nodes and topology
in bird’s eye view (BEV). Prior works that estimate road
topology from monocular images first process images using
Convolutional Neural Networks or Transformers to extract
road lanes and markings [9] or road centerlines [10] from
images. These are used in conjunction with recurrent neural
networks for the generation of polygonal structures [12] or
heuristic post-processing [33] to estimate a spatial graph in
BEV. This is a very difficult learning problem: such methods need to jointly learn to estimate a non-linear mapping
from image pixels to BEV, as well as to estimate the road
layout and learn to generate a discrete spatial graph.
Pix2Map. Instead, our core insight is to simply sidestep
the problem of graph generation and 3D localization from
monocular images by recasting Pix2Map as a cross-modal
retrieval task: given a set of test-time ego-view images, we
(i) compute their visual embedding and then (ii) retrieve
a graph with the closest graph embedding in terms of cosine similarity. Given recent multi-city autonomous vehicle datasets [13], it is straightforward to construct pairs of
ego-view images and street maps, both for training and test17514

