This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

E2PN: Efficient SE(3)-Equivariant Point Network
Minghan Zhu
University of Michigan

Maani Ghaffari
University of Michigan

William A Clark
Cornell University

minghanz@umich.edu

maanigj@umich.edu

wac76@cornell.edu

Huei Peng
University of Michigan
hpeng@umich.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a convolution structure for learning SE(3)-equivariant features from 3D point clouds. It can
be viewed as an equivariant version of kernel point convolutions (KPConv), a widely used convolution form to process point cloud data. Compared with existing equivariant networks, our design is simple, lightweight, fast, and
easy to be integrated with existing task-specific point cloud
learning pipelines. We achieve these desirable properties
by combining group convolutions and quotient representations. Specifically, we discretize SO(3) to finite groups for
their simplicity while using SO(2) as the stabilizer subgroup
to form spherical quotient feature fields to save computations. We also propose a permutation layer to recover SO(3)
features from spherical features to preserve the capacity to
distinguish rotations. Experiments show that our method
achieves comparable or superior performance in various
tasks, including object classification, pose estimation, and
keypoint-matching, while consuming much less memory and
running faster than existing work. The proposed method
can foster the development of equivariant models for realworld applications based on point clouds.

1. Introduction
Processing 3D data has become a vital task today as demands for automated robots and augmented reality technologies emerge. In the past decade, computer vision has
significantly succeeded in image processing, but learning
from 3D data such as point clouds is still challenging. An
important reason is that 3D data presents more variations
than 2D images in several aspects. For example, the rigid
body transformations in 2D only have 3 degrees of freedom
(DoF) with 1 for rotations. In 3D space, the DoF is 6, with 3
for rotations. The 2D translation equivariance is a key factor in the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)

Figure 1. Our method achieves higher efficiency by working with smaller
feature maps defined on S 2′ × R3 rather than SO(3)′ × R3 (′ denotes
discretization). R3 is omitted in the figure. The black arrows in each space
represent elements. The top and bottom paths are equivalent, showing the
relations among different representations.

in image processing, but it is not enough for 3D tasks.
Generally speaking, equivariance is a property for a map
such that given a transformation in the input, the output
changes in a predictable way determined by the input transformation. It drastically improves generalization as the variance caused by the transformations is captured via the network by design. Take CNNs as an example, the equivariance property refers to the fact that a translation in the
input image results in the same translation in the feature
map output from a convolution layer. However, conventional convolutions are not equivariant to rotations, which
becomes problematic, especially when we deal with 3D
data where many rotational variations occur. In response,
on the one hand, data augmentations with 3D rotations are
frequently used. On the other hand, equivariant feature
learning emerges as a research area, aiming to generalize
the translational equivariance to broader transformations.
A lot of progress has been made in group-equivariant
feature learning. The term group encompasses the 3D rotations and translations, which is called the special Euclidean
11223

