This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-fidelity Generalized Emotional Talking Face Generation
with Multi-modal Emotion Space Learning
Chao Xu1 Junwei Zhu2 Jiangning Zhang2 Yue Han1 Wenqing Chu2
Ying Tai2 Chengjie Wang2,4 * Zhifeng Xie3 Yong Liu1∗
1

APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University

2

Youtu Lab, Tencent

3

Shanghai University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{21832066, 22132041}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn, wqchu16@gmail.com
{junweizhu, vtzhang, yingtai, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com, zhifeng xie@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

audio-driven talking face generation, which is critical for
creating vivid talking faces.

Recently, emotional talking face generation has received
considerable attention. However, existing methods only
adopt one-hot coding, image, or audio as emotion conditions, thus lacking flexible control in practical applications
and failing to handle unseen emotion styles due to limited
semantics. They either ignore the one-shot setting or the
quality of generated faces. In this paper, we propose a more
flexible and generalized framework. Specifically, we supplement the emotion style in text prompts and use an Aligned
Multi-modal Emotion encoder to embed the text, image, and
audio emotion modality into a unified space, which inherits rich semantic prior from CLIP. Consequently, effective
multi-modal emotion space learning helps our method support arbitrary emotion modality during testing and could
generalize to unseen emotion styles. Besides, an Emotionaware Audio-to-3DMM Convertor is proposed to connect
the emotion condition and the audio sequence to structural representation. A followed style-based High-fidelity
Emotional Face generator is designed to generate arbitrary
high-resolution realistic identities. Our texture generator
hierarchically learns flow fields and animated faces in a
residual manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
flexibility and generalization of our method in emotion control and the effectiveness of high-quality face synthesis.

Some works have achieved significant progress in solving the above task conditioned on emotion embedding.
However, there are three continuously critical issues: 1)
How to explore a more semantic emotion embedding to
achieve better generalization for unseen emotions. Early
efforts [41,47,55] adopt the one-hot vector to indicate emotion category, which could only cover the pre-defined label and lacks semantic cues. Subsequently, EVP [19] disentangles emotion embedding from the audio, while GCAVT [23] and EAMM [18] drive emotion by visual images. However, tailored audio- and image-based emotion
encoders show limited semantics and also struggle to handle
unseen emotion styles. 2) Could we construct multi-modal
emotion sources into a unified feature space to allow a more
flexible and user-friendly emotion control. Existing methods only support one specific modality as the emotion condition, while the desired modality is usually not available in
practical applications. 3) How to design a high-resolution
identity-generalized generator. Early works [19, 41, 47] are
in identity-specific design, while recent works [18, 23] have
started to enable one-shot emotional talking face generation. However, as shown in Fig. 1(a), GC-AVT and EAMM
fail to produce high-resolution faces due to the inevitable
information loss in face embedding and the challenge of estimating accurate high-resolution flow fields, respectively.

1. Introduction

To address the aforementioned challenges, we first supplement the emotion styles in the text prompt inspired by
the zero-shot CLIP-guided image manipulation [29, 39, 43],
which could inherit rich semantic knowledge and convenient interaction after being encoded. As shown in Fig. 1(b),
unseen emotions, e.g., Satisfied, could be flexibly specified using the text description and precisely reflected on
the source face. Furthermore, to achieve alignment among
multi-modal emotion features, we introduce an Aligned
Multi-modal Emotion (AME) encoder to unify the text, im-

Talking face generation [13,38,46,58] is the task of driving a static portrait with given audio. Recently, many works
have tried to solve the challenges of maintaining lip movements synchronized with input speech contents and synthesizing natural facial motion simultaneously. However,
most researchers ignore a more challenging task, emotional
* Corresponding authors

6609

