This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AGAIN: Adversarial Training with Attribution Span Enlargement and Hybrid
Feature Fusion
Shenglin Yin1 , Kelu Yao2, 3, * , Sheng Shi4, 5 , Yangzhou Du5 , Zhen Xiao1, *
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou 311100, China
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
Northwest University, Xi’an 710127, P. R. China
5
AI Lab, Lenovo Research, Beijing 100094, P. R. China
yinsl@stu.pku.edu.cn
yaokelu@ict.ac.cn
{shisheng2, duyz1}@lenovo.com
xiaozhen@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The deep neural networks (DNNs) trained by adversarial
training (AT) usually suffered from significant robust generalization gap, i.e., DNNs achieve high training robustness
but low test robustness. In this paper, we propose a generic
method to boost the robust generalization of AT methods
from the novel perspective of attribution span. To this end,
compared with standard DNNs, we discover that the generalization gap of adversarially trained DNNs is caused by
the smaller attribution span on the input image. In other
words, adversarially trained DNNs tend to focus on specific
visual concepts on training images, causing its limitation
on test robustness. In this way, to enhance the robustness,
we propose an effective method to enlarge the learned attribution span. Besides, we use hybrid feature statistics for
feature fusion to enrich the diversity of features. Extensive
experiments show that our method can effectively improves
robustness of adversarially trained DNNs, outperforming
previous SOTA methods. Furthermore, we provide a theoretical analysis of our method to prove its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable
success in solving complex prediction tasks. However, recent studies have shown that they are particularly vulnerable to adversarial attacks [22], which take the form of small
perturbations to the input that cause DNNs to predict in* Zhen Xiao and Kelu Yao are the corresponding authors.

(a)

ASC: 0.585

ASC: 0.491

ASC: 0.562

ASC: 0.479

ASC: 0.583

ASC: 0.497

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. A visual illustration of attribution span under ResNet18. (a) is the original image; (b) and (c) are attribution spans of
the standard model and robust model in the inference phase, respectively. ASC is Attribution Span Coverage; (d) is the difference between the standard model and the robust model in terms of
attribution span; (e) is the result after partial feature erasure of the
original image using (d).

correct outputs. The defense of adversarial examples has
been intensively studied in recent years and several defenses
against adversarial attacks have been proposed in a great
deal of work [17, 18].
Among the various existing defense strategies, adversarial training (AT) [10, 15] has been shown to be one of the
most effective defenses [16] and has received a lot of attention from the research community. However, adversarially

20544

