This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Unified Scene Text Spotting based on Sequence Generation
Taeho Kil1 * Seonghyeon Kim2† Sukmin Seo1
1

Naver Cloud

2

Yoonsik Kim1

Daehee Kim1

Kakao Brain

{taeho.kil, sukmin.seo, yoonsik.kim90, daehee.k}@navercorp.com, matt.mldev@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Sequence generation models have recently made significant progress in unifying various vision tasks. Although
some auto-regressive models have demonstrated promising
results in end-to-end text spotting, they use specific detection formats while ignoring various text shapes and are
limited in the maximum number of text instances that can
be detected. To overcome these limitations, we propose
a UNIfied scene Text Spotter, called UNITS. Our model
unifies various detection formats, including quadrilaterals and polygons, allowing it to detect text in arbitrary
shapes. Additionally, we apply starting-point prompting to
enable the model to extract texts from an arbitrary starting point, thereby extracting more texts beyond the number of instances it was trained on. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method achieves competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art methods. Further analysis shows that UNITS can extract a larger number of texts
than it was trained on. We provide the code for our method
at https://github.com/clovaai/units.

(a) Single central point format.

(b) Bounding box format.

(c) Quadrilateral format.

(d) Polygonal format.

Figure 1. Various types of detection formats. The green line represents the boundary shape of the detection format, and the red dot
represents the points used for the corresponding format.

1. Introduction
End-to-end scene text spotting, which can jointly detect and recognize text from an image at once, has recently
gained significant attention. This work has practical applications in various fields such as visual navigation, visual
question answering, and document image understanding.
In this paper, we formulate scene text spotting as a sequence generation task. This approach casts the vision task
as a language modeling task conditioned on the image and
text prompt [6, 7, 27, 38]. By formulating the output as a sequence of discrete tokens, the vision task can be performed
by generating a sequence through an auto-regressive transformer decoder. Recent studies have attempted to integrate
various tasks into an auto-regressive model, including text
spotting. SPTS [28] treated all detection formats as the sin* Corresponding author.
† This work was done while the authors were at Naver Cloud.

gle central point and predicted the coordinate tokens of the
central point and word tokens auto-regressively. However,
there are several challenges associated with applying the sequence generation approach directly to scene text spotting.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, there are various methods to indicate the location and boundaries of text instances, and each
method has its own trade-offs in terms of annotation costs
and potential applicability. For instance, a single central
point or bounding box annotation has a relatively low annotation cost and is appropriate when the detailed shape information is not necessary. However, in many fields where text
spotting is applied, handling text location information as
only a single point might be insufficient. As shown in Fig. 2,
in the scene text editing [17, 32], which converts the text in
the image to desired text while preserving the text style, detailed text shape extraction is required. Therefore, for such

15223

