This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uni-Perceiver v2: A Generalist Model
for Large-Scale Vision and Vision-Language Tasks
Hao Li1⇤ , Jinguo Zhu2⇤ , Xiaohu Jiang3⇤ , Xizhou Zhu4,6B , Hongsheng Li1 ,
Chun Yuan3 , Xiaohua Wang2 , Yu Qiao6 , Xiaogang Wang1 , Wenhai Wang6 , Jifeng Dai5,6
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 SIGS, Tsinghua University 4 SenseTime Research
5
Tsinghua University 6 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of foundation models,
their task-specific fine-tuning paradigm makes them inconsistent with the goal of general perception modeling. The
key to eliminating this inconsistency is to use generalist
models for general task modeling. However, existing attempts at generalist models are inadequate in both versatility and performance. In this paper, we propose UniPerceiver v2, which is the first generalist model capable
of handling major large-scale vision and vision-language
tasks with competitive performance. Specifically, images
are encoded as general region proposals, while texts are
encoded via a Transformer-based language model. The encoded representations are transformed by a task-agnostic
decoder. Different tasks are formulated as a unified maximum likelihood estimation problem. We further propose
an effective optimization technique named Task-Balanced
Gradient Normalization to ensure stable multi-task learning with an unmixed sampling strategy, which is helpful for
tasks requiring large batch-size training. After being jointly
trained on various tasks, Uni-Perceiver v2 is capable of directly handling downstream tasks without any task-specific
adaptation. Results show that Uni-Perceiver v2 outperforms all existing generalist models in both versatility and
performance. Meanwhile, compared with the commonlyrecognized strong baselines that require tasks-specific finetuning, Uni-Perceiver v2 achieves competitive performance
on a broad range of vision and vision-language tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning a general perception model that can handle
various modalities and tasks is widely regarded as an im⇤ Equal contribution.
This work is done when Hao Li, Jinguo
Zhu, and Xiaohu Jiang are interns at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory. Code shall be released at https : / / github . com /
B Corresponding to
fundamentalvision / Uni - Perceiver.
Xizhou Zhu <zhuxizhou@sensetime.com>.

portant step towards artificial general intelligence. Due to
its difficulty, many works (e.g., Florence [45], CoCa [44],
BEiT-3 [40]), also known as foundation models [2], instead
focus on a fallback solution of learning a general representation encoder that can be adapted (e.g., fine-tuned) to
various downstream tasks. By performing large-scale pretraining on massive multi-modal task-agnostic data, these
works have demonstrated the superiority by pushing the
state-of-the-art results on a broad range of tasks including
single-modal tasks (e.g., image classification and object detection) and also cross-modal tasks (e.g., image captioning
and image retrieval).
Despite the success, there is still a considerable gap between foundation models and the goal of general perception
modeling. While foundation models only focus on general
representation learning, task modeling is neglected. Traditional task-specific fine-tuning paradigm is still utilized (see
Fig. 1). This significantly increases the marginal cost of
adapting pre-trained models to various downstream tasks,
making it difficult to meet the rapidly growing demands
of diverse downstream tasks and scenarios. Such a taskspecific fine-tuning paradigm of foundation models is inconsistent with the goal of general perception modeling.
Instead of performing task-specific fine-tuning, generalist models process different tasks with shared architecture and parameters, which is aligned with the goal of general perception modeling. It not only reduces the cost of
handling diverse tasks but also enables task collaboration.
Most existing attempts on generalist models are sequenceto-sequence (seq2seq) models [1, 5, 10, 14, 23, 29, 39, 43].
However, these attempts are inadequate in both versatility and performance: (1) some pillar vision and visionlanguage tasks as listed in Tab. 1 cannot be handled,
e.g., image-text retrieval, object detection, and instance segmentation; (2) the accuracy and inference speed still lag
significantly behind state-of-the-art task-specific methods.
Another line of research named Uni-Perceivers [49, 50]
builds generalist models supporting both generation and

2691

