This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Probabilistic Model Made Slim
Xingyi Yang1 Daquan Zhou2 Jiashi Feng2 Xinchao Wang1 *
National University of Singapore1 ByteDance Inc.2
xyang@u.nus.edu, {daquanzhou, jshfeng}@bytedance.com, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite the recent visually-pleasing results achieved, the
massive computational cost has been a long-standing flaw
for diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs), which, in turn,
greatly limits their applications on resource-limited platforms. Prior methods towards efficient DPM, however, have
largely focused on accelerating the testing yet overlooked
their huge complexity and sizes. In this paper, we make
a dedicated attempt to lighten DPM while striving to preserve its favourable performance. We start by training a
small-sized latent diffusion model (LDM) from scratch, but
observe a significant fidelity drop in the synthetic images.
Through a thorough assessment, we find that DPM is intrinsically biased against high-frequency generation, and
learns to recover different frequency components at different time-steps. These properties make compact networks
unable to represent frequency dynamics with accurate highfrequency estimation. Towards this end, we introduce a
customized design for slim DPM, which we term as Spectral Diffusion (SD), for light-weight image synthesis. SD
incorporates wavelet gating in its architecture to enable
frequency dynamic feature extraction at every reverse step,
and conducts spectrum-aware distillation to promote highfrequency recovery by inverse weighting the objective based
on spectrum magnitude. Experimental results demonstrate
that, SD achieves 8-18× computational complexity reduction as compared to the latent diffusion models on a series of
conditional and unconditional image generation tasks while
retaining competitive image fidelity.

1. Introduction
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [18, 57, 59] have
recently emerged as a powerful tool for generative modeling, and have demonstrated impressive results in image
synthesis [8, 45, 48], video generation [17, 20, 77] and 3D
editing [43]. Nevertheless, the gratifying results come with
a price: DPMs suffer from massive model sizes. In fact,
* Corresponding author

①

DPM

Lite DPM*

Spectral DPM (Ours)

274.1M #Param
96.1G MACs

22.4M #Param
7.9G MACs

21.1M #Param
6.7G MACs

(Ours)

Better
FID

Smaller #Params(M)

②

Figure 1. (1) Visualization of the frequency gap among generated
images with the DPM [48], Lite DPM and our SD on FFHQ [27]
dataset. Lite-DPM is unable to recover fine-grained textures, while
SD can produce realistic patterns. (2) Model size, Multiply-Add
cumulation (MACs) and FID score on ImageNet [7]. Our model
achieves compelling visual quality with minimal computational
cost. ∗ indicates our re-implemented version.

state-of-the-art DPMs requires billions of parameters, with
hundreds or even thousands of inference steps per image.
For example, DALL· E 2 [45], which is composed of 4 separate diffusion models, requires 5.5B parameters and 356
sampling steps in total. such an enormous model size, in
turn, makes DPMs extremely cumbersome to be employed
in resource-limited platforms.
However, existing efforts towards efficient DPMs have
focused on model acceleration, but largely overlooked lightening of the model. For example, the approaches of [1,
32, 37, 38, 40, 52, 56] strive for faster sampling, while those
of [13, 19, 48, 62] rely on reducing the input size. Admittedly, all of these methods give rise to shortened training or
inference time, yet still, the large sizes prevent them from
many real-world application scenarios.
In this paper, we make a dedicated efforts towards building compact DPMs. To start with, we train a lite version
of the popular latent diffusion model (LDM) [48] by re-

22552

