This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompting Large Language Models with Answer Heuristics for
Knowledge-based Visual Question Answering
Zhenwei Shao1

Zhou Yu1 *

Meng Wang2

Jun Yu1

1

Key Laboratory of Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China.
2
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
{shaozw, yuz, yujun}@hdu.edu.cn, eric.mengwang@gmail.com
Code: https://github.com/MILVLG/prophet

Abstract
Knowledge-based visual question answering (VQA) requires external knowledge beyond the image to answer the
question. Early studies retrieve required knowledge from
explicit knowledge bases (KBs), which often introduces
irrelevant information to the question, hence restricting the
performance of their models. Recent works have sought to
use a large language model (i.e., GPT-3 [3]) as an implicit
knowledge engine to acquire the necessary knowledge for
answering. Despite the encouraging results achieved by
these methods, we argue that they have not fully activated
the capacity of GPT-3 as the provided input information is
insufficient. In this paper, we present Prophet—a conceptually simple framework designed to prompt GPT-3 with
answer heuristics for knowledge-based VQA. Specifically,
we first train a vanilla VQA model on a specific knowledgebased VQA dataset without external knowledge. After that,
we extract two types of complementary answer heuristics
from the model: answer candidates and answer-aware
examples. Finally, the two types of answer heuristics
are encoded into the prompts to enable GPT-3 to better
comprehend the task thus enhancing its capacity. Prophet
significantly outperforms all existing state-of-the-art methods on two challenging knowledge-based VQA datasets,
OK-VQA and A-OKVQA, delivering 61.1% and 55.7%
accuracies on their testing sets, respectively.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have enabled substantial progress in visual question answering (VQA) which requires a machine to answer free-form questions by reasoning about given images. Benefiting from large-scale vision* Zhou Yu is the corresponding author

what fruit comes
(Q) from
these trees?

(K)

<entity-1, desc-1>

...

<entity-N, desc-N>

knowledge base

PICa

C

GPT-3

KAT / REVIVE

C

candidates KB-augmented
VQA model
evidence

GPT-3
GPT-3
Q

(V)

A

Q

V
captioning model

a group of people
(C) walk
in a city square

V
Q

A

K

Q

Prophet (ours)
vanillia
VQA model

answer
heuristics

GPT-3
C

A

Q

Figure 1. Conceptual comparisons of three knowledge-based
VQA frameworks using a frozen GPT-3 model [3]. While PICa
[43], KAT [11], and REVIVE [22] directly feed the caption (C)
and question (Q) into GPT-3 as the prompt, we argue that the
information they provide for GPT-3 is insufficient thus cannot
fully activate GPT-3’s potential. In contrast, our Prophet learns
a vanilla VQA model without external knowledge to produce
answer heuristics, which endows GPT-3 with richer and more
task-specific information for answer prediction.

language pretraining, the state-of-the-art methods have even
surpassed human level on several representative benchmarks [1,41,48]. Despite the success of these methods, their
reasoning abilities are far from satisfactory, especially when
external knowledge is required to answer the questions.
In this situation, the task of knowledge-based VQA is
introduced to validate models’ abilities to leverage external
knowledge. Early knowledge-based VQA benchmarks
additionally provide structured knowledge bases (KBs) and
annotate required knowledge facts for all the questions
[38, 39]. More recently, benchmarks emphasizing on opendomain knowledge have been established [29, 32], which
means KBs are no longer provided and any external knowledge resource can be used for answering. We focus on the
task with open-domain knowledge in this paper.
A straightforward solution for knowledge-based VQA
is to retrieve knowledge entries from explicit KBs, e.g.,

14974

