This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Occupancy Flow Fields for Perception and Prediction in Self-Driving
Ben Agro*, Quinlan Sykora∗ , Sergio Casas∗ , Raquel Urtasun
Waabi, University of Toronto
{bagro, qsykora, sergio, urtasun}@waabi.ai
Abstract
A self-driving vehicle (SDV) must be able to perceive its
surroundings and predict the future behavior of other traffic participants. Existing works either perform object detection followed by trajectory forecasting of the detected
objects, or predict dense occupancy and flow grids for the
whole scene. The former poses a safety concern as the number of detections needs to be kept low for efficiency reasons, sacrificing object recall. The latter is computationally expensive due to the high-dimensionality of the output grid, and suffers from the limited receptive field inherent to fully convolutional networks. Furthermore, both approaches employ many computational resources predicting
areas or objects that might never be queried by the motion
planner. This motivates our unified approach to perception and future prediction that implicitly represents occupancy and flow over time with a single neural network. Our
method avoids unnecessary computation, as it can be directly queried by the motion planner at continuous spatiotemporal locations. Moreover, we design an architecture
that overcomes the limited receptive field of previous explicit occupancy prediction methods by adding an efficient
yet effective global attention mechanism. Through extensive experiments in both urban and highway settings, we
demonstrate that our implicit model outperforms the current state-of-the-art. For more information, visit the project
website: https://waabi.ai/research/implicito.

1. Introduction
The goal of a self-driving vehicle is to take sensor observations of the environment and offline evidence such as
high-definition (HD) maps and execute a safe and comfortable plan towards its destination. Meanwhile, it is important
to produce interpretable representations that explain why
the vehicle performed a certain maneuver, particularly if a
dangerous event were to occur. To satisfy this, traditional
autonomy stacks [2, 6, 9, 14, 15, 20, 32, 38, 39] break down
the problem into 3 tasks: perception, motion forecasting and
motion planning. Perception leverages sensor data to localize the traffic participants in the scene. Motion forecasting
* Denotes equal contribution

Figure 1. Left: Explicit approaches predict whole-scene occupancy and flow on a spatio-temporal grid. Right: Our implicit
approach only predicts occupancy and flow at queried continuous
points, focusing on what matters for downstream planning.

outputs the distribution of their future motion, which is typically multimodal. Finally, motion planning is tasked with
deciding which maneuver the SDV should execute.
Most autonomy systems are object-based, which involves detecting the objects of interest in the scene. To do
so, object detectors threshold predicted confidence scores
to determine which objects in the scene, a trade off between precision and recall. Furthermore, object-based motion forecasting methods are limited to predict only a handful of sample trajectories or parametric distributions with
closed-form likelihood for tractability, as they scale linearly
with the number of objects and must run online in the vehicle. This causes information loss that could result in unsafe
situations [30], e.g., if a solid object is below the detection
threshold, or the future behavior of the object is not captured
by the simplistic future trajectory estimates.
In recent years, object-free approaches [3, 12, 29, 30]
that model the presence, location and future behavior of all
agents in the scene via a non-parametric distribution have
emerged to address the shortcomings of object-based models. Object-free approaches predict occupancy probability
and motion for each cell in a spatio-temporal grid, directly
from sensor data. More concretely, the spatio-temporal grid
is a 3-dimensional dense grid with two spatial dimensions
representing the bird’s-eye view, and a temporal dimension
from the current observation time to a future horizon of
choice. All dimensions are quantized at regular intervals.

1379

