This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-aware Pretraining for Efficient Blind Image Decomposition
Chao Wang1,2∗ , Zhedong Zheng3 , Ruijie Quan1 , Yifan Sun2 , Yi Yang1†
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
2
Baidu Inc.
3
Sea-NExT Joint Lab, School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract
In this paper, we study Blind Image Decomposition
(BID), which is to uniformly remove multiple types of degradation at once without foreknowing the noise type. There
remain two practical challenges: (1) Existing methods typically require massive data supervision, making them infeasible to real-world scenarios. (2) The conventional
paradigm usually focuses on mining the abnormal pattern of a superimposed image to separate the noise, which
de facto conflicts with the primary image restoration task.
Therefore, such a pipeline compromises repairing efficiency
and authenticity. In an attempt to solve the two challenges in one go, we propose an efficient and simplified
paradigm, called Context-aware Pretraining (CP), with two
pretext tasks: mixed image separation and masked image reconstruction. Such a paradigm reduces the annotation demands and explicitly facilitates context-aware feature learning. Assuming the restoration process follows a
structure-to-texture manner, we also introduce a Contextaware Pretrained network (CPNet). In particular, CPNet
contains two transformer-based parallel encoders, one information fusion module, and one multi-head prediction
module. The information fusion module explicitly utilizes
the mutual correlation in the spatial-channel dimension,
while the multi-head prediction module facilitates textureguided appearance flow. Moreover, a new sampling loss
along with an attribute label constraint is also deployed to
make use of the spatial context, leading to high-fidelity image restoration. Extensive experiments on both real and
synthetic benchmarks show that our method achieves competitive performance for various BID tasks.

1. Introduction
Different from traditional image restoration, Blind Image Decomposition (BID) aims to remove arbitrary degra∗ Work done during an internship at Baidu.
† Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

Figure 1. The prototype of restoration frameworks: (a) Traditional
methods [61,62] require task-specific network design and separate
training. (b) All-in-one [28] relies on tedious one-by-one training
of multiple heads. (c) TransWeather [49] is ad-hoc to remove one
specific noise at a time. (d) IPT [4] extends (c) with a reusable
pretrained middle-level transformer, which only works on specific
tasks. (e) BIDeN [17] returns to the complex multiple decoders
and demands dense supervision from noise labels. (f) The proposed method studies removing the general noise combinations by
harnessing the prior knowledge learned during pretraining, which
largely simplifies the pipeline. (Please zoom in to see the details.)

dation combinations without knowing noise type and mixing mechanism. This task is challenging due to the huge
gap between different noises and varying mixing patterns
as amalgamated noises increase. Although many existing methods [30, 54, 61, 62] have been proposed as generic
restoration networks, they are still fine-tuned on the individual datasets and do not use a single general model for all
the noise removal tasks (Figure 1 (a)). All-in-one [28] further proposes a unified model across 3 datasets, but it still
uses computationally complex separate encoders (Figure 1
(b)). To ameliorate this issue, TransWeather [49] introduces
a single encoder-single decoder transformer network for
multi-type adverse weather removal, yet this method is designed to restore one specific degradation at one time (Figure 1 (c)), which does not conform to the BID setting.

18186

