This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Less is More: Reducing Task and Model Complexity
for 3D Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Li Li1
Hubert P. H. Shum1
Toby P. Breckon1,2
1
Department of {Computer Science | Engineering2 }, Durham University, UK
{li.li4, hubert.shum, toby.breckon}@durham.ac.uk

Abstract

(ours)

Whilst the availability of 3D LiDAR point cloud data has
significantly grown in recent years, annotation remains expensive and time-consuming, leading to a demand for semisupervised semantic segmentation methods with application
domains such as autonomous driving. Existing work very
often employs relatively large segmentation backbone networks to improve segmentation accuracy, at the expense of
computational costs. In addition, many use uniform sampling to reduce ground truth data requirements for learning
needed, often resulting in sub-optimal performance. To address these issues, we propose a new pipeline that employs a
smaller architecture, requiring fewer ground-truth annotations to achieve superior segmentation accuracy compared
to contemporary approaches. This is facilitated via a novel
Sparse Depthwise Separable Convolution module that significantly reduces the network parameter count while retaining
overall task performance. To effectively sub-sample our
training data, we propose a new Spatio-Temporal Redundant Frame Downsampling (ST-RFD) method that leverages
knowledge of sensor motion within the environment to extract a more diverse subset of training data frame samples.
To leverage the use of limited annotated data samples, we
further propose a soft pseudo-label method informed by LiDAR reflectivity. Our method outperforms contemporary
semi-supervised work in terms of mIoU, using less labeled
data, on the SemanticKITTI (59.5@5%) and ScribbleKITTI
(58.1@5%) benchmark datasets, based on a 2.3× reduction
in model parameters and 641× fewer multiply-add operations whilst also demonstrating significant performance
improvement on limited training data (i.e., Less is More).

1. Introduction
3D semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds has played
a key role in scene understanding, facilitating applications
such as autonomous driving [6, 23, 26, 28, 46, 60, 63] and
robotics [3, 38, 51, 52]. However, many contemporary methods require relatively large backbone architectures with millions of trainable parameters requiring many hundred gigabytes of annotated data for training at a significant computational cost. Considering the time-consuming and costly
nature of 3D LiDAR annotation, such methods have become
less feasible for practical deployment.

mIoU (%)

55

LiM3D

2DPASS

50

● ScribbleKITTI

(ours)

(ours)

Ozan et al.

2DVNAS

45

● SemanticKITTI

LiM3D+SDSC
(ours)
LiM3D

LiM3D+SDSC

60

Ozan et al.
2DPASS

40
Cylinder3D

35

SPVNAS

Cylinder3D

MinkowskiNet

MinkowskiNet

30
0

20

40

# Parameters (Millions)

60 50

500

5000

50000

Multiply-Adds (Millions)

Figure 1. mIoU performance (%) against parameters and multiplyadd operations on SemanticKITTI (fully annotated) and ScribbleKITTI (weakly annotated) under the 5% sampling protocol.

Existing supervised 3D semantic segmentation methods [13, 31, 38, 44, 51, 52, 56, 58, 63] primarily focus on
designing network architectures for densely annotated data.
To reduce the need for large-scale data annotation, and inspired by similar work in 2D [11, 47, 49], recent 3D work
proposes efficient ways to learn from weak supervision [46].
However, such methods still suffer from high training costs
and inferior on-task performance. To reduce computational
costs, a 2D projection-based point cloud representation is
often considered [3, 14, 31, 38, 51, 52, 56, 61], but again at
the expense of significantly reduced on-task performance.
As such, we observe a gap in the research literature for the
design of semi or weakly supervised methodologies that
employ a smaller-scale architectural backbone, hence facilitating improved training efficiency whilst also reducing their
associated data annotation requirements.
In this paper, we propose a semi-supervised methodology
for 3D LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation. Facilitated by three novel design aspects, our Less is More (LiM)
based methodologies require less training data and less training computation whilst offering (more) improved accuracy
over contemporary state-of-the-art approaches (see Fig. 1).
Firstly, from an architectural perspective, we propose a
novel Sparse Depthwise Separable Convolution (SDSC)
module, which substitutes traditional sparse 3D convolution into existing 3D semantic segmentation architectures,
resulting in a significant reduction in trainable parameters
and numerical computation whilst maintaining on-task performance (see Fig. 1). Depthwise Separable Convolution
has shown to be very effective within image classification

9361

