This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ultra-High Resolution Segmentation with Ultra-Rich Context: A Novel
Benchmark
Deyi Ji1,2 Feng Zhao1 * Hongtao Lu3,4 * Mingyuan Tao2 Jieping Ye2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Alibaba Group
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
MOE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
jideyi@mail.ustc.edu.cn

fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

htlu@sjtu.edu.cn

{juchen.tmy, yejieping.ye}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
With the increasing interest and rapid development of
methods for Ultra-High Resolution (UHR) segmentation,
a large-scale benchmark covering a wide range of scenes
with full fine-grained dense annotations is urgently needed
to facilitate the field. To this end, the URUR dataset
is introduced, in the meaning of Ultra-High Resolution
dataset with Ultra-Rich Context. As the name suggests,
URUR contains amounts of images with high enough resolution (3,008 images of size 5,120×5,120), a wide range
of complex scenes (from 63 cities), rich-enough context
(1 million instances with 8 categories) and fine-grained
annotations (about 80 billion manually annotated pixels),
which is far superior to all the existing UHR datasets
including DeepGlobe, Inria Aerial, UDD, etc.. Moreover, we also propose WSDNet, a more efficient and effective framework for UHR segmentation especially with
ultra-rich context. Specifically, multi-level Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT) is naturally integrated to release computation burden while preserve more spatial details, along
with a Wavelet Smooth Loss (WSL) to reconstruct original structured context and texture with a smooth constrain. Experiments on several UHR datasets demonstrate
its state-of-the-art performance. The dataset is available at
https://github.com/jankyee/URUR.

1. Introduction
Benefited from the advancement of photography and
sensor technologies, the accessibility and analysis of ultrahigh resolution (UHR) images has opened new horizons
for the computer vision community, playing an increasingly
important role in a wide range of applications, including but
* Corresponding Authors.

not limited to disaster control, environmental monitoring,
land resource protection and urban planning. The focus of
this paper is on semantic segmentation for UHR images.
The most commonly-used datasets in existing UHR segmentation methods include DeepGlobe [4], Inria Aerial [8]
and Citysacpes [3]. According the definition of UHR medias [9,10], an image with at least 2048×1080 (2.2M) pixels
are regarded as 2K high resolution media. An image with
at least 3,840×1,080 (4.1M) pixels reaches the bare minimum bar of 4K resolution, and 4K ultra-high definition media usually refers to a minimum resolution of 3,840×2,160
(8.3M). However, except for Inria Aeral which reaches
to 5,000×5,000 pixels, the average resolution of all other
two datasets are below 2,500×2,500 (6.2M), thus actually
they are not strictly UHR medias. Besides, DeepGlobe
also adopts coarse annotations that result in numbers of
noises. Although the utra-high resolution, Inria Aerial contains only 180 images in limited scenes, and only annotates one category of building, which is not sufficient to
fully verify the performance of UHR segmentation methods
and limits the development of the community. Therefore, a
novel large-scale benchmark dataset covering a wide range
of scenes with full fine-grained dense annotations is urgently needed to facilitate the field. To this end, the URUR
dataset is proposed in the paper, in this meaning of UltraHigh Resolution dataset with Ultra-Rich Context. Firstly
for the resolution, URUR contains 3,008 UHR images of
size 5,120×5,120 (up to 26M), coming from a wide range
of complex scenes in 63 cities. For annotations, there are 80
billion manually annotated pixels, including 2 million finegrained instances with 8 categories, which is of ultra-high
context and far superior to all the existing UHR datasets.
Visualization samples and detailed statistics are revealed in
Figure 1 and Section 3.
In order to balance the memory occupation and accuracy when the image resolution grows to ultra-high, earlier

23621

