This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Super-Resolution Neural Operator
Min Wei*
Xuesong Zhang∗†
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
{mw, xuesong zhang}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose Super-resolution Neural Operator (SRNO),
a deep operator learning framework that can resolve highresolution (HR) images at arbitrary scales from the lowresolution (LR) counterparts. Treating the LR-HR image
pairs as continuous functions approximated with different
grid sizes, SRNO learns the mapping between the corresponding function spaces. From the perspective of approximation theory, SRNO first embeds the LR input into
a higher-dimensional latent representation space, trying to
capture sufficient basis functions, and then iteratively approximates the implicit image function with a kernel integral mechanism, followed by a final dimensionality reduction step to generate the RGB representation at the target
coordinates. The key characteristics distinguishing SRNO
from prior continuous SR works are: 1) the kernel integral
in each layer is efficiently implemented via the Galerkintype attention, which possesses non-local properties in the
spatial domain and therefore benefits the grid-free continuum; and 2) the multilayer attention architecture allows for
the dynamic latent basis update, which is crucial for SR
problems to “hallucinate” high-frequency information from
the LR image. Experiments show that SRNO outperforms
existing continuous SR methods in terms of both accuracy
and running time. Our code is at https://github.com/
2y7c3/Super-Resolution-Neural-Operator.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) addresses the inverse problem of reconstructing high-resolution (HR) images from their low-resolution (LR) counterparts. In a datadriven way, deep neural networks (DNNs) learn the inversion map from many LR-HR sample pairs and have demonstrated appealing performances [4, 20, 21, 24, 29, 40, 41].
Nevertheless, most DNNs are developed in the configuration of single scaling factors, which cannot be used in sce* Equal contributions. This work is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (61871055).
† Corresponding author.

𝒱(Ωℎ𝑓 )

⋅⋅⋅

ℋ(Ωℎ𝑐 )
ℒ

⋅⋅⋅

𝒦

𝒫

SRNO

ℋ(Ωℎ𝑓 )

⋅⋅⋅
Set5(

)

DIV2K(

)

Urban100(

)

Figure 1. Overview of Super-Resolution Neural operator
(SRNO). SRNO is composed of three parts, L (Lifting), K (kernel integrals) and P (Projection), which perform consecutively
to learn mappings between approximation spaces H(Ωhc ) and
H(Ωhf ) associated with grid sizes hc and hf , respectively. The
key component, K, uses test functions in the latent Hilbert space
V(Ωhf ) to seek instance-specific basis functions.

narios requiring arbitrary SR factors [37, 38]. Recently, implicit neural functions (INF) [5, 18] have been proposed to
represent images in arbitrary resolution, and paving a feasible way for continuous SR. These networks, as opposed to
storing discrete signals in grid-based formats, represent signals with evaluations of continuous functions at specified
coordinates, where the functions are generally parameterized by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). To share knowledge across instances instead of fitting individual functions
for each signal, encoder-based methods [5, 15, 26] are proposed to retrieve latent codes for each signal, and then a decoding MLP is shared by all the instances to generate the
required output, where both the coordinates and the corresponding latent codes are taken as input. However, the
point-wise behavior of MLP in the spatial dimensions results in limited performance when decoding various objects,
particularly for high-frequency components [30, 32].

18247

