This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AeDet: Azimuth-invariant Multi-view 3D Object Detection
Chengjian Feng

Zequn Jie

Yujie Zhong

Xiangxiang Chu

Lin Ma

Meituan Inc.

Abstract
Recent LSS-based multi-view 3D object detection has
made tremendous progress, by processing the features in
Brid-Eye-View (BEV) via the convolutional detector. However, the typical convolution ignores the radial symmetry
of the BEV features and increases the difficulty of the detector optimization. To preserve the inherent property of
the BEV features and ease the optimization, we propose an
azimuth-equivariant convolution (AeConv) and an azimuthequivariant anchor. The sampling grid of AeConv is always
in the radial direction, thus it can learn azimuth-invariant
BEV features. The proposed anchor enables the detection
head to learn predicting azimuth-irrelevant targets. In addition, we introduce a camera-decoupled virtual depth to
unify the depth prediction for the images with different camera intrinsic parameters. The resultant detector is dubbed
Azimuth-equivariant Detector (AeDet). Extensive experiments are conducted on nuScenes, and AeDet achieves a
62.0% NDS, surpassing the recent multi-view 3D object detectors such as PETRv2 and BEVDepth by a large margin. Project page: https://fcjian.github.io/
aedet.

1. Introduction
In the field of autonomous driving, multi-view 3D object detection has been one of the most widely researched
problems and received a lot of attention due to its low assembly cost and high efficiency. In the recent literature,
such vision-based 3D object detector has made tremendous
progress, especially for the Lift-Splat-Shoot (LSS) based
methods [11,15]. They first transfer the image features from
the image-view to Bird-Eye-View (BEV), and then process
the BEV features via the convolutional backbone and detection head similar to 2D object detection [6, 7, 28].
However, the BEV features in multi-view 3D object detection are significantly different from the image features
in 2D object detection: (1) the BEV features from the same
camera are naturally endowed with radial symmetry; (2) the
cameras have different orientations in BEV, and the BEV

Feature

Predictions

Figure 1. Illustration of the BEV features and predictions from
the typical LSS-based detector BEVDepth [15] (top row) and our
AeDet (bottom row). The BEV features are the outputs of the
BEV backbone. Assume the six cameras capture the same imaging, and the detector takes the same imaging as the input of the six
views. BEVDepth generates different features and predictions for
the same bus in different azimuths, while AeDet yields almost the
same feature and prediction for the same bus in different azimuths.

features from the different cameras are also approximately
with radial symmetry. Simply using the typical 2D backbone and detection head to perform BEV perception (such
as [11, 15]) ignores the inherent property of the BEV features and suffers from two limitations discussed as follows:
First, the BEV representation of the same imaging in
different azimuths is inconsistent. The typical convolution shares the kernel weights and adopts the same regular
sampling grid at each location of the features. Such design may destroy the radial symmetry of the BEV features,
and thus is unfriendly to representation learning. To be specific, assume the six cameras capture the same imaging of
the object, and the detector takes the same imaging as the
input of the six views. These images are then transferred
to be the rotation-equivalent features in different azimuths
from BEV. However, the sampling grid of the convolution is

21580

