This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoATT: Online Monocular 3D Object Detection
with Adaptive Token Transformer
Yunsong Zhou 1 Hongzi Zhu 1 * Quan Liu 1 Shan Chang 2 Minyi Guo 1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Donghua University
{zhouyunsong,hongzi,liuquan2017,guo-my}@sjtu.edu.cn changshan@dhu.edu.cn
Abstract
Mobile monocular 3D object detection (Mono3D) (e.g.,
on a vehicle, a drone, or a robot) is an important yet challenging task. Existing transformer-based ofﬂine Mono3D
models adopt grid-based vision tokens, which is suboptimal when using coarse tokens due to the limited available
computational power. In this paper, we propose an online
Mono3D framework, called MonoATT, which leverages a
novel vision transformer with heterogeneous tokens of varying shapes and sizes to facilitate mobile Mono3D. The core
idea of MonoATT is to adaptively assign ﬁner tokens to areas of more signiﬁcance before utilizing a transformer to
enhance Mono3D. To this end, we ﬁrst use prior knowledge to design a scoring network for selecting the most
important areas of the image, and then propose a token
clustering and merging network with an attention mechanism to gradually merge tokens around the selected areas
in multiple stages. Finally, a pixel-level feature map is reconstructed from heterogeneous tokens before employing a
SOTA Mono3D detector as the underlying detection core.
Experiment results on the real-world KITTI dataset demonstrate that MonoATT can effectively improve the Mono3D
accuracy for both near and far objects and guarantee low
latency. MonoATT yields the best performance compared
with the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin and is
ranked number one on the KITTI 3D benchmark.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) object detection has long been
a fundamental problem in both industry and academia and
enables various applications, ranging from autonomous
vehicles [17] and drones, to robotic manipulation and
augmented reality applications. Previous methods have
achieved superior performance based on the accurate depth
information from multiple sensors, such as LiDAR signal
[11,23,35,43,44,69] or stereo matching [9,10,21,34,37,57].
In order to lower the sensor requirements, a much cheaper,
more energy-efﬁcient, and easier-to-deploy alternative, i.e.,
* Corresponding authors

17493

;ĂͿ'ƌŝĚͲďĂƐĞĚƚŽŬĞŶƐŝŶŵƵůƚŝƉůĞƐƚĂŐĞƐ

;ďͿHĞƚĞƌŽŐĞŶĞŽƵƐ

 ƚŽŬĞŶƐ
  ŝŶ ŵƵůƚŝƉůĞ

ƐƚĂŐĞƐ


Figure 1. Illustration of (a) grid-based tokens used in traditional vision transformers and (b) heterogeneous tokens used in our adaptive token transformer (ATT). Instead of equally treating all image
regions, our ATT distributes dense and ﬁne tokens to meaningful
image regions (i.e., distant cars and lane lines) yet coarse tokens
to regions with less information such as the background.

monocular 3D object detection (Mono3D) has been proposed and made impressive progress. A practical online
Mono3D detector for autonomous driving should meet the
following two requirements: 1) given the constrained computational resource on a mobile platform, the 3D bounding
boxes produced by the Mono3D detector should be accurate enough, not only for near objects but also for far ones,
to ensure, e.g., high-priority driving safety applications; 2)
the response time of the Mono3D detector should be as low
as possible to ensure that objects of interest can be instantly
detected in mobile settings.
Current Mono3D methods, such as depth map based
[15, 29, 36], pseudo-LiDAR based [15, 29–31, 36, 54, 57],
and image-only based [2, 3, 12, 22, 26, 28, 42, 48, 51, 64–67],
mostly follow the pipelines of traditional 2D object detectors [41, 42, 48, 66] to ﬁrst localize object centers from
heatmaps and then aggregate visual features around each
object center to predict the object’s 3D properties, e.g., location, depth, 3D sizes, and orientation. Although it is con-

