This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structural Multiplane Image: Bridging Neural View Synthesis and 3D
Reconstruction
Mingfang Zhang1,2* , Jinglu Wang2 , Xiao Li2 , Yifei Huang1 , Yoichi Sato1 , Yan Lu2
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{mfzhang,hyf,ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp,

{jinglwa,xili11,yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The Multiplane Image (MPI), containing a set of frontoparallel RGBα layers, is an effective and efficient representation for view synthesis from sparse inputs. Yet, its fixed
structure limits the performance, especially for surfaces imaged at oblique angles. We introduce the Structural MPI (SMPI), where the plane structure approximates 3D scenes
concisely. Conveying RGBα contexts with geometricallyfaithful structures, the S-MPI directly bridges view synthesis and 3D reconstruction. It can not only overcome the
critical limitations of MPI, i.e., discretization artifacts from
sloped surfaces and abuse of redundant layers, and can
also acquire planar 3D reconstruction. Despite the intuition and demand of applying S-MPI, great challenges are
introduced, e.g., high-fidelity approximation for both RGBα
layers and plane poses, multi-view consistency, non-planar
regions modeling, and efficient rendering with intersected
planes. Accordingly, we propose a transformer-based network based on a segmentation model [4]. It predicts compact and expressive S-MPI layers with their corresponding
masks, poses, and RGBα contexts. Non-planar regions are
inclusively handled as a special case in our unified framework. Multi-view consistency is ensured by sharing global
proxy embeddings, which encode plane-level features covering the complete 3D scenes with aligned coordinates. Intensive experiments show that our method outperforms both
previous state-of-the-art MPI-based view synthesis methods
and planar reconstruction methods.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis [30, 51] aims to generate new images from specifically transformed viewpoints given one or
multiple images. It finds wide applications in augmented or
mixed reality for immersive user experiences.
The advance of neural networks mostly drives the recent progress. NeRF-based methods [28, 30] achieve impressive results but are limited in rendering speed and gen*This work was done when Mingfang Zhang was an intern at MSRA.

Standard MPI

View synthesis

Structural MPI

3D Reconstruction

Single-/sparse-view input

(a) Standard MPI v.s. Structural MPI
(D)

(R)

Standard MPI

Ours

(b) View-synthesis result

Input

PlaneFormer

Ours

(c) Reconstruction result

Figure 1. We propose the Structural Multiplane Image (S-MPI)
representation to bridge the tasks of neural view synthesis and 3D
reconstruction. It consists of a set of posed RGBα images with geometries approximating the 3D scene. The scene-adaptive S-MPI
overcomes the critical limitations of standard MPI [20], e.g., discretization artifacts (D) and repeated textures (R), and achieves a
better depth map compared with the previous planar reconstruction method, PlaneFormer [1].

eralizability. The multiplane image (MPI) representation
[42, 50] shows superior abilities in these two aspects, especially given extremely sparse inputs. Specifically, neural
networks are utilized to construct MPI layers, containing a
set of fronto-parallel RGBα planes regularly sampled in a
reference view frustum. Then, novel views are rendered in
real-time through simple homography transformation and
integral over the MPI layers. Unlike NeRF models, MPI
models do not need another training for a new scene.
Nevertheless, standard MPI has underlying limitations.
1) It is sensitive to discretization due to slanted surfaces in
scenes. As all layered planes are parallel to the source image plane, slanted surfaces will be distributed to multiple
MPI layers causing discretization artifacts in novel views,

16707

