This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstantAvatar: Learning Avatars from Monocular Video in 60 Seconds
Tianjian Jiang1 *, Xu Chen1,2 *, Jie Song†1 , Otmar Hilliges1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

1 min
Training

15 FPS
Rendering

Figure 1. InstantAvatar: we propose a system that can reconstruct animatable high-fidelity human avatars from a monocular video within
60 seconds, providing poses and masks, and can animate and render the model at 15 FPS at 540 × 540 resolution. To achieve this we
integrate accelerated neural radiance fields, originally designed for rigid scenes, with a fast correspondence search module for articulation.
An efficient empty-space skipping strategy further speeds up training and inference, enabling near-instant avatar learning.

Abstract
In this paper, we take one step further towards real-world
applicability of monocular neural avatar reconstruction by
contributing InstantAvatar, a system that can reconstruct
human avatars from a monocular video within seconds, and
these avatars can be animated and rendered at an interactive rate. To achieve this efficiency we propose a carefully designed and engineered system, that leverages emerging acceleration structures for neural fields, in combination
with an efficient empty-space skipping strategy for dynamic
scenes. We also contribute an efficient implementation that
we will make available for research purposes. Compared
to existing methods, InstantAvatar converges 130× faster
and can be trained in minutes instead of hours. It achieves
comparable or even better reconstruction quality and novel
pose synthesis results. When given the same time budget,
our method significantly outperforms SoTA methods. InstantAvatar can yield acceptable visual quality in as little
as 10 seconds training time. For code and more demo results, please refer to https://ait.ethz.ch/InstantAvatar.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Creating high-fidelity digital humans is important
for many applications including immersive telepresence,
AR/VR, 3D graphics, and the emerging metaverse. Currently acquiring personalized avatars is an involved process
that typically requires the use of calibrated multi-camera
systems and incurs significant computational cost. In this
paper, we embark on the quest to build a system for the
learning of 3D virtual humans from monocular video alone
that is lightweight enough to be widely deployable and fast
enough to allow for walk-up and use scenarios.
The emergence of powerful neural fields has enabled a
number of methods for the reconstruction of animatable
avatars from monocular videos of moving humans [1, 2, 6,
49, 62]. These methods typically model human shape and
appearance in a pose-independent canonical space.
To reconstruct the model from images that depict humans in different poses, such methods must use animation (e.g. skinning) and rendering algorithms, to deform
and render the model into posed space in a differentiable
way. This mapping between posed and canonical space allows optimization of network weights by minimizing the
difference between the generated pixel values and real images. Especially methods that leverage neural radiance

16922

