This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Slide-Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer with Local Self-Attention
Xuran Pan*

Tianzhu Ye*

Zhuofan Xia

Gao Huang†

Shiji Song

Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Self-attention mechanism has been a key factor in the recent progress of Vision Transformer (ViT), which enables
adaptive feature extraction from global contexts. However,
existing self-attention methods either adopt sparse global
attention or window attention to reduce the computation
complexity, which may compromise the local feature learning or subject to some handcrafted designs. In contrast,
local attention, which restricts the receptive field of each
query to its own neighboring pixels, enjoys the benefits of
both convolution and self-attention, namely local inductive
bias and dynamic feature selection. Nevertheless, current
local attention modules either use inefficient Im2Col function or rely on specific CUDA kernels that are hard to generalize to devices without CUDA support. In this paper, we
propose a novel local attention module, Slide Attention,
which leverages common convolution operations to achieve
high efficiency, flexibility and generalizability. Specifically,
we first re-interpret the column-based Im2Col function from
a new row-based perspective and use Depthwise Convolution as an efficient substitution. On this basis, we propose a
deformed shifting module based on the re-parameterization
technique, which further relaxes the fixed key/value positions to deformed features in the local region. In this way,
our module realizes the local attention paradigm in both
efficient and flexible manner. Extensive experiments show
that our slide attention module is applicable to a variety of
advanced Vision Transformer models and compatible with
various hardware devices, and achieves consistently improved performances on comprehensive benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Transformer was originally proposed for natural language processing [5, 29] and has gained increasing research
interest in recent years. With the advent of Vision Transformer [9], researchers begin to realize its great potential
on processing vision data, and further extend Transformer
models to a variety of vision tasks including image classi* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Query

Receptive Field

Key/Value Points

(a) PVT

(b) Swin Transformer

(c) Local Attention

(d) Slide Attention (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of our model and other attention patterns. Comparing to the global attention in PVT and window attention in Swin-Transformer, we propose a novel Slide Attention
module that not only imposes local inductive bias like local attention, but also has high efficiency and flexibility.

fication [20, 21, 30], semantic segmentation [26, 36], object
detection [2, 16, 22, 39], and multi-modal tasks [23, 24].
Nevertheless, adapting Transformer to vision is a nontrivial task. The computation complexity of self-attention
with global receptive field grows quadratically with the sequence length, which leads to excessive computation costs
and makes it impractical for vision models that require highresolution inputs and large memory consumption.
To overcome this challenge, existing works have proposed to limit the global receptive field to smaller regions.
For example, PVT [30] and DAT [33] use sparse global attention to select sparse key and value positions from the
feature map and share them across all queries. Another line
of research including Swin Transformer [20] and CSwin
Transformer [8] follow the window attention paradigm. The
input is divided into specially designed windows, where
features are extracted and aggregated within. Despite be-

2082

