This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoVLN: Learning Geometry-Enhanced Visual Representation with Slot
Attention for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Jingyang Huo*, Qiang Sun*, Boyan Jiang*, Haitao Lin, Yanwei Fu†
Fudan University
jyhuo22@m.fudan.edu.cn, {18110860051, 18110240008, 19110860015, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing works solving Room-to-Room VLN problem only utilize RGB images and do not consider local context around candidate views, which lack sufficient
visual cues about surrounding environment. Moreover,
natural language contains complex semantic information
thus its correlations with visual inputs are hard to model
merely with cross attention. In this paper, we propose
GeoVLN, which learns Geometry-enhanced visual representation based on slot attention for robust Visual-andLanguage Navigation. The RGB images are compensated
with the corresponding depth maps and normal maps predicted by Omnidata as visual inputs. Technically, we introduce a two-stage module that combine local slot attention
and CLIP model to produce geometry-enhanced representation from such input. We employ V&L BERT to learn a
cross-modal representation that incorporate both language
and vision informations. Additionally, a novel multiway attention module is designed, encouraging different phrases
of input instruction to exploit the most related features from
visual input. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our newly designed modules and show the compelling performance of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of vision, robotics, and AI
research in the past decade, asking robots to follow human instructions to complete various tasks is no longer an
unattainable dream. To achieve this, one of the fundamental problems is that given a natural language instruction,
let robot (agent) make its decision about the next move
automatically based on past and current visual observa* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

Yanwei Fu is with School of Data Science, Fudan University,
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and Fudan
ISTBI–ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence, Zhejiang
Normal University, Jinhua, China.

Slot Enhanced
RGB Feature

Aggregate RGB Information
with Local-Aware Slot Attention.

Go through the door and turn left.

Depth

Normal

Geometry-Enhanced
Visual Representation

Recurrent VLN BERT

Action

Figure 1. Illustration of our learning geometry-enhanced visual representation (GeoVLN) for visual-and-language navigation.
Critically, our GeoVLN utilizes the slot attention mechanism.

tions. This is referred as Vision-and-Language Navigation
(VLN) [2]. Importantly, such navigation abilities should
also work well in previously unseen environments.
In the popular Room-to-Room navigation task [2], the
agent is typically assumed to be equipped with a single
RGB camera. At each time step, given a set of visual observations captured from different view directions and several
navigation options, the goal is to choose an option as the
next station. The process will be repeated until the agent
reaches the end point described by the user instruction. Involving both natural language and vision information, the
main challenge here is to learn a cross-modal representation that incorporates the correlations between user instruction and current surrounding environment to aid decisionmaking.
As solutions, early studies [2, 8, 30] resort to LSTM [13]
to process temporal visual data stream. However, recent
works [4, 11, 15, 18, 19, 22, 25] have taken advantage of the
superior performance of the Transformer [31] and typically
employ this attention-based model to facilitate representation learning with cross attention and predict actions in either recurrent [15] or one-shot [4] fashion. Despite their
advantages, these approaches still have several limitations.
• 1) They only rely on RGB images which provide very

23212

