This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoAD: Movie Description in Context
Tengda Han1∗

Max Bain1∗

Arsha Nagrani1†
1

2

Gül Varol1,2

Weidi Xie1,3

Andrew Zisserman1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS

3

CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/vgg/research/autoad/

Abstract
The objective of this paper is an automatic Audio Description (AD) model that ingests movies and outputs AD in
text form. Generating high-quality movie AD is challenging due to the dependency of the descriptions on context,
and the limited amount of training data available. In this
work, we leverage the power of pretrained foundation models, such as GPT and CLIP, and only train a mapping network that bridges the two models for visually-conditioned
text generation. In order to obtain high-quality AD, we
make the following four contributions: (i) we incorporate
context from the movie clip, AD from previous clips, as well
as the subtitles; (ii) we address the lack of training data
by pretraining on large-scale datasets, where visual or contextual information is unavailable, e.g. text-only AD without movies or visual captioning datasets without context;
(iii) we improve on the currently available AD datasets, by
removing label noise in the MAD dataset, and adding character naming information; and (iv) we obtain strong results
on the movie AD task compared with previous methods.

1. Introduction
That of all the arts, the most important for us is the cinema.
Vladimir Lenin

One of the long-term aims of computer vision is to understand long-form feature films. There has been steady
progress towards this aim with the identification of characters by their face and voice [12, 15, 25, 29, 79], the recognition of their actions and inter-actions [38,50,60,85], of their
relationships [37], and 3D pose [61]. However, this is still a
long way away from story understanding. Movie Audio Description (AD), the narration describing visual elements in
movies, provides a means to evaluate current movie understanding capabilities. AD was developed to aid visually impaired audiences, and is typically generated by experienced
annotators. The amount of AD on the internet is growing
∗: equal contribution. †: also at Google Research

Context AD:
As Karen stares groomly out of the window,
a man approaches toying with a lighter.
She turns her head, and finds Jack standing
beside her.

Subtitles:
> Can I buy you a drink?
> Yeah I'd love one. Sit down.
Target AD: He takes the seat opposite,
then places his lighter on the table

Figure 1. Movie audio description (AD) consists of sentences
describing movies for the visually impaired. Note how it is heavily influenced by various types of context – the visual frames, the
previous AD, and the subtitles of the movie.

due to more societal support for visually impaired communities and its inclusion is becoming an emerging legal requirement.
AD differs from image or video captioning in several significant respects [67], bringing its own challenges. First,
AD provides dense descriptions of important visual elements over time. Second, AD is always provided on a separate soundtrack to the original audio track and is highly
complementary to it. It is complementary in two ways: it
does not need to provide descriptions of events that can be
understood from the soundtrack alone (such as dialogue and
ambient sounds), and it is constrained in time to intervals
that do not overlap with the dialogue. Third, unlike dense
video captioning, AD aims at storytelling; therefore, it typically includes factors like a character’s name, emotion, and
action descriptions.
In this work, our objective is automatic AD generation –
a model that takes continuous movie frames as input and
outputs AD in text form. Specifically, we generate text
given a temporal interval of an AD, and evaluate its quality by comparing with the ground-truth AD. This is a relatively unexplored task in the vision community with previous work targeting ActivityNet videos [88], a very different
domain to long-term feature films with storylines, and the
LSMDC challenge [68], where the descriptions and character names are treated separately.
As usual, one of the challenges holding back progress

18930

