This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoMAE: Masked Geometric Target Prediction
for Self-supervised Point Cloud Pre-Training
Xiaoyu Tian1
1

Haoxi Ran2

Yue Wang3

IIIS, Tsinghua University

2

Abstract
This paper tries to address a fundamental question in
point cloud self-supervised learning: what is a good signal we should leverage to learn features from point clouds
without annotations? To answer that, we introduce a point
cloud representation learning framework, based on geometric feature reconstruction. In contrast to recent papers
that directly adopt masked autoencoder (MAE) and only
predict original coordinates or occupancy from masked
point clouds, our method revisits differences between images and point clouds and identifies three self-supervised
learning objectives peculiar to point clouds, namely centroid prediction, normal estimation, and curvature prediction. Combined, these three objectives yield an nontrivial
self-supervised learning task and mutually facilitate models to better reason fine-grained geometry of point clouds.
Our pipeline is conceptually simple and it consists of two
major steps: first, it randomly masks out groups of points,
followed by a Transformer-based point cloud encoder; second, a lightweight Transformer decoder predicts centroid,
normal, and curvature for points in each voxel. We transfer
the pre-trained Transformer encoder to a downstream peception model. On the nuScene Datset, our model achieves
3.38 mAP improvment for object detection, 2.1 mIoU gain
for segmentation, and 1.7 AMOTA gain for multi-object
tracking. We also conduct experiments on the Waymo Open
Dataset and achieve significant performance improvements
over baselines as well. 1

1. Introduction
While object detection and segmentation from LiDAR
point clouds have achieved significant progress, these models usually demand a large amount of 3D annotations that
are hard to acquire. To alleviate this issue, recent works explore learning representations from unlabeled point clouds,
* Corresponding to: hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/Tsinghua-

MARS-Lab/GeoMAE.

CMU

3

Hang Zhao1 *
NVIDIA

Masked Token Prediction

Performance

+ 3.4

+ 0.9

Scratch
Prediction Target

Pixel values: brightness

Point values: coordinates
Geometric features

Pre-trained with point values
Pre-trained with geometric features

Figure 1. Pixel value regression has been proved effective in
masked autoencoder pre-training for images. We find this practice
ineffective in point cloud pre-training and propose a set of geometry aware prediction targets.

such as contrastive learning [20, 46, 53], and mask modeling [32, 51]. Similar to image-based representation learning settings, these representations are transferred to downstream tasks for weight initialization. However, the existing self-supervised pretext tasks do not bring adequate improvements to the downstream tasks as expected.
Contrastive learning based methods typically encode different ‘views’ (potentially with data augmentation) of point
clouds into feature space. They bring features of the same
point cloud closer and make features of different point
clouds ‘repel’ each other. Other recent works use masked
modeling to learn point cloud features through self reconstruction [32, 51]. That is, randomly sparsified point
clouds are encoded by point cloud feature extractors, followed by a reconstruction module to predict original point
clouds. These methods, when applied to point clouds, ignore the fundamental difference of point clouds from images – point clouds provide scene geometry while images
provide brightness. As shown in Figure 1, this modality
disparity hampers direct use of methods developed in the
image domain for point cloud domain, and thus calls for
novel self-supervised objectives dedicated to point clouds.
Inspired by modeling and computational techniques in
geometry processing, we introduce a self-supervised learning framework dedicated to point clouds. Most importantly,
we design a series of prediction targets which describe the
fine-grained geometric features of the point clouds. These

13570

