This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Stage 3D Whole-Body Mesh Recovery with Component Aware Transformer

E

Fusion

D

E3

E2

E2

E1

Jing Lin1,2§ , Ailing Zeng1¶ , Haoqian Wang2 , Lei Zhang1 , Yu Li1
1
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA),
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
https://osx-ubody.github.io

(a) Previous multi-stage pipeline

(b) Our one-stage pipeline

Figure 1. A comparison of existing whole-body mesh recovery methods and ours. Most existing methods leverage a multi-stage pipeline
which uses separate expert models to process body component (e.g., E1: HeadNet, E2: HandNet, E3: BodyNet) and fuse them to get the
whole-body prediction in a copy-paste manner. The result (from [36]) produces unnatural wrist poses. In contrast, our pipeline is a neat
one-stage framework with a single encoder-decoder and can predict more accurately with natural meshes.

Abstract
Whole-body mesh recovery aims to estimate the 3D human body, face, and hands parameters from a single image. It is challenging to perform this task with a single
network due to resolution issues, i.e., the face and hands
are usually located in extremely small regions. Existing
works usually detect hands and faces, enlarge their resolution to feed in a specific network to predict the parameter,
and finally fuse the results. While this copy-paste pipeline
can capture the fine-grained details of the face and hands,
the connections between different parts cannot be easily recovered in late fusion, leading to implausible 3D rotation
and unnatural pose. In this work, we propose a one-stage
pipeline for expressive whole-body mesh recovery, named
OSX, without separate networks for each part. Specifically,
we design a Component Aware Transformer (CAT) composed of a global body encoder and a local face/hand decoder. The encoder predicts the body parameters and provides a high-quality feature map for the decoder, which performs a feature-level upsample-crop scheme to extract highresolution part-specific features and adopt keypoint-guided

deformable attention to estimate hand and face precisely.
The whole pipeline is simple yet effective without any manual post-processing and naturally avoids implausible prediction. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of OSX. Lastly, we build a large-scale Upper-Body
dataset (UBody) with high-quality 2D and 3D whole-body
annotations. It contains persons with partially visible bodies in diverse real-life scenarios to bridge the gap between
the basic task and downstream applications.

1. Introduction
Expressive whole-body mesh recovery aims to jointly estimate the 3D human body poses, hand gestures, and facial expressions from monocular images. It is gaining increasing attention due to recent advancements in wholebody parametric models (e.g., SMPL-X [37]). This task is a
key step in modeling human behaviors and has many applications, e.g., motion capture, human-computer interaction.
Previous research focus on individual tasks of reconstructing human body [9, 21, 25, 44, 48, 49], face [2, 10, 12, 43],
§ Work done during an internship at IDEA; ¶ Corresponding author.

21159

