This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Koopman Pooling: Control-Inspired Temporal Dynamics Encoding for
Skeleton-Based Action Recognition

1

Xinghan Wang1 , Xin Xu1 , Yadong Mu1,2 *
Peking University, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory

{xinghan wang, xuxin2001, myd}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Skeleton-based human action recognition is becoming
increasingly important in a variety of fields. Most existing works train a CNN or GCN based backbone to extract
spatial-temporal features, and use temporal average/max
pooling to aggregate the information. However, these pooling methods fail to capture high-order dynamics information. To address the problem, we propose a plug-andplay module called Koopman pooling, which is a parameterized high-order pooling technique based on Koopman
theory. The Koopman operator linearizes a non-linear dynamics system, thus providing a way to represent the complex system through the dynamics matrix, which can be
used for classification. We also propose an eigenvalue normalization method to encourage the learned dynamics to
be non-decaying and stable. Besides, we also show that
our Koopman pooling framework can be easily extended to
one-shot action recognition when combined with Dynamic
Mode Decomposition. The proposed method is evaluated
on three benchmark datasets, namely NTU RGB+D 60, 120
and NW-UCLA. Our experiments clearly demonstrate that
Koopman pooling significantly improves the performance
under both full-dataset and one-shot settings.

1. Introduction
Skeleton-based human action recognition is a crucial
task in many applications, ranging from video surveillance
to autonomous driving and human-robot interaction. With
the prevalence of deep learning, the rising of LSTM, CNN
and GCN has significantly improved the performance of action recognition. Most existing methods [9,13,28,46,70,73]
use a CNN or GCN based backbone to extract complex
spatial-temporal features, and use temporal average/max
pooling to aggregate the information. However, vanilla temporal average/max pooling contains only first-order information and abandons higher-order statistical information.
* Corresponding author

Feature Extraction

Aggregation & Classification

…
𝑥𝑥1 𝑥𝑥2

Average/Sum

𝑥𝑥 𝑇𝑇

Feature Space

𝑥𝑥ҧ

𝑥𝑥1

𝐾𝐾
Matching

𝑥𝑥2

𝐾𝐾

…
𝑥𝑥 𝑇𝑇

Koopman Space

𝐾𝐾1
𝐾𝐾2
…
𝐾𝐾𝑁𝑁

Classifier

Class-wise Dynamics Matrices

Temporal Average Pooling

Koopman Pooling

Figure 1. Most existing works use temporal average pooling to
aggregate the information along the temporal dimension (left), and
only first-order information is considered. Our proposed Koopman
pooling (right) instead focuses on the true latent dynamics of the
sequence in linear Koopman space, and learns a set of class-wise
Koopman dynamics matrices to represent the dynamics of each
class. The classification is achieved by dynamics matching.

To this end, recent works focus on second-order pooling to capture second-order information of the feature sequences. Specifically, bilinear and covariance pooling is
widely used to extract second-order statistical information
from the feature sequence. Early works [14] use simple bilinear pooling to model the interaction of features
and aggregate temporal information. In recent years, researchers proposed to use covariance pooling [22] to capture second-order statistical information, as covariance matrix can model the interaction between features while maintaining good geometrical structure [31]. However, the
skeleton sequence as well as the extracted feature sequence
has complex underlying dynamics in nature. Existing methods such as covariance pooling only exploit the feature interaction between frames or channels, but they fail to discover the true dynamics of the sequence. Instead, we aim

10597

