This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point Cloud Forecasting as a Proxy for 4D Occupancy Forecasting
Tarasha Khurana∗

Peiyun Hu∗

David Held

Deva Ramanan

Carnegie Mellon University

Historical LiDAR Sweeps

t = {-T ... 0}

Future Point Clouds

Future 4D Occupancy

t=1

...

t=T

t = {1 ... T}

Figure 1. We focus on the problem of scene perception and forecasting for autonomous systems. As traditional methods rely on costly
human annotations, we look towards emerging self-supervisable and scalable tasks such as point cloud forecasting [11, 18, 19]. However,
we argue that the formulation of point cloud forecasting unnecessarily focuses on learning the sensor extrinsics and intrinsics as part of
predicting future point clouds, whereas the only physical quantity of central importance to autonomous perception is future spacetime 4D
occupancy. We recast the task as that of 4D occupancy forecasting and show how using the same data as point cloud forecasting, one can
learn a meaningful and generic intermediate quantity – future spacetime 4D occupancy.

Abstract
Predicting how the world can evolve in the future is crucial for motion planning in autonomous systems. Classical methods are limited because they rely on costly human
annotations in the form of semantic class labels, bounding
boxes, and tracks or HD maps of cities to plan their motion — and thus are difficult to scale to large unlabeled
datasets. One promising self-supervised task is 3D point
cloud forecasting [11, 18–20] from unannotated LiDAR sequences. We show that this task requires algorithms to implicitly capture (1) sensor extrinsics (i.e., the egomotion
of the autonomous vehicle), (2) sensor intrinsics (i.e., the
sampling pattern specific to the particular LiDAR sensor),
and (3) the shape and motion of other objects in the scene.
But autonomous systems should make predictions about the
world and not their sensors! To this end, we factor out (1)
and (2) by recasting the task as one of spacetime (4D) oc∗ Equal contribution

cupancy forecasting. But because it is expensive to obtain
ground-truth 4D occupancy, we “render” point cloud data
from 4D occupancy predictions given sensor extrinsics and
intrinsics, allowing one to train and test occupancy algorithms with unannotated LiDAR sequences. This also allows one to evaluate and compare point cloud forecasting
algorithms across diverse datasets, sensors, and vehicles.

1. Introduction
Motion planning in a dynamic environment requires autonomous agents to predict the motion of other objects.
Standard solutions consist of perceptual modules such as
mapping, object detection, tracking, and trajectory forecasting. Such solutions often rely on human annotations
in the form of HD maps of cities, or semantic class labels,
bounding boxes, and object tracks, and therefore are difficult to scale to large unlabeled datasets. One promising selfsupervised task is 3D point cloud forecasting [11, 18–20].

1116

