This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SmartAssign: Learning A Smart Knowledge Assignment Strategy
for Deraining and Desnowing
Yinglong Wang† Chao Ma§ Jianzhuang Liu†
†
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
§
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ylwanguestc@gmail.com, chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com

Abstract
Existing methods mainly handle single weather types.
However, the connections of different weather conditions at
deep representation level are usually ignored. These connections, if used properly, can generate complementary representations for each other to make up insufficient training data, obtaining positive performance gains and better
generalization. In this paper, we focus on the very correlated rain and snow to explore their connections at deep
representation level. Because sub-optimal connections may
cause negative effect, another issue is that if rain and snow
are handled in a multi-task learning way, how to find an
optimal connection strategy to simultaneously improve deraining and desnowing performance. To build desired connection, we propose a smart knowledge assignment strategy, called SmartAssign, to optimally assign the knowledge
learned from both tasks to a specific one. In order to further enhance the accuracy of knowledge assignment, we
propose a novel knowledge contrast mechanism, so that
the knowledge assigned to different tasks preserves better
uniqueness. The inherited inductive biases usually limit
the modelling ability of CNNs, we introduce a novel transformer block to constitute the backbone of our network to effectively combine long-range context dependency and local
image details. Extensive experiments on seven benchmark
datasets verify that proposed SmartAssign explores effective connection between rain and snow, and improves the
performances of both deraining and desnowing apparently.
The implementation code will be available at https://
gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/
research/cv/SmartAssign.

1. Introduction
Bad weather types, such as haze, rain, and snow inevitably degrade the visual quality of images, meanwhile
decrease the performances of other downstream computer

Input

Restormer [58]

Ours

Input

HDCWNet [7]

Ours

Figure 1. Given challenging rainy (with blurry rain streaks) and
snowy (with high bright snowflakes) images , the proposed method
effectively removes the artifacts of rain and snow simultaneously,
achieving better results than the state-of-the-art approaches. This
is attributed to the unique knowledge which captures accurate features of rain/snow as well as the common knowledge boosting the
generalization of our model to real data.

vision tasks, e.g., autonomous driving [57]. Existing methods mainly focus on single weather types, e.g., deraining
[14,19,26,45,46,48–50,56,60], dehazing [5,10,31,41,54],
and desnowing [6, 7, 32, 49]. However, these methods usually ignore the connections among these weather types,
which, if used properly, may simultaneously improve the
performance of multiple image recovery tasks.
Some methods attempt to explore the connections among
different weather types by handling them with an unified architecture and one set of pre-trained weights, e.g.,
[8, 25, 27]. But they neglect the difference of multiple
weather types, the uniqueness belonging to single weather
types may harm the performance of other weather recovery
tasks. Therefore, the performances of such unified networks

3677

