This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Search-Map-Search: A Frame Selection Paradigm for Action Recognition
Mingjun Zhao
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada

Yakun Yu
Univerity of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada

Xiaoli Wang
Tencent
Shenzhen, China

zhao2@ualberta.ca

yakun2@ualberta.ca

evexlwang@tencent.com

Lei Yang
Tencent
Shenzhen, China

Di Niu
Tencent
Edmonton, Canada

yangalalei@gmail.com

dniu@ualberta.ca

Abstract

Despite the success of deep learning in video understanding tasks, processing every frame in a video is computationally expensive and often unnecessary in real-time
applications. Frame selection aims to extract the most informative and representative frames to help a model better
understand video content. Existing frame selection methods
either individually sample frames based on per-frame importance prediction, without considering interaction among
frames, or adopt reinforcement learning agents to find representative frames in succession, which are costly to train
and may lead to potential stability issues. To overcome the
limitations of existing methods, we propose a Search-MapSearch learning paradigm which combines the advantages
of heuristic search and supervised learning to select the best
combination of frames from a video as one entity. By combining search with learning, the proposed method can better capture frame interactions while incurring a low inference overhead. Specifically, we first propose a hierarchical
search method conducted on each training video to search
for the optimal combination of frames with the lowest error on the downstream task. A feature mapping function is
then learned to map the frames of a video to the representation of its target optimal frame combination. During inference, another search is performed on an unseen video to select a combination of frames whose feature representation is
close to the projected feature representation. Extensive experiments based on several action recognition benchmarks
demonstrate that our frame selection method effectively improves performance of action recognition models, and significantly outperforms a number of competitive baselines.

1. Introduction
Videos have proliferated online in recent years with the
popularity of social media, and have become a major form
of content consumption on the Internet. The abundant video
data has greatly encouraged the development of deep learning techniques for video content understanding. As one of
the most important tasks, action recognition aims to identify relevant actions described in videos, and plays a vital
role to other downstream tasks like video retrieval and recommendation.
Due to the high computational cost of processing frames
in a video, common practices of action recognition involve
sampling a subset of frames or clips uniformly [31] or
densely [26, 37] from a given video a serve as the input
to a content understanding model. However, since frames
in a video may contain redundant information and are not
equally important, simple sampling methods are often incapable of capturing such knowledge and hence can lead to
sub-optimal action recognition results.
Prior studies attempt to actively select relevant video
frames to overcome the limitation of straightforward sampling, achieving improvements to model performance.
Heuristic methods are proposed to rank and select frames
according to the importance score of each frame/clip calculated by per-frame prediction [15, 19]. Despite the effectiveness, these methods heavily rely on per-frame features,
without considering the interaction or diversity among selected frames. Reinforcement learning (RL) has also been
proposed to identify informative frames by formulating
frame selection as a Markov decision process (MDP) [8, 9,
33,35,36]. However, existing RL-based methods may suffer
from training stability issues and rely on a massive amount
of training samples. Moreover, RL methods make an MDP
assumption that frames are selected sequentially depending

10627

