This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-resolution image reconstruction with latent diffusion models from human
brain activity
Yu Takagi1,2 *
1

Shinji Nishimoto1,2

Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Japan
2

CiNet, NICT, Japan

{takagi.yuu.fbs,nishimoto.shinji.fbs}@osaka-u.ac.jp

Figure 1. Presented images (red box, top row) and images reconstructed from fMRI signals (gray box, bottom row) for one subject (subj01).

Abstract
Reconstructing visual experiences from human brain activity offers a unique way to understand how the brain represents the world, and to interpret the connection between
computer vision models and our visual system. While deep
generative models have recently been employed for this
task, reconstructing realistic images with high semantic fidelity is still a challenging problem. Here, we propose a
new method based on a diffusion model (DM) to reconstruct images from human brain activity obtained via functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). More specifically, we rely on a latent diffusion model (LDM) termed
Stable Diffusion. This model reduces the computational
cost of DMs, while preserving their high generative performance. We also characterize the inner mechanisms of the
LDM by studying how its different components (such as the
latent vector of image Z, conditioning inputs C, and different elements of the denoising U-Net) relate to distinct brain
functions. We show that our proposed method can reconstruct high-resolution images with high fidelity in straight* Corresponding author

forward fashion, without the need for any additional training and fine-tuning of complex deep-learning models. We
also provide a quantitative interpretation of different LDM
components from a neuroscientific perspective. Overall, our
study proposes a promising method for reconstructing images from human brain activity, and provides a new framework for understanding DMs. Please check out our webpage at https://sites.google.com/view/stablediffusion-withbrain/.

1. Introduction
A fundamental goal of computer vision is to construct
artificial systems that see and recognize the world as human visual systems do. Recent developments in the measurement of population brain activity, combined with advances in the implementation and design of deep neural network models, have allowed direct comparisons between latent representations in biological brains and architectural characteristics of artificial networks, providing
important insights into how these systems operate [3, 8–
10, 13, 18, 19, 21, 42, 43, 54, 55]. These efforts have in-

14453

