This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScarceNet: Animal Pose Estimation with Scarce Annotations
Chen Li
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
lichen@u.nus.edu

gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Animal pose estimation is an important but underexplored task due to the lack of labeled data. In this paper,
we tackle the task of animal pose estimation with scarce
annotations, where only a small set of labeled data and unlabeled images are available. At the core of the solution to
this problem setting is the use of the unlabeled data to compensate for the lack of well-labeled animal pose data. To
this end, we propose the ScarceNet, a pseudo label-based
approach to generate artificial labels for the unlabeled images. The pseudo labels, which are generated with a model
trained with the small set of labeled images, are generally
noisy and can hurt the performance when directly used for
training. To solve this problem, we first use a small-loss
trick to select reliable pseudo labels. Although effective,
the selection process is improvident since numerous highloss samples are left unused. We further propose to identify
reusable samples from the high-loss samples based on an
agreement check. Pseudo labels are re-generated to provide
supervision for those reusable samples. Lastly, we introduce a student-teacher framework to enforce a consistency
constraint since there are still samples that are neither reliable nor reusable. By combining the reliable pseudo label selection with the reusable sample re-labeling and the
consistency constraint, we can make full use of the unlabeled data. We evaluate our approach on the challenging
AP-10K dataset, where our approach outperforms existing
semi-supervised approaches by a large margin. We also test
on the TigDog dataset, where our approach can achieve better performance than domain adaptation based approaches
when only very few annotations are available. Our code is
available at the project website 1 .

1. Introduction
The ability to understand animal behavior is fundamental to many applications, such as farming, ecology and
surveillance. Animal pose estimation is a key step to un1 https://github.com/chaneyddtt/ScarceNet

Ground
truth
Agreement
check

Labeled data
Our
Model
Reliability
check

Unlabeled data

Student-teacher
consistency

Pseudo
labels

20.jpg
93.jpg
149.jpg
218.jpg
280.jpg
360.jpg
540.jpg
576.jpg
644.jpg
737.jpg
924.jpg
1066.jpg
1229.jpg

Estimated animal poses

Figure 1. An illustration of our task. We aim to achieve accurate
animal pose estimation with a small set of labeled images as well
as unlabeled images.

derstand animal behavior and has attracted increasing attention in recent years [5, 16, 20, 23, 33]. Although great success is achieved for human pose estimation with the development of sophisticated deep learning models, these techniques cannot be directly used for animals due to the lack
of labeled animal pose data. Existing works overcome this
problem by learning from human pose data [5] or synthetic
animal images [16, 20, 23]. However, there is a large domain gap between the real and synthetic (human) data. For
example, the synthetic animal images in [20], which are
generated from CAD models, only exhibit limited pose, appearance and background variations. As a result, the model
trained with the synthetic data may not adapt well to real
images, especially for images with crowded scene or selfocclusion. Moreover, the generation of synthetic images is
a tedious process that also requires expert knowledge. The
above-mentioned problems lead us to ask whether we can
achieve accurate animal pose estimation with minimal effort for annotating? To answer this question, we focus on
how to learn from scarce labeled data for animal pose estimation. As shown in Fig. 1, we aim to achieve accurate
animal pose estimation with only a small set of labeled images and unlabeled images.
The data scarcity problem is solved by semi-supervised
learning (SSL) for the classification task [3, 25, 28, 34]. One
powerful class of SSL is pseudo labeling (PL), where artificial labels generated from a pretrained model are used
together with labeled data to train a model. Impressive

17174

