This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2PCNet: Two-Phase Consistency Training for Day-to-Night
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Mikhail Kennerley1,2 , Jian-Gang Wang2 , Bharadwaj Veeravalli1 , and Robby T. Tan1
1
National University of Singapore, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
mikhailk@u.nus.edu, jgwang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, elebv@nus.edu.sg, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Object detection at night is a challenging problem due
to the absence of night image annotations. Despite several
domain adaptation methods, achieving high-precision results remains an issue. False-positive error propagation is
still observed in methods using the well-established studentteacher framework, particularly for small-scale and lowlight objects. This paper proposes a two-phase consistency
unsupervised domain adaptation network, 2PCNet, to address these issues. The network employs high-confidence
bounding-box predictions from the teacher in the first phase
and appends them to the student’s region proposals for the
teacher to re-evaluate in the second phase, resulting in a
combination of high and low confidence pseudo-labels. The
night images and pseudo-labels are scaled-down before being used as input to the student, providing stronger smallscale pseudo-labels. To address errors that arise from lowlight regions and other night-related attributes in images,
we propose a night-specific augmentation pipeline called
NightAug. This pipeline involves applying random augmentations, such as glare, blur, and noise, to daytime images. Experiments on publicly available datasets demonstrate that our method achieves superior results to state-ofthe-art methods by 20%, and to supervised models trained
directly on the target data. 1

1. Introduction
Nighttime object detection is critical in many applications. However, the requirement of annotated data by supervised methods is impractical, since night data with annotations is few, and supervised methods are generally prone
to overfitting to the training data. Among other reasons,
this scarcity is due to poor lighting conditions which makes
nighttime images hard to annotate. Hence, methods that
1 www.github.com/mecarill/2pcnet

Figure 1. Qualitative results of state-of-the-art DA methods, DA
Faster-RCNN [3], UMT [7], Adaptive Teacher (AT) [15] and our
method 2PCNet on the BDD100K [36] dataset. Unlike the SOTA
methods, our method is able to detect dark and small scale objects
with minimal additional false positive predictions.

do not assume the availability of the annotations are more
advantageous. Domain adaptation (DA) is an efficient solution to this problem by allowing the use of readily available
annotated source daytime datasets.
A few domain adaptation methods have been proposed,
e.g., adversarial learning which uses image and instance
level classifiers [3] and similar concepts [22, 32]. However,
these methods isolate the domain adaptation task purely towards the feature extractor, and suppress features of the
target data for the sake of domain invariance. Recent unsupervised domain adaptation methods exploit the studentteacher framework (e.g. [1,7,11,15]). Since the student initially learns from the supervised loss, there is a bias towards
the source data. Augmentation [7,11] and adversarial learning [15] have been proposed to address this problem. Unfortunately, particularly for day-to-night unsupervised domain adaptation, these methods suffer from a large num-

11484

