This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing With Sound:
Long-range Acoustic Beamforming for Multimodal Scene Understanding
Praneeth Chakravarthula1

Jim Aldon D’Souza2 Ethan Tseng1 Joe Bartusek1
1
Princeton University 2 Algolux

Felix Heide1,2

Abstract

EM radiation-based sensor systems (active or passive) are
fundamentally limited by the propagation of EM waves.

Mobile robots, including autonomous vehicles rely heavily on sensors that use electromagnetic radiation like lidars,
radars and cameras for perception. While effective in most
scenarios, these sensors can be unreliable in unfavorable
environmental conditions, including low-light scenarios and
adverse weather, and they can only detect obstacles within
their direct line-of-sight. Audible sound from other road
users propagates as acoustic waves that carry information
even in challenging scenarios. However, their low spatial
resolution and lack of directional information have made
them an overlooked sensing modality. In this work, we introduce long-range acoustic beamforming of sound produced
by road users in-the-wild as a complementary sensing modality to traditional electromagnetic radiation-based sensors.
To validate our approach and encourage further work in the
field, we also introduce the first-ever multimodal long-range
acoustic beamforming dataset. We propose a neural aperture expansion method for beamforming and demonstrate
its effectiveness for multimodal automotive object detection
when coupled with RGB images in challenging automotive
scenarios, where camera-only approaches fail or are unable
to provide ultra-fast acoustic sensing sampling rates. Data
and code can be found here1 .

Acoustic waves are an alternative and complementary
sensing modality that are not subject to these limitations. Every automotive vehicle generates noise due to
engine/transmission, aerodynamics, braking, and contact
with the road. Even electric vehicles are required by law
to emit sound to alert pedestrians [36]. However, acoustic
sensing is not without challenges. Spatially resolving the
acoustic spectrum at meter wavelengths (e.g., a 1 kHz sound
wave has a wavelength of about 35 cm in air) has limited
existing approaches to low-resolution tracking of 3D spatial
coordinates [11–13, 32, 44].

1. Introduction
Autonomous mobile robots of today predominantly rely
on several electromagnetic (EM) radiation-based sensing
modalities such as camera, radar and lidar for diverse scene
understanding tasks, including object detection, semantic
segmentation, lane detection, and intent prediction. The most
promising approaches rely on fused data input from these
camera, lidar and radar sensor configurations [7, 42, 50] and
robust data-driven perception algorithms using convolutional
neural networks or vision transformers. However, existing
camera/radar/lidar stacks do not return signal for objects with
low reflectance and in conditions where light-based sensors
struggle, such as severe scattering due to fog. All existing

In this work, we show that acoustic sensing is complementary to existing EM wave-based sensors, robust to challenging scenarios, and achieves improved performance when
combined with existing vision-only approaches. To this end,
we captured a large multimodal dataset with a prototype
vehicle equipped with a 1024 (32x32 grid) microphone array
and a plethora of vision sensors, and had them labeled by
human annotators, which we release as the first multimodal
long-range beamforming dataset. To the best of our knowledge, there is no such large and diverse multimodal acoustic
beamforming dataset, as also illustrated in Table 1. We additionally propose a neural acoustic beamforming method
for small aperture microphone arrays via learned aperture
expansion. The aperture-expanded beamforming maps recover spatial resolution typically lost in sound measurements,
and facilitate fusion with visual inference tasks. We assess
multimodal visual and acoustic vision tasks in diverse realworld driving scenarios. We validate that visual and acoustic
signals can complement each other in challenging automotive scenarios and can enable future frame predictions at
kHz frequencies. We also demonstrate that object detection using vision and acoustic signals outperform that of
vision-only signals in challenging low-light scenarios. Furthermore, we show the applicability of acoustic sensing in
non-line-of-sight and partially occluded scenes where purely
vision-based sensing fails.

1 light.princeton.edu/seeingwithsound

Specifically, we make the following contributions:

982

