This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-SDF: Text-to-Shape via Voxelized Diffusion
Muheng Li1 , Yueqi Duan†,2 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
A chair with straight legs.

A straight
chair.
A ball-shaped
A sofa with
revolving chair. curving legs.

A two-layered
triangular table.

An artistic chair.
Text-to-Shape Generation

A sofa.
Incomplete
Shape

A chair with curving legs.

Text-Guided Shape Completion

Text-Guided Shape Manipulation

Figure 1. We propose a text-to-shape synthesis approach named Diffusion-SDF. Our method is capable of performing various text-to-shape
tasks including text-to-shape generation (directly generating 3D shapes from texts), text-guided shape completion (generating the missing
part of an incomplete shape under the guidance of texts), and text-guided shape manipulation (modifying a given shape according to texts).

Abstract
With the rising industrial attention to 3D virtual modeling technology, generating novel 3D content based on
specified conditions (e.g. text) has become a hot issue.
In this paper, we propose a new generative 3D modeling framework called Diffusion-SDF for the challenging
task of text-to-shape synthesis. Previous approaches lack
flexibility in both 3D data representation and shape generation, thereby failing to generate highly diversified 3D
shapes conforming to the given text descriptions. To address this, we propose a SDF autoencoder together with
the Voxelized Diffusion model to learn and generate representations for voxelized signed distance fields (SDFs) of
3D shapes. Specifically, we design a novel UinU-Net architecture that implants a local-focused inner network inside the standard U-Net architecture, which enables better
reconstruction of patch-independent SDF representations.
We extend our approach to further text-to-shape tasks including text-conditioned shape completion and manipulation. Experimental results show that Diffusion-SDF generates both higher quality and more diversified 3D shapes
that conform well to given text descriptions when compared
to previous approaches. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/ttlmh/Diffusion-SDF.
† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Exploring data representations for 3D shapes has been a
fundamental and critical issue in 3D computer vision. Explicit 3D representations including point clouds [38, 39],
polygon meshes [17, 24] and occupancy voxel grids [9, 53]
have been widely applied in various 3D downstream applications [1, 35, 56]. While explicit 3D representations
achieve encouraging performance, there are some primary
limitations including not being suitable for generating watertight surfaces (e.g. point clouds), or being subject to topological constraints (e.g. meshes). On the other hand, implicit 3D representations have been widely studied more
recently [3, 14, 37], with representative works including
DeepSDF [37], Occupancy Network [32] and IM-Net [8].
In general, implicit functions encode the shapes by the isosurface of the function, which is a continuous field and can
be evaluated at arbitrary resolution.
In recent years, numerous explorations have been conducted for implicit 3D generative models, which show
promising performance on several downstream applications
such as single/multi-view 3D reconstruction [23, 54] and
shape completion [12, 34]. Besides, several studies have
also explored the feasibility of directly generating novel 3D
shapes based on implicit representations [15, 21]. However, these approaches are incapable of generating specified
3D shapes that match a given condition, e.g. a short text
describing the shape characteristics as shown in Figure 1.

12642

