This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleGAN Salon:
Multi-View Latent Optimization for Pose-Invariant Hairstyle Transfer
Sasikarn Khwanmuang
Pakkapon Phongthawee
Patsorn Sangkloy✂ Supasorn Suwajanakorn
✂
VISTEC, Thailand
Phranakhon Rajabhat University, Thailand
patsorn.s@pnru.ac.th

Input Hair

{sasikarn.k_s18, pakkapon.p_s19, supasorn.s}@vistec.ac.th

Input Face

Figure 1. Our method can transfer the hairstyle from any reference hair image in the top row to Tom Holland [33], in the second row.

Abstract
Our paper seeks to transfer the hairstyle of a reference
image to an input photo for virtual hair try-on. We target
a variety of challenges scenarios, such as transforming a
long hairstyle with bangs to a pixie cut, which requires removing the existing hair and inferring how the forehead
would look, or transferring partially visible hair from a
hat-wearing person in a different pose. Past solutions leverage StyleGAN for hallucinating any missing parts and producing a seamless face-hair composite through so-called
GAN inversion or projection. However, there remains a challenge in controlling the hallucinations to accurately transfer
hairstyle and preserve the face shape and identity of the
input. To overcome this, we propose a multi-view optimization framework that uses two different views of reference
composites to semantically guide occluded or ambiguous
regions. Our optimization shares information between two
poses, which allows us to produce high fidelity and realistic
results from incomplete references. Our framework produces
high-quality results and outperforms prior work in a user
study that consists of significantly more challenging hair
transfer scenarios than previously studied. Project page:
https://stylegan-salon.github.io/.

1. Introduction
What makes Jennifer Aniston keep her same hairstyle for
over three decades? Perhaps she likes the classic, or perhaps
changing her hairstyle is a decision too high-stakes that she
could later regret. Unlike garments or makeup, trying on a
new hairstyle is not easy, and being able to imagine yourself
in different hairstyles could be an indispensable tool.
Recent approaches for hairstyle transfer, StyleYourHair [20], Barbershop [46], LOHO [30], and MichiGAN [35], allow users to manipulate multiple hair attributes
of an input image, such as appearance, shape, or color by providing a reference image for each different attribute. These
methods [20, 30, 46] rely on a generative adversarial network [11], specifically StyleGAN2 [19], which can synthesize highly realistic face images. Their key idea, which also
forms the basis of our method, is to leverage the realistic face
distribution learned by StyleGAN and search for a hairstyletransfer output whose latent code lies within the learned
distribution using optimization (commonly known as GAN
projection or inversion).
Our extensive study on these state-of-the-art techniques
still reveal several unsolved challenges for in-the-wild
hairstyle transfer. One of the main challenges is when the
reference hair comes from a person with a very different head

8609

