This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAPE: Camera View Position Embedding for Multi-View 3D Object Detection
Kaixin Xiong*,1 , Shi Gong∗,2 , Xiaoqing Ye∗,2 , Xiao Tan2 , Ji Wan2 ,
Errui Ding2 , Jingdong Wang†,2 , Xiang Bai1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Baidu Inc.
kaixinxiong@hust.edu.cn,

{gongshi, yexiaoqing}@baidu.com

wangjingdong@outlook.com

Abstract
Softmax & MatMul

In this paper, we address the problem of detecting 3D objects from multi-view images. Current query-based methods
rely on global 3D position embeddings (PE) to learn the geometric correspondence between images and 3D space. We
claim that directly interacting 2D image features with global
3D PE could increase the difficulty of learning view transformation due to the variation of camera extrinsics. Thus
we propose a novel method based on CAmera view Position
Embedding, called CAPE. We form the 3D position embeddings under the local camera-view coordinate system instead
of the global coordinate system, such that 3D position embedding is free of encoding camera extrinsic parameters.
Furthermore, we extend our CAPE to temporal modeling by
exploiting the object queries of previous frames and encoding the ego motion for boosting 3D object detection. CAPE
achieves the state-of-the-art performance (61.0% NDS and
52.5% mAP) among all LiDAR-free methods on nuScenes
dataset. Codes and models are available.1

1. Introduction
3D perception from multi-view cameras is a promising
solution for autonomous driving due to its low cost and rich
semantic knowledge. Given multiple sensors equipped on
autonomous vehicles, how to perform end-to-end 3D perception integrating all features into a unified space is of critical
importance. In contrast to traditional perspective-view perception that relies on post-processing to fuse the predictions
from each monocular view [44, 45] into the global 3D space,
perception in the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) is straightforward
and thus arises increasing attention due to its unified representation for 3D location and scale, and easy adaptation for
downstream tasks such as motion planning.
The camera-based BEV perception is to predict 3D geometric outputs given the 2D features and thus the vital
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work is done when
Kaixin Xiong is an intern at Baidu Inc.
1 Codes of Paddle3D and PyTorch Implementation.

Softmax & MatMul

V

V

+

MatMul
K

Q

+

+

MatMul
K

Global
Image PE

Global
Query PE

MatMul
K

Local
Image PE

(a) PETRv2
Image Features

Q

Q

Local
Query PE

(b) CAPE
Decoder Embedding

Feature Guided PE

Figure 1. Comparison of the network structure between PETRv2
and our proposed CAPE. (a) In PETRv2, position embedding of
queries and keys are in the global system. (b) In CAPE, position
embeddings of queries and keys are within the local system of
each view. Bilateral cross-attention is adopted to compute attention
weights in the local and global systems independently.

challenge is to learn the view transformation relationship
between 2D and 3D space. According to whether the explicit
dense BEV representation is constructed, existing BEV approaches could be divided into two categories: the explicit
BEV representation methods and the implicit BEV representation methods. The former constructs an explicit BEV
feature map by lifting the 2D perspective-view features to 3D
space [12, 19, 34]. The latter mainly follow DETR-based [3]
approaches in an end-to-end manner. Without projection or
lift operation, those methods [24, 25, 52] implicitly encode
the 3D global information into 3D position embedding (3D
PE) to obtain 3D position-aware multi-view features, which
is shown in Figure 1(a).
Though learning the transformation from 2D images to
3D global space is straightforward, we reveal that the interaction in the global space for the query embeddings and
3D position-aware multi-view features hinders performance.
The reasons are two-fold. For one thing, defining each cam-

21570

