This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shepherding Slots to Objects:
Towards Stable and Robust Object-Centric Learning
Jinwoo Kim1∗

Janghyuk Choi2∗ Ho-Jin Choi2
1
Yonsei University 2 KAIST

Seon Joo Kim1

{jinwoo-kim, seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr
{janghyuk.choi, hojinc}@kaist.ac.kr

Trial 1

Abstract
Object-centric learning (OCL) aspires general and compositional understanding of scenes by representing a scene
as a collection of object-centric representations. OCL has
also been extended to multi-view image and video datasets
to apply various data-driven inductive biases by utilizing
geometric or temporal information in the multi-image data.
Single-view images carry less information about how to disentangle a given scene than videos or multi-view images
do. Hence, owing to the difficulty of applying inductive biases, OCL for single-view images remains challenging, resulting in inconsistent learning of object-centric representation. To this end, we introduce a novel OCL framework
for single-view images, SLot Attention via SHepherding
(SLASH), which consists of two simple-yet-effective modules on top of Slot Attention. The new modules, Attention
Refining Kernel (ARK) and Intermediate Point Predictor
and Encoder (IPPE), respectively, prevent slots from being distracted by the background noise and indicate locations for slots to focus on to facilitate learning of objectcentric representation. We also propose a weak semisupervision approach for OCL, whilst our proposed framework can be used without any assistant annotation during
the inference. Experiments show that our proposed method
enables consistent learning of object-centric representation and achieves strong performance across four datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/objectunderstanding/SLASH.

1. Introduction
Object-centric learning (OCL) decomposes an image
into a set of vectors corresponding to each distinct object to acquire object-wise representations [16]. Learning
object-centric representation enables machines to perceive
the visual world in a manner similar to humans. We recog* Equal contribution, a coin is flipped.

Input Images

Trial 2

Object Masks

Figure 1. Results of training Slot Attention [35] with different
seeds, which show inconsistent learning results. In the first trial,
object-centric representations fail to grasp each distinct object due
to the background noise. In the second, the model succeeds in
distinguishing each different object from the background.

nize the world as a composition of objects [27] and extend
the object-related knowledge to various environments [48].
Therefore, OCL enables a compositional understanding of
an image and generalization for downstream tasks, such as
visual reasoning [36] and object localization [6].
Mainstream OCL has adopted an autoencoding-based
compositional generative model [10, 15, 35]. Slot Attention [35] is the most prominent technique for OCL, which

19198

