This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionDiffuser: Controllable Multi-Agent Motion Prediction using Diffusion
Chiyu “Max” Jiang∗
Benjamin Sapp

Andre Cornman∗
Cheolho Park
Yin Zhou
Dragomir Anguelov

∗ equal contribution

Waymo LLC

Figure 1. MotionDiffuser is a learned representation for the distribution of multi-agent trajectories based on diffusion models. During
inference, samples from the predicted joint future distribution are first drawn i.i.d. from a random normal distribution (leftmost column),
and gradually denoised using a learned denoiser into the final predictions (rightmost column). Diffusion allows us to learn a diverse,
multimodal distribution over joint outputs (top right). Furthermore, guidance in the form of a differentiable cost function can be applied at
inference time to obtain results satisfying additional priors and constraints (bottom right).

Abstract
We present MotionDiffuser, a diffusion based representation for the joint distribution of future trajectories over
multiple agents. Such representation has several key advantages: first, our model learns a highly multimodal distribution that captures diverse future outcomes. Second, the
simple predictor design requires only a single L2 loss training objective, and does not depend on trajectory anchors.
Third, our model is capable of learning the joint distribution for the motion of multiple agents in a permutationinvariant manner. Furthermore, we utilize a compressed
trajectory representation via PCA, which improves model
performance and allows for efficient computation of the
exact sample log probability. Subsequently, we propose
a general constrained sampling framework that enables
controlled trajectory sampling based on differentiable cost
functions. This strategy enables a host of applications such
as enforcing rules and physical priors, or creating tailored simulation scenarios. MotionDiffuser can be combined with existing backbone architectures to achieve top
motion forecasting results. We obtain state-of-the-art results for multi-agent motion prediction on the Waymo Open
Motion Dataset.

1. Introduction
Motion prediction is a central yet challenging problem
for autonomous vehicles to safely navigate under uncertainties. Motion prediction, in the autonomous driving setting,
refers to the prediction of the future trajectories of modeled
agents, conditioned on the histories of the modeled agents,
context agents, road graph and traffic light signals.
Several key challenges arise in the motion prediction
problem. First, motion prediction is probabilistic and multimodal in nature where it is important to faithfully predict
an unbiased distribution of possible futures. Second, motion prediction requires jointly reasoning about the future
distribution for a set of agents that may interact with each
other in each such futures. Naively predicting and sampling
from the marginal distribution of trajectories for each agent
independently leads to unrealistic and often conflicting outcomes. Last but not least, while it is challenging to constrain
or bias the predictions of conventional regression-based trajectory models, guided sampling of the trajectories is often
required. For example, it may be useful to enforce rules
or physical priors for creating tailored simulation scenarios.
This requires the ability to enforce constraints over the future time steps, or enforce a specified behavior for one or

9644

