This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Neural Volumetric Representations of Dynamic Humans in Minutes
Chen Geng*

Sida Peng*

Zhen Xu*

Hujun Bao

Xiaowei Zhou†

Neural Body

Ours

State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

1 min

5 min

10 min

Figure 1. Convergence rate of training. Given a monocular video of a human performer, our model can be learned in ∼5 minutes to
produce photorealistic novel view rendering, which is 100 times faster than Neural Body [58].

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of efficiently reconstructing volumetric videos of dynamic humans from sparse
multi-view videos. Some recent works represent a dynamic
human as a canonical neural radiance field (NeRF) and a
motion field, which are learned from input videos through
differentiable rendering. But the per-scene optimization generally requires hours. Other generalizable NeRF models
leverage learned prior from datasets to reduce the optimization time by only finetuning on new scenes at the cost of
visual fidelity. In this paper, we propose a novel method for
learning neural volumetric representations of dynamic humans in minutes with competitive visual quality. Specifically,
we define a novel part-based voxelized human representation to better distribute the representational power of the
network to different human parts. Furthermore, we propose
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

a novel 2D motion parameterization scheme to increase the
convergence rate of deformation field learning. Experiments
demonstrate that our model can be learned 100 times faster
than previous per-scene optimization methods while being
competitive in the rendering quality. Training our model on
a 512 × 512 video with 100 frames typically takes about 5
minutes on a single RTX 3090 GPU. The code is available
on our project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/instant nvr.

1. Introduction
Creating volumetric videos of human performers has
many applications, such as immersive telepresence, video
games, and movie production. Recently, some methods
[58, 93] have shown that high-quality volumetric videos can
be recovered from sparse multi-view videos by representing
dynamic humans with neural scene representations. However, they typically require more than 10 hours of training on

8759

