This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Look Before You Match: Instance Understanding Matters
in Video Object Segmentation
Junke Wang1,2 , Dongdong Chen3 , Zuxuan Wu1,2† , Chong Luo4 , Chuanxin Tang4 ,
Xiyang Dai3 , Yucheng Zhao4 , Yujia Xie3 , Lu Yuan3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2†
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Cloud + AI, 4 Microsoft Research Asia
Time

Abstract
Exploring dense matching between the current frame
and past frames for long-range context modeling, memorybased methods have demonstrated impressive results in
video object segmentation (VOS) recently. Nevertheless,
due to the lack of instance understanding ability, the above
approaches are oftentimes brittle to large appearance variations or viewpoint changes resulted from the movement of
objects and cameras. In this paper, we argue that instance
understanding matters in VOS, and integrating it with
memory-based matching can enjoy the synergy, which is intuitively sensible from the definition of VOS task, i.e., identifying and segmenting object instances within the video. Towards this goal, we present a two-branch network for VOS,
where the query-based instance segmentation (IS) branch
delves into the instance details of the current frame and the
VOS branch performs spatial-temporal matching with the
memory bank. We employ the well-learned object queries
from IS branch to inject instance-specific information into
the query key, with which the instance-augmented matching is further performed. In addition, we introduce a multipath fusion block to effectively combine the memory readout
with multi-scale features from the instance segmentation decoder, which incorporates high-resolution instance-aware
features to produce final segmentation results. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on DAVIS 2016/2017
val (92.6% and 87.1%), DAVIS 2017 test-dev (82.8%), and
YouTube-VOS 2018/2019 val (86.3% and 86.3%), outperforming alternative methods by clear margins.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation aims to identify and segment the specific objects in a video sequence, which has
very broad applications, e.g., interactive video editing and
† Corresponding authors.

First Frame (GT)

Current Frame

XMem

Ours

Figure 1. J&F-time curve of XMem [13], a state-of-the-art
memory-based VOS model and our proposed method. XMem will
suffer from a distinct accuracy degradation when the appearance
of the target object (e.g., pose of the dancing person) changes dramatically compared to the reference frame. Comparatively, our
approach is more robust to this challenging case.

autonomous driving. This work focuses on the semisupervised setting where the annotation of the first frame
is given. Starting from Space-Time Memory network
(STM) [46], memory-based methods [13–15, 25, 36, 41, 47,
53, 58] have almost dominated this field due to their superior performance and simplicity. STM [46] and its variants [25,35,65] typically build a feature memory to store the
past frames as well as corresponding masks, and perform
dense matching between the query frame and the memory
to separate targeted objects from the background.
Despite the prominent success achieved, there exists a
non-negligible limitation for the above approaches, i.e., the
object deformation and large appearance variations resulting from the motion of camera and objects will inevitably
give rise to the risk of false matches [13,15,46], thus making
them struggle to generate accurate masks. We visualize the
J&F -time curve of XMem [13], a state-of-the-art memorybased VOS model, on a representative video from DAVIS
2017 in Figure 1. It can be seen that, when the target ob-

2268

