This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Egocentric Audio-Visual Object Localization
Chao Huang1 , Yapeng Tian1 , Anurag Kumar2 , Chenliang Xu1
1
University of Rochester, 2 Meta Reality Labs Research
{chaohuang, yapengtian, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu, anuragkr90@meta.com

Abstract
Humans naturally perceive surrounding scenes by unifying sound and sight from a first-person view. Likewise,
machines are advanced to approach human intelligence by
learning with multisensory inputs from an egocentric perspective. In this paper, we explore the challenging egocentric audio-visual object localization task and observe
that 1) egomotion commonly exists in first-person recordings, even within a short duration; 2) The out-of-view sound
components can be created when wearers shift their attention. To address the first problem, we propose a geometryaware temporal aggregation module that handles the egomotion explicitly. The effect of egomotion is mitigated by
estimating the temporal geometry transformation and exploiting it to update visual representations. Moreover, we
propose a cascaded feature enhancement module to overcome the second issue. It improves cross-modal localization robustness by disentangling visually-indicated audio representation. During training, we take advantage
of the naturally occurring audio-visual temporal synchronization as the “free” self-supervision to avoid costly labeling. We also annotate and create the Epic Sounding
Object dataset for evaluation purposes. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art localization performance in egocentric videos and can be generalized to diverse audio-visual scenes. Code is available at
https://github.com/WikiChao/Ego-AV-Loc.

1. Introduction
The emergence of wearable devices has drawn the attention of the research community to egocentric videos, the
significance of which can be seen from egocentric research
in a variety of applications such as robotics [32,34,48], augmented/virtual reality [31,61,75], and healthcare [53,66]. In
recent years, the computer vision community has made substantial efforts to build benchmarks [12, 13, 15, 40, 57, 69],
establish new tasks [17, 36, 37, 39, 60], and develop frameworks [33, 41, 54, 82] for egocentric video understanding.
While existing works achieve promising results in the

Figure 1. Sounding object localization in egocentric videos.
Due to the wearer’s egomotion, the viewpoint changes continuously across time. Consequently, audio-visual relations are dynamically changing in egocentric videos. Our approach tackles
challenges in the egocentric audio-visual sounding object task and
learns audio-visual associations from first-person videos.

egocentric domain, it still remains an interesting but challenging topic to perform fine-grained egocentric video understanding. For instance, understanding which object is
emitting sound in a first-person recording is difficult for machines. As shown in Fig. 1, the wearer moves his/her head
to put down the bottle. The frying pot which emits sound
subsequently suffers deformation and occlusion due to the
wearer’s egomotion. Human speech outside the wearer’s
view also affects the machine’s understanding of the current
scene. This example reveals two significant challenges for
designing powerful and robust egocentric video understanding systems: First, people with wearable devices usually
record videos in naturalistic surroundings, where a variety
of illumination conditions, object appearance, and motion
patterns are shown. The dynamic visual variations introduce difficulties in accurate visual perception. Second, egocentric scenes are often perceived within a limited field of
view (FoV). The common body and head movements cause
frequent view changes (see Fig. 1), which brings object deformation and creates dynamic out-of-view content.
Although a visual-only system may struggle to fully decode the surrounding information and perceive scenes in
egocentric videos, audio provides stable and persistent signals associated with the depicted events. Instead of purely
visual perception, numerous psychological and cognitive

22910

