This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Detect and Segment for Open Vocabulary Object Detection
Tao Wang
Sichuan University
twangnh@gmail.com

Abstract
Open vocabulary object detection has been greatly advanced by the recent development of vision-language pretrained model, which helps recognize novel objects with
only semantic categories. The prior works mainly focus on
knowledge transferring to the object proposal classification
and employ class-agnostic box and mask prediction. In this
work, we propose CondHead, a principled dynamic network
design to better generalize the box regression and mask segmentation for open vocabulary setting. The core idea is to
conditionally parameterize the network heads on semantic
embedding and thus the model is guided with class-specific
knowledge to better detect novel categories. Specifically,
CondHead is composed of two streams of network heads,
the dynamically aggregated head and dynamically generated head. The former is instantiated with a set of static
heads that are conditionally aggregated, these heads are
optimized as experts and are expected to learn sophisticated
prediction. The latter is instantiated with dynamically generated parameters and encodes general class-specific information. With such a conditional design, the detection model
is bridged by the semantic embedding to offer strongly generalizable class-wise box and mask prediction. Our method
brings significant improvement to the state-of-the-art open
vocabulary object detection methods with very minor overhead, e.g., it surpasses a RegionClip model by 3.0 detection
AP on novel categories, with only 1.1% more computation.

1. Introduction
Given the semantic object categories of interest, object
detection aims at localizing each object instance from the
input images. The prior research efforts mainly focus on the
close-set setting, where the images containing the interested
object categories are annotated and used to train a detector.
The obtained detector only recognizes object categories that
are annotated in the training set. In such a setting, more data
needs to be collected and annotated if novel category1 needs
1 we treat category and class interchangeably in this paper

Figure 1. Illustration of our main intuition. Given the object
proposals, the bounding box regression and mask segmentation
learned from some object categories could generalize to the target category. For example, the knowledge learned from a chicken
could help detect and segment the long thin feet and the small head
of an ibis (upper row). Similarly for the hairbrush, the knowledge
learned from the toothbrush could better handle the extreme aspect
ratio and occlusion from the hand (lower row).

to be detected. However, data collection and annotation are
very costly for object detection, which raises a significant
challenge for traditional object detection methods.
To address the challenge, the open vocabulary object detection methods are widely explored recently, these methods [1, 7, 9, 11, 14, 21, 23, 30–32] aim at generalizing object detection on novel categories by only training on a set
of labeled categories. The core of these methods is transferring the strong image-text aligned features [16, 22] to
classify objects of novel categories. To achieve bounding box regression and mask segmentation on novel categories, they simply employ the class-agnostic network
heads. Although class agnostic heads can be readily applied to novel target object categories, they offer limited
capacity to learn category-specific knowledge like object

7051

