This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVGformer: Representation Learning for Continuous Vector Graphics
using Transformers
Defu Cao1 ,

Zhaowen Wang2 , Jose Echevarria2 , Yan Liu1
1
University of Southern California
2
Adobe Research, Inc.
{defucao, yanliu.cs}@usc.edu, {zhawang, echevarr}@adobe.com

Abstract
Advances in representation learning have led to great
success in understanding and generating data in various domains. However, in modeling vector graphics data, the pure
data-driven approach often yields unsatisfactory results in
downstream tasks as existing deep learning methods often require the quantization of SVG parameters and cannot exploit
the geometric properties explicitly. In this paper, we propose
a transformer-based representation learning model (SVGformer) that directly operates on continuous input values and
manipulates the geometric information of SVG to encode outline details and long-distance dependencies. SVGfomer can
be used for various downstream tasks: reconstruction, classification, interpolation, retrieval, etc. We have conducted
extensive experiments on vector font and icon datasets to
show that our model can capture high-quality representation
information and outperform the previous state-of-the-art on
downstream tasks significantly.

1. Introduction
In the last few years, there have been tremendous advances in image representation learning [22, 26, 37], and
these representations lead to great success in many downstream tasks such as image reconstruction [40], image classification [14, 16], etc. However, most previous works have
focused on analyzing structured bitmap format, which uses
a grid at the pixel level to represent textures and colors [18].
Therefore, there is still considerable room for improving the
representation of detailed attributes for vector objects [25].
In contrast to bitmap image format, scalable vector graphics (SVG) format for vector images is widely used in realworld applications due to its excellent scaling capabilities [12, 20, 33]. SVGs usually contain a mixture of smooth
curves and sharp features, such as lines, circles, polygons,
and splines, represented as parametric curves in digital format. This allows us to treat SVGs as sequential data and

learn their compact and scale-invariant representation using
neural network models. However, how to automatically learn
an effective representation of vector images is still non-trivial
as it requires a model to understand the high-level perception
of the 2D spatial pattern as well as geometric information to
support the high-quality outcome in downstream tasks.
Transformer-based models [30] have been proven to
achieve start-of-the-art results when dealing with sequential data in various problems including Natural Language
Processing (NLP) [34] tasks and time-series forecasting [41]
problems. We argue that representation learning for SVG is
different from these tasks for two reasons: Firstly, most if not
all NLP tasks need a fixed token space to embed the discrete
tokens, while SVGs are parameterized by continuous values
which make the token space infinite in the previous setting;
Secondly, the number of commands and the correlation between the commands vary greatly from one SVG to another,
which is hard to handle by a pure data-driven attention mechanism. For example, the font data may vary across different
families while sharing similar styles within the same font
family. Such property is encoded in the sequential data explicitly and can provide geometric dependency guidance for
modeling the SVG if used appropriately.
To tackle the above challenges and fully utilize the geometric information from SVG data, this work introduces a
novel model architecture named SVGformer, which can take
continuous sequential input into a transformer-based model
to handle the complex dependencies over SVG commands
and yield a robust representation for the input. Specifically,
we first extract the SVG segment information via medial
axis transform (MAT) [2] to convey the geometric information into the learned representation. Then we introduce
a 1D convolutional embedding layer to preserve the original continuous format of SVG data, as opposed to previous
vector representation learning models [8] which need a preprocessing step to discretize the input to limited discrete
tokens. After that, we inject the structural relationship between commands into the proposed geometric self-attention
module in the encoder layer to get the hidden representation

10093

