This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BiasAdv: Bias-Adversarial Augmentation for Model Debiasing
Jongin Lim1 * Youngdong Kim1 Byungjai Kim1 Chanho Ahn1
Jinwoo Shin2 Eunho Yang2 Seungju Han1
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
Neural networks are often prone to bias toward spurious
correlations inherent in a dataset, thus failing to generalize
unbiased test criteria. A key challenge to resolving the issue
is the significant lack of bias-conflicting training data (i.e.,
samples without spurious correlations). In this paper, we
propose a novel data augmentation approach termed BiasAdversarial augmentation (BiasAdv) that supplements biasconflicting samples with adversarial images. Our key idea
is that an adversarial attack on a biased model that makes
decisions based on spurious correlations may generate synthetic bias-conflicting samples, which can then be used as
augmented training data for learning a debiased model.
Specifically, we formulate an optimization problem for generating adversarial images that attack the predictions of
an auxiliary biased model without ruining the predictions
of the desired debiased model. Despite its simplicity, we
find that BiasAdv can generate surprisingly useful synthetic
bias-conflicting samples, allowing the debiased model to
learn generalizable representations. Furthermore, BiasAdv
does not require any bias annotations or prior knowledge of
the bias type, which enables its broad applicability to existing debiasing methods to improve their performances. Our
extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of BiasAdv, achieving state-of-the-art performance on four
popular benchmark datasets across various bias domains.

1. Introduction
Real-world datasets are often inherently biased [2, 34],
where certain visual attributes are spuriously correlated
with class labels. For example, let us consider a binary classification task between cats and dogs. Unbeknownst to us,
our dataset could consist of most cats indoors and most dogs
outdoors, as illustrated in Figure 1. When trained on such
a biased dataset, neural networks often learn unintended
shortcuts [2, 8, 34, 39] (e.g., making predictions based on
* Corresponding author: jonny.lim@samsung.com

Objective : Classify Cat vs. Dog
Bias attribute : Indoor vs. Outdoor (Unknown)
Bias-guiding
(Cat, Indoor)

Bias-conflicting

(Dog, Outdoor)

(Cat, Outdoor)

(Dog, Indoor)

Adversarial
Attack
Cat
or
Dog

Auxiliary model
(Biased)

Debiased
model

Synthetic bias-conflicting
samples by BiasAdv

Figure 1. An overview of BiasAdv. In MetaShift [26], the bias
attribute {Indoor, Outdoor} is spuriously correlated to the class
label {Cat, Dog}. In this work, we refer to data with such spurious
correlations as bias-guiding samples and without such correlations
as bias-conflicting samples, respectively. Using the biased dataset,
we train an auxiliary model to be biased, and BiasAdv supplements bias-conflicting samples using adversarial images which attack the biased predictions of the auxiliary model while preserving
the predictions of the debiased model. By leveraging the diversified bias-conflicting data, BiasAdv allows the debiased model to
learn generalizable representations for unbiased classification.

the background) and fail to generalize in a new unbiased test
environment. To tackle the problem, conventional methods
have utilized explicit bias annotations [1, 19, 39, 43] or prior
knowledge of the bias type [2, 3, 5, 9, 46]. However, bias
annotations are expensive and laborious to obtain, and presuming certain bias types in advance limits the capability to
be universally applicable to various bias types.
To train a debiased model without bias annotations, the
main line of recent research [6, 22, 30, 34, 42] has commonly utilized an intentionally biased model as an auxiliary
model under the idea that bias attributes are easy-to-learn.
In essence, these methods identify bias-conflicting samples
based on the auxiliary model and train the debiased model
in a way that focuses more on the identified samples (i.e., re-

3832

