This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AccelIR: Task-aware Image Compression for Accelerating Neural Restoration
Juncheol Ye
Hyunho Yeo
Jinwoo Park
Dongsu Han
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{juncheol, hyunho.yeo, jinwoo520528, dhan.ee}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, deep neural networks have been successfully
applied for image restoration (IR) (e.g., super-resolution,
de-noising, de-blurring). Despite their promising performance, running IR networks requires heavy computation.
A large body of work has been devoted to addressing this
issue by designing novel neural networks or pruning their
parameters. However, the common limitation is that while
images are saved in a compressed format before being enhanced by IR, prior work does not consider the impact of
compression on the IR quality.
In this paper, we present AccelIR, a framework that
optimizes image compression considering the end-to-end
pipeline of IR tasks. AccelIR encodes an image through
IR-aware compression that optimizes compression levels
across image blocks within an image according to the impact on the IR quality. Then, it runs a lightweight IR network on the compressed image, effectively reducing IR computation, while maintaining the same IR quality and image
size. Our extensive evaluation using nine IR networks shows
that AccelIR can reduce the computing overhead of superresolution, de-nosing, and de-blurring by 49%, 29%, and
32% on average, respectively.

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) is a class of techniques that recovers a high-quality image from a lower-quality counterpart (e.g., super-resolution, de-noising, de-blurring). With
the advances of deep learning, IR has been widely deployed
in various applications such as satellite/medical image enhancement [9,42,43,51,52], facial recognition [7,44,65,69],
and video streaming/analytics [15, 27, 66, 67, 70]. Meanwhile, the resolution of images used in these applications has been rapidly increasing along with the evolution
in client devices (e.g., smartphones [58, 61], TV monitors [57]). Thus, deep neural networks (DNNs) used for
IR need to support higher-resolution images such as 4K
(4096×2160) and even 8K (7680×4320).
However, because the computing and memory overhead

JPEG + IR
AccelIR
FLOPs
PSNR
FLOPs
PSNR
Super-resolution 1165G 25.28dB
298G
25.30dB
De-noising
1701G 30.49dB 1132G 30.70dB
De-blurring
2590G 30.57dB 1718G 30.58dB
Table 1. Computing overhead and quality of IR under the same
compression ratio (1.2bpp). AccelIR reduces computation by 3474% while providing the same IR quality and image size.
Task

grow quadratically to the input resolution, applying IR networks to such a large image is computationally expensive [32, 34]. Prior work addresses this issue using three
different approaches: 1) designing efficient feature extraction or up-scaling layers [2, 16, 29, 33, 59, 75], 2) adjusting
network complexities within an image according to the IR
difficulty [32, 34], and 3) pruning network parameters considering their importance [50]. The common limitation in
the prior studies is that they do not consider the detrimental
impact of image compression on the IR quality, despite the
fact that images in real-world applications are commonly
saved in a compressed format before being enhanced by IR.
In this work, we observe that there is a large opportunity
in optimizing image compression considering the end-toend pipeline of IR tasks. Compression loss has a significant impact on the IR quality, while its impact also greatly
varies according to the image content, even within the same
image. Such heterogeneity offers room for IR-aware image
compression that optimizes compression levels across image blocks within an image according to the impact on the
IR quality. IR-awareness allows us to use a lighter-weight
IR network because the quality enhancement from IR-aware
image compression can compensate the quality loss due to
the reduced network capacity.
Based on this observation, we present AccelIR, the first
IR-aware image compression framework that considers the
end-to-end pipeline of IR tasks, including image compression. AccelIR aims to reduce IR computation while maintaining the same IR quality and image size. To enable this,
AccelIR develops a practical IR-aware compression algorithm and adopts a lightweight IR network. AccelIR operates in two phases: offline profiling and online compression.
In the offline phase, AccelIR clusters image blocks in the

18216

