This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Image Recognition by Retrieving from Web-Scale Image-Text Data
Ahmet Iscen

Alireza Fathi

Cordelia Schmid

Google Research

Abstract
Retrieval augmented models are becoming increasingly
popular for computer vision tasks after their recent success
in NLP problems. The goal is to enhance the recognition capabilities of the model by retrieving similar examples for the
visual input from an external memory set. In this work, we
introduce an attention-based memory module, which learns
the importance of each retrieved example from the memory. Compared to existing approaches, our method removes
the influence of the irrelevant retrieved examples, and retains those that are beneficial to the input query. We also
thoroughly study various ways of constructing the memory
dataset. Our experiments show the benefit of using a massivescale memory dataset of 1B image-text pairs, and demonstrate the performance of different memory representations.
We evaluate our method in three different classification tasks,
namely long-tailed recognition, learning with noisy labels,
and fine-grained classification, and show that it achieves
state-of-the-art accuracies in ImageNet-LT, Places-LT and
Webvision datasets.

1. Introduction
Increasing the number of parameters of large transformer models has been a recent successful trend achieving new benchmarks in vision and language tasks. Recent
results from T5 [35], GPT-3 [5], PaLM [8], CoCa [50],
Flamingo [1], BEIT-3 [46], PaLI [7], Florence [51] and
FLAVA [40] show that transformer models are able to store
a surprising amount of information when scaled to tens of
billions of parameters and trained on vast text and image
corpora. These so-called ‘foundation models’ achieve stateof-the-art results when fine tuned and applied to secondary
tasks such as language modeling, image captioning, visual
question answering and open vocabulary recognition.
In these foundation models, the learned world knowledge
is stored implicitly in the parameters of the underlying neural network. This implies that some of the problems of the
current ML paradigm are amplified in these models: (a) scaling is challenging, both in learning and serving, given the
large number of parameters that are required for storing the

External memory

kNN search

Retrieved images

Memory
Attention
Module

Query

Figure 1. Retrieval augmented classification finds similar images to
the query from an external memory. Our memory attention module
learns the importance of each retrieved image by assigning high
weights (green line in the figure) to the relevant images, and low
weights (red line) to the irrelevant images.

knowledge, (b) it is hard to update the model as the world
facts change or input data gets modified, (c) these models
tend to be black box, which means it is hard to interpret the
underlying reason behind their decisions.
To address the above issues, we propose an alternative
perspective on the problem. Instead of compiling the world
knowledge statically into model weights, we take an interpretive view where the world knowledge gets transformed into a
massive-scale index/memory. On the other hand, a relatively
low-compute small model learns to use the memory for the
given inference task. Instead of increasing the size of the
model and training on more data as done in most previous
work, we equip models with the ability to directly access a
large database to perform predictions—a semi-parametric
approach.
To evaluate our approach, we focus on the problem of
long-tailed recognition and learning with noisy labels. The
distribution of real-world data is often noisy, imbalanced and
highly skewed on a per-class basis, with a majority of classes
containing a small number of samples. Long-tailed recognition is a well-studied problem [19, 33]. Base approaches
are largely variants of the core idea of “adjustment”, where
the learner is encouraged to focus on the tail of the distribution. This is achieved either by re-weighting samples during
training [21] and cluster-based sampling [10], logit or loss
modification [12, 20, 31, 54] or ensembling [47]. Despite being well-studied, commonly occurring, and of great practical
importance, classification performance on long-tail distribu-

19295

