This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Semantic Segmentation
Jiaqi Chen1 Jiachen Lu1 Xiatian Zhu2 Li Zhang1 *
1
Fudan University 2 University of Surrey
https://github.com/fudan-zvg/GSS

Abstract
We present Generative Semantic Segmentation (GSS), a
generative learning approach for semantic segmentation.
Uniquely, we cast semantic segmentation as an imageconditioned mask generation problem. This is achieved
by replacing the conventional per-pixel discriminative learning with a latent prior learning process. Specifically, we
model the variational posterior distribution of latent variables given the segmentation mask. To that end, the segmentation mask is expressed with a special type of image
(dubbed as maskige). This posterior distribution allows to
generate segmentation masks unconditionally. To achieve
semantic segmentation on a given image, we further introduce a conditioning network. It is optimized by minimizing
the divergence between the posterior distribution of maskige
(i.e. segmentation masks) and the latent prior distribution
of input training images. Extensive experiments on standard
benchmarks show that our GSS can perform competitively to
prior art alternatives in the standard semantic segmentation
setting, whilst achieving a new state of the art in the more
challenging cross-domain setting.

1. Introduction
The objective of semantic segmentation is to predict a
label for every single pixel of an input image [32]. Conditioning on each pixel’s observation, existing segmentation
methods [4,9,50,56] naturally adopt the discriminative learning paradigm, along with dedicated efforts on integrating
task prior knowledge (e.g., spatial correlation) [9, 23, 46, 56].
For example, existing methods [4, 50, 56] typically use a
linear projection to optimize the log-likelihood classification
for each pixel. Despite the claim of subverting per-pixel classification, the bipartite matching-based semantic segmentation [8, 9] still cannot avoid the per-pixel max log-likelihood.
In this paper, we introduce a new approach, Generative Semantic Segmentation (GSS), that formulates seman* Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author with
School of Data Science, Fudan University.

Discriminative
learning

Mask
N classes
(a) Discriminative semantic segmentation
Prior learning

Posterior
learning

Latent distribution
(b) Generative semantic segmentation

Figure 1. Schematic comparison between (a) conventional discriminative learning and (b) our generative learning based model for
semantic segmentation. Our GSS introduces a latent variable z
and, given the segmentation mask c, it learns the posterior distribution of z subject to the reconstruction constraint. Then, we train
a conditioning network to model the prior of z by aligning with
the corresponding posterior distribution. This formulation can thus
generate the segmentation mask for an input image.

tic segmentation as an image-conditioned mask generation
problem. This conceptually differs from the conventional formulation of discriminative per-pixel classification learning,
based on the log-likelihood of a conditional probability (i.e.
the classification probability of image pixels). Taking the
manner of image generation instead [24,44], we generate the
whole segmentation masks with an auxiliary latent variable
distribution introduced. This formulation is not only simple
and more task-agnostic, but also facilitates the exploitation
of off-the-shelf big generative models (e.g. DALL·E [39]
trained by 3 billion iterations on a 300 million open-image
dataset, far beyond both the data scale and training cost of
semantic segmentation).

7111

