This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STAR Loss: Reducing Semantic Ambiguity in Facial Landmark Detection
Zhenglin Zhou1⇤, Huaxia Li2⇤, Hong Liu3⇤, Nanyang Wang2, Gang Yu2, Rongrong Ji1†
1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University.
2

Tencent PCG. 3 National Institute of Information.
zhenglinzhou@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {haroldzcli, cagewang, skicyyu}@tencent.com,
hliu@nii.ac.jp, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep learning-based facial landmark detection
has achieved significant improvement. However, the semantic ambiguity problem degrades detection performance.
Specifically, the semantic ambiguity causes inconsistent annotation and negatively affects the model’s convergence,
leading to worse accuracy and instability prediction. To
solve this problem, we propose a Self-adapTive Ambiguity
Reduction (STAR) loss by exploiting the properties of semantic ambiguity. We find that semantic ambiguity results
in the anisotropic predicted distribution, which inspires us
to use predicted distribution to represent semantic ambiguity. Based on this, we design the STAR loss that measures the anisotropism of the predicted distribution. Compared with the standard regression loss, STAR loss is encouraged to be small when the predicted distribution is
anisotropic and thus adaptively mitigates the impact of semantic ambiguity. Moreover, we propose two kinds of eigenvalue restriction methods that could avoid both distribution’s abnormal change and the model’s premature convergence. Finally, the comprehensive experiments demonstrate that STAR loss outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on three benchmarks, i.e., COFW, 300W, and WFLW,
with negligible computation overhead. Code is at https:
//github.com/ZhenglinZhou/STAR

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection, which aims to locate a group
of pre-defined facial landmarks from images [48, 51, 56], is
a fundamental problem for many downstream tasks, including face verification [12], face synthetic [1], and 3D face
reconstruction [10, 13, 17, 46].
Thanks to the development of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [20, 36, 39], facial landmark detection has
† Corresponding author.

⇤ Equal contribution. This work was done when Zhenglin Zhou was an

intern at Tencent PCG.

Figure 1. The impact of semantic ambiguity. We visualize the
outputs of five models trained with the same architecture under the
same experimental setting. (1) The first row shows the predicted
facial landmarks for Mr. Tony Stark, marked as red points. And
the green point refers to the corresponding mean value. (2) The
second row shows the results of predicted probability distribution
(i.e., heatmap) from one of the trained models.

improved significantly. At first, coordinate regression methods [3, 16, 33, 47] are proposed to learn the transformation between CNN features and landmark locations via fully
connected layers. Recently, the research focus has been the
heatmap regression methods, which have shown superiority
over coordinate regression methods. The heatmap regression methods [21, 24, 48] predict an intermediate heatmap
for each landmark and decode the coordinates from the
heatmap. But, the commonly used decoder, Argmax [55], is
not differentiable and suffers from quantization error. Recently, some solutions have been proposed [38, 53], and
the focus is on the differentiable expectation decoder: softArgmax [32]. With the help of soft-Argmax, the heatmap
regression method has the advantage of end-to-end training. So the training loss is mainly composed of a regression
loss (such as L2 ), which makes the model prediction fit the
manual annotation.
However, the manual annotation suffers from the semantic ambiguity problem [16, 21, 30]. Specifically, some fa-

15475

