This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RefSR-NeRF: Towards High Fidelity and Super Resolution View Synthesis
Xudong Huang∗, Wei Li∗, Jie Hu, Hanting Chen, Yunhe Wang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{huangxudong9, wei.lee, chenhanting, hujie23, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
We present Reference-guided Super-Resolution Neural
Radiance Field (RefSR-NeRF) that extends NeRF to super
resolution and photorealistic novel view synthesis. Despite
NeRF’s extraordinary success in the neural rendering field,
it suffers from blur in high resolution rendering because
its inherent multilayer perceptron struggles to learn high
frequency details and incurs a computational explosion as
resolution increases. Therefore, we propose RefSR-NeRF,
an end-to-end framework that first learns a low resolution
NeRF representation, and then reconstructs the high frequency details with the help of a high resolution reference
image. We observe that simply introducing the pre-trained
models from the literature tends to produce unsatisfied artifacts due to the divergence in the degradation model. To this
end, we design a novel lightweight RefSR model to learn
the inverse degradation process from NeRF renderings to
target HR ones. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that our method exhibits an impressive
trade-off among rendering quality, speed, and memory usage, outperforming or on par with NeRF and its variants
while being 52× speedup with minor extra memory usage.
Code will be available at: Mindspore and Pytorch

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [29], which was first proposed by Mildenhall et al. in 2020, is leading a trend
in neural rendering field for its realism and representation parsimony, showing great potential in various downstream industrial applications such as immersive view synthesis [1, 2, 41], 3D scene reconstruction [24, 60], autonomous driving [38, 18, 31, 50], aerial surveying [9, 21],
digital human deformation [47, 62, 52, 36], robot navigation and environment simulation [38]. In essence, NeRF
synthesizes photorealistic renderings by encoding the volumetric density and color of a scene within the weights of
a coordinate-based multilayer perceptron (MLP) [2], and
∗ Equal Contribution

its magic manifests in reconstructing an intact 3D spacial
representation from a handful of sparse observations, while
simultaneously retaining a highly compact scene representation [58].
While this approach works well when the training and
testing images observe the scene content with low resolution, NeRF, and its follow-ups exhibit significant blurry effects when the resolution goes up. This can be attributed
to the following two reasons. First of all, MLPs perform
poorly to regress the high frequency details from uniformlysampled low-dimension 5D coordinates [39]. Although a
positional encoding that uses Fourier Transformation will
greatly leverage this inherent low frequency bias in neural
networks, there is still a big room for photorealism. In addition, as the resolution increases, or in other words, when the
scene becomes more complex, NeRF requires a larger MLP
to encode more high frequency information [38]. However, simply enlarging the MLP only achieves minor gains
in detail restoration [33] and will significantly exacerbate
the rendering efficiency.
Moreover, due to the dense sampling strategy and frequent MLP queries, rendering a NeRF is agonizingly slow.
It takes more than one day to train for a scene and 30
seconds to render an 800 × 800 image even running on a
high-performance desktop GPU, and this issue would be
more unacceptable when the resolution continues to ascend. To accelerate the rendering speed, several follow-up
works are proposed from different perspectives. One of the
most strait-forward solutions is introducing voxel-grid representation to NeRF to model local properties of geometries [22, 48, 37, 58, 10, 49, 13, 30, 5]. Despite the fact
that this paradigm achieves two or three orders of magnitudes of speed up [37, 10], they consume massive storage
and compromise rendering quality, which is unbearable for
resource-limited mobile devices.
To tackle the issue of lacking high frequency details, a
surge of interest is to introduce more advanced positional
encoding algorithms [1, 39]. However, these approaches
brought minor improvements. To this end, we propose
that since MLPs have a natural defect in learning high frequency details, it is better to let MLPs learn low frequency
18244

