This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ambiguous Medical Image Segmentation using Diffusion Models
Aimon Rahman1
Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu1
Ilker Hacihaliloglu2
Vishal M. Patel1
1
2
Johns Hopkins University
University of British Columbia
arahma30@jhu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Diagnosis is the central part of medicine, which heavily
relies on the individual practitioner assessment strategy. Recent studies suggest that misdiagnosis with potential mortality and morbidity is widespread for even the most common health conditions [32, 49]. Hence, reducing the frequency of misdiagnosis is a crucial step towards improving
healthcare. Medical image segmentation, which is a central part of diagnosis, plays a crucial role in clinical outcomes. Deep learning-based networks for segmentation are
now getting traction for assisting in clinical settings, however, most of the leading segmentation networks in the literature are deterministic [17, 23, 34, 36, 41, 42, 44], meaning they predict a single segmentation mask for each input image. Unlike natural images, ground truths are not

Annotations from different radiologists

b) VAE-based

a)Deterministic
Input

c)Diffusion-based (Ours)
Input

PriorNet
μPrior z , z , z …
1

2

3

𝜎Prior
b

Network
Network

Collective insights from a group of experts have always proven to outperform an individual’s best diagnostic
for clinical tasks. For the task of medical image segmentation, existing research on AI-based alternatives focuses
more on developing models that can imitate the best individual rather than harnessing the power of expert groups.
In this paper, we introduce a single diffusion model-based
approach that produces multiple plausible outputs by learning a distribution over group insights. Our proposed model
generates a distribution of segmentation masks by leveraging the inherent stochastic sampling process of diffusion using only minimal additional learning. We demonstrate on
three different medical image modalities- CT, ultrasound,
and MRI that our model is capable of producing several
possible variants while capturing the frequencies of their
occurrences. Comprehensive results show that our proposed approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art ambiguous segmentation networks in terms of accuracy while
preserving naturally occurring variation. We also propose
a new metric to evaluate the diversity as well as the accuracy of segmentation predictions that aligns with the interest of clinical practice of collective insights. Implementation code: https://github.com/aimansnigdha/AmbiguousMedical-Image-Segmentation-using-Diffusion-Models.

Input

Prediction

Xb,T

Xb,t

Xb,t-1

Xb,0

Sampling

Input

Predictions

Predictions

Figure 1. a) Deterministic networks produce a single output for
an input image. b) c-VAE-based methods encode prior information about the input image in a separate network and sample latent
variables from there and inject it into the deterministic segmentation network to produce stochastic segmentation masks. c) In our
method the diffusion model learns the latent structure of the segmentation as well as the ambiguity of the dataset by modeling the
way input images are diffused through the latent space. Hence our
method does not need an additional prior encoder to provide latent
variables for multiple plausible annotations.

deterministic in medical images as different diagnosticians
can have different opinions on the type and extent of an
anomaly [1,15,37,39]. Due to this, the diagnosis from medical images is quite challenging and often results in a low
inter-rater agreement [22, 24, 56]. Depending on only pixelwise probabilities and ignoring co-variances between the
pixels might lead to misdiagnosis. In clinical practice, aggregating interpretations of multiple experts have shown to
improve diagnosis and generate fewer false negatives [57].
In fact, utilizing the aptitude of multiple medical experts has been a part of long-standing clinical traditions
such as case conferences, specialist consultations, and tumor boards. By harnessing the power of collective intelligence, team-based decision-making provides safer healthcare through improved diagnosis [32, 40]. Although collective insight is gaining traction in healthcare for its potential

11536

