This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance Relation Graph Guided
Source-Free Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Vibashan VS, Poojan Oza, and Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
{vvishnu2,poza2,vpatel36}@jhu.edu

1. Introduction
In recent years, object detection has seen tremendous
advancements due to the rise of deep networks [12, 42,
44, 45, 53, 79]. The major contributor to this success is
the availability of large-scale annotated detection datasets
[10, 13, 15, 43, 73], as it enables the supervised training
of deep object detector models. However, these models

GraphCon Loss

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) is an effective
approach to tackle the issue of domain shift. Specifically,
UDA methods try to align the source and target representations to improve generalization on the target domain. Further, UDA methods work under the assumption that the
source data is accessible during the adaptation process.
However, in real-world scenarios, the labelled source data
is often restricted due to privacy regulations, data transmission constraints, or proprietary data concerns. The SourceFree Domain Adaptation (SFDA) setting aims to alleviate
these concerns by adapting a source-trained model for the
target domain without requiring access to the source data.
In this paper, we explore the SFDA setting for the task of
adaptive object detection. To this end, we propose a novel
training strategy for adapting a source-trained object detector to the target domain without source data. More precisely, we design a novel contrastive loss to enhance the
target representations by exploiting the objects relations for
a given target domain input. These object instance relations are modelled using an Instance Relation Graph (IRG)
network, which are then used to guide the contrastive representation learning. In addition, we utilize a student-teacher
to effectively distill knowledge from source-trained model
to target domain. Extensive experiments on multiple object detection benchmark datasets show that the proposed
approach is able to efficiently adapt source-trained object
detectors to the target domain, outperforming state-of-theart domain adaptive detection methods. Code and models
are provided in https://viudomain.github.io/irg-sfda-web/.

Pseudo-label Loss

Abstract

Unlabeled target domain
Labeled source domain

Source model training

Source-free
domain adaptation

Instance Relation
Graph

Figure 1. Left: Supervised training of detection model on the
source domain. Right: Source-Free Domain Adaptation where
a source-trained model is adapted to the target domain in the absence of source data with pseudo-label self-training and proposed
Instance Relation Graph (IRG) network guided contrastive loss.

often have poor generalization when deployed in visual
domains not encountered during training. In such cases,
most works in the literature follow the Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) setting to improve generalization
[7, 14, 23, 24, 57, 62]. Specifically, UDA methods aim to
minimize the domain discrepancy by aligning the feature
distribution of the detector model between source and target domain [9, 19, 28, 56, 59]. To perform feature alignment, UDA methods require simultaneous access to the labeled source and unlabeled target data. However in practical scenarios, the access to source data is often restricted
due to concerns related to privacy/safety, data transmission, data proprietary etc. For example, consider a detection model trained on large-scale source data, that performs
poorly when deployed in new devices having data with different visual domains. In such cases, it is far more efficient to transmit the source-trained detector model (∼5001000MB) for adaptation rather than transmitting the source
data (∼10-100GB) to these new devices [27,37]. Moreover,
transmitting only source-trained model alleviates many privacy/safety, data proprietary concerns as well [41, 47, 70].
Hence, adapting the source-trained model to the target domain without having access to source data is essential in the
case of practical deployment of detection models. This motivates us to study Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA)
setting for adapting object detectors (illustrated in Fig. 1).
The SFDA is a more challenging setting than UDA.
Specifically, on top of having no labels for the target data,

3520

