This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoxelNeXt: Fully Sparse VoxelNet for 3D Object Detection and Tracking
Yukang Chen1
1

Jianhui Liu2

Xiangyu Zhang3

Xiaojuan Qi2

Jiaya Jia1,4

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 MEGVII 4 SmartMore

Abstract
3D object detectors usually rely on hand-crafted proxies, e.g., anchors or centers, and translate well-studied 2D
frameworks to 3D. Thus, sparse voxel features need to be
densified and processed by dense prediction heads, which
inevitably costs extra computation. In this paper, we instead propose VoxelNext for fully sparse 3D object detection. Our core insight is to predict objects directly based
on sparse voxel features, without relying on hand-crafted
proxies. Our strong sparse convolutional network VoxelNeXt detects and tracks 3D objects through voxel features entirely. It is an elegant and efficient framework,
with no need for sparse-to-dense conversion or NMS postprocessing. Our method achieves a better speed-accuracy
trade-off than other mainframe detectors on the nuScenes
dataset. For the first time, we show that a fully sparse voxelbased representation works decently for LIDAR 3D object
detection and tracking. Extensive experiments on nuScenes,
Waymo, and Argoverse2 benchmarks validate the effectiveness of our approach. Without bells and whistles, our model
outperforms all existing LIDAR methods on the nuScenes
tracking test benchmark. Code and models are available at
github.com/dvlab-research/VoxelNeXt.

1. Introduction
3D perception is a fundamental component in autonomous driving systems. 3D detection networks take
sparse point clouds or voxels as input, and localize and categorize 3D objects. Recent 3D object detectors [40, 49,
57] usually apply sparse convolutional networks (Sparse
CNNs) [53] for feature extraction owing to its efficiency.
Inspired by 2D object detection frameworks [14, 38], anchors [12, 53] or centers [57], i.e., dense point anchors
in CenterPoint [57], are commonly utilized for prediction.
Both of them are hand-crafted and taken as intermediate
proxies for 3D objects.
Anchors and centers are designed for regular and gridstructured image data in the first place, and do not consider
sparsity and irregularity of 3D data. To employ these proxy
representations, the main stream of detectors [12, 40, 57]

0

Input

1

CenterPoint

Figure 1. Visualization of input and heatmaps of CenterPoint in
BEV for Car. Most values in the heatmaps are nearly zero, while
the dense head computes over all BEV features, which is wasteful.

convert 3D sparse features to 2D dense features, so as to
build a dense detection head for the ordered anchors or
centers. Albeit useful, this dense head tradition leads to
other limitations, including inefficiency and complicated
pipelines, as explained below.
In Fig. 1, we visualize the heatmap in CenterPoint [57].
It is clear that a large portion of space has nearly zero prediction scores. Due to inherent sparsity and many background points, only a small number of points have responses, i.e., less than 1% for Car class on average of
nuScenes validation set. However, the dense prediction
head computes over all positions in the feature map, as required by the dense convolution computation. They not
only waste much computation, but also complicate detection pipelines with redundant predictions. It requires to use
non-maximum suppression (NMS) like post-processing to
remove duplicate detections, preventing the detector from
being elegant. These limitations motivate us to seek alternative sparse detection solutions.
In this paper, we instead propose VoxelNeXt. It is a
simple, efficient, and post-processing-free 3D object detector. The core of our design is a voxel-to-object scheme,
which directly predicts 3D objects from voxel features, with
a strong fully sparse convolutional network. The key advantage is that our approach can get rid of anchor proxies,
sparse-to-dense conversion, region proposal networks, and

21674

Voxe

