This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Set Representation Learning through Combinatorial Embedding
Geeho Kim1
Junoh Kang1
Bohyung Han1,2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ECE1 & IPAI2 , Seoul National University
{snow1234, junoh.kang, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Visual recognition tasks are often limited to dealing with
a small subset of classes simply because the labels for the
remaining classes are unavailable. We are interested in
identifying novel concepts in a dataset through representation learning based on both labeled and unlabeled examples, and extending the horizon of recognition to both
known and novel classes. To address this challenging task,
we propose a combinatorial learning approach, which naturally clusters the examples in unseen classes using the compositional knowledge given by multiple supervised metaclassifiers on heterogeneous label spaces. The representations given by the combinatorial embedding are made more
robust by unsupervised pairwise relation learning. The
proposed algorithm discovers novel concepts via a joint
optimization for enhancing the discrimitiveness of unseen
classes as well as learning the representations of known
classes generalizable to novel ones. Our extensive experiments demonstrate remarkable performance gains by the
proposed approach on public datasets for image retrieval
and image categorization with novel class discovery.

able to effectively identify unseen classes while preserving
the information of previously seen classes. Our problem
setting is more challenging than the case where the unlabeled data only consist of unseen classes because we have
to solve an additional problem, predicting the membership
of unlabeled examples between seen and unseen classes.
We propose a representation learning approach based on
the concept of combinatorial classification [36], where the
examples in unseen categories are identified by the composition of multiple meta-classifiers. Figure 1 illustrates
the main idea of our combinatorial embedding framework,
which forms partitions for novel classes via a combination
of multiple classifiers for the meta-classes involving several
constituent base classes. Images in the same meta-class potentially have common attributes that are helpful for knowledge transfer to novel classes, and we learn the representations of the images by the proposed combinatorial embedding. The learned representations via the combinatorial embedding become even stronger by unsupervised pairwise relation learning, which is effective to identify novel classes.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel combinatorial learning framework,
which embeds the examples in both seen and novel
classes effectively by the composition of the knowledge learned from multiple heterogeneous meta-class
classifiers.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable success of machine learning fueled by deep neural networks, existing frameworks still
have critical limitations in an open-world setting, where
some categories are not defined a priori and the labels for
some classes are missing. Although there have been a growing number of works that identify new classes in unlabeled
data given a set of labeled examples [4, 5, 15–18], they often assume that all the unlabeled examples belong to unseen
classes and/or the number of novel classes is known in advance, which makes their problem settings unrealistic.
To address the limitations, this paper introduces an algorithm applicable to a more realistic setting. We aim to
discover and learn the representations of unseen categories
without any prior information or supervision about novel
classes, where unlabeled data may contain examples in both
seen and unseen classes. This task requires the model to be

• We introduce an unsupervised learning approach to define pairwise relations, especially semantic structure
between labeled and unlabeled examples, which further improves the quality of the representations given
by combinatorial embedding.
• We demonstrate the outstanding performance of our
model in the presence of novel classes through extensive evaluations on image retrieval and image categorization with novel class discovery benchmarks.
In the rest of this paper, we first review related works in
Section 2 and discusses our main algorithm in Section 3.
Section 4 presents our experimental results and Section 5
concludes this paper.

19744

