This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RepMode: Learning to Re-parameterize Diverse Experts
for Subcellular Structure Prediction
Donghao Zhou 1, 2, 3
1

Chunbin Gu 3
Guangyong Chen 4 *

Junde Xu 1, 2, 3
Furui Liu 4
Pheng-Ann Heng 1, 3, 4

Qiong Wang 1

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Zhejiang Lab
https://correr-zhou.github.io/RepMode

Abstract

(a)

(b) Partial Labeling
Microtubule

Recent years have witnessed great progress in biological
research at the subcellular level [1,2,7,21,23,59,61], which
plays a pivotal role in deeply studying cell functions and
behaviors. To address the difficulty of observing subcellu* Corresponding Author: gychen@zhejianglab.com

DNA

×
×

×

•••

Neural Network

×

×
•••

1. Introduction

Golgi

×

Transmitted-Light Image

(c) Multi-Scale

Fluorescent Image

•••

In biological research, fluorescence staining is a key
technique to reveal the locations and morphology of subcellular structures. However, it is slow, expensive, and harmful to cells. In this paper, we model it as a deep learning
task termed subcellular structure prediction (SSP), aiming
to predict the 3D fluorescent images of multiple subcellular structures from a 3D transmitted-light image. Unfortunately, due to the limitations of current biotechnology, each
image is partially labeled in SSP. Besides, naturally, subcellular structures vary considerably in size, which causes
the multi-scale issue of SSP. To overcome these challenges,
we propose Re-parameterizing Mixture-of-Diverse-Experts
(RepMode), a network that dynamically organizes its parameters with task-aware priors to handle specified singlelabel prediction tasks. In RepMode, the Mixture-of-DiverseExperts (MoDE) block is designed to learn the generalized
parameters for all tasks, and gating re-parameterization
(GatRep) is performed to generate the specialized parameters for each task, by which RepMode can maintain a compact practical topology exactly like a plain network, and
meanwhile achieves a powerful theoretical topology. Comprehensive experiments show that RepMode can achieve
state-of-the-art overall performance in SSP.

Mitochondrion

Cell Membrane

Nucleolus

Nuclear Envelope

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of subcellular structure prediction (SSP),
which aims to predict the 3D fluorescent images of multiple subcellular structures from a 3D transmitted-light image. This task
faces two challenges, i.e. (b) partial labeling and (c) multi-scale.

lar structures, fluorescence staining was invented and has
become a mainstay technology for revealing the locations
and morphology of subcellular structures [26]. Specifically,
biologists use the antibodies coupled to different fluorescent dyes to ªstainº cells, after which the subcellular structures of interest can be visualized by capturing distinct fluorescent signals [64]. Unfortunately, fluorescence staining
is expensive and time-consuming due to the need for advanced instrumentation and material preparation [29]. Besides, phototoxicity during fluorescent imaging is detrimental to living cells [28]. In this paper, we model fluorescence

3312

