This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF-DS: Neural Radiance Fields for Dynamic Specular Objects
Zhiwen Yan
Chen Li
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{yan.zhiwen, lichen}@u.nus.edu

gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Dynamic Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is a powerful
algorithm capable of rendering photo-realistic novel view
images from a monocular RGB video of a dynamic scene.
Although it warps moving points across frames from the
observation spaces to a common canonical space for rendering, dynamic NeRF does not model the change of the
reflected color during the warping. As a result, this approach often fails drastically on challenging specular objects in motion. We address this limitation by reformulating the neural radiance field function to be conditioned on
surface position and orientation in the observation space.
This allows the specular surface at different poses to keep
the different reflected colors when mapped to the common
canonical space. Additionally, we add the mask of moving
objects to guide the deformation field. As the specular surface changes color during motion, the mask mitigates the
problem of failure to find temporal correspondences with
only RGB supervision. We evaluate our model based on the
novel view synthesis quality with a self-collected dataset of
different moving specular objects in realistic environments.
The experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly improves the reconstruction quality of moving
specular objects from monocular RGB videos compared to
the existing NeRF models. Our code and data are available
at the project website 1 .

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] trained with multiview images can synthesize novel views for 3D scenes with
photo-realistic quality. NeRF predicts the volume density
and view dependent color of the sampled spatial points
in the scene with a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Recent
works such as Nerfies [32] and NSFF [22] extend NeRF to
reconstruct dynamic scenes from monocular videos. They
resolve the lack of multi-view image supervision in dynamic scenes using a deformation field, which warps dif1 https://github.com/JokerYan/NeRF-DS

HyperNeRF

NeRF-DS (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of novel views rendered by HyperNeRF [33] (left) and our NeRF-DS (right), on the “americano” scene
in the HyperNeRF dataset [33]2 (top) and the “basin” scene in our
dynamic specular dataset (bottom). Our NeRF-DS model significantly improves the reconstruction quality by a surface-aware dynamic NeRF and a mask guided deformation field.

ferent observation spaces to a common canonical space.
Despite showing promising results, we find that the existing dynamic NeRFs do not consider specular reflections
during warping and often fail drastically on challenging dynamic specular objects as shown in Fig. 1. The quality
of dynamic specular object reconstruction is important because specular (e.g. metallic, plastic) surfaces are common
in our daily environment and furthermore it indicates how
accurate a dynamic NeRF represents the radiance field under motion or deformation. Previous works such as RefNeRF [50] and NeRV [45] have only focused on improving
the specular reconstruction in static scenes. The problem of
reconstructing dynamic specular objects with NeRF remain
largely unexplored.
We postulate that one of the reasons for dynamic models
to fail on moving specular objects is because they do not
2 The rendered frames come from the first 3 seconds of the “americano”
scene when the cup is rotating. This part of the video is not included in the
HyperNeRF [33] qualitative results.

8285

