This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging Search Region Interaction with Template for RGB-T Tracking
Tianrui Hui1,2,4

Zizheng Xun3,5 Fengguang Peng3,5 Junshi Huang4 Xiaoming Wei4
Xiaolin Wei4 Jiao Dai1,2 * Jizhong Han1,2 Si Liu3,5
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
4
Meituan 5 Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
RGB Search Frame

Abstract
CNN

RGB-T tracking aims to leverage the mutual enhancement and complement ability of RGB and TIR modalities for
improving the tracking process in various scenarios, where
cross-modal interaction is the key component. Some previous methods concatenate the RGB and TIR search region
features directly to perform a coarse interaction process
with redundant background noises introduced. Many other
methods sample candidate boxes from search frames and
conduct various fusion approaches on isolated pairs of RGB
and TIR boxes, which limits the cross-modal interaction
within local regions and brings about inadequate context
modeling. To alleviate these limitations, we propose a novel
Template-Bridged Search region Interaction (TBSI) module
which exploits templates as the medium to bridge the crossmodal interaction between RGB and TIR search regions by
gathering and distributing target-relevant object and environment contexts. Original templates are also updated with
enriched multimodal contexts from the template medium.
Our TBSI module is inserted into a ViT backbone for joint
feature extraction, search-template matching, and crossmodal interaction. Extensive experiments on three popular RGB-T tracking benchmarks demonstrate our method
achieves new state-of-the-art performances. Code is available at https://github.com/RyanHTR/TBSI.

1. Introduction
Given the initial state of a single target object in the first
frame, the goal of single object tracking (SOT) is to localize the target object in successive frames. As a fundamental task in the computer vision community, SOT has drawn
the great attention of researchers. However, current SOT
methods built on only visible light (RGB) data become vulnerable under extreme imaging conditions (e.g., low illumi* Corresponding author

(a)

Concat
CNN
TIR Search Frame
RGB RoIs

CNN
(b)

Fusion
CNN
TIR RoIs
RGB Search Tokens

ViT

Template
Bridging

(c)

Tokens

ViT
TIR Search Tokens

Figure 1. Comparison between our cross-modal interaction approach and previous ones. (a) Features of RGB and TIR search
frames are directly concatenated. (b) Candidate boxes (RoIs) are
sampled from RGB and TIR search frames and fused in pairs with
gating or attention mechanisms. (c) Our approach exploits template tokens as the medium to bridge the cross-modal interaction
between RGB and TIR search region tokens.

nation and adverse weather, etc), which motivates the incorporation of thermal infrared (TIR or T) data for mutual
enhancement and complement. Benefiting from the strong
nocturnal photosensitivity and penetration ability of thermal
infrared data, RGB-T tracking enjoys wide potential applications such as video surveillance processing [1], intelligent
robotics [5], and autonomous driving [8].
As a multimodal vision task, the key to RGB-T tracking
is how to perform effective cross-modal interaction. Since
the tracking process occurs in successive frames guided
by the annotated initial frame, cross-modal interaction be-

13630

