This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ground-Truth Free Meta-Learning for Deep Compressive Sampling
Xinran Qin1,2
1

Yuhui Quan1,2 * Tongyao Pang3

Hui Ji3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510335, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
csqinxinran@gmail.com, csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, matpt@nus.edu.sg, matjh@nus.edu.sg †

Abstract
Compressive sampling (CS) is an efficient technique for
imaging. This paper proposes a ground-truth (GT) free
meta-learning method for CS, which leverages both external and internal deep learning for unsupervised highquality image reconstruction. The proposed method first
trains a deep neural network (NN) via external metalearning using only CS measurements, and then efficiently
adapts the trained model to a test sample for exploiting sample-specific internal characteristic for performance
gain. The meta-learning and model adaptation are built on
an improved Stein’s unbiased risk estimator (iSURE) that
provides efficient computation and effective guidance for
accurate prediction in the range space of the adjoint of the
measurement matrix. To improve the learning and adaption on the null space of the measurement matrix, a modified model-agnostic meta-learning scheme and a null-space
consistency loss are proposed. In addition, a bias tuning
scheme for unrolling NNs is introduced for further acceleration of model adaption. Experimental results have demonstrated that the proposed GT-free method performs well and
can even compete with supervised methods.

1. Introduction
CS is an imaging technique that captures an image by
collecting a limited number of measurements using a specific measurement matrix [5]. This technique has a wide
range of applications, including magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging, computed tomography (CT), and many others.
One main challenges in CS is reconstructing an image from
its limited measurements. Let x ∈ RN denote an image of
interest, y ∈ CM its CS measurement vector with M  N ,
and Φ the measurement matrix. Then the CS reconstruction
* Corresponding author: Yuhui Quan
† This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of Guang-

dong Province (Grant No. 2022A1515011755 and 2023A1515012841),
and Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 1 Grant (WBS No. A-8000981-00-00).

needs to solve an under-determined system:
y = Φx + ,

(1)

where  ∈ CM denotes measurement noise. As Φ is underdetermined, a direct inversion suffers from solution ambiguity and noise sensitivity.
Supervised learning is one popular approach for CSR,
which trains an end-to-end NN for CSR over a dataset with
pairs of a GT image and its measurements; see e.g. [11,
42, 45, 47]. However, supervised CSR has two limitations.
Firstly, it is often expensive or even impractical to collect a
sufficient number of GT images in practice. Consequently,
the NN trained using a limited amount of external training
data may not generalize well. Secondly, the training data
may be biased or insufficient to cover the full range of patterns and characteristics of the images being reconstructed,
resulting in poor generalization performance.
Recently, many works (e.g. [6, 7, 27, 50]) have sought to
address the first limitation of supervised CSR by developing
GT-free external learning techniques, which train an end-toend NN without accessing GT images. Quite a few methods along this line are based on the Stein’s unbiased risk
estimator (SURE) [37]. While they have shown promise,
there remains a noticeable performance gap between these
GT-free techniques and existing supervised methods.
To address the second limitation of supervised CSR,
there are also some works on self-supervised internal learning, which train a deep NN model directly on a test sample to exploit sample-specific internal characteristics; see
e.g. [15, 30, 39]. These methods are based on the deep image prior (DIP) [38] induced by the structures of a convolutional NN (CNN). The downside of these methods is their
computational efficiency. Since each test example requires
learning an individual model, processing a large number of
test samples can be time-consuming and overwhelming.
Motivated by the pros and cons of existing works on external and internal learning, this paper aims at developing a
GT-free joint external and internal learning method for CSR
that takes the full advantages of both:

9947

