This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Executing your Commands via Motion Diffusion in Latent Space
Xin Chen1 *

Wen Liu1
Zilong Huang1
Biao Jiang2 *
Tao Chen2
Gang Yu1†
1
2
Tencent PCG
Fudan University

Bin Fu1

https://github.com/chenfengye/motion-latent-diffusion

the person rises from a laying position and walks in a
clockwise circle, and then lays back down the ground.

Abstract
We study a challenging task, conditional human motion
generation, which produces plausible human motion sequences according to various conditional inputs, such as
action classes or textual descriptors. Since human motions are highly diverse and have a property of quite different distribution from conditional modalities, such as textual descriptors in natural languages, it is hard to learn a
probabilistic mapping from the desired conditional modality to the human motion sequences. Besides, the raw motion data from the motion capture system might be redundant in sequences and contain noises; directly modeling the
joint distribution over the raw motion sequences and conditional modalities would need a heavy computational overhead and might result in artifacts introduced by the captured noises. To learn a better representation of the various human motion sequences, we first design a powerful
Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) and arrive at a representative and low-dimensional latent code for a human motion
sequence. Then, instead of using a diffusion model to establish the connections between the raw motion sequences
and the conditional inputs, we perform a diffusion process
on the motion latent space. Our proposed Motion Latentbased Diffusion model (MLD) could produce vivid motion
sequences conforming to the given conditional inputs and
substantially reduce the computational overhead in both
the training and inference stages. Extensive experiments
on various human motion generation tasks demonstrate that
our MLD achieves significant improvements over the stateof-the-art methods among extensive human motion generation tasks, with two orders of magnitude faster than previous
diffusion models on raw motion sequences.

1. Introduction
Human motion synthesis has recently rapidly developed
in a multi-modal generative fashion. Various condition in* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

a person is careful while walking around the obstacles.

dribble with the basketball

run in a circle

Figure 1. Our Motion Latent-based Diffusion (MLD) model can
achieve high-quality and diverse motion generation given a text
prompt. The darker colors indicate the later in time, and the colored words refer to the motions with same colored trajectory.

puts, such as music [34, 33, 32], control signals [45, 66, 65],
action categories [46, 19], and natural language descriptions [16, 47, 69, 18, 2, 28], provide a more convenient and
human-friendly way to animate virtual characters or even
control humanoid robots. It will benefit numerous applications in the game industry, film production, VR/AR, and
robotic assistance.
Among all conditional modalities, text-based conditional
human motion synthesis has been driving and dominating
research frontiers because the language descriptors provide
a convenient and natural user interface for people to interact with computers [47, 2, 75, 69, 28]. However, since the
distributions between the natural language descriptors and

18000

