This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning the Distribution of Errors in Stereo Matching
for Joint Disparity and Uncertainty Estimation
Liyan Chen

Weihan Wang
Philippos Mordohai
Stevens Institute of Technology

Abstract
We present a new loss function for joint disparity and
uncertainty estimation in deep stereo matching. Our work
is motivated by the need for precise uncertainty estimates
and the observation that multi-task learning often leads to
improved performance in all tasks. We show that this can
be achieved by requiring the distribution of uncertainty to
match the distribution of disparity errors via a KL divergence term in the network’s loss function. A differentiable
soft-histogramming technique is used to approximate the
distributions so that they can be used in the loss. We experimentally assess the effectiveness of our approach and observe significant improvements in both disparity and uncertainty prediction on large datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/lly00412/SEDNet.git.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision problems can be formulated as
estimation tasks. Considering, however, that even highperforming estimators are not error-free, associating confidence or uncertainty with their estimates is of great importance, particularly in critical applications. In this paper,
we focus on disparity estimation via stereo matching, but
we are confident that our approach is applicable to other
pixel-wise regression tasks after minor modifications.
We distinguish between confidence and uncertainty: the
former refers to a probability or likelihood of correctness,
while the latter is related to the magnitude of the expected
error of an estimate. Confidence can be used to reject estimates that are suspected to be incorrect, or to rank them
from most to least reliable. We argue that uncertainty is
more valuable because it can also used for fusing multiple
observations, e.g. in a Kalman filtering framework. Most
research has focused on confidence estimation for stereo
matching [12, 30]. Moreover, most methods estimate confidence for pre-computed disparities that are not further improved. Joint estimation of disparity and confidence, which
benefits both due to multi-task learning, is addressed infrequently [19, 20, 26, 34].

Our work is partially inspired by the joint treatment
of epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty by Kendall and Gal
[14], who propose novel loss functions that give rise to uncertainty estimates in pixel-wise vision tasks. Results on
semantic segmentation and single-image depth estimation
demonstrate how the primary task benefits from simultaneous uncertainty estimation. Kendall and Gal argue that
“in many big data regimes (such as the ones common to
deep learning with image data), it is most effective to model
aleatoric uncertainty,” while epistemic uncertainty can be
reduced when large amounts of data are available. Here, we
restrict our attention to aleatoric uncertainty.
Our motivation is that ideally we should be able to predict the magnitude of the estimator’s error at each pixel. Of
course, this is unrealistic, since if it was possible, we could
drive all errors down to zero. A feasible objective is to train
an uncertainty estimator whose outputs follow the same distribution as the true errors of the disparity estimator.
In this paper, we present an implementation of this concept via a deep network that jointly estimates disparity and
its uncertainty from a pair of rectified images. We named
the network SEDNet, for Stereo Error Distribution Network. SEDNet includes a novel, lightweight uncertainty estimation subnetwork that predicts the aleatoric uncertainty

Left Image

Predicted Disparity

Figure 1. Examples of left images and predicted disparity maps by
SEDNet on DrivingStereo [36]. The first example is taken around
sunset with over-exposure. The second example is taken on a rainy
day with under-exposure. In both challenge cases, SEDNet predicts accurate disparity.

17235

