This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gated Stereo:
Joint Depth Estimation from Gated and Wide-Baseline Active Stereo Cues
Stefanie Walz1 Mario Bijelic2 Andrea Ramazzina1 Amanpreet Walia3 Fahim Mannan3 Felix Heide2,3
1
Mercedes-Benz 2 Princeton University 3 Algolux

Abstract
We propose Gated Stereo, a high-resolution and longrange depth estimation technique that operates on active
gated stereo images. Using active and high dynamic range
passive captures, Gated Stereo exploits multi-view cues
alongside time-of-flight intensity cues from active gating.
To this end, we propose a depth estimation method with a
monocular and stereo depth prediction branch which are
combined in a final fusion stage. Each block is supervised through a combination of supervised and gated selfsupervision losses. To facilitate training and validation, we
acquire a long-range synchronized gated stereo dataset for
automotive scenarios. We find that the method achieves an
improvement of more than 50 % MAE compared to the next
best RGB stereo method, and 74 % MAE to existing monocular gated methods for distances up to 160 m. Our code,
models and datasets are available here1 .

1. Introduction
Long-range high-resolution depth estimation is critical
for autonomous drones, robotics, and driver assistance systems. Most existing fully autonomous vehicles strongly rely
on scanning LiDAR for depth estimation [51, 52]. While
these sensors are effective for obstacle avoidance the measurements are often not as semantically rich as RGB images. LiDAR sensing also has to make trade-offs due to
physical limitations, especially beyond 100 meters range,
including range range versus eye-safety and spatial resolution. Although recent advances in LiDAR sensors such
as, MEMS scanning [60] and photodiode technology [58]
have drastically reduced the cost and led to a number of sensor designs with ≈ 100 - 200 scanlines, these are still significantly lower resolutions than modern HDR megapixel
camera sensors with a vertical resolution more than ≈ 5000
pixels. However, extracting depth from RGB images with
monocular methods is challenging as existing estimation
methods suffer from a fundamental scale ambiguity [16].
Stereo-based depth estimation methods resolve this issue
but need to be well calibrated and often fail on texture-less

regions and in low-light scenarios when no reliable features,
and hence triangulation candidate, can be found.
To overcome the limitations of existing scanning LiDAR
and RGB stereo depth estimation methods, a body of work
has explored gated imaging [2, 7–9, 22, 27]. Gated imagers integrate the transient response from flash-illuminated
scenes in broad temporal bins, see Section 3 for more details. This imaging technique is robust to low-light, and
adverse weather conditions [7] and the embedded time-offlight information can be decoded as depth. Specifically,
Gated2Depth [23] estimates depth from three gated slices
and learns the prediction through a combination of simulation and LiDAR supervision. Building on these findings, recently, Walia et al. [59] proposed a self-supervised training
approach predicting higher-quality depth maps. However,
both methods have in common that they often fail in conditions where the signal-to-noise ratio is low, e.g., in the case
of strong ambient light.
We propose a depth estimation method from gated stereo
observations that exploits both multi-view and time-offlight cues to estimate high-resolution depth maps. We
propose a depth reconstruction network that consists of a
monocular depth network per gated camera and a stereo
network that utilizes both active and passive slices from the
gated stereo pair. The monocular network exploits depthdependent gated intensity cues to estimate depth in monocular and low-light regions while the stereo network relies
on active stereo cues. Both network branches are fused in a
learned fusion block. Using passive slices allows us to perform robustly under bright daylight where active cues have
a low signal-to-noise ratio due to ambient illumination. To
train our network, we rely on supervised and self-supervised
losses tailored to the stereo-gated setup, including ambientaware and illuminator-aware consistency along with multicamera consistency. To capture training data and assess the
method, we built a custom prototype vehicle and captured a
stereo-gated dataset under different lighting conditions and
automotive driving scenarios in urban, suburban and highway environments across 1000 km of driving.
Specifically, we make the following contributions:
• We propose a novel depth estimation approach using gated stereo images that generates high-resolution

1 https://light.princeton.edu/gatedstereo/

13252

