This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-Guided Music Recommendation for Video via Prompt Analogies
Justin Salamon2
Josef Sivic2,3
Bryan Russell2
Daniel McKee1 *
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Adobe Research
3
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University
dbmckee2@illinois.edu

salamon@adobe.com

josef.sivic@cvut.cz

brussell@adobe.com

https://www.danielbmckee.com/language-guided-music-for-video

Abstract
We propose a method to recommend music for an input
video while allowing a user to guide music selection with
free-form natural language. A key challenge of this problem setting is that existing music video datasets provide the
needed (video, music) training pairs, but lack text descriptions of the music. This work addresses this challenge with
the following three contributions. First, we propose a textsynthesis approach that relies on an analogy-based prompting procedure to generate natural language music descriptions from a large-scale language model (BLOOM-176B)
given pre-trained music tagger outputs and a small number of human text descriptions. Second, we use these synthesized music descriptions to train a new trimodal model,
which fuses text and video input representations to query
music samples. For training, we introduce a text dropout
regularization mechanism which we show is critical to
model performance. Our model design allows for the retrieved music audio to agree with the two input modalities
by matching visual style depicted in the video and musical
genre, mood, or instrumentation described in the natural
language query. Third, to evaluate our approach, we collect a testing dataset for our problem by annotating a subset
of 4k clips from the YT8M-MusicVideo dataset with natural
language music descriptions which we make publicly available. We show that our approach can match or exceed the
performance of prior methods on video-to-music retrieval
while significantly improving retrieval accuracy when using
text guidance.

1. Introduction
A key part of the video editing process for creators is
choosing a musical soundtrack. Especially given the rise
of short-form videos on social media platforms, automated
music recommendation systems have become an increas* Work done as an intern with Adobe Research

Language-Guided Music Retrieval
Retrieved Music

Video+Language Query

ViML

A somber folk ballad
featuring female vocalist,
guitar, and tambourine

ViML

Pop featuring a female
vocalist with energetic
synth melodies

ViML
Upbeat pop

Lighthearted pop song
with a male vocalist
backed by guitar, drums

User input includes video
and a text description of
target music.

Descriptions of the retrieved
music tracks provided by the
authors for illustration only.

Folk music with guitar

Upbeat pop

Figure 1. Language-guided music retrieval. Our ViML model
takes a video and text prompt as input to retrieve a suitable music
track from a database. The model learns to fuse video and language representations in order to guide retrieval. Notice how our
approach retrieves audio matching both the video and language
content. For the same video query (top two rows), we can change
the music style to match the language query, and for the same
Upbeat pop query (bottom two rows) we can change the vocalist to match the video content. To fully appreciate our results,
please view and listen to the companion video on our website.

ingly common and important part of video editing applications. While these systems can be helpful for finding relevant music, they often provide limited capability for user
control over the types of music recommended. In previous work, music is retrieved based solely on the visual content and style from a video [32, 37]. However, music itself
can convey critical information about how a video should

14784

