This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D2 Former: Jointly Learning Hierarchical Detectors and Contextual
Descriptors via Agent-based Transformers
Jianfeng He1, *, Yuan Gao1, *, Tianzhu Zhang1,2,†, Zhe Zhang2 , Feng Wu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
{hejf, wazs98}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn, cnclepzz@126.com

Abstract
Establishing pixel-level matches between image pairs is
vital for a variety of computer vision applications. However, achieving robust image matching remains challenging
because CNN extracted descriptors usually lack discriminative ability in texture-less regions and keypoint detectors are only good at identifying keypoints with a specific
level of structure. To deal with these issues, a novel image matching method is proposed by Jointly Learning Hierarchical Detectors and Contextual Descriptors via Agentbased Transformers (D2 Former), including a contextual
feature descriptor learning (CFDL) module and a hierarchical keypoint detector learning (HKDL) module. The
proposed D2 Former enjoys several merits. First, the proposed CFDL module can model long-range contexts efficiently and effectively with the aid of designed descriptor
agents. Second, the HKDL module can generate keypoint
detectors in a hierarchical way, which is helpful for detecting keypoints with diverse levels of structures. Extensive
experimental results on four challenging benchmarks show
that our proposed method significantly outperforms stateof-the-art image matching methods.

1. Introduction
Finding pixel-level matches accurately between images
depicting the same scene is a fundamental task with a wide
range of 3D vision applications, such as 3D reconstruction [35, 53, 55], simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [15, 25, 39], pose estimation [13, 29], and visual
localization [35,43]. Owing to its broad real-world applications, the image matching task has received increasing attention in the past decades [9, 16, 31, 33, 34]. However, realizing robust image matching remains difficult due to various
challenges such as illumination changes, viewpoint transformations, poor textures and scale variations.
To conquer the above challenges, tremendous image
matching approaches have been proposed [7,9,12,16,31,34,
42], among which some dense matching methods [7,16,42]
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Full attention
Agent-based attention
(a) Activation areas for different attention mechanism
High-level structures (object parts)

Low-level structures (corners/edges)

(b) Diverse levels of structures in the image

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) shows the comparison between our proposed agent-based attention and full attention,
where full attention would aggregate features from irrelevant areas. (b) shows the diverse structures contained in the image.

are proposed to consider all possible matches adequately
and have achieved great success. However, because of the
large matching space, these dense matching methods are expensive in computation cost and memory consumption. To
achieve high efficiency, we notice that the detector-based
matching methods [4, 9, 20, 31] can effectively reduce the
matching space by designing keypoint detectors to extract a
relatively small keypoint set for matching, thus having high
research value. Generally, existing detector-based matching methods can be categorized into two main groups including detect-then-describe approaches [18, 37, 40, 41, 54]
and detect-and-describe approaches [12, 20, 31]. Detectthen-describe approaches refer to first detect repeatable keypoints [3, 5, 18], and then keypoint features [19, 23, 28] are
represented by describing image patches extracted around
these keypoints. In this way, matches can be established
by nearest neighbor search according to the Euclidean distance between keypoint features. However, since the keypoint detector and descriptor are usually designed separately in detect-then-describe approaches, keypoint features
may not be suitable for detected keypoints, resulting in
poor performance under extreme appearance changes. Differently, detect-and-describe approaches [12, 31] are proposed to tightly couple the keypoint detector learning with
the descriptor learning. For example, both D2-Net [12]
and R2D2 [31] use a single convolutional neural network
(CNN) for joint detection and description. These methods

2904

