This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Steerable Function for Efficient Image Resampling
Jiacheng Li1 * Chang Chen2 * Wei Huang1
Zhiqiang Lang2 Fenglong Song2 Youliang Yan2 Zhiwei Xiong1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{jclee,weih527}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

{chenchang25,langzhiqiang,songfenglong,yanyouliang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Image resampling is a basic technique that is widely
employed in daily applications. Existing deep neural networks (DNNs) have made impressive progress in resampling performance. Yet these methods are still not the perfect substitute for interpolation, due to the issues of efficiency and continuous resampling. In this work, we propose
a novel method of Learning Resampling Function (termed
LeRF), which takes advantage of both the structural priors
learned by DNNs and the locally continuous assumption of
interpolation methods. Specifically, LeRF assigns spatiallyvarying steerable resampling functions to input image pixels and learns to predict the hyper-parameters that determine the orientations of these resampling functions with a
neural network. To achieve highly efficient inference, we
adopt look-up tables (LUTs) to accelerate the inference of
the learned neural network. Furthermore, we design a
directional ensemble strategy and edge-sensitive indexing
patterns to better capture local structures. Extensive experiments show that our method runs as fast as interpolation,
generalizes well to arbitrary transformations, and outperforms interpolation significantly, e.g., up to 3dB PSNR gain
over bicubic for ×2 upsampling on Manga109.

1. Introduction
Due to the rapid growth of visual data, there is a strong
demand for digital image processing. Image resampling,
one of the most common techniques, aims to obtain another image by generating new pixels following a geometric transformation rule from existing pixels in a given image [8]. Common transformations include upsampling (i.e.,
single image super-resolution), downsampling, affine transformation, etc. Image resampling enjoys various applications, ranging from photo editing, optical distortion com* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was done when
Jiacheng Li was a research intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

⋯
Fixed Bicubic Resampling Function

Learned Steerable Resampling Functions

Downsample

Rotation

Upsample

Sheering

Warping

Figure 1. LeRF assigns steerable resampling functions to input
pixels, and learns to predict the hyper-parameters that determine
the orientations of these continuous functions for resampling under arbitrary transformations.

pensation [10], online content streaming [35], and visual
special effects production [38].
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have made impressive progress in the field of image resampling [9,12,17,
27, 39, 40], thanks to the learning-from-data paradigm that
obtains powerful structural priors from large-scale datasets.
Despite the superior performance that DNN-based methods
have achieved, long-lived interpolation methods like bicubic [16] are still preferred choices in most cases.
We attribute this phenomenon to the following two reasons: 1) Interpolation is simple and highly efficient, resulting in less dependency and thus the practicality to be deployed on a variety of devices, ranging from IoT devices
to gaming workstations. 2) Interpolation supports arbitrary
transformations. It assumes a continuous resampling function for a local area, resulting in the versatility in applying
to not only homographic transformations like upsampling
and downsampling, but also general warping. Although recent DNN-based methods explore beyond fixed-scale upsampling [5, 12, 27, 39, 43, 48], an efficient and continuous

5866

