This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization with Text
Information
Guozhang Li1 ,De Cheng1 ,Xinpeng Ding2 , Nannan Wang1 *, Xiaoyu Wang3 , Xinbo Gao1,4
1
Xidian University,2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) 4 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
liguozhang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, dcheng@xidian.edu.cn, xdingaf@connect.ust.hk
nnwang@xidian.edu.cn,fanghuaxue@gmail.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the lack of temporal annotation, current Weaklysupervised Temporal Action Localization (WTAL) methods
are generally stuck into over-complete or incomplete localization. In this paper, we aim to leverage the text information to boost WTAL from two aspects, i.e., (a) the discriminative objective to enlarge the inter-class difference,
thus reducing the over-complete; (b) the generative objective to enhance the intra-class integrity, thus ﬁnding more
complete temporal boundaries. For the discriminative objective, we propose a Text-Segment Mining (TSM) mechanism, which constructs a text description based on the action class label, and regards the text as the query to mine all
class-related segments. Without the temporal annotation of
actions, TSM compares the text query with the entire videos
across the dataset to mine the best matching segments while
ignoring irrelevant ones. Due to the shared sub-actions
in different categories of videos, merely applying TSM is
too strict to neglect the semantic-related segments, which
results in incomplete localization. We further introduce a
generative objective named Video-text Language Completion (VLC), which focuses on all semantic-related segments
from videos to complete the text sentence. We achieve the
state-of-the-art performance on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.3. Surprisingly, we also ﬁnd our proposed method
can be seamlessly applied to existing methods, and improve
their performances with a clear margin. The code is available at https://github.com/lgzlIlIlI/Boosting-WTAL.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization attempts to temporally localize the action instances of interest in untrimmed videos.
Although current fully-supervised temporal action localization methods [5, 26, 42, 51] have achieved remarkable
* Corresponding author

10648

GT
Prediction

Incomplete localization Over-complete localization
(a)
Video
Encoder

T-CAM

Action
Localization

… pole vault

pull close
push away

Classifier
(b)

T

T

Class Text
Query

diving

high jump

T

T

A video of
[MASK]

consistency
Attention
Language
completion
(c)

T

T

A video of
Diving

Figure 1. Comparison of our proposed framework with current
WTAL methods. (a) Common failures in existing WTAL methods.
(b) Existing WTAL model’s pipeline. (c) The proposed framework with text-segment mining and video-text language completion, where the depth of color represents the degree of correlation
between segments and texts.

progress, time-consuming and labor-intensive frame-level
annotations are required. To alleviate the annotation cost,
weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL)
methods [15,22,32,35] have gained more attention recently,
which only requires efﬁcient video-level annotations.
With only video-level supervision, existing WTAL methods [15, 22, 35, 45] generally utilize video information to
train a classiﬁer, which is used to generate a sequence
of class logits or predictions named temporal class activation map (T-CAM). While signiﬁcant improvement has
been achieved, current methods still suffer from two prob-

