This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiscale Tensor Decomposition and Rendering Equation Encoding
for View Synthesis
Kang Han
James Cook University

Wei Xiang*
La Trobe University

kang.han@my.jcu.edu.au

w.xiang@latrobe.edu.au

Abstract
Rendering novel views from captured multi-view images
has made considerable progress since the emergence of
the neural radiance field. This paper aims to further advance the quality of view synthesis by proposing a novel
approach dubbed the neural radiance feature field (NRFF).
We first propose a multiscale tensor decomposition scheme
to organize learnable features so as to represent scenes
from coarse to fine scales. We demonstrate many benefits
of the proposed multiscale representation, including more
accurate scene shape and appearance reconstruction, and
faster convergence compared with the single-scale representation. Instead of encoding view directions to model
view-dependent effects, we further propose to encode the
rendering equation in the feature space by employing the
anisotropic spherical Gaussian mixture predicted from the
proposed multiscale representation. The proposed NRFF
improves state-of-the-art rendering results by over 1 dB in
PSNR on both the NeRF and NSVF synthetic datasets. A
significant improvement has also been observed on the realworld Tanks & Temples dataset. Code can be found at
https://github.com/imkanghan/nrff.

1. Introduction
View synthesis aims to synthesize unrecorded views
from multiple captured views using computer vision techniques. A great deal of effort has been made to solve
this problem in the past few decades [29]. The recently
proposed neural radiance field (NeRF) [18] made a breakthrough in this area by modeling a scene via a multilayer perceptron (MLP). The NeRF achieves an impressive
photo-realistic view synthesis quality with 6 degrees of freedom for the first time. The NeRF also represents a scene in
a very compact form. That is, only a small number of parameters in the MLP, whose size is even smaller than the
captured images. However, this advantage in model size
* Corresponding author.

comes at the expense of extensive computations. Numerous
evaluations of the MLP are required to render a single pixel,
incurring a challenge for both training and testing.
Representing a scene via learnable features is shown to
be an effective alternative approach for photo-realistic view
synthesis [6,7,19,25]. Several data structures are employed
to efficiently organize learnable features to achieve compact
representations. Multiresolution hash encoding (MHE) [19]
and tensor decomposition in TensoRF [6] are two typical
works in this direction. MHE organizes learnable features
in multiresolution hash tables. As each hash table corresponds to a distinct grid resolution, a point is thus indexed
into different positions of the hash tables to mitigate the
negative effects of hash collisions. However, this structure
breaks the local coherence in nature scenes, even though
the spatial hash function in MHE preserves the coherence
to some extent. By comparison, TensoRF decomposes a 3D
tensor into 2D plane and 1D line tensors, where the local coherence is largely preserved. However, TensoRF’s decomposition is performed only in a single scale, whereas multiscale methods are much more desirable for wide-ranging
computer vision tasks [1, 14, 16, 26, 27]. We thus propose
a multiscale tensor decomposition (MTD) method to represent scenes from coarse to fine scales. We show that the
proposed MTD method is able to reconstruct more accurate
scene shapes and appearances, and also converges faster
than the single-scale TensoRF. As a result, the proposed
MTD method achieves better view synthesis quality than
TensoRF, even with fewer learnable features.
View direction encoding is the key to the success of neural rendering in modeling complex view-dependent effects.
Frequency (or position encoding) [18] and spherical harmonics [30] are the two mostly used view direction encoding methods. The encoded feature vector of a view direction is then fed to an MLP to predict a view-dependent
color. This approach models the 5D light field function (3D
spatial position with 2D view direction) [13]. In computer
graphics, the light field is usually modeled by the rendering
equation [10], where the outgoing radiance is the interaction
result of the incoming light at a point with a specific mate-

4232

