This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MSeg3D: Multi-modal 3D Semantic Segmentation for Autonomous Driving
Jiale Li1 Hang Dai2∗ Hao Han3 Yong Ding3∗
1
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow
3
School of Micro-Nano Electronics, Zhejiang University
∗

Corresponding authors{Hang.Dai@glasgow.ac.uk, dingyong09@zju.edu.cn}.

Abstract
LiDAR and camera are two modalities available for
3D semantic segmentation in autonomous driving. The
popular LiDAR-only methods severely suffer from inferior
segmentation on small and distant objects due to insufficient
laser points, while the robust multi-modal solution is
under-explored, where we investigate three crucial inherent
difficulties: modality heterogeneity, limited sensor field
of view intersection, and multi-modal data augmentation.
We propose a multi-modal 3D semantic segmentation
model (MSeg3D) with joint intra-modal feature extraction
and inter-modal feature fusion to mitigate the modality
heterogeneity. The multi-modal fusion in MSeg3D consists
of geometry-based feature fusion GF-Phase, cross-modal
feature completion, and semantic-based feature fusion
SF-Phase on all visible points. The multi-modal data
augmentation is reinvigorated by applying asymmetric
transformations on LiDAR point cloud and multi-camera
images individually, which benefits the model training
with diversified augmentation transformations. MSeg3D
achieves state-of-the-art results on nuScenes, Waymo, and
SemanticKITTI datasets. Under the malfunctioning multicamera input and the multi-frame point clouds input,
MSeg3D still shows robustness and improves the LiDARonly baseline. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/jialeli1/lidarseg3d.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding for safe autonomous driving can
be achieved through semantic segmentation using camera
2D images and LiDAR 3D point clouds, which densely
classifies each smallest sensing unit of the modality. The
image-based 2D semantic segmentation has been developed
with massive solid studies [12, 34, 61, 63]. The camera
image has rich appearance information about the object but
severely suffers from illumination, varying object scales,
and indirect applications in the 3D world. Another modality, LiDAR point cloud, drives 3D semantic segmentation
with laser points [1, 3, 11, 37]. Unfortunately, irregular

laser points are too sparse to capture the details of objects.
The inaccurate segmentation appears especially on small
and distant objects. The other under-explored direction is
using multi-modal data to increase both the robustness and
accuracy in 3D semantic segmentation [67].
Despite the conceptual superiority, the development of
multi-modal segmentation model is still nontrivial, lagging
behind the single-modal methods [27]. We rationally
attribute the difficulties to the three following aspects. i)
Heterogeneity between modalities. Due to sparse points
and dense pixels, point cloud feature extractors [14, 31]
and image feature extractors [15, 44, 47] are developed
distinctly. Separate intra-modal feature extractors are
used to address the heterogeneity [13, 20, 25, 42, 51],
but the lack of joint optimization leads to suboptimal
features from irrelevant network parameters. ii) Limited
intersection on the field of view (FOV) between sensors.
Only the points falling into the intersected FOV are
geometrically associated with multi-modal data, while
simply considering the intersected multi-modal data is not
sufficient to be practically applicable. Performing fusion
solely in the limited FOV intersection like [20,67] results in
unsatisfactory overall segmentation performance as shown
in Fig. 1. iii) Multi-modal data augmentation. For
example, PMF [67] uses only several 2D augmentations
for spatially aligned point cloud projection image and
camera RGB image. Under the constraint of modal
alignment or 2D representation of point cloud, the multimodal segmentation works [20, 25, 67] discard many useful
and critical point cloud augmentation transformations with
sacrificed perception performance [36, 48].
Accordingly, we propose a top-performing multi-modal
3D semantic segmentation method termed MSeg3D, inherently motivated by addressing the aforementioned three
technical difficulties. i) Unlike separately extracting modal
features in existing methods [13, 25, 42, 51], we jointly
optimize intra-modal feature extraction and inter-modal
feature fusion to drive maximum correlation and complementarity between heterogeneous modalities. ii) To
overcome the disregarded multi-modal fusion outside FOV

21694

