This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PaCa-ViT: Learning Patch-to-Cluster Attention in Vision Transformers
Ryan Grainger1 , Thomas Paniagua1 , Xi Song2 , Naresh Cuntoor3 , Mun Wai Lee3 and Tianfu Wu1 *
1
Department of ECE, NC State, 2 An Independent Researcher, 3 BlueHalo

1. Introduction
A picture is worth a thousand words. Seeking solutions that can bridge the semantic gap between those words
and raw image data has long been, and remains, a grand
challenge in computer vision, machine learning and AI.
Deep learning has revolutionized the field of computer vision in the past decade. More recently, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [13, 45] have witnessed remarkable progress in
* T. Wu is the corresponding author.

iii) The Proposed PaCa: Patch-to-Cluster Attention

!

pa
tch
es

Pa
tc
Q h-b
ue as
rie ed
s

" patches

Quadratic complexity:
(%×')!
ed
as e
-b alu
tch & V
a
P y
e
K

ed
as e
-b lu
er Va
t
s
lu &
C ey
K

Linear complexity:
%×' ×!

! cluster heatmaps
(e.g., ! = 100)

ii) Patch-to-Reduced-Patch Attention

$ patches

Reduced complexity:
%×' ×(ℎ×*)
ℎp
atc
he
s

du

c

ey ed-P
& atch
Va -bas
lu ed
e

…

Re

Vision Transformers (ViTs) are built on the assumption
of treating image patches as “visual tokens” and learn
patch-to-patch attention. The patch embedding based tokenizer has a semantic gap with respect to its counterpart,
the textual tokenizer. The patch-to-patch attention suffers
from the quadratic complexity issue, and also makes it nontrivial to explain learned ViTs. To address these issues in
ViT, this paper proposes to learn Patch-to-Cluster attention (PaCa) in ViT. Queries in our PaCa-ViT starts with
patches, while keys and values are directly based on clustering (with a predefined small number of clusters). The
clusters are learned end-to-end, leading to better tokenizers
and inducing joint clustering-for-attention and attentionfor-clustering for better and interpretable models. The
quadratic complexity is relaxed to linear complexity. The
proposed PaCa module is used in designing efficient and interpretable ViT backbones and semantic segmentation head
networks. In experiments, the proposed methods are tested
on ImageNet-1k image classification, MS-COCO object detection and instance segmentation and MIT-ADE20k semantic segmentation. Compared with the prior art, it obtains better performance in all the three benchmarks than
the SWin [32] and the PVTs [47, 48] by significant margins in ImageNet-1k and MIT-ADE20k. It is also significantly more efficient than PVT models in MS-COCO and
MIT-ADE20k due to the linear complexity. The learned
clusters are semantically meaningful. Code and model
checkpoints are available at https://github.com/
iVMCL/PaCaViT.

i) Vanilla Patch-to-Patch Attention

K

Abstract

Simple forward interpretability by
directly visualizing the cluster heatmaps

…

Figure 1. i) The vanilla patch-to-patch self-attention [13, 45] directly leverages image patch embeddings as visual tokens and suffers from its quadratic complexity. Every Query (e.g., the patches
in the blue grid) needs to interact with every Key. ii) To address
the quadratic complexity, one popular method is to leverage spatial reduction (e.g., implemented via a convolution with a stride
r > 1) in computing the Key and the Value [47, 48]. It still performs patch-to-patch attention, but enjoys a reduced complexity.
iii) We propose Patch-to-Cluster attention (PaCa) in this paper.
A predefined number of M cluster assignments is first learned and
then used in computing the Key and Value, resulting in not only
linear complexity, but also more meaningful visual tokens.

computer vision. ViTs are built on the basis of treating
image patches as “visual tokens” using patch embedding
and learning patch-to-patch attention throughout. Unlike
the textual tokens that are provided as inputs in natural language processing, visual tokens need to be learned first and
continuously refined for more effective learning of ViTs.
The patch embedding based tokenizer is a workaround in
practice and has a semantic gap with respect to its counterpart, the textual tokenizer. On one hand, the well-known
issue of the quadratic complexity of vanilla Transformer
models and the 2D spatial nature of images create a nontrivial task of developing ViTs that are applicable for many
vision problems including image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation. On the other hand,
explaining trained ViTs requires non-trivial and sophisticated methods [4] following the trend of eXplainable AI
(XAI) [18] that has been extensively studied with convolutional neural networks.
To address the quadratic complexity, there have been

18568

