This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RIDCP: Revitalizing Real Image Dehazing via High-Quality Codebook Priors
Rui-Qi Wu1 Zheng-Peng Duan1 Chun-Le Guo1 * Zhi Chai2 Chongyi Li3
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 Hisilicon Technologies Co. Ltd.
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{wuruiqi, adamduan0211}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, guochunle@nankai.edu.cn,
chaizhi2@huawei.com, chongyi.li@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing dehazing approaches struggle to process realworld hazy images owing to the lack of paired real data
and robust priors. In this work, we present a new paradigm
for real image dehazing from the perspectives of synthesizing more realistic hazy data and introducing more robust priors into the network. Specifically, (1) instead of
adopting the de facto physical scattering model, we rethink the degradation of real hazy images and propose a
phenomenological pipeline considering diverse degradation types. (2) We propose a Real Image Dehazing network via high-quality Codebook Priors (RIDCP). Firstly, a
VQGAN is pre-trained on a large-scale high-quality dataset
to obtain the discrete codebook, encapsulating high-quality
priors (HQPs). After replacing the negative effects brought
by haze with HQPs, the decoder equipped with a novel
normalized feature alignment module can effectively utilize
high-quality features and produce clean results. However,
although our degradation pipeline drastically mitigates the
domain gap between synthetic and real data, it is still intractable to avoid it, which challenges HQPs matching in
the wild. Thus, we re-calculate the distance when matching the features to the HQPs by a controllable matching
operation, which facilitates finding better counterparts. We
provide a recommendation to control the matching based
on an explainable solution. Users can also flexibly adjust
the enhancement degree as per their preference. Extensive
experiments verify the effectiveness of our data synthesis
pipeline and the superior performance of RIDCP in real
image dehazing. Code and data are released at https://rqwu.github.io/projects/RIDCP.

1. Introduction
Image dehazing aims to recover clean images from their
hazy counterparts, which is essential for computational photography and high-level tasks [20, 32]. The hazy image formulation is commonly described by a physical scattering
* Corresponding author

(a) Hazy input

(b) DAD [33]

(c) PSD [7]

(d) Ours
Figure 1. Visual comparisons on a typical hazy image. The proposed method generates cleaner results than other two state-of-theart real image dehazing approaches. The enhancement degree of
our result can be flexibly adjusted by adopting different parameters in the real-domain adaptation phase. The image with a golden
border is the result obtained under our recommended parameter.

model:
  I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1-t(x)), \label {eq:physical_model} 

(1)

where I(x) denotes the hazy image and J(x) is its corresponding clean image. The variables A and t(x) are the
global atmosphere light and transmission map, respectively.
The transmission map t(x) = eβd(x) depends on scene
depth d(x) and haze density coefficient β.
Given a hazy image, restoring its clean version is highly
ill-posed. To mitigate the ill-posedness of this problem, various priors, e.g., dark channel prior [16], color attenuation
prior [44], and color lines [12] have been proposed in existing traditional methods. Nevertheless, the statistical priors
cannot cover diverse cases in real-world scenes, leading to
suboptimal dehazing performance.
With the advent of deep learning, image dehazing has
achieved remarkable progress. Existing methods either
adopt deep networks to estimate physical parameters [5, 21,
31] or directly restore haze-free images [10, 15, 27, 30, 40].
However, image dehazing neural networks perform limited generalization to real scenes, owing to the difficulty in
1
22282

