This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relightable Neural Human Assets from Multi-view Gradient Illuminations
Taotao Zhou1,4 *

Kai He1∗

Di Wu1,3∗

Teng Xu1,4

Kuixiang Shao1,4
Wenzheng Chen2
Lan Xu1†
1
2
ShanghaiTech University
University of Toronto
4
LumiAni Technology

Qixuan Zhang1,3

Jingyi Yu1†
3
Deemos Technology

{zhoutt, hekai, wudi, xuteng, zhangqx1, shaokx, xulan1, yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
wenzheng@cs.toronto.edu

Figure 1. We present UltraStage, a new dataset containing more than 2000 human assets captured under multi-view and multi-illumination
settings. The high-quality images allow us to extract detailed normal, albedo, and material maps, as well as reconstruct fine geometry (left).
We further propose a neural processing pipeline to interpret each capture into a neural human asset, which enables various applications like
photo-realistic relighting (middle) and exquisite novel view synthesis (right). Our assets faithfully model human details, e.g., the delicate
cloth wrinkles or the vivid classical fan textures.

Abstract
Human modeling and relighting are two fundamental
problems in computer vision and graphics, where highquality datasets can largely facilitate related research.
However, most existing human datasets only provide multiview human images captured under the same illumination.
Although valuable for modeling tasks, they are not readily used in relighting problems. To promote research in
both fields, in this paper, we present UltraStage, a new 3D
human dataset that contains more than 2,000 high-quality
human assets captured under both multi-view and multiillumination settings. Specifically, for each example, we
provide 32 surrounding views illuminated with one white
light and two gradient illuminations. In addition to regular
multi-view images, gradient illuminations help recover detailed surface normal and spatially-varying material maps,
enabling various relighting applications. Inspired by re* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

cent advances in neural representation, we further interpret
each example into a neural human asset which allows novel
view synthesis under arbitrary lighting conditions. We show
our neural human assets can achieve extremely high capture
performance and are capable of representing fine details
such as facial wrinkles and cloth folds. We also validate
UltraStage in single image relighting tasks, training neural
networks with virtual relighted data from neural assets and
demonstrating realistic rendering improvements over prior
arts. UltraStage will be publicly available to the community
to stimulate significant future developments in various human modeling and rendering tasks. The dataset is available
at https://miaoing.github.io/RNHA.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) and photometric stereo (PS)
have long served as two complementary workhorses for recovering 3D objects, human performances, and environments [1,29]. Earlier MVS typically exploits feature matching and bundle adjustment to find ray correspondences

4315

