This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Quality-aware Diagnosis via Meta-knowledge Co-embedding
Haoxuan Che
Siyu Chen
Hao Chen*
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hche,schende,jhc}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Medical images usually suffer from image degradation
in clinical practice, leading to decreased performance of
deep learning-based models. To resolve this problem, most
previous works have focused on filtering out degradationcausing low-quality images while ignoring their potential
value for models. Through effectively learning and leveraging the knowledge of degradations, models can better resist
their adverse effects and avoid misdiagnosis. In this paper, we raise the problem of image quality-aware diagnosis,
which aims to take advantage of low-quality images and image quality labels to achieve a more accurate and robust diagnosis. However, the diversity of degradations and superficially unrelated targets between image quality assessment
and disease diagnosis makes it still quite challenging to effectively leverage quality labels to assist diagnosis. Thus,
to tackle these issues, we propose a novel meta-knowledge
co-embedding network, consisting of two subnets: Task Net
and Meta Learner. Task Net constructs an explicit quality
information utilization mechanism to enhance diagnosis via
knowledge co-embedding features, while Meta Learner ensures the effectiveness and constrains the semantics of these
features via meta-learning and joint-encoding masking. Superior performance on five datasets with four widely-used
medical imaging modalities demonstrates the effectiveness
and generalizability of our method.

1. Introduction
Medical imaging is one of the most valuable sources
of diagnostic information about anatomical structures and
pathological characteristics [1]. Advanced deep learningbased methods applied to high-quality (HQ) medical images have shown significant potential in disease analysis
and diagnosis [2, 3], achieving favorable results compared
with human healthcare professionals [4]. However, in clinical practice, obtaining HQ images is not always feasible.
Medical images often exhibit significant variations in imaging quality due to factors such as patient movements or en* Corresponding author: Hao Chen, email: jhc@cse.ust.hk.

Normal HQ Image

Abnormal HQ Image

Normal LQ Image

Figure 1. Illustration of impact of image degradations on diagnosis semantics for fundus (top) and OCTA (bottom) images. Top:
Degradations obscure parts of the vessel structure and present
lesion-like spots. Bottom: Degradations result in a fake enlargement of the foveal avascular zone (central circular area).

vironmental conditions [5,6]. For instance, a medical image
quality assessment study of 28,780 fundus images revealed
that approximately 41.6% of them contained image artifacts
and corruption and were considered low-quality (LQ) [7].
Such degradations can increase the uncertainty in pathological observation, leading to misdiagnosis [8, 9].
Medical image degradations can significantly affect diagnostic semantics, as illustrated in Figure 1. For instance,
shadow degradation can obscure anatomical structures crucial for diagnosis, while spot artifacts can obfuscate pathological signs that typically manifest as circular shapes [10].
Furthermore, image degradations can also affect diagnostic measurements, such as the vessel area density in optical
coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) images, rendering them unreliable [6]. These close relationships raise
challenges in distinguishing degradations from actual abnormalities [10], leading to false knowledge of lesions and
undesired misdiagnosis during training and deployment [9].
Aware of the profound influence of image quality on diagnosis, many previous works have focused on utilizing image
quality assessment to select relatively HQ images for training and testing, thereby avoiding the influence of LQ im-

19819

