This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Entities as Semantic Points for Visual Information Extraction
in the Wild
Zhibo Yang1,2 * Rujiao Long2 *† Pengfei Wang2 * Sibo Song2 Humen Zhong2
Wenqing Cheng1 Xiang Bai1 Cong Yao2
1
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Alibaba Group

Figure 1. Demonstration of the proposed SIBR dataset, where real-world complexity and challenges (e.g., overlap, blur, printing shift,
rotation, and complex linking) are well represented. The rectangles in red and green stand for keys and values, while the yellow and blue
arrows indicate inter-entity and intra-entity linkings, respectively. (Best viewed in color.)

Abstract
Recently, Visual Information Extraction (VIE) has been
becoming increasingly important in both the academia and
industry, due to the wide range of real-world applications.
Previously, numerous works have been proposed to tackle
this problem. However, the benchmarks used to assess these
methods are relatively plain, i.e., scenarios with real-world
complexity are not fully represented in these benchmarks.
As the first contribution of this work, we curate and release a new dataset for VIE, in which the document images are much more challenging in that they are taken from
real applications, and difficulties such as blur, partial occlusion, and printing shift are quite common. All these factors may lead to failures in information extraction. Therefore, as the second contribution, we explore an alternative
approach to precisely and robustly extract key information
from document images under such tough conditions. Specifically, in contrast to previous methods, which usually either incorporate visual information into a multi-modal architecture or train text spotting and information extraction
in an end-to-end fashion, we explicitly model entities as semantic points, i.e., center points of entities are enriched
with semantic information describing the attributes and relationships of different entities, which could largely benefit entity labeling and linking. Extensive experiments on
standard benchmarks in this field as well as the proposed
* Equal Contribution.
† Correspondence Author.

dataset demonstrate that the proposed method can achieve
significantly enhanced performance on entity labeling and
linking, compared with previous state-of-the-art models.
Dataset is available at https://www.modelscope.
cn/datasets/damo/SIBR/summary.

1. Introduction
Visually Rich Documents (VRDs) are ubiquitous in
daily, industrial, and commercial activities, such as receipts
of shopping, reports of physical examination, product manuals, and bills of entry. Visual Information Extraction (VIE)
aims to automatically extract key information from these
VRDs, which can significantly facilitate subsequent processing and analysis. Due to its broad applications and
grand technical challenges, VIE has recently attracted considerable attention from both the Computer Vision community [33, 34, 39] and the Natural Language Processing
community [16,35,37]. Typical techniques for tackling this
challenging problem include essential electronic conversion
of image (OCR) [28, 30, 41], intermediate procedure of
structure analysis [25] and high-level understanding of contents [35], among which entities play an important role as
an aggregation of vision, structure, and language.
Though substantial progresses [11, 19, 35] have been
made, it is still challenging to precisely and reliably extract
key information from document images in unconstrained
conditions. As shown in Fig. 1, in real-world scenarios documents may have various formats, be captured casually with

15358

