This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMT-NAS:Transferring architectural knowledge between tasks from different
datasets

1

Peng Liao1 , Yaochu Jin1,2 *, Wenli Du1∗
Key Laboratory of Smart Manufacturing in Energy Chemical Process, Ministry of Education, ECUST, China
2
Faculty of Technology, Bielefeld University, Germany
pengliao@mail.ecust.edu.cn, yaochu.jin@uni-bielefeld.de, wldu@ecust.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of multi-task learning (MTL) can largely be
attributed to the shared representation of related tasks, allowing the models to better generalise. In deep learning,
this is usually achieved by sharing a common neural network architecture and jointly training the weights. However, the joint training of weighting parameters on multiple related tasks may lead to performance degradation,
known as negative transfer. To address this issue, this work
proposes an evolutionary multi-tasking neural architecture
search (EMT-NAS) algorithm to accelerate the search process by transferring architectural knowledge across multiple related tasks. In EMT-NAS, unlike the traditional
MTL, the model for each task has a personalised network
architecture and its own weights, thus offering the capability of effectively alleviating negative transfer. A fitness re-evaluation method is suggested to alleviate fluctuations in performance evaluations resulting from parameter sharing and the mini-batch gradient descent training
method, thereby avoiding losing promising solutions during
the search process. To rigorously verify the performance of
EMT-NAS, the classification tasks used in the empirical assessments are derived from different datasets, including the
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, and four MedMNIST datasets.
Extensive comparative experiments on different numbers of
tasks demonstrate that EMT-NAS takes 8% and up to 40%
on CIFAR and MedMNIST, respectively, less time to find
competitive neural architectures than its single-task counterparts.

1. Introduction
Many neural architecture search (NAS) algorithms [8,
16, 23, 56] have shown better performance on a specific
task than manually designed deep neural networks [11, 14,
* Corresponding author.

Code: https://github.com/PengLiao12/EMT-NAS

Figure 1. Conceptual differences between our work and two
main existing methodologies for two-task learning. (a) Existing
multi-task NAS typically handles multiple tasks such as semantic
segmentation and surface normal prediction on the same dataset,
where the loss function contains losses for multiple tasks, resulting
in a network architecture that shares a common set of weight parameters. (b) Model-based transfer learning trains a network architecture on a source dataset and then transfers it to a target dataset
by fine-tuning the weights using a separate loss function. (c) EMTNAS simultaneously optimises multiple classification tasks from
different datasets using a separate loss function for each task, resulting in an individual network architecture and corresponding
weights for each task. EMT-NAS aims to optimise each task separately while sharing the knowledge of good network architectures
to facilitate the optimisation of each task. Best viewed in colour.

35, 51]. However, when the task (or dataset) changes, the
NAS algorithm needs to be run again to find a new optimal
network architecture for the new task, which is typical for
single-task learning (STL).
By contrast, it has been shown that simultaneously learning multiple related tasks, known as multi-task learning
(MTL) is beneficial [3, 52]. One class of MTL focuses
on designing or training a single network to jointly solve
multiple tasks formed by scene understanding (the same

3643

