This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedSeg: Class-Heterogeneous Federated Learning for Semantic Segmentation
Jiaxu Miao, Zongxin Yang, Leilei Fan, Yi Yang†
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
{jiaxumiao, yangzongxin, 22151297, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

Client 1
(motorbike)

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed learning
paradigm that collaboratively learns a global model by
multiple clients with data privacy-preserving. Although
many FL algorithms have been proposed for classification
tasks, few works focus on more challenging semantic segmentation tasks, especially in the class-heterogeneous FL
situation. Compared with classification, the issues from heterogeneous FL for semantic segmentation are more severe:
(1) Due to the non-IID distribution, different clients may
contain inconsistent foreground-background classes, resulting in divergent local updates. (2) Class-heterogeneity for
complex dense prediction tasks makes the local optimum
of clients farther from the global optimum. In this work,
we propose FedSeg, a basic federated learning approach
for class-heterogeneous semantic segmentation. We first
propose a simple but strong modified cross-entropy loss to
correct the local optimization and address the foregroundbackground inconsistency problem. Based on it, we introduce pixel-level contrastive learning to enforce local pixel
embeddings belonging to the global semantic space. Extensive experiments on four semantic segmentation benchmarks (Cityscapes, CamVID, PascalVOC and ADE20k)
demonstrate the effectiveness of our FedSeg. We hope this
work will attract more attention from the FL community to
the challenging semantic segmentation federated learning.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the task of assigning a unique
semantic label to every pixel in a given image, which is
a fundamental research topic in computer vision and has
many potential applications, such as autonomous driving,
image editing and robotics [30]. Training a semantic segmentation model usually needs vast of data with pixel-level
annotations, which is extremely hard to acquire. Collaborative training on multiple clients is a feasible way to solve
† Corresponding author.

Server

Client 2
(person)

Client 3
(cat)

(a)
Class-Heterogeneous
Dense Prediction

Clients’ Optimization
Divergence

𝒘𝒕𝟏
𝒘

𝒘𝒕𝟐

𝒘𝒕𝟑

𝒘𝒕#𝟏
𝟏

𝒘𝒕#𝟏
𝟐

𝒘𝒕#𝟏
𝟑

Clients

?
?
?
?

Server

?
?
Pixel Embedding Space

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The foreground-background inconsistency for classheterogeneous semantic segmentation. (b) Local optimization divergence problem for the heterogeneous dense prediction task.

the problem. However, collaborative training has the risk
of leaking sensitive information. For example, for the autonomous driving task, the training images may include private information such as where the user arrived, where the
user lives and what the user’s house looks like. Thus, a
privacy-preserving collaborative training method is requisite for semantic segmentation.
Federated Learning (FL) [31] is an emerging distributed
machine learning paradigm that jointly trains a shared
global model by multiple clients without exchanging their
raw data. FedAvg [31] is a basic FL algorithm that learns
local models with raw data on clients separately while aggregating weights to a global model on a server. One key
problem of FL is the statistical heterogeneity of data distribution among different clients. Many recent FL algorithms [1, 21, 22, 26, 32] are proposed to tackle the problem. However, most of them evaluate their methods on
classification, while few works focus on more challenging semantic segmentation. Although some federated learn-

8042

