This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multilateral Semantic Relations Modeling
for Image Text Retrieval
Image to Text
Query image：
Zheng Wang13 ,* Zhenwei Gao1 , Kangshuai Guo1 , Yang Yang1†, Xiaoming Wang1 , Heng Tao Shen12
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China1 , Peng Cheng Lab2
Results:
Institute of Electronic and Information Engineering
of UESTC in Guangdong3
t1: A man that is standing in the dirt with a bat.
t2: A batter at a baseball game swinging his bat.
t3: A baseball player is in the middle of his swing as the catcher is ready to catch the ball.

Abstract
Image-text retrieval is a fundamental task to bridge vision and language by exploiting various strategies to finegrained alignment between regions and words. This is
still tough mainly because of one-to-many correspondence,
where a set of matches from another modality can be accessed by a random query. While existing solutions to
this problem including multi-point mapping, probabilistic
distribution, and geometric embedding have made promising progress, one-to-many correspondence is still underexplored. In this work, we develop a Multilateral Semantic
Relations Modeling (termed MSRM) for image-text retrieval to capture the one-to-many correspondence between
multiple samples and a given query via hypergraph modeling. Specifically, a given query is first mapped as a probabilistic embedding to learn its true semantic distribution
based on Mahalanobis distance. Then each candidate instance in a mini-batch is regarded as a hypergraph node
with its mean semantics while a Gaussian query is modeled as a hyperedge to capture the semantic correlations
beyond the pair between candidate points and the query.
Comprehensive experimental results on two widely used
datasets demonstrate that our MSRM method can outperform state-of-the-art methods in the settlement of multiple matches while still maintaining the comparable performance of instance-level matching.

1. Introduction
Image and text are two important information carriers to
help human and intelligent agents to better understand the
real world. Many explorations [9, 18, 35] have been conducted in the computer vision as well as natural language
processing domains to bridge these two modalities [16]. As
a fundamental yet challenging topic in this research, image* This work was supported by the Sichuan Science and Technology
Program, China (2023YFG0289), National Natural Science Foundation of
China (62020106008, 62220106008, and U20B2063), and the Guangdong
Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2022A1515110576).
† Corresponding author, dlyyang@gmail.com.

Query text：

Text to Image

A batter at a
baseball game
swinging his bat.
Results:

Figure 1. Examples of one-to-many correspondence caused by the
inherent nature of different modalities. The existing point-to-point
mapping can not capture the semantic richness of data.

text retrieval can benefit other vision-language tasks [11] in
two ways, e.g. images search for a given sentence and the
retrieval of descriptions for an image query, and spread to a
variety of applications, such as person search [48], sketchbased image retrieval [33], and food recipe retrieval [52].
Due to the power of deep metric learning [30, 31] in visual embedding augmentation, its core idea is intuitively
extended into image-text retrieval to consider the domain
differences. The naive strategy [3, 8, 38] is based on
triplet loss to learn distinctive representations at the global
level only with the help of positive pair and a hard negative one. However, such random sampling cannot effectively select informative pairs, which causes a slow convergence and poor performance [43]. Thus, several reweighting methods [1,4,42,43] are proposed to address this
issue by assigning different weights to positive and negative pairs. Moreover, a flat vector is difficult to infer the
complex relationships among many objects existing in a visual scene [16]. Hence, advanced methods formulate various attention mechanisms [2, 15, 20, 40, 50, 51] to distinguish important features from those negligible or irrelevant
ones based on Top-K region features obtained from the pretrained Faster R-CNN [29].
Actually, the prevailing image-text retrieval approaches
are instance-based, which only focus on the match of the
ground-truth sample. Despite their amazing success, imagetext retrieval is still very difficult because of the one-tomany correspondence [6] where a set of candidates can be

2830

