This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Relation Modeling for Transformer Tracking
Shenyuan Gao1 Chunluan Zhou2 Jun Zhang1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Wormpex AI Research
sygao@connect.ust.hk

czhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg

eejzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
Compared with previous two-stream trackers, the recent
one-stream tracking pipeline, which allows earlier interaction between the template and search region, has achieved
a remarkable performance gain. However, existing onestream trackers always let the template interact with all
parts inside the search region throughout all the encoder
layers. This could potentially lead to target-background
confusion when the extracted feature representations are
not sufficiently discriminative. To alleviate this issue, we
propose a generalized relation modeling method based
on adaptive token division. The proposed method is a
generalized formulation of attention-based relation modeling for Transformer tracking, which inherits the merits of
both previous two-stream and one-stream pipelines whilst
enabling more flexible relation modeling by selecting appropriate search tokens to interact with template tokens.
An attention masking strategy and the Gumbel-Softmax
technique are introduced to facilitate the parallel computation and end-to-end learning of the token division module.
Extensive experiments show that our method is superior
to the two-stream and one-stream pipelines and achieves
state-of-the-art performance on six challenging benchmarks with a real-time running speed. Code and models are
publicly available at https://github.com/Little-Podi/GRM.

1. Introduction
Given the target bounding box in the initial frame of a
video, visual tracking [18] aims to localize the target in
successive frames. Over the past few years, two-stream
trackers [1,21,22,49], which extract features of the template
and search region separately and then model cross-relations
of the template and search region in a sequential fashion, have emerged as a dominant tracking paradigm and
made a significant progress. Following this two-stream
pipeline, several Transformer-based trackers [4, 11, 38]
utilize parallel self-attention blocks to enhance the extracted features by modeling global self-relations within
each image as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Recently, leveraging

Figure 1. Comparison of different relation modeling pipelines of
Transformer-based trackers. The two-stream pipeline uses parallel
self-attention blocks to model relations within each set of tokens
(template or search tokens). The one-stream pipeline integrates
the cross-relation modeling between two sets of tokens and selfrelation modeling within each set of tokens via an unified attention
block. In contrast, our proposed pipeline performs an adaptive
division of the search tokens, which can degenerate to the twostream form if no search token is selected to interact with template
tokens and to the one-stream form if all the search tokens are selected for cross-relation modeling.

the flexibility of the attention mechanism, the one-stream
pipeline [3, 5, 44] is proposed to jointly extract features
and model relations, achieving promising performance. By
conducting self-attention among all concatenated tokens,
both cross-relation modeling and self-relation modeling
can be performed simultaneously as illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
It is demonstrated in [3, 5, 39, 44] that letting the search
region interact with the template as early as possible is ben-

18686

