This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCOOP: Self-Supervised Correspondence and Optimization-Based Scene Flow
Itai Lang1,2 *

Dror Aiger2
Forrester Cole2
Shai Avidan1
1
2
Tel Aviv University
Google Research

{itailang@mail, avidan@eng}.tau.ac.il

{aigerd, fcole, mrub}@google.com

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation [27] is a fundamental problem
in computer vision with various use-cases, such as autonomous driving, scene parsing, pose estimation, and object tracking, to name a few. Given two consecutive observations of a 3D scene, the aim is to compute the dynamics
of the scene between the observations. Scene flow prediction based on 2D images has been thoroughly investigated
in the literature [17, 19, 28, 32, 33]. However, in light of the
1 https://github.com/itailang/SCOOP
* The work was done during an internship at Google Research.

Strict accuracy (%)

Abstract
Scene flow estimation is a long-standing problem in computer vision, where the goal is to find the 3D motion of
a scene from its consecutive observations. Recently, there
have been efforts to compute the scene flow from 3D point
clouds. A common approach is to train a regression model
that consumes source and target point clouds and outputs
the per-point translation vector. An alternative is to learn
point matches between the point clouds concurrently with
regressing a refinement of the initial correspondence flow.
In both cases, the learning task is very challenging since the
flow regression is done in the free 3D space, and a typical
solution is to resort to a large annotated synthetic dataset.
We introduce SCOOP, a new method for scene flow estimation that can be learned on a small amount of data without employing ground-truth flow supervision. In contrast to
previous work, we train a pure correspondence model focused on learning point feature representation and initialize the flow as the difference between a source point and
its softly corresponding target point. Then, in the run-time
phase, we directly optimize a flow refinement component
with a self-supervised objective, which leads to a coherent
and accurate flow field between the point clouds. Experiments on widespread datasets demonstrate the performance
gains achieved by our method compared to existing leading
techniques while using a fraction of the training data. Our
code is publicly available1 .

Michael Rubinstein2

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

SCOOP+ (ours)
SCOOP (ours)

SCOOP+ (ours)
SCOOP (ours) 3DFlow

BiPFN

Just Go with the Flow
FLOT
Self-Point-Flow
FESTA
RigidFlow
FlowNet3D

Full supervision, synthetic train data (FlyingThings3D)
Self supervision, synthetic train data (FlyingThings3D)
Self supervision, real train data (KITTI)

100

1,000
Train set size (#, in a log10 scale)

10,000

Figure 1. Flow accuracy on the KITTI benchmark vs. the train
set size. Our method is trained on one or two orders of magnitude
less data while surpassing the performance of the competing techniques [4, 13, 14, 16, 21, 24, 30, 31] by a large margin. Please see
Table 1 for the complete details of the evaluation settings.

recent proliferation of 3D sensors, such as LiDAR, there is a
surge of interest in scene flow methods that operate directly
on the 3D data [10, 13, 16, 21, 34].
Liu et al. [16] were among the first to pursue this
research avenue. They proposed FlowNet3D, a fullysupervised neural network that learned to regress the flow
between 3D point clouds and showed remarkable performance improvement over image-based techniques [1, 19,
29]. Since their method required ground-truth flow annotations, which are scarce for real-world data, they turned to
training on a large synthetic dataset that compromised the
generalization capability to real-world LiDAR data.
Follow-up works devised self-supervised learning
schemes [13, 21] and narrowed the domain gap by training
on unannotated LiDAR point cloud pairs. However, similar
to Liu et al. [16], they used a regression approach in which
the model should learn to compute the flow in the free 3D
space. This task is extremely challenging, given the irregular nature of point clouds, and requires a large amount of
training data for the network to converge.
In another line of work [8, 11, 24], researchers leveraged
point cloud correspondence for scene flow prediction. In
this approach, the flow is computed as the translation of
a point in the first point cloud (source) to its softly corre-

5281

