This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OT-Filter: An Optimal Transport Filter for Learning with Noisy Labels
Chuanwen Feng† Yilong Ren† Xike Xie
University of Science and Technology of China
Data Darkness Lab, MIRACLE Center, Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC
{chuanwen,ylren}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xkxie}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of deep learning is largely attributed to the
training over clean data. However, data is often coupled
with noisy labels in practice. Learning with noisy labels
is challenging because the performance of the deep neural
networks (DNN) drastically degenerates, due to confirmation bias caused by the network memorization over noisy
labels. To alleviate that, a recent prominent direction is
on sample selection, which retrieves clean data samples
from noisy samples, so as to enhance the model’s robustness and tolerance to noisy labels. In this paper, we revamp the sample selection from the perspective of optimal
transport theory and propose a novel method, called the
OT-Filter. The OT-Filter provides geometrically meaningful distances and preserves distribution patterns to measure
the data discrepancy, thus alleviating the confirmation bias.
Extensive experiments on benchmarks, such as Clothing1M
and ANIMAL-10N, show that the performance of the OTFilter outperforms its counterparts. Meanwhile, results on
benchmarks with synthetic labels, such as CIFAR-10/100,
show the superiority of the OT-Filter in handling data labels of high noise.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success on a flurry of
emerging applications, such as [28, 29, 32, 49]. It is believed that the phenomenal achievement of deep learning
is largely attributed to accurate labels. However, the inaccuracy or imprecision of labels is inherent in real-world
datasets, the so-called noisy label challenge. One way to
alleviate that is to collect labels from internet queries over
data-level tags, but the performance of deep neural networks
(DNN) suffers drastically from the inaccuracy of such labels [27,32]. A higher quality of data labels can be obtained
by employing human workers, but the seemingly “ground
truth annotations” inevitably involve human biases or mis† Equal Contribution.

takes [45,66]. More, the human annotation is expensive and
time-consuming, especially for large-scale datasets.
There have been many works on handling noisy labels,
such as regularization [23] and transition matrix [13, 43].
The regularization approach leverages the regularization
bias to overcome the label noise issue. But the regularization bias is permanent [62], thus overfitting models to
noisy labels. The transition matrix approach assumes that
the transition probabilities between clean and noisy labels
are fixed and independent of data samples. However, a
quality label transition matrix is hard to be estimated, especially when the number of classes is big, making it fall
short in handling noisy real-world datasets, such as [60]
and [36]. A recent prominent direction is on adopting sample selection [27, 38, 58] for enhancing the label quality,
by selecting clean samples from the noisy training dataset.
In general, existing literatures in sample selection can be
grouped to two categories, co-training networking [27, 62]
and criterion-based filtering [31, 34, 57, 58].
The former utilizes the memorization of DNNs and
multiple networks (e.g., co-teaching [27] and its variants
[38, 62]) to filter label noise with small loss trick, so that
a small set of clean samples are used as training examples.
Letting alone the high training overhead of multiple networks, the disadvantages are two-fold: 1) it may require
the a-prior knowledge of noisy rates to select the specified
proportion of small loss samples as clean samples; 2) the
small-loss trick is not tolerant to the error accumulation of
network training once a clean sample is falsely recognized,
the so-called confirmation bias, especially for labels with
high noise where clean and noisy samples largely overlap.
The latter alleviates the problem by setting a specific criterion. Mostly, existing works [31] [58] adopt Euclidean
distances for measuring the similarity between data samples. Distance-based filtering iteratively explores the neighborhood of the feature representation and infers/cleans sample labels by aggregating the information from their neighborhoods. Despite the simplicity, distance-based filtering
is insufficient to address noisy labels, especially when the
label noise is high, e.g., overlapped label classes.

16164

