This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Octree Guided Unoriented Surface Reconstruction
Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage1
1

Yizhak Ben-Shabat1,2

The Australian National University

2

Stephen Gould1

Technion Israel Institute of Technology

{chamin.hewa, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au sitzikbs@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of surface reconstruction from
unoriented point clouds. Implicit neural representations
(INRs) have become popular for this task, but when information relating to the inside versus outside of a shape is
not available (such as shape occupancy, signed distances or
surface normal orientation) optimization relies on heuristics and regularizers to recover the surface. These methods can be slow to converge and easily get stuck in local
minima. We propose a two-step approach, OG-INR, where
we (1) construct a discrete octree and label what is inside
and outside (2) optimize for a continuous and high-fidelity
shape using an INR that is initially guided by the octree’s
labelling. To solve for our labelling, we propose an energy function over the discrete structure and provide an efficient move-making algorithm that explores many possible
labellings. Furthermore we show that we can easily inject
knowledge into the discrete octree, providing a simple way
to influence the result from the continuous INR. We evaluate
the effectiveness of our approach on two unoriented surface
reconstruction datasets and show competitive performance
compared to other unoriented, and some oriented, methods.
Our results show that the exploration by the move-making
algorithm avoids many of the bad local minima reached by
purely gradient descent optimized methods (see Figure 1).

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds has been
studied extensively in computer vision and computer graphics. The task requires estimating a mesh of the shape’s surface from a point cloud sampled from the surface of the
shape. We focus on the reconstruction of watertight 3D
shapes, i.e., shapes that have a well defined interior and exterior. Such shapes are often represented as signed distance
fields (SDFs) or occupancy fields, which can be efficiently
encoded by a neural network [28, 30]. As these representations are fields parameterized by neural networks, they are
often called neural fields. Furthermore, they implicitly rep-

Figure 1. Our method with a SIREN INR (OG-SIREN, left) compared to SIREN wo n (right) for two shapes from the ShapeNet
dataset. Our octree guidance allows for consistent inside-outside
determinism. On the other hand, SIREN wo n gets stuck in local minima from which it cannot escape (due to needing to completely change the occupancy of certain areas) creating extraneous
surfaces (often called ghost geometries in the literature).

resent the shape by a level set of the field, thus they are also
often referred to as implicit neural representations (INRs).
The broader class of neural fields, including INRs, have
been very popular over the last few years as they can handle
arbitrary topology, are memory efficient, and are continuous with potentially infinite resolution [39, 46]. Among the
INRs for 3D shapes, SDFs are the most popular as they provide more useful information (distances not just occupancy)
and are required for downstream graphics algorithms such
as sphere tracing and approximate soft shadows [29, 35].
When learning an implicit representation of a shape, a
major difficulty is predicting whether points in space are
inside or outside the shape. Many methods require oriented surface normals for the input points or signed distances from the surface, which usually are not given by raw
data from scans. While this can be estimated using the line
of sight information [17] or algorithms [4, 6, 15, 21], they
yield noisy predictions that after postprocessing still can
lead to bad results (see Section 4.4). We consider the task
of unoriented surface reconstruction, where such information is not available, and only the sampled surface points
are given. We demonstrate that our method performs competitively and sometimes better than oriented methods, even
when they are given the ground truth (GT) normals.

16717

