This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Where is my Wallet? Modeling Object Proposal Sets
for Egocentric Visual Query Localization
Mengmeng Xu1,2 *

Yanghao Li1

Cheng-Yang Fu1
Bernard Ghanem2
1
Juan-Manuel Pérez-Rúa
1

Tao Xiang1

Meta AI 2 KAUST, Saudi Arabia

{mengmeng.xu,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa, {lyttonhao,chengyangfu,txiang,jmpr}@meta.com

Abstract
This paper deals with the problem of localizing objects
in image and video datasets from visual exemplars. In particular, we focus on the challenging problem of egocentric visual query localization. We first identify grave implicit biases in current query-conditioned model design and
visual query datasets. Then, we directly tackle such biases at both frame and object set levels. Concretely, our
method solves these issues by expanding limited annotations and dynamically dropping object proposals during
training. Additionally, we propose a novel transformerbased module that allows for object-proposal set context to
be considered while incorporating query information. We
name our module Conditioned Contextual Transformer or
CocoFormer. Our experiments show the proposed adaptations improve egocentric query detection, leading to a better
visual query localization system in both 2D and 3D configurations. Thus, we can improve frame-level detection performance from 26.28% to 31.26% in AP, which correspondingly improves the VQ2D and VQ3D localization scores
by significant margins. Our improved context-aware query
object detector ranked first and second respectively in the
VQ2D and VQ3D tasks in the 2nd Ego4D challenge. In addition to this, we showcase the relevance of our proposed
model in the Few-Shot Detection (FSD) task, where we also
achieve SOTA results. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/vq2d_cvpr.

1. Introduction
The task of Visual Queries Localization can be described
as the question, ‘when was the last time that I saw X’, where
X is an object query represented by a visual crop. In the
Ego4D [24] setting, this task aims to retrieve objects from
an ‘episodic memory’, supported by the recordings from an

inference

train/validate
model

model
visual
query

visual
query

annotated
track

query
frame

query
target
object distractor frame

easy

0.721->0.027

moderate

0.803->0.352

hard

0.954->0.712

visual query

target object

distractor

Figure 1. Existing approaches to visual query localization are
biased. Top: only positive frames containing query object are used
to train and validate the query object detector, while the model
is naturally tested on whole videos, where the query object is
mostly absent. Training with background frames alleviates confusion caused by hard negatives during inference and helps predict
fewer false positives in negative frames. Bottom: visual query,
target object, and distractors of three query objects from easy to
hard. The confidence scores in white from a biased model get suppressed in our model in cyan. Our method improves the visual
query localization system with fewer false positives, even for the
very challenging scenario shown in the last row.

* Work done during an internship at Meta AI.

2593

