This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perception and Semantic Aware Regularization for Sequential Confidence
Calibration

1

Zhenghua Peng1 , Yu Luo1 , Tianshui Chen2 , Keke Xu1 , Shuangping Huang1,3, *
South China University of Technology, 2 Guangdong University of Technology, 3 Pazhou Laboratory
eepzh@mail.scut.edu.cn, luoyurl@126.com, tianshuichen@gmail.com,
eexkk@mail.scut.edu.cn, eehsp@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep sequence recognition (DSR) models receive increasing attention due to their superior application to various applications. Most DSR models use merely the target sequences as supervision without considering other related sequences, leading to over-confidence in their predictions. The DSR models trained with label smoothing
regularize labels by equally and independently smoothing
each token, reallocating a small value to other tokens for
mitigating overconfidence. However, they do not consider
tokens/sequences correlations that may provide more effective information to regularize training and thus lead
to sub-optimal performance. In this work, we find tokens/sequences with high perception and semantic correlations with the target ones contain more correlated and effective information and thus facilitate more effective regularization. To this end, we propose a Perception and Semantic
aware Sequence Regularization framework, which explore
perceptively and semantically correlated tokens/sequences
as regularization. Specifically, we introduce a semantic
context-free recognition and a language model to acquire
similar sequences with high perceptive similarities and semantic correlation, respectively. Moreover, over-confidence
degree varies across samples according to their difficulties. Thus, we further design an adaptive calibration intensity module to compute a difficulty score for each samples to obtain finer-grained regularization. Extensive experiments on canonical sequence recognition tasks, including scene text and speech recognition, demonstrate that our
method sets novel state-of-the-art results. Code is available
at https://github.com/husterpzh/PSSR.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable
performance in sequence recognition tasks, such as scene
* Corresponding author.

(a) Perception overconfidence

(b) Semantic overconfidence

Figure 1. Text strings placed along the right side of images are
target, prediction, and sequence confidence respectively from top
to bottom. Fig. 1 (a): the model assigns higher confidence to the
character that extremely resembles to the ground-truth character in
visual perception (e.g., texture and topological shape); Fig. 1 (b):
the word that are semantically correlated to the ground-truth label
will be predicted with a high confidence.

text recognition (STR) [11, 40, 47] and speech recognition
(SR) [3, 25]. Despite impressive accuracy, recent studies
have indicated that DNNs [7, 8, 19], including deep sequence recognition (DSR) models, are usually poorly calibrated and tend to be overconfident [15,27,28]. In the sense
that the confidence values associated with the predicted labels are higher than the true likelihood of the correctness
of these labels, even for the wrong predictions, the overconfident DSR models may assign high confidences. This
property may lead to potentially disastrous consequences
for many safety-critical applications, such as autonomous
driving [12] and medical diagnosis [26, 35].
Current DSR models use merely the target sequence as
supervision and consider little information about any other
sequences. Thus, they may tend to blindly give an overconfident score for their predictions, leading to the overconfidence dilemma. Presently, some works [13, 58] introduce label smoothing, which smooth each token by reallocating a small value to all non-target token class from
the target class, to prevent the DSR models from assigning the full probability mass to target sequences. However,
these algorithms do not consider token/sequences correla-

10658

