This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Look Around for Anomalies:
Weakly-supervised Anomaly Detection via Context-Motion Relational Learning
MyeongAh Cho1 Minjung Kim1 Sangwon Hwang2 Chaewon Park1 Kyungjae Lee3 Sangyoun Lee1
1
2
3
Yonsei University
Hyundai Motor Company
Yong In University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) in surveillance systems
refers to the identiﬁcation of undeﬁned, unusual, or unseen
abnormal events (e.g., trafﬁc accidents, robberies, and other
unforeseeable events) from amongst normal situations with
temporal intervals. Currently, numerous CCTVs installed
in public places such as banks, streets, and buildings record
This work was supported by the Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation(IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2021-0-00172, The development of human
Re-identiﬁcation and masked face recognition based on CCTV camera)

D &ODVV$FWLYDWH
)HDWXUHV

kjlee@yongin.ac.kr

G 1RUPDO
,QWHUDFWLRQ6SDFH

3URMHFWLRQ

5HSURMHFWLRQ

H $EQRUPDO
0RWLRQ
&RQWH[W

7HPSRUDO6SDFH

E 5HODWLYH
'LVWDQFHOHDUQLQJ

F &RQWH[W0RWLRQ
,QWHUUHODWLRQ

$QRPDO\6FRUH

Weakly-supervised Video Anomaly Detection is the task
of detecting frame-level anomalies using video-level labeled
training data. It is difﬁcult to explore class representative
features using minimal supervision of weak labels with a
single backbone branch. Furthermore, in real-world scenarios, the boundary between normal and abnormal is ambiguous and varies depending on the situation. For example, even for the same motion of running person, the abnormality varies depending on whether the surroundings
are a playground or a roadway. Therefore, our aim is
to extract discriminative features by widening the relative
gap between classes’ features from a single branch. In the
proposed Class-Activate Feature Learning (CLAV), the features are extracted as per the weights that are implicitly
activated depending on the class, and the gap is then enlarged through relative distance learning. Furthermore, as
the relationship between context and motion is important
in order to identify the anomalies in complex and diverse
scenes, we propose a Context–Motion Interrelation Module (CoMo), which models the relationship between the appearance of the surroundings and motion, rather than utilizing only temporal dependencies or motion information.
The proposed method shows SOTA performance on four
benchmarks including large-scale real-world datasets, and
we demonstrate the importance of relational information by
analyzing the qualitative results and generalization ability.

sangwonH@hyundai.com

$QRPDO\6FRUH

{maycho0305,mjkima,chaewon28,syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Figure 1. Concept of proposed method. We extract discriminative features that (a) are activated according to normal or abnormal
classes, and (b) enlarge their gaps using relative distance learning.
Furthermore, by projecting features into an interaction space, we
(c) explore relationships between the context and motion information of the scene. For detecting anomalies, the proposed method
considers not only motion but also its relationship with the context.
For example, (d) shows a normal video with a physical ﬁghting in
a basketball game while (e) shows an abnormal ﬁghting video. The
red highlighted ranges are ground-truth abnormal frames and ours
(red line) accurately detects anomalies without false alarms.

our daily life and play an important role in public safety.
However, because it is time-consuming and laborious for
humans to pinpoint anomalies in petabytes of surveillance
videos or to monitor constantly, the VAD task, which provides automatic and instantaneous responses, is a hot topic
in the ﬁeld of deep learning [5, 26].
Weakly-supervised VAD (WVAD) utilizes minimal
knowledge about abnormal events through video-level labeled training data that only has a label stating whether an
abnormal event exists in each video clip or not. WVAD
faces several challenges. First, it is difﬁcult for the network
to learn to classify anomalies at the frame-level through
weak labeled training data. Therefore, most WVAD methods [13,20,31,35] learn through a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL)-based approach. When normal and abnormal
video clips are divided into multiple snippets and each is

12137

