This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Industrial Anomaly Detection via Hybrid Fusion
Yue Wang1 ,* Jinlong Peng2 ,* Jiangning Zhang2 , Ran Yi1†, Yabiao Wang2 , Chengjie Wang2,1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent
1

{imwangyue,ranyi}@sjtu.edu.cn 2 {jeromepeng,vtzhang,caseywang,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com

Abstract
2D-based Industrial Anomaly Detection has been widely
discussed, however, multimodal industrial anomaly detection based on 3D point clouds and RGB images still has
many untouched fields. Existing multimodal industrial
anomaly detection methods directly concatenate the multimodal features, which leads to a strong disturbance between features and harms the detection performance. In this
paper, we propose Multi-3D-Memory (M3DM), a novel
multimodal anomaly detection method with hybrid fusion
scheme: firstly, we design an unsupervised feature fusion
with patch-wise contrastive learning to encourage the interaction of different modal features; secondly, we use a
decision layer fusion with multiple memory banks to avoid
loss of information and additional novelty classifiers to
make the final decision. We further propose a point feature alignment operation to better align the point cloud and
RGB features. Extensive experiments show that our multimodal industrial anomaly detection model outperforms the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on both detection and segmentation precision on MVTec-3D AD dataset. Code at
github.com/nomewang/M3DM.

1. Introduction
Industrial anomaly detection aims to find the abnormal
region of products and plays an important role in industrial
quality inspection. In industrial scenarios, it’s easy to acquire a large number of normal examples, but defect examples are rare. Current industrial anomaly detection methods
are mostly unsupervised methods, i.e., only training on normal examples, and testing on detect examples only during
inference. Moreover, most existing industrial anomaly detection methods [2,9,25,34] are based on 2D images. However, in the quality inspection of industrial products, human
inspectors utilize both the 3D shape and color characteristics to determine whether it is a defective product, where
* Equal contributions. This work was done when Yue Wang was a intern
at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author.

Colored
Point Clouds

Point Clouds

RGB Image

PatchCore
+ FPFH

Ours

Ground
Truth
Bagel

Cookie

Potato

Dowel

Foam

Tire

Figure 1. Illustrations of MVTec-3D AD dataset [3]. The second
and third rows are the input point cloud data and the RGB data.
The fourth and fifth rows are prediction results, and according to
the ground truth, our prediction has more accurate prediction results than the previous method.

3D shape information is important and essential for correct
detection. As shown in Fig. 1, for cookie and potato, it is
hard to identify defects from the RGB image alone. With
the development of 3D sensors, recently MVTec-3D AD
dataset [3] (Fig. 1) with both 2D images and 3D point cloud
data has been released and facilitates the research on multimodal industrial anomaly detection.
The core idea for unsupervised anomaly detection is
to find out the difference between normal representations
and anomalies. Current 2D industrial anomaly detection methods can be categorized into two categories: (1)
Reconstruction-based methods. Image reconstruction tasks
are widely used in anomaly detection methods [2, 9, 14,
22, 34, 35] to learn normal representation. Reconstructionbased methods are easy to implement for a single modal
input (2D image or 3D point cloud). But for multimodal inputs, it is hard to find a reconstruction target. (2) Pretrained
feature extractor-based methods. An intuitive way to utilize the feature extractor is to map the extracted feature to
a normal distribution and find the out-of-distribution one as
an anomaly. Normalizing flow-based methods [15, 27, 33]

8032

