This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compacting Binary Neural Networks by Sparse Kernel Selection
Yikai Wang1 Wenbing Huang2 Yinpeng Dong1,3 Fuchun Sun1 Anbang Yao4
1
BNRist Center, State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 3 RealAI 4 Intel Labs China
{yikaiw,fcsun,dongyinpeng}@tsinghua.edu.cn,hwenbing@126.com,anbang.yao@intel.com

Abstract
Binary Neural Network (BNN) represents convolution
weights with 1-bit values, which enhances the efficiency of
storage and computation. This paper is motivated by a previously revealed phenomenon that the binary kernels in successful BNNs are nearly power-law distributed: their values are mostly clustered into a small number of codewords.
This phenomenon encourages us to compact typical BNNs
and obtain further close performance through learning nonrepetitive kernels within a binary kernel subspace. Specifically, we regard the binarization process as kernel grouping
in terms of a binary codebook, and our task lies in learning
to select a smaller subset of codewords from the full codebook. We then leverage the Gumbel-Sinkhorn technique to
approximate the codeword selection process, and develop
the Permutation Straight-Through Estimator (PSTE) that
is able to not only optimize the selection process end-toend but also maintain the non-repetitive occupancy of selected codewords. Experiments verify that our method reduces both the model size and bit-wise computational costs,
and achieves accuracy improvements compared with stateof-the-art BNNs under comparable budgets.

1. Introduction
It is crucial to design compact Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) which allow the model deployment on resourceconstrained embedded devices, since most powerful DNNs
including ResNets [10] and DenseNets [13] are storage
costly with deep and rich building blocks piled up. Plenty of
approaches have been proposed to compress DNNs, among
which network quantization [15, 43, 45] is able to reduce
memory footprints as well as accelerate the inference speed
by converting full-precision weights to discrete values. Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) [2, 14] belong to the family of network quantization but they further constrict the
parameter representations to binary values (±1). In this

way, the model is largely compressed. More importantly,
floating-point additions and multiplications in conventional
DNNs are less required and mostly reduced to bit-wise operations that are well supported by fast inference accelerators [32], particularly when activations are binarized as
well. To some extent, this makes BNNs more computationally efficient than other compression techniques, e.g., network pruning [9, 11, 25] and switchable models [37, 41, 42].
Whilst a variety of methods are proposed to improve the
performance of BNNs, seldom is there a focus on discussing
how the learnt binary kernels are distributed in BNNs. A recent work SNN [38] demonstrates that, by choosing typical
convolutional BNN models [27, 31, 32] well trained on ImageNet and displaying the distribution of the 3 × 3 kernels
along all possible 23×3 binary values (a.k.a. codewords),
these kernels nearly obey the power-law distribution: only a
small portion of codewords are activated for the most time.
Such a phenomenon is re-illustrated in Figure 1(b). This
observation motivates SNN to restrict the size of the codebook by removing those hardly-selected codewords. As a
result, SNN is able to compact BNN further since indexing the kernels with a smaller size of codebook results in a
compression ratio of log2 (n)/ log2 (N ), where n and N are
separately the sizes of the compact and full codebooks.
However, given that the size of codebook is limited (only
512), the sub-codebook degenerates during training since
codewords are likely to become repetitive. Therefore, we
believe the clustering property of kernels can be further exploited during the training of BNNs. To do so, we reformulate the binary quantization process as a grouping task
that selects, for each kernel, the nearest codeword from a
binary sub-codebook which is obtained by selecting optimal codewords from the full one. To pursue an optimal
solution and retain the non-repetitive occupancy of the selected codewords, we first convert the sub-codebook selection problem to a permutation learning task. However,
learning the permutation matrix is non-differential since the
permutation matrix is valued with only 0/1 entries. Inspired
by the idea in [29], we introduce the Gumbel-Sinkhorn op-

24374

