This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperDisco: Super-Class Discovery Improves Visual Recognition for the Long-Tail
Yingjun Du1 , Jiayi Shen1 , Xiantong Zhen1,2 *, Cees G. M. Snoek1
1
AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Modern image classifiers perform well on populated
classes, while degrading considerably on tail classes with
only a few instances. Humans, by contrast, effortlessly handle the long-tailed recognition challenge, since they can
learn the tail representation based on different levels of semantic abstraction, making the learned tail features more
discriminative. This phenomenon motivated us to propose
SuperDisco, an algorithm that discovers super-class representations for long-tailed recognition using a graph model.
We learn to construct the super-class graph to guide the
representation learning to deal with long-tailed distributions. Through message passing on the super-class graph,
image representations are rectified and refined by attending
to the most relevant entities based on the semantic similarity among their super-classes. Moreover, we propose to
meta-learn the super-class graph under the supervision of a
prototype graph constructed from a small amount of imbalanced data. By doing so, we obtain a more robust super-class
graph that further improves the long-tailed recognition performance. The consistent state-of-the-art experiments on the
long-tailed CIFAR-100, ImageNet, Places and iNaturalist
demonstrate the benefit of the discovered super-class graph
for dealing with long-tailed distributions.

1. Introduction
This paper strives for long-tailed visual recognition. A
computer vision challenge that has received renewed attention in the context of representation learning, as realworld deployment demands moving from balanced to imbalanced scenarios. Three active strands of work involve
class re-balancing [15, 22, 32, 43, 65], information augmentation [34, 51, 54] and module improvement [29, 31, 76]. Each
of these strands is intuitive and has proven empirically successful. However, all these approaches seek to improve the
classification performance of the original feature space. In
this paper, we instead explore a graph learning algorithm
to discover the imbalanced super-class space hidden in the
original feature representation.
* Currently with United Imaging Healthcare, Co., Ltd., China.

(a) 100 original classes

(b) 20 ground truth super-classes

(c) 16 discovered super-classes

(d) 32 discovered super-classes

Figure 1. SuperDisco learns to project the original class space
(a) into a relatively balanced super-class space. Different color
curves indicate the different imbalance factors on the long-tailed
CIFAR-100 dataset. Like the 20 super-class ground truth (b) our
discovered super-classes for 16 super-classes (c) or 32 super-classes
(d) provide a much better balance than the original classes.

The fundamental problem in long-tailed recognition [18,
32, 44, 77] is that the head features and the tail features are
indistinguishable. Since the head data dominate the feature
distribution, they cause the tail features to fall within the
head feature space. Nonetheless, humans effortlessly handle
long-tailed recognition [2, 16] by leveraging semantic abstractions existing in language to gain better representations
of tail objects. This intuition hints that we may discover
the semantic hierarchy from the original feature space and
use it for better representations of tail objects. Moreover,
intermediate concepts have been shown advantageous for
classification [5, 36] by allowing the transfer of shared features across classes. Nevertheless, it remains unexplored
to exploit intermediate super-classes in long-tailed visual
recognition that rectify and refine the original features.
In the real world, each category has a corresponding superclass, e.g., bus, taxi, and train all belong to the vehicle superclass. This observation raises the question: are super-classes
of categories also distributed along a long-tail? We find empirical evidence that within the super-class space of popular
datasets, the long-tailed distribution almost disappears, and
each super-class has essentially the same number of samples.

19944

