This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discrete Point-wise Attack Is Not Enough: Generalized Manifold Adversarial
Attack for Face Recognition
Qian Li, Yuxiao Hu,* Ye Liu, Dongxiao Zhang, Xin Jin,† Yuntian Chen†
Eastern Institute for Advanced Study, Ningbo Zhejiang, China
{QianL01205, huyuxiao1205, liuye66a}@gmail.com
{dzhang, jinxin, ychen}@eias.ac.cn

Abstract
Classical adversarial attacks for Face Recognition (FR)
models typically generate discrete examples for target identity with a single state image. However, such paradigm of
point-wise attack exhibits poor generalization against numerous unknown states of identity and can be easily defended. In this paper, by rethinking the inherent relationship
between the face of target identity and its variants, we introduce a new pipeline of Generalized Manifold Adversarial
Attack (GMAA)1 to achieve a better attack performance by
expanding the attack range. Specifically, this expansion lies
on two aspects – GMAA not only expands the target to be
attacked from one to many to encourage a good generalization ability for the generated adversarial examples, but
it also expands the latter from discrete points to manifold
by leveraging the domain knowledge that face expression
change can be continuous, which enhances the attack effect as a data augmentation mechanism did. Moreover, we
further design a dual supervision with local and global constraints as a minor contribution to improve the visual quality of the generated adversarial examples. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method based on extensive experiments, and reveal that GMAA promises a semantic continuous adversarial space with a higher generalization ability
and visual quality.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the rapid development of deep neural networks (DNNs), the face recognition (FR) networks [5, 27]
has been applied to identity security identification systems
in a variety of crucial applications, such as face unlocking
and face payment on smart devices. However, it has been
observed that DNNs are easily fooled by adversarial examples and offer incorrect assessments [9, 23], which has risks
* Co-first author
† Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/tokaka22/GMAA

of unauthorized access to FR systems and stealing personal
privacy through poisoned data. These ‘well-designed’ adversarial examples reveal the aspects of FR models that are
vulnerable to be attacked, which makes the adversarial attack a meaningful work to provide reference for improving
model robustness.
Following the point-wise paradigm, previous methods
typically tend to attack a single target identity sample with
discrete adversarial examples illustrated in Fig. 1. However,
these methods are not strong enough both in target domain
and adversarial domain. Concretely, for the target domain,
attacking a single identity image has a poor generalization
on those unseen faces (even if they belong to the same person) in realistic scenarios. For example, Fig. 2 shows these
adversarial examples which were used to attack the target
(a girl) have a disappointingly lower success rate of attacking the identity with other unseen states. We analyze that’s
because attacking a single image of target identity overfits
the generation of adversarial examples to some fixed factors
such as expression, makeup style, etc. In addition to the
target domain, we naturally consider the weakness of adversarial domain in the existing methods. Most adversarial
attack methods optimize a Lp bounded perturbation [24,34]
based on the gradient, which limits the problem to searching for discrete adversarial examples in a hypersphere of the
clean sample and ignores the continuity of the generated adversarial domain. For example, the recently proposed methods based on makeup style transformation [16,35,37] focus
on generating finite adversarial examples that correspond
to discrete makeup references. Such methods all overemphasize on mining discrete adversarial examples within a
limited scope and ignore the importance of the continuity
in adversarial space. The weakness of current adversarial
attack tasks motivates us, on the one hand, to explore how
to generate adversarial examples that are more general to
various target identity’s states and, on the other hand, to upgrade adversarial domain from discrete points to continuous
manifold for a stronger attack.
In this paper, we introduce a new paradigm dubbed Gen-

20575

