This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Decoding for Pixel, Image, and Language
Xueyan Zou∗§ , Zi-Yi Dou∗♯ , Jianwei Yang∗ ‡♠ , Zhe Gan† , Linjie Li† , Chunyuan Li‡ , Xiyang Dai† , Harkirat Behl‡
Jianfeng Wang† , Lu Yuan† , Nanyun Peng♯ , Lijuan Wang† , Yong Jae Lee¶§ , Jianfeng Gao¶‡
§

University of Wisconsin-Madison
∗

♯

UCLA

‡

Microsoft Research at Redmond

†

Microsoft Cloud & AI

Equal Technical Contribution ¶ Equal Advisory Contribution ♠ Project Lead

{xueyan,yongjaelee}@cs.wisc.edu

{zdou,violetpeng}@cs.ucla.edu

{jianwyan,jfgao,zhgan,linjli,chunyl,jianfw,luyuan,lijuanw,hbehl,xidai}@microsoft.com

Figure 1. With one suite of parameters, X-Decoder after pretraining supports all types of image segmentation tasks ranging from open-vocabulary instance/semantic/panoptic segmentation to referring segmentation, and vision-language tasks including image-text retrieval, and image captioning (labeled in
green boxes). It further empowers composite tasks like referring captioning using X-Decoder itself and image editing collaborating with generative models
such as Stable Diffusion [61] (labeled in yellow boxes).

Abstract
We present X-Decoder, a generalized decoding model
that can predict pixel-level segmentation and language tokens seamlessly. X-Decoder takes as input two types of
queries: (i) generic non-semantic queries and (ii) semantic
queries induced from text inputs, to decode different pixellevel and token-level outputs in the same semantic space.
With such a novel design, X-Decoder is the first work that
provides a unified way to support all types of image segmentation and a variety of vision-language (VL) tasks. Without any pseudo-labeling, our design enables seamless interactions across tasks at different granularities and brings
mutual benefits by learning a common and rich pixel-level
understanding. After pretraining on a mixed set of a limited amount of segmentation data and millions of image-text
pairs, X-Decoder exhibits strong transferability to a wide
range of downstream tasks in both zero-shot and finetuning
settings. Notably, it achieves (1) state-of-the-art results on

open-vocabulary segmentation and referring segmentation
on seven datasets; (2) better or competitive finetuned performance to other generalist and specialist models on segmentation and VL tasks; and (3) flexibility for efficient finetuning and novel task composition (e.g., referring captioning and image editing shown in Fig. 1). Code, demo, video
and visualization are available at: https://x-decodervl.github.io.

1. Introduction
Visual understanding at different levels of granularity
has been a longstanding problem in the vision community.
The tasks span from image-level tasks (e.g., image classification [14], image-text retrieval, image captioning [8],
and visual question answering (VQA) [2]), region-level localization tasks (e.g., object detection and phrase grounding [58]), to pixel-level grouping tasks (e.g., image inThe work is initiated during an internship at Microsoft.

15116

