This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth Estimation from Camera Image and mmWave Radar Point Cloud
Akash Deep Singh, Yunhao Ba, Ankur Sarker, Howard Zhang, Achuta Kadambi,
Stefano Soatto, Mani Srivastava
University of California, Los Angeles
{akashdeepsingh, yhba, ankursarker, hwdz15508, achuta, soatto, mbs}@ucla.edu

Alex Wong
Yale University
alex.wong@yale.edu

Abstract
We present a method for inferring dense depth from a
camera image and a sparse noisy radar point cloud. We
first describe the mechanics behind mmWave radar point
cloud formation and the challenges that it poses, i.e. ambiguous elevation and noisy depth and azimuth components
that yields incorrect positions when projected onto the image, and how existing works have overlooked these nuances
in camera-radar fusion. Our approach is motivated by these
mechanics, leading to the design of a network that maps
each radar point to the possible surfaces that it may project
onto in the image plane. Unlike existing works, we do not
process the raw radar point cloud as an erroneous depth
map, but query each raw point independently to associate
it with likely pixels in the image – yielding a semi-dense
radar depth map. To fuse radar depth with an image, we
propose a gated fusion scheme that accounts for the confidence scores of the correspondence so that we selectively
combine radar and camera embeddings to yield a dense
depth map. We test our method on the NuScenes benchmark
and show a 10.3% improvement in mean absolute error and
a 9.1% improvement in root-mean-square error over the
best method. Code: https://github.com/nesl/
radar-camera-fusion-depth.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3-dimensional (3D) structure of the
scene surrounding us can support a variety of spatial tasks
such as navigation [33] and manipulation [9]. To perform
these tasks, an agent is generally equipped with multiple
sensors, including optical i.e., RGB camera and range i.e.,
lidar, radar. The images from a camera are “dense” in that
they provide an intensity value at each pixel. Yet, they are
also sparse in that much of the image does not allow for the

70m

(a)

(b)

(c)

0m

Figure 1. Depth estimation using a mmWave radar and a camera.
(a) RGB image. (b) Semi-dense depth generated from associating
the radar point cloud to probable image pixels. (c) Predicted depth.
Boxes highlight mapping of radar points to objects in the scene.

establishing of unique correspondence due to occlusions or
the aperture problem to recover the 3D structure lost to the
image formation process. On the other hand, range sensors
are typically sparse in returns, but provide the 3D coordinates for a subset of points in the scene i.e., a point cloud.
The goal then is to leverage the complementary properties
of both sensor observations – an RGB image and a radar
point cloud that is synchronized with the frame – to recover
the dense 3D scene i.e., camera-radar depth estimation.
While sensor platforms that pair lidar with camera have
been of recent interest i.e., in autonomous vehicles, they are
expensive in cost, heavy in payload, and have high energy
and bandwidth consumption [36] – limiting their applications at the edge [37]. On the other hand, mmWave [20]
radars are orders of magnitude cheaper, light weight, and
power efficient. Over the last few years, developments
in mmWave radars and antenna arrays [18] have significantly advanced the performance of these sensors. Radars
are already ubiquitous in automotive vehicles as they enable services such as cruise control and collision warning [10]. Methods to perform 3D reconstruction with camera and radar are also synergistic with the joint communication and sensing (JCAS) paradigm in 6G cellular communication [1, 43, 57], where cellular base-stations will not only
be the hub of communication, but also act as radars, to sense
the environment.
The challenge, however, is that a mmWave radar is a
point scatterer and only a very small subset of points (50

9275

