This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffTalk: Crafting Diffusion Models for
Generalized Audio-Driven Portraits Animation
Shuai Shen1

Wenliang Zhao1 Zibin Meng1 Wanhua Li1 Zheng Zhu2
1
2
Tsinghua University
PhiGent Robotics

Jie Zhou1

Jiwen Lu1,∗

…
Figure 1. We present a crafted conditional Diffusion model for generalized Talking head synthesis (DiffTalk). Given a driven audio, the
DiffTalk is capable of synthesizing high-fidelity and synchronized talking videos for multiple identities without further fine-tuning.

Abstract
Talking head synthesis is a promising approach for the
video production industry. Recently, a lot of effort has
been devoted in this research area to improve the generation quality or enhance the model generalization. However, there are few works able to address both issues simultaneously, which is essential for practical applications. To
this end, in this paper, we turn attention to the emerging
powerful Latent Diffusion Models, and model the Talking
head generation as an audio-driven temporally coherent
denoising process (DiffTalk). More specifically, instead
of employing audio signals as the single driving factor,
we investigate the control mechanism of the talking face,
and incorporate reference face images and landmarks as
conditions for personality-aware generalized synthesis. In
this way, the proposed DiffTalk is capable of producing
high-quality talking head videos in synchronization with the
source audio, and more importantly, it can be naturally
∗ Corresponding author

generalized across different identities without further finetuning. Additionally, our DiffTalk can be gracefully tailored for higher-resolution synthesis with negligible extra
computational cost. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed DiffTalk efficiently synthesizes high-fidelity audiodriven talking head videos for generalized novel identities. For more video results, please refer to https://
sstzal.github.io/DiffTalk/.

1. Introduction
Talking head synthesis is a challenging and promising
research topic, which aims to generate video portraits with
given audio. This technique is widely applied in various
practical scenarios including animation, virtual avatars, online education, and video conferencing [4, 45, 48, 51, 54].
Recently a lot of effort has been devoted to this research area to improve the generation quality or enhance
the model generalization. Among these existing main-

1982

