This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Random Convolutions for Single Domain Generalization
Seokeon Choi

Debasmit Das

Sungha Choi Seunghan Yang
Qualcomm AI research†

Hyunsin Park

Sungrack Yun

{seokchoi,debadas,sunghac,seunghan,hyunsinp,sungrack}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Single domain generalization aims to train a generalizable model with only one source domain to perform well on
arbitrary unseen target domains. Image augmentation based
on Random Convolutions (RandConv), consisting of one
convolution layer randomly initialized for each mini-batch,
enables the model to learn generalizable visual representations by distorting local textures despite its simple and
lightweight structure. However, RandConv has structural
limitations in that the generated image easily loses semantics
as the kernel size increases, and lacks the inherent diversity
of a single convolution operation. To solve the problem, we
propose a Progressive Random Convolution (Pro-RandConv)
method that recursively stacks random convolution layers
with a small kernel size instead of increasing the kernel size.
This progressive approach can not only mitigate semantic
distortions by reducing the influence of pixels away from
the center in the theoretical receptive field, but also create more effective virtual domains by gradually increasing
the style diversity. In addition, we develop a basic random
convolution layer into a random convolution block including deformable offsets and affine transformation to support
texture and contrast diversification, both of which are also
randomly initialized. Without complex generators or adversarial learning, we demonstrate that our simple yet effective
augmentation strategy outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on single domain generalization benchmarks.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance in a wide range of applications [26,
27]. However, this success is built on the assumption that
the test data (i.e. target) should share the same distribution
as the training data (i.e. source), and they often fail to generalize to out-of-distribution data [9, 21, 47]. In practice,
this domain discrepancy problem between source and target
domains is commonly encountered in real-world scenarios.
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Comparison of conventional random convolutions (singlelayer) and our progressive random convolutions (multi-layer). Our
final model includes multiple random convolution blocks consisting
of deformable offsets and affine transformation.

Especially, a catastrophic safety issue may occur in medical
imaging [33, 65] and autonomous driving [62, 68] applications. To tackle this problem, one line of work focuses on
domain adaptation (DA) to transfer knowledge from a source
domain to a specific target domain [4, 14, 22, 25]. This approach usually takes into account the availability of labeled
or unlabeled target domain data. Another line of work deals
with a more realistic setting known as domain generalization (DG), which aims to learn a domain-agnostic feature
representation with only data from source domains without
access to target domain data. Thanks to its practicality, the
task of domain generalization has been extensively studied.
In general, the paradigm of domain generalization depends on the availability of using multi-source domains [57].
Previously, many studies [3, 16, 17, 30, 41] have focused on
using multi-source domains, and the distribution shift can be
alleviated by simply aggregating data from multiple training

10312

