This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M IX S IM: A Hierarchical Framework for Mixed Reality Traffic Simulation
Simon Suo1,2 * Kelvin Wong1,2∗ Justin Xu1,3 James Tu1,2
Alexander Cui1,2 Sergio Casas1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Waabi 2 University of Toronto 3 University of Waterloo
{ssuo,kwong,jjxu,jtu,acui,scasas,urtasun}@waabi.ai

Abstract
The prevailing way to test a self-driving vehicle (SDV) in
simulation involves non-reactive open-loop replay of real
world scenarios. However, in order to safely deploy SDVs
to the real world, we need to evaluate them in closed-loop.
Towards this goal, we propose to leverage the wealth of
interesting scenarios captured in the real world and make
them reactive and controllable to enable closed-loop SDV
evaluation in what-if situations. In particular, we present
M IX S IM, a hierarchical framework for mixed reality traffic simulation. M IX S IM explicitly models agent goals as
routes along the road network and learns a reactive routeconditional policy. By inferring each agent’s route from
the original scenario, M IX S IM can reactively re-simulate
the scenario and enable testing different autonomy systems under the same conditions. Furthermore, by varying each agent’s route, we can expand the scope of testing to what-if situations with realistic variations in agent
behaviors or even safety critical interactions. Our experiments show that M IX S IM can serve as a realistic, reactive, and controllable digital twin of real world scenarios. For more information, please visit the project website:
https://waabi.ai/research/mixsim/

1. Introduction
During your commute to work, you encounter an erratic
driver. As you both approach a merge, the erratic driver suddenly accelerates and nearly collides with you. Your heart
skips a beat and you feel uneasy. While you’ve avoided
an accident, you can’t help but wonder: What if the erratic
driver was a bit more aggressive? Would you have needed
to swerve? Would other drivers be able to react to you?
Having the ability to test a self-driving vehicle (SDV)
in these what-if situations would be transformational for
safely deploying SDVs to the real world. However, the current approach for testing SDVs in simulation lacks this abil* Indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1. In mixed reality traffic simulation, given a real world
scenario, we aim to build a reactive and controllable digital twin
of how its traffic agents behave. This enables us to re-simulate the
original scenario and answer what-if questions like: What if the
SDV lane changes? What if the agent cuts in front of the SDV?

ity. In particular, the self-driving industry largely relies on
non-reactive open-loop replay of real world scenarios; traffic agents do not react to the SDV and so the SDV cannot
observe the consequences of its actions. This limits the realism and interpretability of the tests. Clearly, naively replaying real world scenarios in simulation is not enough!
In this paper, we propose to leverage the wealth of interesting scenarios captured in the real world and make them
reactive and controllable to enable closed-loop SDV evaluation in what-if situations. We call this task mixed reality
traffic simulation. Specifically, given a recorded scenario,
we aim to build a reactive and controllable digital twin of
how its traffic agents behave (see Fig. 1). The digital twin
should preserve the high-level behaviors and interactions
of the original scenario; e.g., a driver cutting in front of
the SDV. But it should also react to changes in the environment in a realistic manner. This allows us to reactively
re-simulate the original scenario to test different autonomy
systems in the same conditions. It also expands the scope of
testing to include what-if situations with realistic variations
of agent behaviors or even safety critical interactions.
To incorporate reactivity into replaying recorded scenarios, the self-driving industry commonly relies on heuristic
models [18, 19, 21, 38] and trajectory optimization-based

9622

