This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Coarse-to-Fine Learning for Oriented Tiny Object Detection
Chang Xu1 , Jian Ding2 , Jinwang Wang1 , Wen Yang1 ,* Huai Yu1 , Lei Yu1 ,* Gui-Song Xia2
1
School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
{xuchangeis,jian.ding,jwwangchn,yangwen,yuhuai,ly.wd,guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn

Static Rule

Abstract
Detecting arbitrarily oriented tiny objects poses intense
challenges to existing detectors, especially for label assignment. Despite the exploration of adaptive label assignment
in recent oriented object detectors, the extreme geometry
shape and limited feature of oriented tiny objects still induce severe mismatch and imbalance issues. Specifically,
the position prior, positive sample feature, and instance are
mismatched, and the learning of extreme-shaped objects is
biased and unbalanced due to little proper feature supervision. To tackle these issues, we propose a dynamic prior
along with the coarse-to-fine assigner, dubbed DCFL. For
one thing, we model the prior, label assignment, and object representation all in a dynamic manner to alleviate the
mismatch issue. For another, we leverage the coarse prior
matching and finer posterior constraint to dynamically assign labels, providing appropriate and relatively balanced
supervision for diverse instances. Extensive experiments on
six datasets show substantial improvements to the baseline.
Notably, we obtain the state-of-the-art performance for onestage detectors on the DOTA-v1.5, DOTA-v2.0, and DIORR datasets under single-scale training and testing. Codes
are available at https://github.com/ChaselTsui/mmrotate-dcfl.

1. Introduction
The oriented bounding box is a finer representation for
object detection since the object’s background region is
greatly eradicated by introducing the rotation angle [55].
This advantage is pronounced in aerial images, where objects are in arbitrary orientations, resulting in the prosperity of corresponding object detection datasets [7, 11, 35, 55]
and customized oriented object detectors [10,17,18,60,62].
Nevertheless, one unignorable fact is that there exist numerous tiny objects in aerial images. When oriented objects
are tiny-sized, the challenges posed to existing object detec* Corresponding Authors

Fixed
Prior

Fixed
GT

GT

M*

Static Train
Samples

Fixed Prior

Dynamic Rule

DNN

Pos Samples

(a) RetinaNet, FCOS, Rotated RPN

Dynamic
Prior

Finer
GT

GT

M*

Feedback

Dynamic Train
Samples

Dynamic Prior

DNN

Pos Samples

(b) DCFL

Figure 1. Comparisons of different learning paradigms for oriented object detection. M* means the matching function. Each box
in the 2nd row denotes a prior location. The 3rd row are predictions of the RetinaNet and DCFL, where green, blue, and red boxes
denote true positive, false positive, and false negative predictions.
(a) RetinaNet, FCOS, and Rotated RPN statically assign labels between fixed priors and fixed gts. (b) Our proposed DCFL dynamically updates priors and gts, and dynamically assigns labels.

tors are quite remarkable. Especially, the extreme geometry
characteristics of oriented tiny objects hamper the accurate
label assignment.
Label assignment is a fundamental and crucial process
in object detection [68], in which priors (box for anchorbased [30] and point for anchor-free detectors [50]) need
to be assigned with appropriate labels to supervise the network training. In fact, there have been some works that lay
a foundation for the effective label assignment of oriented
objects, as shown in Fig. 1. Early works additionally preset
anchors of different angles (e.g. Rotated RPN [36]) or refine high-quality anchors (e.g. S2 A-Net [17]) based on the
generic object detector, then a static rule (e.g. MaxIoU strategy [44]) is used to separate positive and negative (pos/neg)
training samples. The derived prior boxes can thus cover
more ground truth (gt) boxes and a considerable accuracy
improvement can be expected. However, the static assignment cannot adaptively divide pos/neg samples according
to the gt’s shape and filter out low-quality samples, usually

7318

