This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Use Your Head: Improving Long-Tail Video Recognition
Saptarshi Sinha

Tilo Burghardt
Majid Mirmehdi
<first>.<last>@bristol.ac.uk
University of Bristol, UK

This paper presents an investigation into long-tail
video recognition. We demonstrate that, unlike naturallycollected video datasets and existing long-tail image benchmarks, current video benchmarks fall short on multiple
long-tailed properties. Most critically, they lack few-shot
classes in their tails. In response, we propose new video
benchmarks that better assess long-tail recognition, by sampling subsets from two datasets: SSv2 and VideoLT.
We then propose a method, Long-Tail Mixed Reconstruction (LMR), which reduces overfitting to instances
from few-shot classes by reconstructing them as weighted
combinations of samples from head classes. LMR then
employs label mixing to learn robust decision boundaries. It achieves state-of-the-art average class accuracy on EPIC-KITCHENS and the proposed SSv2-LT and
VideoLT-LT. Benchmarks and code at: github.com/
tobyperrett/lmr

1. Introduction
Advances in deep learning have been driven by increasing quantities of data to train larger and more sophisticated models. Landmark recognition datasets such as ImageNet [17] and Kinetics [10], amongst others, have fulfilled
this need for data by first defining a taxonomy, and then
scraping or crowd-sourcing until a sufficient number of examples are obtained for each class. They typically aim for
balanced, or nearly balanced, class distributions. However,
in practice, collecting enough examples for every object or
action, including rare ones, remains challenging. Naturally
occurring data is known to come from long-tail distributions, where it is often not possible to obtain a sufficient
number of samples from classes in the tail.
In order to encourage methods to train effectively on
long-tail data, image-recognition benchmarks include multiple naturally-collected1 [24] as well as curated long-tail
datasets [6, 9, 15, 37, 64]. In contrast, long-tail video recognition has been a less explored field. In Fig. 1, we compare image and video benchmarks, showcasing that none
1 We use the term ‘naturally’ to focus on the data collection. It does not
imply footage of nature. We hope this footnote prevents any confusion.

Dima Damen

Naturally collected
Head (50% data)

Images

Abstract

Tail
iNaturalist

ImageNet-LT

Places-LT

Cifar-LT

Few-shot (≤ 20 samples)
Proposed

2016

Videos

Toby Perrett

2017

Youtube-8M

2018

2019

2020

EPICSomethingSomething V2 KITCHENS-100

2021
VideoLT

SSv2-LT

VideoLT-LT

Figure 1. Long-tail image recognition datasets (top) [9, 37] aimed
to curate similar distributions to the naturally-collected iNaturalist [24]. For video datasets (bottom), the naturally-collected
EPIC-KITCHENS-100 [16] demonstrates a similar distribution of
head/tail/few-shot classes to long-tail image datasets. In comparison, curated video datasets do not include any few-shot classes [1,
21, 71]. We propose two versions of existing datasets which do –
SSv2-LT and VideoLT-LT. Head/tail/few-shot definitions in Fig. 2.
Numeric comparison in Tab. 1.

of the curated video datasets to date contain any few-shot
classes [1, 21, 71]. This is a critical oversight, as seminal
research has highlighted that long-tail methods must “learn
accurate few-shot models for classes in the tail of the class
distribution” [64] and “deal with imbalanced classification,
few-shot learning” [37]. In this paper, we follow the approach from [37] and re-sample videos to introduce longtail versions of two video datasets.
We evaluate current long-tail recognition methods on
our re-sampled long-tail video datasets and the naturallycollected EPIC-KITCHENS-100 dataset [16]. Unsurprisingly, when confronted with few-shot classes, current methods perform poorly due to a lack of sample diversity in the
few-shot classes. We thus propose a new method that focuses on improving the performance on few-shot classes.
Long-Tail Mixed Reconstruction (LMR) reconstructs fewshot samples as weighted combinations of head samples
within the batch. A residual connection, weighted by the
class size, is used to combine instances with their reconstructions. We use pairwise label mixing on these reconstructed samples to help learn robust class decision boundaries. Our key contributions are as follows:
• We compare image and video long-tail datasets, by providing a consistent definition of properties for long-tail

2415

