This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Effective Ambiguity Attack Against Passport-based DNN Intellectual Property
Protection Schemes through Fully Connected Layer Substitution
†

Yiming Chen1 , Jinyu Tian2 , Xiangyu Chen1,3 , and Jiantao Zhou1,
1
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Faculty of Innovation Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yc17486, jtzhou}@umac.mo, jytian@must.edu.mo, chxy95@gmail.com

Abstract
Since training a deep neural network (DNN) is costly,
the well-trained deep models can be regarded as valuable
intellectual property (IP) assets. The IP protection associated with deep models has been receiving increasing attentions in recent years. Passport-based method, which replaces normalization layers with passport layers, has been
one of the few protection solutions that are claimed to be
secure against advanced attacks. In this work, we tackle the
issue of evaluating the security of passport-based IP protection methods. We propose a novel and effective ambiguity
attack against passport-based method, capable of successfully forging multiple valid passports with a small training dataset. This is accomplished by inserting a specially
designed accessory block ahead of the passport parameters. Using less than 10% of training data, with the forged
passport, the model exhibits almost indistinguishable performance difference (less than 2%) compared with that of
the authorized passport. In addition, it is shown that our
attack strategy can be readily generalized to attack other IP
protection methods based on watermark embedding. Directions for potential remedy solutions are also given.

1. Introduction
With the geometric growth of computing power of computational devices in recent decades, there have emerged
many deep learning applications that have contributed to
the human world such as super-resolution reconstruction
[7, 9, 30], image inpainting [31, 34, 35] and forgery detection [32]. It usually costs many resources to develop new
DNN models and developers will not tolerate the act of theft
of their IP. The IP protection problem of deep models be† Corresponding author.

comes more severe with the birth of Machine Learning as
a Service (MLaaS) [26]. Preventing the infringement behavior of deep models now emerges as a necessary concern
when developing new algorithms and systems.
Model watermark [20, 25, 27, 28, 37] has been a popular method to protect the IP of DNN models. In the embedding process, the owners embed the secret signatures
(watermarks), and then in the verification process, they can
claim their ownership to the model by matching the extracted signatures with the original versions. The existing
model watermark methods can be roughly divided into two
categories [10, 11]: feature-based and trigger-based methods. Specifically, feature-based methods [4, 8, 24, 29] applied a regularizer to embed the secret watermark into the
activation functions or model weights. Uchida et al. [29]
proposed to use a regularizer to embed a watermark into the
model weights. Darvish et al. [8] embedded the fingerprints
in the Probability Density Function of trainable weights instead. Aramoon et al. [3] inserted the signature into the
gradient of the cross-entropy loss function with respect to
the inputs. In contrast, trigger-based methods make the output target respond to specific inputs. Along this line, Adi et
al. [1] used the backdoor attack as a means to watermark the
model. Merrer et al. [18] designed a zero-bit watermarking
algorithm that uses adversarial samples as watermarks to
claim the ownership. Zhang et al. [39] applied watermarks
to images and then trained the network to output target labels when input images carry these watermarks.
Despite the strength in retaining ownership of DNN
models, most existing model watermark methods are shown
to be vulnerable to the so-called ambiguity attack, in which
the attacker manages to cast doubts on the ownership verification by crafting counterfeit (forged) watermarks [11].
Recently, Fan et al. [10] first designed a series of ambiguity
attacks, which are effective in attacking DNN watermark
methods. It was stated that for conventional watermark

8123

