This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniAvatar: Geometry-Guided Controllable 3D Head Synthesis
Hongyi Xu1

Guoxian Song1 Zihang Jiang1,2 Jianfeng Zhang1,2 Yichun Shi1
Jing Liu1 Wanchun Ma1 Jiashi Feng1 Linjie Luo1
1
2
ByteDance Inc
National University of Singapore

{hongyixu, guoxian.song, zihang.jiang, jianfeng.zhang, yichun.shi,
jing.liu, wanchun.ma, jshfeng, linjie.luo}@bytedance.com

Figure 1. Our model can synthesize diverse identity-preserved 3D heads with compelling dynamic details under full disentangled control
over camera poses, facial expressions, head shapes, articulated neck and jaw poses (left). Our model can also reconstruct 3D heads from a
single photo reference and enable multi-view-consistent head reenactment (right).

Abstract
We present OmniAvatar, a novel geometry-guided 3D
head synthesis model trained from in-the-wild unstructured
images that is capable of synthesizing diverse identitypreserved 3D heads with compelling dynamic details under full disentangled control over camera poses, facial expressions, head shapes, articulated neck and jaw poses. To
achieve such high level of disentangled control, we first explicitly define a novel semantic signed distance function
(SDF) around a head geometry (FLAME) conditioned on
the control parameters. This semantic SDF allows us to
build a differentiable volumetric correspondence map from
the observation space to a disentangled canonical space
from all the control parameters. We then leverage the 3Daware GAN framework (EG3D) to synthesize detailed shape
and appearance of 3D full heads in the canonical space, followed by a volume rendering step guided by the volumetric
correspondence map to output into the observation space.
To ensure the control accuracy on the synthesized head

shapes and expressions, we introduce a geometry prior loss
to conform to head SDF and a control loss to conform to the
expression code. Further, we enhance the temporal realism
with dynamic details conditioned upon varying expressions
and joint poses. Our model can synthesize more preferable
identity-preserved 3D heads with compelling dynamic details compared to the state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively. We also provide an ablation study
to justify many of our system design choices.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic face image synthesis, editing and animation attract significant interests in computer vision and
graphics, with a wide range of important downstream applications in visual effects, digital avatars, telepresence and
many others. With the advent of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15], remarkable progress has been
achieved in face image synthesis by StyleGAN [23–25]

12814

