This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP the Gap: A Single Domain Generalization Approach for Object Detection
Vidit Vidit1 Martin Engilberge1 Mathieu Salzmann1,2
CVLab, EPFL1 , ClearSpace SA2
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Single Domain Generalization (SDG) tackles the problem of training a model on a single source domain so that
it generalizes to any unseen target domain. While this has
been well studied for image classification, the literature on
SDG object detection remains almost non-existent. To address the challenges of simultaneously learning robust object localization and representation, we propose to leverage
a pre-trained vision-language model to introduce semantic
domain concepts via textual prompts. We achieve this via
a semantic augmentation strategy acting on the features extracted by the detector backbone, as well as a text-based
classification loss. Our experiments evidence the benefits of
our approach, outperforming by 10% the only existing SDG
object detection method, Single-DGOD [52], on their own
diverse weather-driving benchmark.

1. Introduction
As for most machine learning models, the performance
of object detectors degrades when the test data distribution deviates from the training data one. Domain adaptation techniques [3, 5, 8, 33, 44, 46] try to alleviate this
problem by learning domain invariant features between a
source and a known target domain. In practice, however,
it is not always possible to obtain target data, even unlabeled, precluding the use of such techniques. Domain
generalization tackles this by seeking to learn representations that generalize to any target domain. While early
approaches [1, 10, 28, 29, 31, 50, 60] focused on the scenario where multiple source domains are available during
training, many recent methods tackle the more challenging,
yet more realistic, case of Single Domain Generalization
(SDG), aiming to learn to generalize from a single source
dataset. While this has been well studied for image classification [14, 38, 48, 51, 59], it remains a nascent topic in
object detection. To the best of our knowledge, a single existing approach, Single-DGOD [52], uses disentanglement
and self-distillation [25] to learn domain-invariant features.
In this paper, we introduce a fundamentally different ap-

Figure 1. Semantic Augmentation: We compare the PCA projections of CLIP [39] image embeddings obtained in two different
manners: (Top) The embeddings were directly obtained from the
real images from 5 domains corresponding to different weather
conditions. (Bottom) The embeddings were obtained from the day
images only and modified with our semantic augmentation strategy based on text prompts to reflect the other 4 domains. Note that
the relative positions of the clusters in the bottom plot resembles
that of the top one, showing that our augmentations let us generalize to different target domains. The principal components used
are the same for both the figures.

proach to SDG for object detection. To this end, we build
on two observations: (i) Unsupervised/self-supervised pretraining facilitates the transfer of a model to new tasks [2,

3219

