This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MACARONS: Mapping And Coverage Anticipation
with RGB Online Self-Supervision
Antoine Guédon
Tom Monnier
Pascal Monasse
Vincent Lepetit
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
https://imagine.enpc.fr/˜guedona/MACARONS/

(a) NBV methods with a depth sensor (e.g., [27])

(b) Our approach MACARONS with an RGB sensor

Figure 1. Mapping and Coverage Anticipation with RGB Online Self-Supervision. (a) NBV methods such as [27] rely on a depth
sensor to perform path planning (bottom) and scan the environment (top). They need to be trained with explicit 3D supervision, generally
on small-scale meshes. (b) Our approach MACARONS instead simultaneously learns to efficiently explore the scene and to reconstruct it
(top) using an RGB sensor only. Its self-supervised, online learning process scales to large-scale and complex scenes.

Abstract
We introduce a method that simultaneously learns to explore new large environments and to reconstruct them in 3D
from color images only. This is closely related to the Next
Best View problem (NBV), where one has to identify where
to move the camera next to improve the coverage of an unknown scene. However, most of the current NBV methods
rely on depth sensors, need 3D supervision and/or do not
scale to large scenes. Our method requires only a color
camera and no 3D supervision. It simultaneously learns in
a self-supervised fashion to predict a “volume occupancy
field” from color images and, from this field, to predict the
NBV. Thanks to this approach, our method performs well
on new scenes as it is not biased towards any training 3D
data. We demonstrate this on a recent dataset made of various 3D scenes and show it performs even better than recent
methods requiring a depth sensor, which is not a realistic
assumption for outdoor scenes captured with a flying drone.

1. Introduction
By bringing together Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
and Structure-from-Motion algorithms, it is now possible to
reconstruct 3D models of large outdoor scenes, for example
for creating a Digital Twin of the scene. However, flying a
UAV requires expertise, especially when capturing images
with the goal of running a 3D reconstruction algorithm, as
the UAV needs to capture images that together cover the
entire scene from multiple points of view. Our goal with
this paper is to make this capture automatic by developing a
method that controls a UAV and ensures a coverage suitable
to 3D reconstruction.
This is often referenced in the literature as the “Next
Best View” problem (NBV) [14]: Given a set of alreadycaptured images of a scene or an object, how should we
move the camera to improve our coverage of the scene or

940

