This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPARF: Neural Radiance Fields from Sparse and Noisy Poses
Prune Truong1,2∗

Marie-Julie Rakotosaona2
Fabian Manhardt2
Federico Tombari2,3
1
2
3
ETH Zurich
Google
Technical University of Munich

prune.truong@vision.ee.ethz.ch

{mrakotosaona, fabianmanhardt, tombari}@google.com

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has recently emerged as
a powerful representation to synthesize photorealistic novel
views. While showing impressive performance, it relies on
the availability of dense input views with highly accurate
camera poses, thus limiting its application in real-world
scenarios. In this work, we introduce Sparse Pose Adjusting Radiance Field (SPARF), to address the challenge of
novel-view synthesis given only few wide-baseline input images (as low as 3) with noisy camera poses. Our approach
exploits multi-view geometry constraints in order to jointly
learn the NeRF and refine the camera poses. By relying on
pixel matches extracted between the input views, our multiview correspondence objective enforces the optimized scene
and camera poses to converge to a global and geometrically
accurate solution. Our depth consistency loss further encourages the reconstructed scene to be consistent from any
viewpoint. Our approach sets a new state of the art in the
sparse-view regime on multiple challenging datasets.

1. Introduction
Novel-view synthesis (NVS) has long been one of the
most essential goals in computer vision. It refers to the task
of rendering unseen viewpoints of a scene given a particular set of input images. NVS has recently gained tremendous popularity, in part due to the success of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [30]. NeRF encodes 3D scenes with a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) mapping 3D point locations
to color and volume density and uses volume rendering to
synthesize images. It has demonstrated remarkable abilities
for high-fidelity view synthesis under two conditions: dense
input views and highly accurate camera poses.
Both these requirements however severely impede the
usability of NeRFs in real-world applications. For instance,
in AR/VR or autonomous driving, the input is inevitably
much sparser, with only few images of any particular object
or region available per scene. In such sparse-view scenario,
NeRF rapidly overfits to the input views [11, 22, 32], lead∗ This work was conducted during an internship at Google.

Sparse input views
Ground-truth
camera poses
NeRF

Noisy camera poses
BARF

SPARF (Ours)

Figure 1. Novel-view rendering from sparse images. We show
the RGB (second row) and depth (last row) renderings from an
unseen viewpoint under sparse settings (3 input views only). Even
with ground-truth camera poses, NeRF [30] overfits to the training
images, leading to degenerate geometry (almost constant depth).
BARF [24], which can successfully handle noisy poses when
dense views are available, struggles in the sparse regime. Our
approach SPARF instead produces realistic novel-view renderings
with accurate geometry, given only 3 input views with noisy poses.

ing to inconsistent reconstructions at best, and degenerate
solutions at worst (Fig. 1 left). Moreover, the de-facto standard to estimate per-scene poses is to use an off-the-shelf
Structure-from-Motion approach, such as COLMAP [37].
When provided with many input views, COLMAP can generally estimate accurate camera poses. Its performance nevertheless rapidly degrades when reducing the number of
views, or increasing the baseline between the images [55].
Multiple works focus on improving NeRF’s performance
in the sparse-view setting. One line of research [6,53] trains
conditional neural field models on large-scale datasets. Alternative approaches instead propose various regularization
on color and geometry for per-scene training [11, 19, 22, 32,
34]. Despite showing impressive results in the sparse scenario, all these approaches assume perfect camera poses as
a pre-requisite. Unfortunately, estimating accurate camera
poses for few wide-baseline images is challenging [55] and
has spawned its own research direction [1, 7, 14–16, 28, 60],

4190

