This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PC2 : Projection-Conditioned Point Cloud
Diffusion for Single-Image 3D Reconstruction
Luke Melas-Kyriazi

Christian Rupprecht

Andrea Vedaldi

Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{lukemk,chrisr,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk
https://lukemelas.github.io/projection-conditioned-point-cloud-diffusion

Single Image
Input

Gaussian
Point Cloud

Projection-Conditioned Point Cloud Diffusion

Diffused
Point Cloud

Diffused & Colored
Point Cloud

Figure 1. Projection-Conditioned Point Cloud Diffusion: Our model performs single-image 3D point cloud reconstruction by gradually
diffusing an initially random point cloud to align the with input image. Our model has been trained through simple, sparse COLMAP
supervision from videos.

Abstract
Reconstructing the 3D shape of an object from a single
RGB image is a long-standing problem in computer vision.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for single-image
3D reconstruction which generates a sparse point cloud via
a conditional denoising diffusion process. Our method takes
as input a single RGB image along with its camera pose
and gradually denoises a set of 3D points, whose positions
are initially sampled randomly from a three-dimensional
Gaussian distribution, into the shape of an object. The key
to our method is a geometrically-consistent conditioning
process which we call projection conditioning: at each step
in the diffusion process, we project local image features onto
the partially-denoised point cloud from the given camera
pose. This projection conditioning process enables us to

generate high-resolution sparse geometries that are wellaligned with the input image and can additionally be used
to predict point colors after shape reconstruction. Moreover,
due to the probabilistic nature of the diffusion process, our
method is naturally capable of generating multiple different
shapes consistent with a single input image. In contrast to
prior work, our approach not only performs well on synthetic
benchmarks but also gives large qualitative improvements
on complex real-world data. Data and code are available at
https://lukemelas.github.io/projectionconditioned-point-cloud-diffusion/.

12923

