This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards High-Quality and Efficient Video Super-Resolution via
Spatial-Temporal Data Overfitting
Gen Li1,† , Jie Ji1,† , Minghai Qin† , Wei Niu2 , Bin Ren2 , Fatemeh Afghah1 , Linke Guo1 , Xiaolong Ma1
1
Clemson University 2 William & Mary
{gen,xiaolom}@clemson.edu

Abstract
As deep convolutional neural networks (DNNs) are
widely used in various fields of computer vision, leveraging
the overfitting ability of the DNN to achieve video resolution upscaling has become a new trend in the modern video
delivery system. By dividing videos into chunks and overfitting each chunk with a super-resolution model, the server
encodes videos before transmitting them to the clients, thus
achieving better video quality and transmission efficiency.
However, a large number of chunks are expected to ensure
good overfitting quality, which substantially increases the
storage and consumes more bandwidth resources for data
transmission. On the other hand, decreasing the number of
chunks through training optimization techniques usually requires high model capacity, which significantly slows down
execution speed. To reconcile such, we propose a novel
method for high-quality and efficient video resolution upscaling tasks, which leverages the spatial-temporal information to accurately divide video into chunks, thus keeping the number of chunks as well as the model size to minimum. Additionally, we advance our method into a single overfitting model by a data-aware joint training technique, which further reduces the storage requirement with
negligible quality drop. We deploy our models on an offthe-shelf mobile phone, and experimental results show that
our method achieves real-time video super-resolution with
high video quality. Compared with the state-of-the-art, our
method achieves 28 fps streaming speed with 41.6 PSNR,
which is 14× faster and 2.29 dB better in the live video
resolution upscaling tasks. Code available in https://
github.com/coulsonlee/STDO-CVPR2023.git.

1. Introduction
Being praised by its high image quality performance
and wide application scenarios, deep learning-based superresolution (SR) becomes the core enabler of many incred† Equal Contribution.

Frame: 250/375

Frame: 350/375

Figure 1. Patch PSNR heatmap of two frames in a 15s video
when super-resolved by a general WDSR model. A clear boundary shows that PSNR is strongly related to video content.

ible, cutting-edge applications in the field of image/video
reparation [10, 11, 39, 40], surveillance system enhancement [9], medical image processing [35], and high-quality
video live streaming [20]. Distinct from the traditional
methods that adopt classic interpolation algorithms [15, 45]
to improve the image/video quality, the deep learning-based
approaches [10, 11, 21, 24, 28, 40, 44, 47, 57, 60] exploit
the advantages of learning a mapping function from lowresolution (LR) to high-resolution (HR) using external data,
thus achieving better performance due to better generalization ability when meeting new data.
Such benefits have driven numerous interests in designing new methods [5, 17, 50] to deliver high-quality video
stream to users in the real-time fashion, especially in the
context of massive online video and live streaming available. Among this huge family, an emerging representative [13,16,31,38] studies the prospect of utilizing SR model
to upscale the resolution of the LR video in lieu of transmitting the HR video directly, which in many cases, consumes
tremendous bandwidth between servers and clients [19].
One practical method is to deploy a pretrained SR model
on the devices of the end users [25, 54], and perform resolution upscaling for the transmitted LR videos, thus obtaining HR videos without causing bandwidth congestion.
However, the deployed SR model that is trained with limited data usually suffers from limited generalization abil-

10259

