This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BiCro: Noisy Correspondence Rectification for Multi-modality Data via
Bi-directional Cross-modal Similarity Consistency
Shuo Yang1 Zhaopan Xu2 Kai Wang3 Yang You3
Hongxun Yao2 Tongliang Liu4 Min Xu1 *
1
University of Technology Sydney 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
3
National University Singapore 4 The University of Sydney
Soccer player is
beaten to the ball by
soccer player.

Abstract
As one of the most fundamental techniques in multimodal learning, cross-modal matching aims to project
various sensory modalities into a shared feature space. To
achieve this, massive and correctly aligned data pairs are
required for model training. However, unlike unimodal
datasets, multimodal datasets are extremely harder to
collect and annotate precisely. As an alternative, the
co-occurred data pairs (e.g., image-text pairs) collected
from the Internet have been widely exploited in the area.
Unfortunately, the cheaply collected dataset unavoidably
contains many mismatched data pairs, which have been
proven to be harmful to the model’s performance. To
address this, we propose a general framework called BiCro
(Bidirectional Cross-modal similarity consistency), which
can be easily integrated into existing cross-modal matching
models and improve their robustness against noisy data.
Specifically, BiCro aims to estimate soft labels for noisy
data pairs to reflect their true correspondence degree.
The basic idea of BiCro is motivated by that – taking
image-text matching as an example – similar images should
have similar textual descriptions and vice versa. Then the
consistency of these two similarities can be recast as the
estimated soft labels to train the matching model. The experiments on three popular cross-modal matching datasets
demonstrate that our method significantly improves the
noise-robustness of various matching models, and surpass
the state-of-the-art by a clear margin.The code is available
at https://github.com/xu5zhao/BiCro.

1. Introduction
As a key step towards general intelligence, multimodal
learning aims to endow an agent with the ability to extract
and understand information from various sensory modalities. One of the most fundamental techniques in multimodal
* Corresponding Author(min.xu@uts.edu.au).

I1

T1

Ĩ

T̃

Look at him, like
it’s no work at all.

T2

I2

He is doing some
works.

clean pairs
noisy pairs

Figure 1. Illustration of the Bidirectional Cross-modal similarity
consistency (BiCro). In an image-text shared feature space, assume (I1 , T1 ) and (I2 , T2 ) are two clean positive data pairs. The
image I˜ is very close to the image I1 , but their corresponding texts
T̃ and T1 are far away from each other. Similarly, the text T̃ is very
close to the text T2 while their corresponding images I˜ and I2 are
˜ T̃ ) is possibly noisy (misirrelevant. Therefore the data pair (I,
matched).

learning is cross-modal matching. Cross-modal matching
tries to project different modalities into a shared feature
space, and it has been successfully applied to many areas,
e.g., image/video captioning [1, 21, 23], cross-modal hashing [14, 18], and visual question answering [15, 58].
Like many other tasks in deep learning, cross-modal
matching also requires massive and high-quality labeled
training data. But even worse, the multimodal datasets (e.g.,
in image-text matching) are significantly harder to be manually annotated than those unimodal datasets (e.g., in image
classification). This is because the textual description of an
image is very subjective, while the categorical label of an
image is easier to be determined. Alternatively, many works
collect the co-occurred image-text pairs from the Internet to
train the cross-modal matching model, e.g., CLIP [32] was
trained over 400 million image-text pairs collected from the
Internet. Furthermore, one of the largest public datasets in
cross-modal matching, Conceptual Caption [36], was also

19883

