This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstructing Signing Avatars From Video Using Linguistic Priors
Maria-Paola Forte

Peter Kulits Chun-Hao Huang Vasileios Choutas
Katherine J. Kuchenbecker Michael J. Black

Dimitrios Tzionas

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Stuttgart and Tübingen, Germany
{forte,kjk}@is.mpg.de

{kulits,chuang2,vchoutas,dtzionas,black}@tue.mpg.de

Figure 1. Given a monocular, in-the-wild video of a sign-language sign, SGNify automatically reconstructs a 3D body with accurate hand
pose, facial motion, and body pose. Note that motion blur obscures the finger articulations in several video frames; this is a common
problem. Our novel linguistic priors enable accurate 3D reconstruction despite such image degradation.

Abstract
Sign language (SL) is the primary method of communication for the 70 million Deaf people around the world. Video
dictionaries of isolated signs are a core SL learning tool.
Replacing these with 3D avatars can aid learning and enable AR/VR applications, improving access to technology
and online media. However, little work has attempted to
estimate expressive 3D avatars from SL video; occlusion,
noise, and motion blur make this task difficult. We address
this by introducing novel linguistic priors that are universally applicable to SL and provide constraints on 3D hand
pose that help resolve ambiguities within isolated signs.
Our method, SGNify, captures fine-grained hand pose, facial expression, and body movement fully automatically
from in-the-wild monocular SL videos. We evaluate SGNify
quantitatively by using a commercial motion-capture system to compute 3D avatars synchronized with monocular
video. SGNify outperforms state-of-the-art 3D body-poseand shape-estimation methods on SL videos. A perceptual
study shows that SGNify’s 3D reconstructions are significantly more comprehensible and natural than those of previous methods and are on par with the source videos. Code
and data are available at sgnify.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
It is estimated that over 466 million people have disabling hearing loss [13] and more than 70 million people
use sign language (SL) as their primary means of communication [52]. Increasing use of digital communication motivates research on capturing, understanding, modeling, and
synthesizing expressive 3D SL avatars. Existing datasets
and dictionaries used in SL recognition (SLR), translation
(SLT), and production (SLP) are primarily limited to 2D
video because the technology required to capture 3D movement is prohibitively expensive, requires expertise to operate, and may limit the movements of the signer. Dictionaries of isolated signs are a core SL learning tool, and many
SLs have online 2D video dictionaries. The Deaf community is actively seeking 3D dictionaries of isolated signs to
aid learning [40]. The current approach to creating such
3D signing dictionaries is fully manual, requiring an artist
or a HamNoSys [21] expert, and the resulting avatars often
move unnaturally [3]. We aim to automatically reconstruct
expressive 3D signing avatars from monocular SL video,
which we term Sign Language Capture (SLC). We focus on
SLC of isolated signs.
3D reconstruction of human pose and shape has received
significant attention, but accurate 3D hand-pose estimation

12791

