This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayoutDM: Transformer-based Diffusion Model for Layout Generation
Shang Chai, Liansheng Zhuang*
University of Science and Technology of China

Fengying Yan
Tianjin University

chaishang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lszhuang@ustc.edu.cn

fengying@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic layout generation that can synthesize highquality layouts is an important tool for graphic design in
many applications. Though existing methods based on generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) and Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) have progressed, they still leave much room for improving the quality and diversity of the results. Inspired by the recent success of diffusion models in generating high-quality images,
this paper explores their potential for conditional layout
generation and proposes Transformer-based Layout Diffusion Model (LayoutDM) by instantiating the conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) with a purely
transformer-based architecture. Instead of using convolutional neural networks, a transformer-based conditional
Layout Denoiser is proposed to learn the reverse diffusion process to generate samples from noised layout data.
Benefitting from both transformer and DDPM, our LayoutDM is of desired properties such as high-quality generation, strong sample diversity, faithful distribution coverage,
and stationary training in comparison to GANs and VAEs.
Quantitative and qualitative experimental results show that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art generative models
in terms of quality and diversity.

1. Introduction
Layouts, i.e. the arrangement of the elements to be displayed in a design, play a critical role in many applications
from magazine pages to advertising posters to application
interfaces. A good layout guides viewers’ reading order
and draws their attention to important information. The semantic relationships of elements, the reading order, canvas
space allocation and aesthetic principles must be carefully
decided in the layout design process. However, manually
arranging design elements to meet aesthetic goals and userspecified constraints is time-consuming. To aid the design
of graphic layouts, the task of layout generation aims to
* Corresponding author.

generate design layouts given a set of design components
with user-specified attributes. Though meaningful attempts
are made [1, 10, 11, 15, 18, 21, 23–25, 33, 44–46], it is still
challenging to generate realistic and complex layouts, because many factors need to be taken into consideration, such
as design elements, their attributes, and their relationships
to other elements.
Over the past few years, generative models such as
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9] and Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [20] have gained much attention in layout generation, as they have shown a great
promise in terms of faithfully learning a given data distribution and sampling from it. GANs model the sampling procedure of a complex distribution that is learned in
an adversarial manner, while VAEs seek to learn a model
that assigns a high likelihood to the observed data samples. Though having shown impressive success in generating high-quality layouts, these models have some limitations of their own. GANs are known for potentially unstable
training and less distribution coverage due to their adversarial training nature [4, 5, 27], so they are inferior to state-ofthe-art likelihood-based models (such as VAEs) in terms of
diversity [28, 29, 34]. VAEs can capture more diversity and
are typically easier to scale and train than GANs, but still
fall short in terms of visual sample quality and sampling
efficiency [22].
Recently, diffusion models such as denoising diffusion
probabilistic model (DDPM) [14] have emerged as a powerful class of generative models, capable of producing highquality images comparable to those of GANs. Importantly,
they additionally offer desirable properties such as strong
sample diversity, faithful distribution coverage, a stationary training objective, and easy scalability. This implies
that diffusion models are well suited for learning models
of complex and diverse data, which also motivates us to explore the potential of diffusion-based generative models for
graphic layout generation.
Though diffusion models have shown splendid performance in high-fidelity image generation [8,14,35,39,41], it
is still a sparsely explored area and provides unique challenges to develop diffusion-based generative models for

18349

