This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I2 -SDF: Intrinsic Indoor Scene Reconstruction and Editing
via Raytracing in Neural SDFs
Jingsen Zhu1

Yuchi Huo2,1 *

Lisha Wang1
1

Rui Tang5

Qi Ye3,6

Fujun Luan4

Wei Hua2

4

Adobe Research

5

KooLab, Manycore

6

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D scenes from multi-view images is a
fundamental task in computer graphics and vision. Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [16] and its follow-up research
leverage multi-layer perceptions (MLPs) as implicit functions, taking as input the positional and directional coordinates, to approximate the underlying geometry and appearance of a 3D scene. Such methods have shown compelling
and high-fidelity results in novel view synthesis. However,
we argue that novel view synthesis itself is insufficient for
scene editing such as inserting virtual objects, relighting
* Corresponding author.

Zhejiang Lab

Dianbing Xi1
Rui Wang1 *

3

Zhejiang University

Key Lab of CS&AUS of Zhejiang Province

Abstract
In this work, we present I2 -SDF, a new method for intrinsic indoor scene reconstruction and editing using differentiable Monte Carlo raytracing on neural signed distance fields (SDFs). Our holistic neural SDF-based framework jointly recovers the underlying shapes, incident radiance and materials from multi-view images. We introduce a novel bubble loss for fine-grained small objects and
error-guided adaptive sampling scheme to largely improve
the reconstruction quality on large-scale indoor scenes.
Further, we propose to decompose the neural radiance
field into spatially-varying material of the scene as a neural field through surface-based, differentiable Monte Carlo
raytracing and emitter semantic segmentations, which enables physically based and photorealistic scene relighting
and editing applications. Through a number of qualitative and quantitative experiments, we demonstrate the superior quality of our method on indoor scene reconstruction, novel view synthesis, and scene editing compared to
state-of-the-art baselines. Our project page is at https:
//jingsenzhu.github.io/i2-sdf.

Hujun Bao1
2

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Jifan Li1

R ENDERING

S CENE E DITING

Figure 1. I2 -SDF. Left: State-of-the-art neural implicit surface
representation method [42] fails in reconstructing small objects
inside an indoor scene (e.g. lamps and chandeliers), which is resolved by our bubbling method. Middle and Right: Our intrinsic
decomposition and raytracing method enable photo-realistic scene
editing and relighting applications.

and editing surface materials with global illumination.
On the other hand, inverse rendering or intrinsic decomposition, which reconstructs and decomposes the scene
into shape, shading and surface reflectance from single or
multiple images, enables photorealistic scene editing possibilities. It is a long-term challenge especially for largescale indoor scenes because they typically exhibit complex
geometry and spatially-varying global illumination appearance. As intrinsic decomposition is an extremely ill-posed
task, a physically-based shading model will crucially affect the decomposition quality. Existing neural rendering
methods [2, 18, 43, 46] rely on simple rendering algorithms
(such as pre-filtered shading) for the decomposition and use
a global lighting representation (e.g., spherical Gaussians).
Although these methods have demonstrated the effectiveness on object-level inverse rendering, they are inapplicable
to complex indoor scenes. Moreover, indoor scene images
are usually captured from the inside out and most lighting
information has already presented inside the room. As a result, the reconstructed radiance field already provides sufficient lighting information without the need of active, external capture lighting setup.
To tackle the above challenges, we propose I2 -SDF, a
new method to decompose a 3D scene into its underlying

12489

