This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SGLoc: Scene Geometry Encoding for Outdoor LiDAR Localization
Wen Li1,2 * Shangshu Yu1,2 * Cheng Wang1,2† Guosheng Hu3 Siqi Shen1,2 Chenglu Wen1,2
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Oosto, Belfast, UK

Abstract
LiDAR-based absolute pose regression estimates the
global pose through a deep network in an end-to-end manner,
achieving impressive results in learning-based localization.
However, the accuracy of existing methods still has room
to improve due to the difficulty of effectively encoding the
scene geometry and the unsatisfactory quality of the data.
In this work, we propose a novel LiDAR localization framework, SGLoc, which decouples the pose estimation to point
cloud correspondence regression and pose estimation via
this correspondence. This decoupling effectively encodes
the scene geometry because the decoupled correspondence
regression step greatly preserves the scene geometry, leading to significant performance improvement. Apart from this
decoupling, we also design a tri-scale spatial feature aggregation module and inter-geometric consistency constraint
loss to effectively capture scene geometry. Moreover, we
empirically find that the ground truth might be noisy due
to GPS/INS measuring errors, greatly reducing the pose
estimation performance. Thus, we propose a pose quality
evaluation and enhancement method to measure and correct the ground truth pose. Extensive experiments on the
Oxford Radar RobotCar and NCLT datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of SGLoc, which outperforms state-of-the-art
regression-based localization methods by 68.5% and 67.6%
on position accuracy, respectively.

1. Introduction
Estimating the position and orientation of LiDAR from
point clouds is a fundamental component of many applications in computer vision, e.g., autonomous driving, virtual
reality, and augmented reality.
Contemporary state-of-the-art LiDAR-based localization
methods explicitly use maps, which match the query point
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. LiDAR Localization results of our method and
PosePN++ [51] (state-of-the-art method) in urban (left) and school
(right) scenes from Oxford Radar RobotCar [2] and NCLT [34]
datasets. The star indicates the starting position.

cloud with a pre-built 3D map [18, 23, 27, 49]. However,
these methods usually require expensive 3D map storage
and communication. One alternative is the regressionbased approach, absolute pose regression (APR), which directly estimates the poses in the inference stage without
maps [8, 24, 25, 40, 45]. APR methods typically use a CNN
to encode the scene feature and a multi-layer perceptron to
regress the pose. Compared to map-based methods, APR
does not need to store the pre-built maps, accordingly reducing communications.
For (1), APR networks learn highly abstract global scene
representations, which allow the network to classify the
scene effectively [25]. However, the global features usually
cannot encode detailed scene geometry, which is the key
to achieving an accurate pose estimation [10, 11, 38, 39].
Prior efforts have tried to minimize the relative pose or
photometric errors to add geometry constraints by pose
graph optimization (PGO) [4, 21] or novel view synthesis
(NVS) [10,11]. However, this introduces additional computations, limiting its wide applications. For (2), we empirically
find current large-scale outdoor datasets suffer from various
errors in the data due to GPS/INS measuring errors. It affects
the APR learning process and makes it difficult to evaluate
the localization results accurately. To our knowledge, the
impact of data quality on localization has not been carefully
investigated in the existing literature.

9286

