This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prototypical Residual Networks for Anomaly Detection and Localization
∗

Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
Hui Zhang1,2
Zuxuan Wu1,2
Zheng Wang3
Zhineng Chen1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
School of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology
Input

Abstract
Anomaly detection and localization are widely used in
industrial manufacturing for its efficiency and effectiveness.
Anomalies are rare and hard to collect and supervised models easily over-fit to these seen anomalies with a handful of
abnormal samples, producing unsatisfactory performance.
On the other hand, anomalies are typically subtle, hard to
discern, and of various appearance, making it difficult to
detect anomalies and let alone locate anomalous regions.
To address these issues, we propose a framework called
Prototypical Residual Network (PRN), which learns feature
residuals of varying scales and sizes between anomalous
and normal patterns to accurately reconstruct the segmentation maps of anomalous regions. PRN mainly consists of
two parts: multi-scale prototypes that explicitly represent the
residual features of anomalies to normal patterns; a multisize self-attention mechanism that enables variable-sized
anomalous feature learning. Besides, we present a variety of
anomaly generation strategies that consider both seen and
unseen appearance variance to enlarge and diversify anomalies. Extensive experiments on the challenging and widely
used MVTec AD benchmark show that PRN outperforms current state-of-the-art unsupervised and supervised methods.
We further report SOTA results on three additional datasets
to demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of PRN.

1. Introduction
The human cognition and visual system has an inherent
ability to perceive anomalies [53]. Not only can humans
distinguish between defective and non-defective images, but
they can also point to the location of anomalies even if
they have seen none or only a limited number of anomalies.
Anomaly detection (image-level binary classification) and
anomaly localization (pixel-level binary classification) are
introduced for the same purpose, and have been widely used
∗ Corresponding author.

GT

PatchCore

DRA

Ours

Figure 1. Anomaly detection and localization examples on MVTec
[4]. Compared with the unsupervised method PatchCore [41] and
the supervised method DRA [13], the proposed PRN is able to
locate the anomalous regions more accurately.

in various scenarios due to their efficiency and remarkable
accuracy, including industrial defect detection [4, 7, 34, 61],
medical image analysis [52] and video surveillance [32].
Given its importance, a significant amount of work has
been devoted to anomaly detection and anomaly localization,
but few have addressed both detection and localization problems well at the same time. We argue that real-world anomalous data weaken these models mainly in three aspects: I) the
amount of abnormal samples is limited and significant fewer
than normal samples, producing data distributions that lead
to a naturally imbalanced learning problem; II) anomalies
are typically subtle and hard to discern, since normal patterns
still dominate the anomalous image; identifying abnormal
regions out of the whole image is the key to anomaly detection and localization; III) the appearance of anomalies varies
significantly, i.e., abnormal regions can take on a variety of
sizes, shapes and numbers, and such appearance variations

16281

