This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Local Feature Pre-training for Deformable Shape Analysis
Souhaib Attaiki
Lei Li
Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
Rigid registration

Abstract
Transfer learning is fundamental for addressing problems in settings with little training data. While several
transfer learning approaches have been proposed in 3D,
unfortunately, these solutions typically operate on an entire 3D object or even scene-level and thus, as we show,
fail to generalize to new classes, such as deformable organic shapes. In addition, there is currently a lack of understanding of what makes pre-trained features transferable across significantly different 3D shape categories. In
this paper, we make a step toward addressing these challenges. First, we analyze the link between feature locality and transferability in tasks involving deformable 3D objects, while also comparing different backbones and losses
for local feature pre-training. We observe that with proper
training, learned features can be useful in such tasks, but,
crucially, only with an appropriate choice of the receptive field size. We then propose a differentiable method
for optimizing the receptive field within 3D transfer learning. Jointly, this leads to the first learnable features that
can successfully generalize to unseen classes of 3D shapes
such as humans and animals. Our extensive experiments
show that this approach leads to state-of-the-art results on
several downstream tasks such as segmentation, shape correspondence, and classification. Our code is available at
https://github.com/pvnieo/vader.

1. Introduction
Extracting informative representations from 3D geometry is a central task in Computer Vision, Computer Graphics, and related fields. Classical approaches have relied on
hand-crafted features derived from basic geometric principles [8, 10, 53, 82, 94]. More recently, the focus has shifted
towards data-driven approaches that learn features directly
from 3D data [16, 19, 45] in a task-specific manner.
In addition to methods that learn features from scratch
for each application, several recent works have also advocated for general-purpose representation learning on geometric data [49, 97, 103]. Inspired by the success of transfer
learning in other domains [109], these methods aim to learn

Local feature pre-training

Non rigid registration

Semantic segmentation

Downstream deformable shape analysis

Figure 1. We present VADER, a novel feature pre-training technique aiming for deformable shapes. By pre-training local feature
extractors on 3D scenes for rigid alignment, our approach enables
transfer learning to downstream deformable shape analysis tasks,
such as shape matching and semantic segmentation.

informative representations of 3D data, which can then be
exploited in data-limited downstream tasks.
Despite this progress, state-of-the-art architectures in deformable shape analysis still either rely on classical handcrafted features as input signals to their learning pipelines
[67, 78, 83, 93], or are trained from scratch for each task
[29, 41, 64], thus requiring significant amounts of labeled
data. Unfortunately, as we demonstrate in our work, existing 3D representation learning approaches fail to provide a
useful signal in tasks that involve highly deformable shapes,
such as shape correspondence or segmentation.
This result is perhaps expected since existing approaches
have primarily focused on transfer learning across manmade 3D objects or scenes [102], and are typically restricted
to settings with significant domain overlap between training
and test data. Furthermore, there is currently a lack of understanding of what makes pre-trained features transferable,
especially across significantly different shape classes.
In this work, we aim to investigate the transferability of geometric features to develop representation learning approaches that are useful in downstream deformable
shape analysis tasks, such as non-rigid shape matching
and semantic segmentation (see Fig. 1). Taking inspiration from recent studies that emphasize the importance of
low and mid-level features in enabling 2D transfer learning [75, 108], we explore the impact of feature locality on
downstream task accuracy across significantly different 3D
shape categories. Our study shows that, with a carefully
chosen architecture, successful general-purpose represen-

13650

