This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Architecture, Dataset and Model-Scale Agnostic Data-free Meta-Learning
Zixuan Hu1 Li Shen2, * Zhenyi Wang3 Tongliang Liu4 Chun Yuan1,* Dacheng Tao2
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China; 2 JD Explore Academy, China
3
State University of New York at Buffalo, USA; 4 The University of Sydney, Australia
huzixuan21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; mathshenli@gmail.com; zhenyiwa@buffalo.edu
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au; yuanc@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract

next inversion

Figure 1. Episode Curriculum Inversion can improve the efficiency of pseudo episode training. At each episode, EI may repeatedly synthesize the tasks already learned well, while ECI only
synthesizes harder tasks not learned yet.
support set

query set

Net

(a) Meta training with pseudo task
support set

query set

Net

task distribution shift
from inversion to reality

prediction

* Corresponding authors: Li Shen and Chun Yuan

tasks not learned yet

Linear

Meta-learning [1, 28, 31] aims to learn useful prior
knowledge (e.g., sensitive initialization) from a collection
of similar tasks to facilitate the learning of new unseen
tasks. Most meta-learning methods [3, 4, 7, 9, 15, 29, 30, 35,
36, 41, 42, 44] assume the access to the training and testing data of each task. However, this assumption is not always satisfied: many individuals and institutions only re-

tasks already learned well

prediction

1. Introduction

episode curriculum inversion (ECI)

Linear

The goal of data-free meta-learning is to learn useful
prior knowledge from a collection of pre-trained models
without accessing their training data. However, existing
works only solve the problem in parameter space, which
(i) ignore the fruitful data knowledge contained in the pretrained models; (ii) can not scale to large-scale pre-trained
models; (iii) can only meta-learn pre-trained models with
the same network architecture. To address those issues, we
propose a unified framework, dubbed PURER, which contains: (1) ePisode cUrriculum inveRsion (ECI) during datafree meta training; and (2) invErsion calibRation following
inner loop (ICFIL) during meta testing. During meta training, we propose ECI to perform pseudo episode training
for learning to adapt fast to new unseen tasks. Specifically,
we progressively synthesize a sequence of pseudo episodes
by distilling the training data from each pre-trained model.
The ECI adaptively increases the difficulty level of pseudo
episodes according to the real-time feedback of the meta
model. We formulate the optimization process of meta training with ECI as an adversarial form in an end-to-end manner. During meta testing, we further propose a simple plugand-play supplement—ICFIL—only used during meta testing to narrow the gap between meta training and meta testing task distribution. Extensive experiments in various realworld scenarios show the superior performance of ours.

episode inversion (EI)

original task
space

(b) Meta testing with real task

Figure 2. Task-distribution shift between meta training and testing.
The pseudo data distilled from pre-trained models only contains
partial semantic information learned by pre-trained models.

lease the pre-trained models instead of the data. This is due
to data privacy, safety, or ethical issues in real-world scenarios, making the task-specific data difficult or impossible
to acquire. For example, many pre-trained models with arbitrary architectures are released on GitHub without training data. However, when facing a new task, we need some
prior knowledge learned from those pre-trained models so
that the model can be adapted fast to the new task with few
labeled examples. Thus, meta-learning from several pretrained models without data becomes a critical problem,
named Data-free Meta-Learning (DFML) [43].
Existing data-free meta-learning methods address the
problem in the parameter space. Wang et al. [43] propose
to meta-learn a black-box neural network by predicting the

7736

