This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAGVLT: Masked Generative Vision-and-Language Transformer
Sungwoong Kim1,∗,† ,
Daejin Jo2,∗ ,
Donghoon Lee2,∗ ,
Jongmin Kim2,∗
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Kakao Brain, Seongnam, South Korea
swkim01@korea.ac.kr, {daejin.jo, dhlee, jmkim}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
While generative modeling on multimodal image-text
data has been actively developed with large-scale paired
datasets, there have been limited attempts to generate both
image and text data by a single model rather than a generation of one fixed modality conditioned on the other modality. In this paper, we explore a unified generative visionand-language (VL) model that can produce both images
and text sequences. Especially, we propose a generative VL
transformer based on the non-autoregressive mask prediction, named MAGVLT, and compare it with an autoregressive generative VL transformer (ARGVLT). In comparison
to ARGVLT, the proposed MAGVLT enables bidirectional
context encoding, fast decoding by parallel token predictions in an iterative refinement, and extended editing capabilities such as image and text infilling. For rigorous training of our MAGVLT with image-text pairs from scratch, we
combine the image-to-text, text-to-image, and joint imageand-text mask prediction tasks. Moreover, we devise two
additional tasks based on the step-unrolled mask prediction
and the selective prediction on the mixture of two image-text
pairs. Experimental results on various downstream generation tasks of VL benchmarks show that our MAGVLT outperforms ARGVLT by a large margin even with significant
inference speedup. Particularly, MAGVLT achieves competitive results on both zero-shot image-to-text and text-toimage generation tasks from MS-COCO by one moderatesized model (fewer than 500M parameters) even without the
use of monomodal data and networks.

1. Introduction
Generalizable multimodal modeling has recently made
a lot of progress, especially in the field of vision-andlanguage (VL) modeling [3, 17, 30, 43, 45, 46, 48, 62, 63,
66, 67]. In particular, a massive amount of image-text data
[9, 11, 51, 52, 54, 55] allows robust pretraining of large-scale
multimodal VL models that can be easily transferred to various downstream tasks including image captioning [2, 38],
∗ Contributed equally.
† Work done at Kakao Brain. Corresponding author.

text-guided image generation [16, 17, 19, 40, 45, 46, 48, 67],
visual question answering [23], and image-text retrieval
[30, 38, 42, 43]. In this respect, many multimodal VL pretraining algorithms have been proposed in the literature,
and these can be broadly categorized into either discriminative or generative learning algorithms. Discriminative pretraining such as contrastive learning [30, 43] aims to obtain
semantic representations effective for discriminative tasks
while generative pretraining learns them to reconstruct an
input [4, 8, 13, 25, 32, 35, 61, 63, 64]. The recent growth of
model capacity and data size has led to more interest in generative pretraining since it can provide more diverse and improved generalization ability both for VL understanding and
VL generation tasks.
While generative VL pretraining has been widely exploited, most existing algorithms focus on representation
learning for VL understanding tasks [7, 8, 12, 13, 33, 35, 63]
or conditional generation tasks where a generation is performed on one fixed modality conditioned on the other
modality [3, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 25, 31, 40, 45, 46, 48, 61, 64,
66, 67]. A few algorithms have tried to produce data in both
modalities from a single VL model [4, 32]. If one universal
model can generate both modalities, it would be beneficial
in concentrating training efforts on a single model as well as
resource-saving under a resource-constrained deployment.
Moreover, we can expect task extension as well as synergetic performance improvement between the modalities
from this multimodal generation. Therefore, in this work,
we develop a unified generative VL model.
There are two prevalent paradigms of the generative
modeling for image and text processing: autoregressive
(AR) generative modeling [16, 32, 46, 61, 67] and non-AR
generative modeling [4, 5, 45, 48]. Many previous algorithms adopt AR modeling due to its excellent generation
results and high training scalability, especially with transformer networks. However, AR modeling has restrictions
in unidirectional conditioning in that an image needs to be
flattened into a 1D sequence by an unnatural ordering. In
addition, AR sampling is performed by one-by-one predictions of elements, which incurs very slow generation for a
long sequence. Recently, in order to overcome these limitations of AR modeling, non-AR generative modeling based

23338

