This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthesizing Photorealistic Virtual Humans Through Cross-modal
Disentanglement
Siddarth Ravichandran, Ondřej Texler, Dimitar Dinev, Hyun Jae Kang
NEON, Samsung Research America
{siddarth.r, o.texler, dimitar.d, hyunjae.k}@samsung.com

Figure 1. Three sequences of talking faces generated using the proposed framework. Our method produces high-texture quality, sharp
images, and correct lips shapes that are inline with the spoken audio. See the zoom-in patches, our method faithfully reproduces fine
textural and content details such as teeth.

Abstract

Over the last few decades, many aspects of human life
have been enhanced with virtual domains, from the advent
of digital assistants such as Amazon’s Alexa and Apple’s
Siri to the latest metaverse efforts of the rebranded Meta.
These trends underscore the importance of generating photorealistic visual depictions of humans. This has led to the
rapid growth of so-called deepfake and talking-head generation methods in recent years. Despite their impressive
results and popularity, they usually lack certain qualitative
aspects such as texture quality, lips synchronization, or resolution, and practical aspects such as the ability to run in
real-time. To allow for virtual human avatars to be used in
practical scenarios, we propose an end-to-end framework
for synthesizing high-quality virtual human faces capable
of speaking with accurate lip motion with a special emphasis on performance. We introduce a novel network utilizing visemes as an intermediate audio representation and a
novel data augmentation strategy employing a hierarchical
image synthesis approach that allows disentanglement of
the different modalities used to control the global head motion. Our method runs in real-time, and is able to deliver
superior results compared to the current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
With the metaverse gaining traction in the media and the
rapid virtualization of many aspects of life, virtual humans
are becoming increasingly popular. Propped up by technological advances in hardware, GPU computing, and deep
learning, digitization of humans has become a very active
research topic.
One challenging problem is creating virtual avatars that
attempt to faithfully recreate a specific human indistinguishable from their real counterparts. This entails a perfect visual recreation, with high quality textures that recreate the
minutia that make a human visually realistic, e.g., hair that
appears to be composed of individual strands, clothes that
appear made out of fabric, and pores or vellus hair on the
skin. Recent advances in neural rendering have achieved
considerable success in creating very convincing images
that are able to visually recreate such fine details. Additionally, many use-cases involving virtual humans require
them to appear on large screens, e.g., human-size displays
in airport halls, hotels, and billboards. For such use-cases, it
is vital for the virtual humans to be rendered in a relatively
high resolution.
Unfortunately, rendering quality alone is not sufficient to
recreate a convincing virtual human that can be interacted
with. Just as important as the visual fidelity is the fidelity
of the motion. Specifically, for speech-driven avatars, the

4585

