This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probability-based Global Cross-modal Upsampling for Pansharpening
Zeyu Zhu1 , Xiangyong Cao1,2,3 *, Man Zhou5 , Junhao Huang1 , Deyu Meng1,4
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University; 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Ministry of Education Key Lab For Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Macau University of Science and Technology
5
Nanyang Technological University
{zeyuzhu2077, manzhountu, junhaoxjtu}@gmail.com
{caoxiangyong, dymeng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pansharpening is an essential preprocessing step for remote sensing image processing. Although deep learning
(DL) approaches performed well on this task, current upsampling methods used in these approaches only utilize the
local information of each pixel in the low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) image while neglecting to exploit its global
information as well as the cross-modal information of the
guiding panchromatic (PAN) image, which limits their performance improvement. To address this issue, this paper
develops a novel probability-based global cross-modal upsampling (PGCU) method for pan-sharpening. Precisely,
we first formulate the PGCU method from a probabilistic perspective and then design an efficient network module to implement it by fully utilizing the information mentioned above while simultaneously considering the channel specificity. The PGCU module consists of three blocks,
i.e., information extraction (IE), distribution and expectation estimation (DEE), and fine adjustment (FA). Extensive experiments verify the superiority of the PGCU method
compared with other popular upsampling methods. Additionally, experiments also show that the PGCU module can
help improve the performance of existing SOTA deep learning pansharpening methods. The codes are available at
https://github.com/Zeyu-Zhu/PGCU .

1. Introduction
Pansharpening aims to reconstruct a high-resolution
multispectral image (HRMS) from a low-resolution multispectral image (LRMS) under the guidance of a panchromatic image (PAN). It’s an indispensable pre-processing
step for many subsequent remote sensing tasks, such as
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between local upsampling methods and our
proposed PGCU method. The local method has limited receptive
field and thus only utilizes the local information of LRMS for upsampling, while our proposed PGCU method can fully exploit the
rich global information of LRMS and the cross-modal global information of PAN.

object detection [11, 26], change detection [1, 19], unmixing [3] and classification [7, 8].
The last decades have witnessed the great development
of pansharpening methods. The typical approaches include
component substitution (CS) approaches [10, 18, 23, 24],
multi-resolution analysis (MRA) methods [21, 25, 31], and
variational optimization (VO) methods [12, 13, 15, 16, 38].
Recently, with the rapid development of deep learning,

14039

