This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focused and Collaborative Feedback Integration
for Interactive Image Segmentation
Qiaoqiao Wei
Hui Zhang
Jun-Hai Yong
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
wqq18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{huizhang,yongjh}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

User interaction

(a) Independent Segmentation
Segmentation

Interactive image segmentation aims at obtaining a segmentation mask for an image using simple user annotations.
During each round of interaction, the segmentation result
from the previous round serves as feedback to guide the
user’s annotation and provides dense prior information for
the segmentation model, effectively acting as a bridge between interactions. Existing methods overlook the importance of feedback or simply concatenate it with the original input, leading to underutilization of feedback and an
increase in the number of required annotations. To address
this, we propose an approach called Focused and Collaborative Feedback Integration (FCFI) to fully exploit the feedback for click-based interactive image segmentation. FCFI
first focuses on a local area around the new click and corrects the feedback based on the similarities of high-level
features. It then alternately and collaboratively updates the
feedback and deep features to integrate the feedback into the
features. The efficacy and efficiency of FCFI were validated
on four benchmarks, namely GrabCut, Berkeley, SBD, and
DAVIS. Experimental results show that FCFI achieved new
state-of-the-art performance with less computational overhead than previous methods. The source code is available at
https://github.com/veizgyauzgyauz/FCFI.

𝐼, 𝒫
IoU=93.88%

IoU=81.19%

Feedback 𝑀𝑡−1

Output 𝑀𝑡

(b) Feedback-as-Input Segmentation
Segmentation

𝐼, 𝒫
𝑀𝑡−1

IoU=93.09%
Output 𝑀𝑡

Annotation
Feed back

(c) Deep Feedback-Integrated Segmentation (Ours)
Segmentation

𝐼, 𝒫
IoU=95.10%
Image 𝐼
and
Clicks 𝒫

Output 𝑀𝑡
𝑀𝑡−1

Feed back

Figure 1. An overview of the interactive system and the comparison among (a) independent segmentation [24], (b) feedbackas-input segmentation [35], and (c) deep feedback-integrated segmentation. See the description in Sec. 1. Throughout this paper,
green/red clicks represent foreground/background annotations.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation aims to segment a target
object in an image given simple annotations, such as bounding boxes [17, 32, 37, 38, 40], scribbles [1, 10, 18], extreme
points [2,27,29,42], and clicks [6,15,23,24,34,39]. Due to
its inherent characteristic, i.e., interactivity, it allows users
to add annotations and receive refined segmentation results
iteratively. Unlike semantic segmentation, interactive image segmentation can be applied to unseen categories (categories that do not exist in the training dataset), demonstrating its generalization ability. Additionally, compared with
instance segmentation, interactive segmentation is specific

since it only localizes the annotated instance. Owing to
these advantages, interactive image segmentation is a preliminary step for many applications, including image editing and image composition. This paper specifically focuses
on interactive image segmentation using click annotations
because clicks are less labor-intensive to obtain than other
types of annotations.
The process of interaction is illustrated in Fig. 1. Given
an image, users start by providing one or more clicks to
label background or foreground pixels. The segmentation
model then generates an initial segmentation mask for the

18643

