This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Content-aware Token Sharing for Efficient Semantic Segmentation
with Vision Transformers
Chenyang Lu∗ , Daan de Geus∗ , Gijs Dubbelman
Eindhoven University of Technology
{c.lu.2, d.c.d.geus, g.dubbelman}@tue.nl

Standard vision transformer

Abstract
This paper introduces Content-aware Token Sharing
(CTS), a token reduction approach that improves the computational efficiency of semantic segmentation networks
that use Vision Transformers (ViTs). Existing works have
proposed token reduction approaches to improve the efficiency of ViT-based image classification networks, but these
methods are not directly applicable to semantic segmentation, which we address in this work. We observe that, for
semantic segmentation, multiple image patches can share a
token if they contain the same semantic class, as they contain redundant information. Our approach leverages this by
employing an efficient, class-agnostic policy network that
predicts if image patches contain the same semantic class,
and lets them share a token if they do. With experiments, we
explore the critical design choices of CTS and show its effectiveness on the ADE20K, Pascal Context and Cityscapes
datasets, various ViT backbones, and different segmentation
decoders. With Content-aware Token Sharing, we are able
to reduce the number of processed tokens by up to 44%,
without diminishing the segmentation quality.

1. Introduction
In recent years, many works have proposed replacing
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with Vision Transformers (ViTs) [13] to solve various computer vision tasks,
such as image classification [1, 13, 22, 23], object detection [3, 23, 56] and semantic segmentation [6, 23, 28, 37,
47, 54]. ViTs1 apply multiple layers of multi-head selfattention [41] to a set of tokens generated from fixed-size
image patches. ViT-based models now achieve state-of-theart results for various tasks, and it is found that ViTs are especially well-suited for pre-training on large datasets [1,16],
which in turn yields significant improvements on down* Both authors contributed equally.
1 In this work we use the term ViTs for the complete family of vision
transformers that purely apply global self-attention.

ViT

N tokens

N patches

Vision transformer with Content-aware Token Sharing (CTS)

Policy

N patches

ViT

M<N patches

M<N tokens

Figure 1. Content-aware token sharing (CTS). Standard ViTbased segmentation networks turn fixed-size patches into tokens,
and process all of them. To improve efficiency, we propose to let
semantically similar patches share a token, and achieve considerable efficiency boosts without decreasing the segmentation quality.

stream tasks. However, the use of global self-attention,
which is key in achieving good results, means that the computational complexity of the model is quadratic with respect
to the input tokens. As a result, these models become particularly inefficient for dense tasks like semantic segmentation, which are typically applied to larger images than for
image classification.
Recent works address these efficiency concerns in two
different ways. Some works propose new ViT-based architectures to improve efficiency, which either make a combination of global and local attention [23, 48] or introduce a
pyramid-like structure inspired by CNNs [14,23,44]. Alternatively, to reduce the burden of the quadratic complexity,
some works aim to reduce number of tokens that are processed by the network, by either discarding [29, 39, 49] or
merging [2, 21, 30] the least relevant tokens. These works,
which all address the image classification task, find that a
similar accuracy can be achieved when taking into account
only a subset of all tokens, thereby improving efficiency.
However, these methods, which are discussed further in
Section 2, are not directly applicable to semantic segmentation. First, we cannot simply discard certain tokens, as each

23631

