This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CASP-Net: Rethinking Video Saliency Prediction from an Audio-Visual
Consistency Perceptual Perspective

1

Junwen Xiong1∗ , Ganglai Wang1∗ , Peng Zhang1,2 *†, Wei Huang3 , Yufei Zha1,2 , Guangtao Zhai4
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Ningbo Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Nanchang University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Incorporating the audio stream enables Video Saliency
Prediction (VSP) to imitate the selective attention mechanism of human brain. By focusing on the benefits of
joint auditory and visual information, most VSP methods
are capable of exploiting semantic correlation between vision and audio modalities but ignoring the negative effects
due to the temporal inconsistency of audio-visual intrinsics.
Inspired by the biological inconsistency-correction within
multi-sensory information, in this study, a consistencyaware audio-visual saliency prediction network (CASPNet) is proposed, which takes a comprehensive consideration of the audio-visual semantic interaction and consistent
perception. In addition a two-stream encoder for elegant
association between video frames and corresponding sound
source, a novel consistency-aware predictive coding is also
designed to improve the consistency within audio and visual representations iteratively. To further aggregate the
multi-scale audio-visual information, a saliency decoder is
introduced for the final saliency map generation. Substantial experiments demonstrate that the proposed CASP-Net
outperforms the other state-of-the-art methods on six challenging audio-visual eye-tracking datasets. For a demo of
our system please see our project webpage.

1. Introduction
The task of saliency prediction is to automatically estimate the most prominent area in a scenario by simulating
human selective attention. It has been extended to an alternative way to extract the most valuable information from
a massive of data, which serves wide applications such as
robotic camera control [7], video captioning [35], motion
tracking [30], image quality evaluation [50] and video compression [51], etc.
In recent years, a lot of saliency prediction works have
been developed by their increasing attention [4, 15, 41–43,
* Indicates equal contributions.
† Corresponding author: zh0036ng@nwpu.edu.cn.

Consistent

Consistent

Inconsistent

Consistent

visual

⋯

⋯

⋯

audio

Time

GT

Ours

⋯

⋯

⋯

STAViS

Figure 1. The example figure shows the saliency results of our
model compared to STAViS [39] in audio and video temporal sequences. In the last time segment, the audio information that occurs in the event is inconsistent with the visual information. Our
method can cope with such challenge by automatically learning to
align the audio-visual features. The results of STAViS, however,
show that it is incapable to address the problem of audio-visual
inconsistency. GT denotes ground truth.

49]. According to different data types, these studies can be
categorized into Image Saliency Prediction (ISP) and Video
Saliency Prediction (VSP). The ISP investigates how to
combine the low-level heuristic characteristics (e.g., colour,
texture and luminance) with high-level semantic image attributes to predict prominent areas in the scene [15, 41, 42].
Differently, VSP exploits how to apply the spatio-temporal
structure information in videos, and benefits the perception
and identification of dynamic scenes [4, 49].
From the view of data modalities, the vision and audio present the video content from different sensing, which
complement each other to enhance the perception. Based
on multi-modal data, more recent studies have that audio
information can significantly improve the understanding of
the video semantics [33, 37, 39]. Min et al. [33] conduct
a cross-modal kernel canonical correlation analysis (CCA)

6441

