This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StructVPR: Distill Structural Knowledge with Weighting Samples
for Visual Place Recognition
Yanqing Shen Sanping Zhou Jingwen Fu Ruotong Wang Shitao Chen Nanning Zheng*†
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Query

Abstract
Visual place recognition (VPR) is usually considered
as a specific image retrieval problem. Limited by existing
training frameworks, most deep learning-based works cannot extract sufficiently stable global features from RGB images and rely on a time-consuming re-ranking step to exploit spatial structural information for better performance.
In this paper, we propose StructVPR, a novel training architecture for VPR, to enhance structural knowledge in RGB
global features and thus improve feature stability in a constantly changing environment. Specifically, StructVPR uses
segmentation images as a more definitive source of structural knowledge input into a CNN network and applies
knowledge distillation to avoid online segmentation and inference of seg-branch in testing. Considering that not all
samples contain high-quality and helpful knowledge, and
some even hurt the performance of distillation, we partition
samples and weigh each sample’s distillation loss to enhance the expected knowledge precisely. Finally, StructVPR
achieves impressive performance on several benchmarks
using only global retrieval and even outperforms many twostage approaches by a large margin. After adding additional re-ranking, ours achieves state-of-the-art performance while maintaining a low computational cost.

1. Introduction
Visual place recognition (VPR) is a critical task in autonomous driving and robotics, and researchers usually regard it as an image retrieval problem [28, 30, 54]. Given
a query RGB image from a robot, VPR aims to determine
whether the robot has been to this place before and to identify the corresponding images from a database. Extreme
environmental variations are challenging to methods, especially long-term changes (seasons, illumination, vegetation)
* Corresponding author.
† Supported by National Science Foundation of China (No. 62088102).

GT

Query

GT

Rank=4

Rank=1

Rank=1

Rank=5

(a) SEG is better than RGB

(b) RGB is better than SEG

Figure 1. Examples of query images and ground truths. The
marked number represents the recall performance of two pretrained branches on ground truths. (a) shows the scene with illumination variation and seasonal changes, where segmentation
images are more recognizable. (b) shows the scene with changing
perspectives, where RGB images are more recognizable.

and dynamic occlusions. Therefore, learning discriminative
and robust features is essential to distinguish places.
There has been a commonly used two-stage strategy
that retrieves candidates with global features and then reranks them through local descriptor matching, where reranking is time- and resource-consuming but dramatically
improves the recall performance. The improvement is because geometric verification based on local features provides rich and explicit structural information, which has
stronger robustness to VPR than appearance information in
some aspects, such as shape, edge [3], spatial layout, and
category [13]. Considering that segmentation (SEG) images have rich structural information, we tried some empirical studies using RGB and SEG as network input for VPR.
We find that these two modalities have their advantages and
disadvantages at the sample level, which means that better
performance can be achieved if both modalities are appropriately fused. As Figure 1 shows, both modalities have
specific cases they are better at recognizing.
Based on the above discussion, we attempt to use the
SEG modality to enhance structural knowledge in global
RGB feature representation, achieving comparable performance to re-ranking while maintaining low computational

11217

