This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Poly-PC: A Polyhedral Network for Multiple Point Cloud Tasks at Once
Tao Xie1,3 Shiguang Wang2,3 Ke Wang1 Linqi Yang1 Zhiqiang Jiang1
Xingcheng Zhang3 Kun Dai1 Ruifeng Li1 * Jian Cheng2
1

Harbin Institute of Technology

2

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

3

SenseTime Research

{xietao1997, wangke, nana07, jzq, daikun, lrf100}@hit.edu.cn
{wangshiguang, chenjian}@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we show that it is feasible to perform multiple tasks concurrently on point cloud with a straightforward
yet effective multi-task network. Our framework, Poly-PC,
tackles the inherent obstacles (e.g., different model architectures caused by task bias and conflicting gradients caused
by multiple dataset domains, etc.) of multi-task learning on
point cloud. Specifically, we propose a residual set abstraction (Res-SA) layer for efficient and effective scaling in both
width and depth of the network, hence accommodating the
needs of various tasks. We develop a weight-entanglementbased one-shot NAS technique to find optimal architectures for all tasks. Moreover, such technique entangles the
weights of multiple tasks in each layer to offer task-shared
parameters for efficient storage deployment while providing
ancillary task-specific parameters for learning task-related
features. Finally, to facilitate the training of Poly-PC, we
introduce a task-prioritization-based gradient balance algorithm that leverages task prioritization to reconcile conflicting gradients, ensuring high performance for all tasks.
Benefiting from the suggested techniques, models optimized
by Poly-PC collectively for all tasks keep fewer total FLOPs
and parameters and outperform previous methods. We also
demonstrate that Poly-PC allows incremental learning and
evades catastrophic forgetting when tuned to a new task.

1. Introduction
With the advances in deep learning, modern architectures offer tremendous improvements in 3D understanding [29, 36, 39, 54], e.g., point classification, segmentation,
and detection, etc. Nevertheless, these networks are inefficient when handling numerous tasks since they are often
intended to accomplish a single task. Even if parallel computing can address this issue, the memory footprints and
storage costs grow linearly with the number of networks,
* Corresponding author.

{zhangxingcheng}@sensetime.com

rendering them unaffordable with constrained resources.
Multitask learning (MTL) [3, 12, 13] offers a solution to
this difficulty. In vision tasks, MTL models have been predominantly proposed to simultaneously perform depth estimation, surface normal estimation, and semantic segmentation on an input image [14, 19, 52]. Besides, the joint partof-speech tagging, chunking, and named-entity recognition
for Natural Language Processing (NLP) have also been investigated [8, 9]. Since a substantial piece of the network
(i.e., the backbone) is shared among tasks, an MTL model
offers benefits in terms of complexity, inference time, and
learning efficiency. However, training multiple tasks for
point cloud poses two key challenges:
1) In contrast to common vision tasks, where a backbone
that performs well on image classification can be directly
ported to other tasks, the backbone for point cloud tasks
must be carefully developed. Consequently, it is not feasible
for all point cloud tasks to directly share a single backbone.
2) Instead of using a multi-task dataset as input, we seek
to jointly perform multiple tasks on point cloud with multiple dataset domains as input. Thus, in such a circumstance, multi-task learning would result in considerable disparities in directions and magnitude of different task gradients, a phenomenon known as task interference or negative
transfer [34]. Meanwhile, task difficulty induced by multiple dataset domains is also different, so task prioritization
should be considered to prevent placing undue emphasis on
easier tasks when optimizing the multi-task network.
To address the first challenge, we introduce residual set
abstraction (Res-SA) layer, a scalable point feature learning
module that can adapt to requirements for a variety of tasks
in terms of width and depth of the network. Simultaneously, when multiple tasks are presented to us, to reduce the
manpower loss caused by manually designing the network,
we seek to find the optimal architecture for each task using neural network search (NAS). Thus, we construct different search spaces (neighbour points number, group radius,
width, and depth, etc.) for multiple tasks on Res-SA. Then,
inspired by AutoFormer [4], BigNAS [49] and slimmable

1233

