This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RUST: Latent Neural Scene Representations from Unposed Imagery
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi* Aravindh Mahendran Thomas Kipf
Etienne Pot Daniel Duckworth Mario Lučić Klaus Greff
Google Research, Brain Team
Abstract
Inferring the structure of 3D scenes from 2D observations
is a fundamental challenge in computer vision. Recently popularized approaches based on neural scene representations
have achieved tremendous impact and have been applied
across a variety of applications. One of the major remaining
challenges in this space is training a single model which can
provide latent representations which effectively generalize
beyond a single scene. Scene Representation Transformer
(SRT) has shown promise in this direction, but scaling it to a
larger set of diverse scenes is challenging and necessitates
accurately posed ground truth data. To address this problem,
we propose RUST (Really Unposed Scene representation
Transformer), a pose-free approach to novel view synthesis
trained on RGB images alone. Our main insight is that one
can train a Pose Encoder that peeks at the target image and
learns a latent pose embedding which is used by the decoder
for view synthesis. We perform an empirical investigation
into the learned latent pose structure and show that it allows
meaningful test-time camera transformations and accurate
explicit pose readouts. Perhaps surprisingly, RUST achieves
similar quality as methods which have access to perfect
camera pose, thereby unlocking the potential for large-scale
training of amortized neural scene representations.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations have shown remarkable
ability in capturing the 3D structure of complex real-world
scenes while circumventing many of the downsides of mesh
based, point cloud based, and voxel grid based representations [24]. Apart from visually pleasing novel view syn* Correspondence: rust@msajjadi.com. Project page: rust-paper.github.io.

Contributions: MS: Conception, model design, implementation lead, analysis, infrastructure, experiments, writing, project lead. AM: Conception,
model design, implementation, code reviews, experiments-MSN, analysisMSN, writing. TK: RUST explicit pose estimation, model figures, scoping,
advising, writing. EP: GNeRF experiments, Street View dataset, interactive visualization for embedding inspection. DD: COLMAP experiments,
evaluation. ML: Team buy-in, scoping, writing. KG: Conception, early
MSN analysis, analysis-SV, data-collection and analysis, dataset generation, visualizations, scoping, advising, writing.

Figure 1. Model overview – RUST produces 3D-centric scene
representations through novel view synthesis purely from RGB
images without requiring any camera poses. For training, a novel
Pose Estimator module glimpses at the target view and passes a
low-dimensional latent pose feature to the decoder.

thesis [14, 16], such representations have shown potential
for semantics [25], object decomposition [21], and physics
simulation [2] which makes them promising candidates for
applications in augmented reality and robotics. However,
to be useful in such applications, they need to (1) provide
meaningful representations when conditioned on a very limited number of views, (2) have low latency for real-time
rendering, and (3) produce scene representations that facilitate generalization of knowledge to novel views and scenes.
The recently proposed Scene Representation Transformer
(SRT) [22] exhibits most of these properties. It achieves
state-of-the-art novel view synthesis in the regime when only
a handful of posed input views are available, and produces
representations that are well-suited for later segmentation
at both semantic [22] and instance level [21]. A major challenge in scaling methods such as SRT, however, is the difficulty in obtaining accurately posed real world data which
precludes the training of the models. We posit that it should
be possible to train truly pose-free models from RGB images
alone without requiring any ground truth pose information.
We propose RUST (Really Unposed Scene representation
Transformer), a novel method for neural scene representation
learning through novel view synthesis that does not require
pose information: neither for training, nor for inference;
neither for input views, nor for target views. While at first

17297

