This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What Can Human Sketches Do for Object Detection?
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury Ayan Kumar Bhunia Aneeshan Sain Subhadeep Koley
Tao Xiang Yi-Zhe Song
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
{p.chowdhury, a.bhunia, a.sain, s.koley, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
CLIP
Sketch

1. Introduction
Sketches have been used from prehistoric times for humans to express and record ideas [35, 76]. The level of expressiveness [28, 41] they carry remains unparalleled today
even in the face of language [14, 82] – recall that moment
that you want to resort to pen and paper (or Zoom White-

Sketch Prompt
CLIP
Photo

Object
Detector

Triplet
Loss

CLIP
Sketch
Sketch Prompt

(c)

Photo Prompt

part aware

Object
Detector

(b)

CLIP
Sketch
Sketch Prompt

Query Sketch

Sketches are highly expressive, inherently capturing subjective and fine-grained visual cues. The exploration of such
innate properties of human sketches has, however, been limited to that of image retrieval. In this paper, for the first
time, we cultivate the expressiveness of sketches but for the
fundamental vision task of object detection. The end result
is a sketch-enabled object detection framework that detects
based on what you sketch – that “zebra” (e.g., one that is
eating the grass) in a herd of zebras (instance-aware detection), and only the part (e.g., “head” of a “zebra”) that
you desire (part-aware detection). We further dictate that
our model works without (i) knowing which category to expect at testing (zero-shot) and (ii) not requiring additional
bounding boxes (as per fully supervised) and class labels
(as per weakly supervised). Instead of devising a model
from the ground up, we show an intuitive synergy between
foundation models (e.g., CLIP) and existing sketch models
build for sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR), which can already elegantly solve the task – CLIP to provide model generalisation, and SBIR to bridge the (sketch→photo) gap.
In particular, we first perform independent prompting on
both sketch and photo branches of an SBIR model to build
highly generalisable sketch and photo encoders on the back
of the generalisation ability of CLIP. We then devise a training paradigm to adapt the learned encoders for object detection, such that the region embeddings of detected boxes
are aligned with the sketch and photo embeddings from
SBIR. Evaluating our framework on standard object detection datasets like PASCAL-VOC and MS-COCO outperforms both supervised (SOD) and weakly-supervised object detectors (WSOD) on zero-shot setups. Project Page:
https:// pinakinathc.github.io/ sketch-detect

instance aware

(a)

Figure 1. We train an object detector using SBIR models. (a)
First, we train an FG-SBIR model using existing sketch–photo
pairs that generalise to unseen categories. (b) To train the object
detector module, we tile multiple object-level photos from SBIR
datasets [75] and use its paired sketch encoding via a pre-trained
sketch encoder to align the region embedding of detected boxes.
(c) Inclusion of sketches for object detection opens several avenues
like detecting a specific object for query sketch (e.g., detect a “zebra” eating grass) or part of an object (e.g., “head” of “zebra”).

board) to sketch down an idea?
Sketch research has also flourished over the past decade
[16, 70, 90, 99], with a whole spectrum of works on traditional tasks such as classification [30] and synthesis [15,
31, 54], and those more sketch-specific such as modelling
visual abstraction [1, 59], style transfer [74] and continuous stroke fitting [17], to cute applications such as turning a
sketch into a photo classifier [5, 37].
The expressiveness of sketches, however, has been only
explored in the form of sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR)
[19, 70, 94], especially the fine-grained [2, 6, 9] variant (FGSBIR). Great strides have been made, with recent systems
already reaching maturity for commercial adaptation [6] –
a great testimony to how cultivating sketch expressiveness
can make a real impact.
In this paper, we ask the question – what can human
sketches do for the fundamental vision tasks of object detection? The envisaged outcome is, therefore, a sketch-enabled
object detection framework that detects based on what you
sketch, i.e., how you want to express yourself. Sketching
a “zebra eating the grass” (in Fig. 1) should detect “that”

15083

