This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-aware Conditional Image Synthesis
Kangle Deng

GT View

Gengshan Yang Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University
Novel View

Input Seg Map

Jun-Yan Zhu

GT View

Novel View

Input Seg Map

Novel View

GT View
Input Edge Map

GT View

Novel View

Input Edge Map

Figure 1. Given a 2D label map as input, such as a segmentation or edge map, our model learns to predict high-quality 3D labels, geometry,
and appearance, which enables us to render both labels and RGB images from different viewpoints. The inferred 3D labels further allow
interactive editing of label maps from any viewpoint, as shown in Figure 10.

Abstract
We propose pix2pix3D, a 3D-aware conditional generative model for controllable photorealistic image synthesis.
Given a 2D label map, such as a segmentation or edge map,
our model learns to synthesize a corresponding image from
different viewpoints. To enable explicit 3D user control, we
extend conditional generative models with neural radiance
fields. Given widely-available posed monocular image and
label map pairs, our model learns to assign a label to every
3D point in addition to color and density, which enables it
to render the image and pixel-aligned label map simultaneously. Finally, we build an interactive system that allows
users to edit the label map from different viewpoints and
generate outputs accordingly.

1. Introduction
Content creation with generative models has witnessed
tremendous progress in recent years, enabling high-quality,

user-controllable image and video synthesis [19, 20, 24, 34].
In particular, image-to-image translation methods [29,56,84]
allow users to interactively create and manipulate a highresolution image given a 2D input label map. Unfortunately,
existing image-to-image translation methods operate purely
in 2D, without explicit reasoning of the underlying 3D structure of the content. As shown in Figure 1, we aim to make
conditional image synthesis 3D-aware, allowing not only
3D content generation but also viewpoint manipulation and
attribute editing (e.g., car shape) in 3D.
Synthesizing 3D content conditioned on user input is
challenging. For model training, it is costly to obtain largescale datasets with paired user inputs and their desired 3D
outputs. During test time, 3D content creation often requires
multi-view user inputs, as a user may want to specify the
details of 3D objects using 2D interfaces from different
viewpoints. However, these inputs may not be 3D-consistent,
providing conflicting signals for 3D content creation.
To address the above challenges, we extend conditional
generative models with 3D neural scene representations. To

4434

