This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PartSLIP: Low-Shot Part Segmentation for 3D Point Clouds via Pretrained
Image-Language Models
Minghua Liu1

Yinhao Zhu2 Hong Cai2 Shizhong Han2 Zhan Ling1
1
UC San Diego 2 Qualcomm AI Research*

Fatih Porikli2

Hao Su1

Figure 1. We propose PartSLIP, a zero/few-shot method for 3D point cloud part segmentation by leveraging pretrained image-language
models. The figure shows text prompts and corresponding semantic segmentation results (zoom in for details). Our method also supports
part-level instance segmentation. See Figure 5 and Figure 7 for more results.

Abstract
Generalizable 3D part segmentation is important but
challenging in vision and robotics. Training deep models
via conventional supervised methods requires large-scale
3D datasets with fine-grained part annotations, which are
costly to collect. This paper explores an alternative way
for low-shot part segmentation of 3D point clouds by leveraging a pretrained image-language model, GLIP, which
achieves superior performance on open-vocabulary 2D detection. We transfer the rich knowledge from 2D to 3D
through GLIP-based part detection on point cloud rendering and a novel 2D-to-3D label lifting algorithm. We
also utilize multi-view 3D priors and few-shot prompt tuning to boost performance significantly. Extensive evaluation on PartNet and PartNet-Mobility datasets shows that
our method enables excellent zero-shot 3D part segmentation. Our few-shot version not only outperforms existing
few-shot approaches by a large margin but also achieves
highly competitive results compared to the fully supervised counterpart. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our
method can be directly applied to iPhone-scanned point
clouds without significant domain gaps.

1. Introduction
Human visual perception can parse objects into parts and
generalize to unseen objects, which is crucial for under* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

standing their structure, semantics, mobility, and functionality. 3D part segmentation plays a critical role in empowering machines with such ability and facilitates a wide range
of applications, such as robotic manipulation, AR/VR, and
shape analysis and synthesis [2, 31, 39, 69].
Recent part-annotated 3D shape datasets [40,67,72] have
promoted advances in designing various data-driven approaches for 3D part segmentation [34, 44, 65, 73]. While
standard supervised training enables these methods to
achieve remarkable results, they often struggle with outof-distribution test shapes (e.g., unseen classes). However, compared to image datasets, these 3D part-annotated
datasets are still orders of magnitude smaller in scale, since
building 3D models and annotating fine-grained 3D object
parts are laborious and time-consuming. It is thus challenging to provide sufficient training data covering all object
categories. For example, the recent PartNet dataset [40]
contains only 24 object categories, far less than what an intelligent agent would encounter in the real world.
To design a generalizable 3D part segmentation module, many recent works have focused on the few-shot setting, assuming only a few 3D shapes of each category during training. They design various strategies to learn better
representations, and complement vanilla supervised learning [33, 53, 54, 60, 80]. While they show improvements
over the original pipeline, there is still a large gap between
what these models can do and what downstream applica-

Inc.

21736

