This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decentralized Learning with Multi-Headed Distillation
Andrey Zhmoginov

Mark Sandler

Nolan Miller Gus Kristiansen
Google AI
1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy
Mountain View, CA 94043, USA

Max Vladymyrov

{azhmogin,sandler,namiller,gusatb,mxv}@google.com

Abstract
Decentralized learning with private data is a central problem in machine learning. We propose a novel
distillation-based decentralized learning technique that allows multiple agents with private non-iid data to learn from
each other, without having to share their data, weights or
weight updates. Our approach is communication efficient,
utilizes an unlabeled public dataset and uses multiple auxiliary heads for each client, greatly improving training efficiency in the case of heterogeneous data. This approach
allows individual models to preserve and enhance performance on their private tasks while also dramatically improving their performance on the global aggregated data
distribution. We study the effects of data and model architecture heterogeneity and the impact of the underlying communication graph topology on learning efficiency and show
that our agents can significantly improve their performance
compared to learning in isolation.

1. Introduction
Supervised training of large models historically relied on
access to massive amounts of labeled data. Unfortunately,
since data collection and labeling are very time-consuming,
curating new high-quality datasets remains expensive and
practitioners are frequently forced to get by with a limited
set of available labeled datasets. Recently it has been proposed to circumvent this issue by utilizing the existence of
large amounts of siloed private information. Algorithms capable of training models on the entire available data without having a direct access to private information have been
developed with Federated Learning approaches [24] taking
the leading role.
While very effective in large-scale distributed environments, more canonical techniques based on federated averaging, have several noticeable drawbacks. First, gradient aggregation requires individual models to have fully
compatible weight spaces and thus identical architectures.
While this condition may not be difficult to satisfy for suf-

"Public" Dataset
Client 1

Client 2

Distillation
on "Public" DS

Client 3

Distillation
on "Public" DS

Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of a distillation in a distributed
system. Clients use a public dataset to distill knowledge from
other clients, each having their primary private dataset. Individual clients may have different architectures and different objective
functions.

ficiently small models trained across devices with compatible hardware limitations, this restriction may be disadvantageous in a more general setting, where some participant
hardware can be significantly more powerful than the others. Secondly, federated averaging methods are generally
trained in a centralized fashion. Among other things, this
prohibits the use of complex distributed communication
patterns and implies that different groups of clients cannot
generally be trained in isolation from each other for prolonged periods of time.
Another branch of learning methods suitable for distributed model training on private data are those based on
distillation [3, 6, 15]. Instead of synchronizing the inner
states of the models, such methods use outputs or intermediate representations of the models to exchange the information. The source of data for computing exchanged model
predictions is generally assumed to be provided in the form
of publicly available datasets [12] that do not have to be annotated since the source of annotation can come from other
models in the ensemble (see Figure 1). One interesting interpretation of model distillation is to view it as a way of using queries from the public dataset to indirectly gather information about the weights of the network (see Appendix A).

8053

