This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VisFusion: Visibility-aware Online 3D Scene Reconstruction from Videos
Huiyu Gao, Wei Mao, Miaomiao Liu
Australian National University
{huiyu.gao, wei.mao, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au

Ground truth

NeuralRecon [26]

Ours

Figure 1. The 3D reconstruction by NeuralRecon [26] and the proposed method. Our method reconstructs the scene with more fine details.

Abstract
We propose VisFusion, a visibility-aware online 3D
scene reconstruction approach from posed monocular
videos. In particular, we aim to reconstruct the scene from
volumetric features. Unlike previous reconstruction methods which aggregate features for each voxel from input
views without considering its visibility, we aim to improve
the feature fusion by explicitly inferring its visibility from
a similarity matrix, computed from its projected features in
each image pair. Following previous works, our model is
a coarse-to-fine pipeline including a volume sparsification
process. Different from their works which sparsify voxels
globally with a fixed occupancy threshold, we perform the
sparsification on a local feature volume along each visual
ray to preserve at least one voxel per ray for more fine details. The sparse local volume is then fused with a global
one for online reconstruction. We further propose to predict TSDF in a coarse-to-fine manner by learning its residuals across scales leading to better TSDF predictions. Experimental results on benchmarks show that our method
can achieve superior performance with more scene details.
Code is available at: https://github.com/huiyugao/VisFusion

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction from RGB videos is a critical
task in 3D computer vision, which finds its broad appli-

cations in augmented reality (AR), robot navigation and
human-robot interaction. These applications require accurate, complete and real-time 3D reconstruction of scenes.
While state-of-the-art SLAM systems [3, 31] can track the
camera motion accurately by leveraging both visual and inertial measurements in an unknown environment, the reconstructed map from a SLAM system only contains sparse
point clouds such that dense reconstruction from monocular
videos remains as a challenging problem.
Many previous methods [1, 18] assume the observation
of the whole video sequence for the reconstruction, which is
not practical for online applications like VR games. In this
paper, we follow [26] to propose an online 3D reconstruction method. Given input images, most earlier 3D reconstruction methods [23,35] adopt a two-stage pipeline, which
first estimates the depth map for each keyframe based on
multi-view stereo (MVS) algorithms [11,14,29,32] and then
fuses the estimated depth maps into a Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF) volume [19]. The Marching Cubes
algorithm [16] is then used to extract the 3D mesh. However, those two-stage pipelines struggle to produce globally coherent reconstruction since each depth map is estimated separately [26], especially for low texture regions
like walls whose depth values are extremely hard to estimate with only several local views. To address this, more
recent works [2,26,33] propose to fuse image features into a
global 3D volume and directly regress TSDF [26, 33] or occupancy [2] given the feature volume. Such strategy allows
for an end-to-end global surface reconstruction.

17317

