This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modernizing Old Photos Using Multiple References
via Photorealistic Style Transfer
Agus Gunawan1

Soo Ye Kim1,2 * Hyeonjun Sim1† Jae-Ho Lee3
1
KAIST 2 Adobe Research 3 ETRI

{agusgun, flhy5836, mkimee}@kaist.ac.kr

sooyek@adobe.com

Munchurl Kim1‡

jhlee3@etri.re.kr

Old photo

References

Old photo

References

Old photo

References

Old photo

References

OPR [41]

Ours

OPR [41]

Ours

OPR [41]

Ours

OPR [41]

Ours

Figure 1. The results of old photo modernization produced by our method. Our method is able to generate more modern-looking images
that resemble the style of input reference images without the use of old photos during training.

Abstract
This paper firstly presents old photo modernization using multiple references by performing stylization and enhancement in a unified manner. In order to modernize old
photos, we propose a novel multi-reference-based old photo
modernization (MROPM) framework consisting of a network MROPM-Net and a novel synthetic data generation
scheme. MROPM-Net stylizes old photos using multiple references via photorealistic style transfer (PST) and further
enhances the results to produce modern-looking images.
Meanwhile, the synthetic data generation scheme trains the
network to effectively utilize multiple references to perform
modernization. To evaluate the performance, we propose a
new old photos benchmark dataset (CHD) consisting of diverse natural indoor and outdoor scenes. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method outperforms other
baselines in performing modernization on real old photos,
even though no old photos were used during training. Moreover, our method can appropriately select styles from multiple references for each semantic region in the old photo to
further improve the modernization performance.

* Soo Ye Kim is currently affiliated with Adobe Research.
† Hyeonjun Sim is currently affiliated with Qualcomm.
‡ Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Old photos taken a long time ago may contain important information that carry cultural and heritage values, e.g.,
photos of Queen Elizabeth II’s coronation. Such old images may contain multiple degradations, e.g., scratches, and
old photo artifacts, e.g., color fading, often preventing people from understanding the scene. To restore these images,
a skilled expert needs to perform laborious manual processes such as degradation restoration and modernization,
i.e., colorization or enhancement, to make them look modern [44]. Consequently, early studies [8, 39] try to restore
damaged old photos automatically by using traditional inpainting techniques. However, solely re-synthesizing damaged regions in the image is inadequate to ensure old photos
look modern, as the overall style remains similar.
Recent work [28] formulates the task as time-travel
rephotography which aims to translate old photos into a
modern photos space. The authors considered a multitask problem consisting of two main tasks: (i) restoration of old photos with both unstructured (noise, blur) and
structured (scratch, crack) degradations; (ii) modernization
which aims to change old photos’ characteristics to look like
modern images, e.g., better color saturation and contrast by
using colorization [28, 48] or enhancement [42]. However,
simply using an enhancement method [42] fails to modernize old photos, as shown in Fig. 1, since the overall look

12460

