This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MotionTrack: Learning Robust Short-term and Long-term Motions
for Multi-Object Tracking
Zheng Qin1† Sanping Zhou1† Le Wang1∗ Jinghai Duan2 Gang Hua3 Wei Tang4
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Wormpex AI Research 4 University of Illinois at Chicago

Abstract
The main challenge of Multi-Object Tracking (MOT)
lies in maintaining a continuous trajectory for each target. Existing methods often learn reliable motion patterns to match the same target between adjacent frames
and discriminative appearance features to re-identify the
lost targets after a long period. However, the reliability
of motion prediction and the discriminability of appearances can be easily hurt by dense crowds and extreme occlusions in the tracking process. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective multi-object tracker, i.e., MotionTrack, which learns robust short-term and long-term
motions in a unified framework to associate trajectories
from a short to long range. For dense crowds, we design
a novel Interaction Module to learn interaction-aware motions from short-term trajectories, which can estimate the
complex movement of each target. For extreme occlusions,
we build a novel Refind Module to learn reliable longterm motions from the target’s history trajectory, which
can link the interrupted trajectory with its corresponding detection. Our Interaction Module and Refind Module are embedded in the well-known tracking-by-detection
paradigm, which can work in tandem to maintain superior
performance. Extensive experimental results on MOT17
and MOT20 datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
approach in challenging scenarios, and it achieves stateof-the-art performances at various MOT metrics. Code is
available at https://github.com/qwomeng/MotionTrack.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in
computer vision, which has a wide range of applications,
† Co-first authors. ∗ Corresponding author.

Video sequence

Target

(a)

Tracked trajectory

Occluded trajectory

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of challenging scenarios in different
videos. (a) Dense crowds. Pedestrians do not move independently
in this situation. They will be affected by their surrounding neighbors to avoid collisions which will make their motion patterns hard
to learn in practice. (b) Extreme occlusion. Pedestrians are easily occluded by fixed facilities for a long period, such as billboard
and sunshade, in which the dynamic environment will make them
undergone a large appearance variation.

such as autonomous driving [8] and intelligent surveillance [29]. It aims at jointly locating targets through bounding boxes and recognizing their identities throughout a
whole video [40]. Though great progress has been made
in the past few years, MOT still remains a challenging task
due to the dynamic environment, such as dense crowds and
extreme occlusions, in the tracking scenario.
In general, the existing MOT methods either follow the
tracking-by-detection [2] or tracking-by-regression [39, 40,
59], paradigm. The former methods first detect objects in
each video frame and then associate detections between adjacent frames to create individual object tracks over time.
The latter methods conduct tracking differently: the object detector not only provides frame-wise detections but
also replaces the data association with a continuous regression of each tracklet to its new position. Regardless of the

17939

