This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EditableNeRF: Editing Topologically Varying Neural Radiance Fields
by Key Points
Chengwei Zheng
Wenbin Lin
Feng Xu
School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University
(a) Input Sequence

(b) Reconstruction

EditableNeRF
Training

Knocking on each piano key

(c) Editing Results

Editing by
Key Points

Playing a piece of music

Novel view (key point)

EditableNeRF
Training

Shaking and lifting either cup
(one moves, the other stands)

Sliding on the piano keys

Editing by
Key Points

Novel view (2 key points)

Freely moving for two dice cups

Figure 1. Taking an image sequence (a) as input, EditableNeRF is trained fully automatically to reconstruct the captured scene (b) and can
handle topological changes. After training, end-users are able to edit the scene (c) by controlling the automatically picked-out key points
(circled in green in (b)). Our method enables multi-dimensional editing and can generate novel scenes that are unseen during training.

Abstract
Neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF) achieve highly photorealistic novel-view synthesis, but it’s a challenging problem to edit the scenes modeled by NeRF-based methods, especially for dynamic scenes. We propose editable neural
radiance ﬁelds that enable end-users to easily edit dynamic
scenes and even support topological changes. Input with
an image sequence from a single camera, our network is
trained fully automatically and models topologically varying dynamics using our picked-out surface key points. Then
end-users can edit the scene by easily dragging the key
points to desired new positions. To achieve this, we propose
a scene analysis method to detect and initialize key points
by considering the dynamics in the scene, and a weighted
key points strategy to model topologically varying dynamics
by joint key points and weights optimization. Our method
supports intuitive multi-dimensional (up to 3D) editing and
can generate novel scenes that are unseen in the input sequence. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
high-quality editing on various dynamic scenes and outperforms the state-of-the-art. Our code and captured data are

available at https://chengwei-zheng.github.
io/EditableNeRF/.

1. Introduction
Neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF) [23] have shown great
power in novel-view synthesis and enable many applications as this method achieves photo-realistic rendering [9].
Recent techniques have further improved NeRF by extending it to handle dynamic scenes [27, 30, 40] and even topologically varying scenes [28]. However, these works mainly
focus on reconstruction itself but do not consider scene editing. Thus, for rendering, only the camera views can be
changed, while the modeled scenes cannot be edited.
Recently, some frameworks have been proposed to make
neural radiance ﬁelds editable in different aspects. Some of
them aim to edit the reconstructed appearance and enable
relighting [2, 35, 54]; some allow controlling the shapes and
colors of objects from a speciﬁc category [15, 20, 44, 47];
and some divide the scene into different parts and the location of each part can be modiﬁed [48, 49, 52]. However, the

8317

