This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NIPQ: Noise proxy-based Integrated Pseudo-Quantization
Juncheol Shin* 2 , Junhyuk So* 1 , Sein Park2 , Seungyeop Kang3 , Sungjoo Yoo3 , and Eunhyeok Park1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
{jchshin, junhyukso, seinpark, eh.park}@postech.ac.kr, {ksy8653, yeonbin}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Forward Function
Backward Function

Straight-through estimator (STE), which enables the
gradient flow over the non-differentiable function via
approximation, has been favored in studies related to
quantization-aware training (QAT). However, STE incurs
unstable convergence during QAT, resulting in notable
quality degradation in low precision. Recently, pseudoquantization training has been proposed as an alternative
approach to updating the learnable parameters using the
pseudo-quantization noise instead of STE. In this study,
we propose a novel noise proxy-based integrated pseudoquantization (NIPQ) that enables unified support of pseudoquantization for both activation and weight by integrating
the idea of truncation on the pseudo-quantization framework. NIPQ updates all of the quantization parameters
(e.g., bit-width and truncation boundary) as well as the network parameters via gradient descent without STE instability. According to our extensive experiments, NIPQ outperforms existing quantization algorithms in various vision
and language applications by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Neural network quantization is a representative optimization technique that reduces the memory footprint by
storing the activation and weight in a low-precision domain. In addition, when hardware acceleration is available
(e.g., low-precision arithmetics [30, 41, 43, 48] or bit-serial
operations [14, 18, 42]), it also brings a substantial performance boost. These advantages make network inference
affordable in large-scale servers as well as embedded devices [2, 32], which has helped popularize it in various applications. However, quantization has a critical disadvantage, quality degradation due to limited degrees of freedom.
* Equal contribution.

Δ

Straight-through Estimator

Quantization-aware Training
Weight

Weight
Δ⋅

Pseudo
Quantization
Noise

Activation

Noise Proxy

Activation

Full-precision

Pseudo-quantization Training

Low-precision

Figure 1. The proposed NIPQ as an alternative to QAT with STE.

The way to train the networks accurately within limited precision is critical and receiving much attention these days.
To mitigate the accuracy degradation, quantizationaware training (QAT) has emerged that trains a neural network with quantization operators to adapt to low precision.
While the quantization operator is not differentiable, the
straight-through estimator (STE) [5] allows the backpropagation of the quantized data based on linear approximation [19, 51]. This approximation works well in redundant
networks with moderate precision (>4-bit). Thus, not only
early studies [9, 34, 51] but also advanced ones [8, 16, 46]
have proposed diverse QAT schemes based on STE and
shown that popular neural networks (i.e., ResNet-18 [20])
can be quantized into 4-bit without accuracy loss.
However, STE-based QAT bypasses the approximated
gradient, not the true gradient, and many studies have
pointed out that it can incur instability and bias during training [19,28,29,31,35,39]. For instance, PROFIT [31] points
out that the instability is a major source of accuracy drop
for the optimized networks (e.g., MobileNet-v2/v3 [22,36]).
More recently, an alternative training scheme, pseudoquantization training (PQT) based on pseudo-quantization

3852

