This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP2Scene: Towards Label-efficient 3D Scene Understanding by CLIP
Runnan Chen1,2
1

Youquan Liu2,3 Lingdong Kong2,4 Xinge Zhu5 Yuexin Ma6
Yuenan Hou2,† Yu Qiao2 Wenping Wang7,†

The University of Hong Kong
5

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

6

3

Hochschule Bremerhaven

ShanghaiTech University

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is fundamental in autonomous
driving, robot navigation, etc [26,28]. Current deep learningSymbol † denotes the corresponding authors.
1 https://github.com/runnanchen/CLIP2Scene.

4

National University of Singapore

Texas A&M University

Semantic-driven Cross-modal Contrastive Learning

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
achieves promising results in 2D zero-shot and few-shot
learning. Despite the impressive performance in 2D, applying CLIP to help the learning in 3D scene understanding
has yet to be explored. In this paper, we make the first
attempt to investigate how CLIP knowledge benefits 3D
scene understanding. We propose CLIP2Scene, a simple
yet effective framework that transfers CLIP knowledge
from 2D image-text pre-trained models to a 3D point cloud
network. We show that the pre-trained 3D network yields
impressive performance on various downstream tasks,
i.e., annotation-free and fine-tuning with labelled data for
semantic segmentation. Specifically, built upon CLIP, we
design a Semantic-driven Cross-modal Contrastive Learning
framework that pre-trains a 3D network via semantic and
spatial-temporal consistency regularization. For the former,
we first leverage CLIP’s text semantics to select the positive
and negative point samples and then employ the contrastive
loss to train the 3D network. In terms of the latter, we
force the consistency between the temporally coherent point
cloud features and their corresponding image features. We
conduct experiments on SemanticKITTI, nuScenes, and
ScanNet. For the first time, our pre-trained network achieves
annotation-free 3D semantic segmentation with 20.8% and
25.08% mIoU on nuScenes and ScanNet, respectively. When
fine-tuned with 1% or 100% labelled data, our method
significantly outperforms other self-supervised methods,
with improvements of 8% and 1% mIoU, respectively.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the generalizability for
handling cross-domain datasets. Code is publicly available1 .

7

Yikang Li2

Annotation-free

How CLIP benefits
3D scene
understanding?

car

1% annotation
CLIP2Scene

CLIP
car, bus
pedestrian

100% annotation

Text
Encoder
Image
Encoder

Semantic and
Spatial-Temporal
Consistency
Regularization

Figure 1. We explore how CLIP knowledge benefits 3D scene
understanding. To this end, we propose CLIP2Scene, a Semanticdriven Cross-modal Contrastive Learning framework that leverages
CLIP knowledge to pre-train a 3D point cloud segmentation network via semantic and spatial-temporal consistency regularization.
CLIP2Scene yields impressive performance on annotation-free 3D
semantic segmentation and significantly outperforms other selfsupervised methods when fine-tuning on annotated data.

based methods have shown inspirational performance on 3D
point cloud data [15, 32, 33, 38, 47, 56, 62]. However, some
drawbacks hinder their real-world applications. The first
one comes from their heavy reliance on the large collection
of annotated point clouds, especially when high-quality 3D
annotations are expensive to acquire [39,40,44,51]. Besides,
they typically fail to recognize novel objects that are never
seen in the training data [11, 45]. As a result, it may need extra annotation efforts to train the model on recognizing these
novel objects, which is both tedious and time-consuming.
Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training (CLIP) [48]
provides a new perspective that mitigates the above issues
in 2D vision. It was trained on large-scale free-available
image-text pairs from websites and built vision-language

7020

