This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Handwritten Text Generation from Visual Archetypes
Vittorio Pippi, Silvia Cascianelli, Rita Cucchiara
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
Via Pietro Vivarelli, 10, Modena (Italy)
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
Generating synthetic images of handwritten text in a
writer-specific style is a challenging task, especially in the
case of unseen styles and new words, and even more when
these latter contain characters that are rarely encountered
during training. While emulating a writer’s style has been
recently addressed by generative models, the generalization
towards rare characters has been disregarded. In this work,
we devise a Transformer-based model for Few-Shot styled
handwritten text generation and focus on obtaining a robust and informative representation of both the text and the
style. In particular, we propose a novel representation of
the textual content as a sequence of dense vectors obtained
from images of symbols written as standard GNU Unifont
glyphs, which can be considered their visual archetypes.
This strategy is more suitable for generating characters
that, despite having been seen rarely during training, possibly share visual details with the frequently observed ones.
As for the style, we obtain a robust representation of unseen
writers’ calligraphy by exploiting specific pre-training on a
large synthetic dataset. Quantitative and qualitative results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal in generating words in unseen styles and with rare characters more
faithfully than existing approaches relying on independent
one-hot encodings of the characters.

1. Introduction
Styled handwritten text generation (HTG) is an emerging research area aimed at producing writer-specific handwritten text images mimicking their calligraphic style [7,
14, 29]. The practical applications of this research topic
range from the synthesis of high-quality training data for
personalized Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) models [5, 6, 8, 27, 28, 48] to the automatic generation of handwritten notes for physically impaired people. Moreover, the
writer-specific style representations that can be obtained as
a by-product of models designed for this task can be applied
to other tasks such as writer identification, signature verifi-

Apollo11

Style examples

Visual archetypes

One-hot vectors

A p o l
l o 1 1
VATr

Style

HWT

Content
Beryl
500
2
Federal

Figure 1. Different from previous approaches that use independent one-hot vectors as input text tokens (e.g., the State-of-the-Art
HWT [7]), we exploit visual archetypes, i.e., geometrically-related
binary images of characters. By resorting to similarities between
the archetypes, we are able to generate both characters that are
rarely seen during training (highlighted in red) and frequently observed ones more faithfully.

cation, and handwriting style manipulation. When focusing on styled handwriting generation, simply adopting style
transfer is limiting. In fact, imitating a specific writer’s calligraphy does not only concern texture (e.g., the color and
texture of background and ink), nor just stroke thickness,
slant, skew, and roundness, but also single characters shape
and ligatures. Moreover, these visual aspects must be handled properly to avoid artifacts that might result in content
change (e.g., even small additional or missing strokes).
In sight of this, specific approaches have been designed
for HTG. The handwriting can be handled in the form
of a trajectory (made of the underlying strokes), as done
in [1, 2, 19, 24, 31], or of an image that captures its appearance, as done in [3,7,11,14–16,20,29,32,35,36,39,43,45].
The former approaches adopt online HTG strategies that entail predicting the pen trajectory point-by-point, while the

22458

