This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text with Knowledge Graph Augmented Transformer for Video Captioning
Xin Gu1,3 , Guang Chen2 , Yufei Wang2 , Libo Zhang3,1 ,* Tiejian Luo1 , Longyin Wen2
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
ByteDance Inc., San Jose, USA
3
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
guxin21@mails.ucas.edu.cn, guang.chen@bytedance.com, yufei.wang@bytedance.com
libo@iscas.ac.cn, tjluo@ucas.ac.cn, longyin.wen@bytedance.com

Abstract
Video captioning aims to describe the content of videos
using natural language. Although significant progress has
been made, there is still much room to improve the performance for real-world applications, mainly due to the
long-tail words challenge. In this paper, we propose a text
with knowledge graph augmented transformer (TextKG) for
video captioning. Notably, TextKG is a two-stream transformer, formed by the external stream and internal stream.
The external stream is designed to absorb additional knowledge, which models the interactions between the additional
knowledge, e.g., pre-built knowledge graph, and the builtin information of videos, e.g., the salient object regions,
speech transcripts, and video captions, to mitigate the longtail words challenge. Meanwhile, the internal stream is designed to exploit the multi-modality information in videos
(e.g., the appearance of video frames, speech transcripts,
and video captions) to ensure the quality of caption results.
In addition, the cross attention mechanism is also used in
between the two streams for sharing information. In this
way, the two streams can help each other for more accurate
results. Extensive experiments conducted on four challenging video captioning datasets, i.e., YouCookII, ActivityNet
Captions, MSR-VTT, and MSVD, demonstrate that the proposed method performs favorably against the state-of-theart methods. Specifically, the proposed TextKG method outperforms the best published results by improving 18.7% absolute CIDEr scores on the YouCookII dataset.

1. Introduction
Video captioning aims to generate a complete and natural sentence to describe video content, which attracts much
* Corresponding author:libo@iscas.ac.cn, Libo Zhang was supported
by Youth Innovation Promotion Association, CAS (2020111).
This work was done during internship at ByteDance Inc.

attention in recent years. Generally, most existing methods [21, 38, 41, 58] require a large amount of paired video
and description data for model training. Several datasets,
such as YouCookII [69], and ActivityNet Captions [19] are
constructed to promote the development of video captioning field. Meanwhile, some methods [29, 40, 48, 72] also
use the large-scale narrated video dataset HowTo100M [30]
to pretrain the captioning model to further improve the accuracy.
Although significant progress has been witnessed, it is
still a challenge for video captioning methods to be applied
in real applications, mainly due to the long-tail issues of
words. Most existing methods [29, 40, 48, 72] attempt to
design powerful neural networks, trained on the large-scale
video-text datasets to make the network learn the relations
between video appearances and descriptions. However, it is
pretty tough for the networks to accurately predict the objects, properties, or behaviors that are infrequently or never
appearing in training data. Some methods [14, 71] attempt
to use knowledge graph to exploit the relations between objects for long-tail challenge in image or video captioning,
which produces promising results.
In this paper, we present a text with knowledge graph
augmented transformer (TextKG), which integrates additional knowledge in knowledge graph and exploits the
multi-modality information in videos to mitigate the longtail words challenge. TextKG is a two-stream transformer,
formed by the external stream and internal stream. The external stream is used to absorb additional knowledge to help
mitigate long-tail words challenge by modeling the interactions between the additional knowledge in pre-built knowledge graph, and the built-in information of videos, such as
the salient object regions in each frame, speech transcripts,
and video captions. Specifically, the information is first retrieved from the pre-built knowledge graphs based on the
detected salient objects. After that, we combine the features
of the retrieved information, the appearance features of detected salient objects, the features of speech transcripts and

18941

