This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Back to the Source:
Diffusion-Driven Adaptation to Test-Time Corruption
Jin Gao*1 , Jialing Zhang∗1 , Xihui Liu3 , Trevor Darrell4 , Evan Shelhamer†5 , Dequan Wang†1,2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 University of California, Berkeley 5 DeepMind

Abstract
Test-time adaptation harnesses test inputs to improve the
accuracy of a model trained on source data when tested
on shifted target data. Most methods update the source
model by (re-)training on each target domain. While retraining can help, it is sensitive to the amount and order
of the data and the hyperparameters for optimization. We
update the target data instead, and project all test inputs toward the source domain with a generative diffusion model.
Our diffusion-driven adaptation (DDA) method shares its
models for classiﬁcation and generation across all domains,
training both on source then freezing them for all targets, to
avoid expensive domain-wise re-training. We augment diffusion with image guidance and classiﬁer self-ensembling
to automatically decide how much to adapt. Input adaptation by DDA is more robust than model adaptation across
a variety of corruptions, models, and data regimes on the
ImageNet-C benchmark. With its input-wise updates, DDA
succeeds where model adaptation degrades on too little
data (small batches), on dependent data (correlated orders),
or on mixed data (multiple corruptions).

1. Introduction
Deep networks achieve state-of-the-art performance for
visual recognition [3,8,25,26], but can still falter when there
is a shift between the source data and the target data for testing [38]. Shift can result from corruption [10, 27]; adversarial attack [7]; or natural shifts between simulation and
reality, different locations and times, and other such differences [17, 36]. To cope with shift, adaptation and robustness techniques update predictions to improve accuracy on
target data. In this work, we consider two fundamental axes
of adaptation: what to adapt—the model or the input—and
how much to adapt—using the update or not. We propose
a test-time input adaptation method driven by a generative
diffusion model to counter shifts due to image corruptions.
* indicates equal contribution, † indicates corresponding author.

The dominant paradigm for adaptation is to train the
model by joint optimization over the source and target [6,13,
44, 53, 54]. However, train-time adaptation faces a crucial
issue: not knowing how the data may differ during testing.
While train-time updates can cope with known shifts, what
if new and different shifts should arise during deployment?
In this case, test-time updates are needed to adapt the model
(1) without the source data and (2) without halting inference.
Source-free adaptation [15, 19, 20, 23, 51, 55] satisﬁes (1) by
re-training the model on new targets without access to the
source. Test-time adaptation [46,51,56,58] satisﬁes (1) and
(2) by iteratively updating the model during inference. Although updating the model can improve robustness, these
updates have their own cost and risk. Model updates may be
too computationally costly, which prevents scaling to many
targets (as each needs its own model), and they may be sensitive to different amounts or orders of target data, which
may result in noisy updates that do not help or even hinder
robustness. In summary, most methods update the source
model, but this does not improve all deployments.
We propose to update the target data instead. Our
diffusion-driven adaptation method, DDA, learns a diffusion model on the source data during training, then projects
inputs from all targets back to the source during testing.
Figure 1 shows how just one source diffusion model enables adaptation on multiple targets. DDA trains a diffusion
model to replace the source data, for source-free adaptation,
and adapts target inputs while making predictions, for testtime adaptation. Figure 2 shows how DDA adapts the input
then applies the source classiﬁer without model updates.
Our experiments compare and contrast input and model
updates on robustness to corruptions. For input updates,
we evaluate and ablate our DDA and compare it to DiffPure [30], the state-of-the-art in diffusion for adversarial
defense. For model updates, we evaluate entropy minimization methods (Tent [56] and MEMO [58]), the stateof-the-art for online and episodic test-time updates, and
BUFR [5], the state-of-the-art for source-free ofﬂine updates. DDA achieves higher robustness than DiffPure and
MEMO across ImageNet-C and helps where Tent degrades

11786

