This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GP-VTON: Towards General Purpose Virtual Try-on via
Collaborative Local-Flow Global-Parsing Learning
Zhenyu Xie1 , Zaiyu Huang1 , Xin Dong2 , Fuwei Zhao1
Haoye Dong3 , Xijin Zhang2 , Feida Zhu2 , Xiaodan Liang∗1,4
1

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 ByteDance
3
Carnegie Mellon University, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory

{xiezhy6,huangzy225,zhaofw}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,donghaoye@cmu.edu
{dongxin.1016,zhangxijin}@bytedance.com,zhufeida@connect.hku.hk,xdliang328@gmail.com

Inputs PF-AFN FS-VTON

Ours

Inputs PF-AFN FS-VTON

Ours

Inputs

Ours

Inputs

Ours

(B)

(A)

Figure 1. Our method (A) outperforms existing SOTA methods (e.g., PF-AFN [12], FS-VTON [19]) on the challenging try-on scenario,
and (B) can be easily extended to multi-category scenario to generate high-resolution photo-realistic try-on results.

Abstract
Image-based Virtual Try-ON aims to transfer an in-shop
garment onto a specific person. Existing methods employ
a global warping module to model the anisotropic deformation for different garment parts, which fails to preserve
the semantic information of different parts when receiving
challenging inputs (e.g, intricate human poses, difficult garments). Moreover, most of them directly warp the input
garment to align with the boundary of the preserved region, which usually requires texture squeezing to meet the
boundary shape constraint and thus leads to texture distortion. The above inferior performance hinders existing
methods from real-world applications. To address these
problems and take a step towards real-world virtual try-on,
we propose a General-Purpose Virtual Try-ON framework,
named GP-VTON, by developing an innovative Local-Flow
Global-Parsing (LFGP) warping module and a Dynamic

Gradient Truncation (DGT) training strategy. Specifically,
compared with the previous global warping mechanism,
LFGP employs local flows to warp garments parts individually, and assembles the local warped results via the global
garment parsing, resulting in reasonable warped parts and
a semantic-correct intact garment even with challenging inputs.On the other hand, our DGT training strategy dynamically truncates the gradient in the overlap area and the
warped garment is no more required to meet the boundary constraint, which effectively avoids the texture squeezing problem. Furthermore, our GP-VTON can be easily
extended to multi-category scenario and jointly trained by
using data from different garment categories. Extensive experiments on two high-resolution benchmarks demonstrate
our superiority over the existing state-of-the-art methods. 1

1 Corresponding author is Xiaodan Liang. Code is available at gp-vton.

23550

