This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NEF: Neural Edge Fields for 3D Parametric Curve Reconstruction
from Multi-view Images
Yunfan Ye

2D Edge Detection

Renjiao Yi Zhirui Gao Chenyang Zhu Zhiping Cai
National University of Defense Technology

Neural Edge Fields

3D Edge Points

Parametric Curves

Kai Xu*

Ground Truth

…

Figure 1. We leverage 2D edge detection to directly acquire 3D edge points by learning a neural implicit field and further reconstructing
3D parametric curves that represent the geometrical shape of the object. We introduce the details about extracting 3D edges from the
proposed Neural Edge Field in 3.1, and the coarse-to-fine optimization strategy to reconstruct parametric curves in 3.2. The whole pipeline
is self-supervised with only 2D supervision.

Abstract
We study the problem of reconstructing 3D feature
curves of an object from a set of calibrated multi-view images. To do so, we learn a neural implicit field representing the density distribution of 3D edges which we refer to as Neural Edge Field (NEF). Inspired by NeRF [20],
NEF is optimized with a view-based rendering loss where
a 2D edge map is rendered at a given view and is compared to the ground-truth edge map extracted from the image of that view. The rendering-based differentiable optimization of NEF fully exploits 2D edge detection, without
needing a supervision of 3D edges, a 3D geometric operator or cross-view edge correspondence. Several technical
designs are devised to ensure learning a range-limited and
view-independent NEF for robust edge extraction. The final parametric 3D curves are extracted from NEF with an
iterative optimization method. On our benchmark with synthetic data, we demonstrate that NEF outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on all metrics. Project page:
https://yunfan1202.github.io/NEF/.

1. Introduction
Feature curves “define” 3D shapes to an extent, not
only geometrically (surface reconstruction from curve networks [15, 16]) but also perceptually (feature curve based
shape perception [4, 35]). Therefore, feature curve extrac*Corresponding author.

tion has been a long-standing problem in both graphics and
vision. Traditional approaches to 3D curve extraction often
work directly on 3D shapes represented by, e.g., polygonal meshes or point clouds. Such approaches come with a
major difficulty: Sharp edges may be partly broken or completely missed due to imperfect 3D acquisition and/or reconstruction. Consequently, geometrically-based methods,
even the state-of-the-art…
ones, are sensitive to parameter settings and error-prune near rounded edges, noise, and sparse
data. Recently, learning-based methods are proposed to address these issues but with limited generality [18,19,33,39].
In many cases, edges are visually prominent and easy to
detect in the 2D images of a 3D shape. To resolve occlusion,
one may think of 3D curve reconstruction from multi-view
edges. This solution, however, relies strongly on cross-view
edge correspondence which itself is a highly difficult problem [28]. This explains why there is rarely a work on multiview curve reconstruction even in the deep learning era. We
ask this question: Can we learn 3D feature curve extraction
directly from the input of multi-view images?
In this work, we try to answer the question through learning a neural implicit field representing the density distribution of 3D edges from a set of calibrated multi-view images, inspired by the recent success of neural radiance field
(NeRF) [20]. We refer to this edge density field as Neural Edge Field (NEF). Similar to NeRF, NEF is optimized
with a view-based rendering loss where a 2D edge map is
rendered at a given view and is compared to the groundtruth edge map extracted from the image of that view. The

8486

