This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NoPe-NeRF: Optimising Neural Radiance Field with No Pose Prior
Wenjing Bian

Zirui Wang
Kejie Li
Jia-Wang Bian
Victor Adrian Prisacariu
Active Vision Lab, University of Oxford

{wenjing, ryan, kejie, jiawang, victor}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Ours

BARF

NeRFmm

SC-NeRF

Figure 1. Novel view synthesis comparison. We propose NoPe-NeRF for joint pose estimation and novel view synthesis. Our method
enables more robust pose estimation and renders better novel view synthesis than previous state-of-the-art methods.

Abstract
Training a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) without precomputed camera poses is challenging. Recent advances
in this direction demonstrate the possibility of jointly optimising a NeRF and camera poses in forward-facing scenes.
However, these methods still face difficulties during dramatic camera movement. We tackle this challenging problem by incorporating undistorted monocular depth priors.
These priors are generated by correcting scale and shift
parameters during training, with which we are then able
to constrain the relative poses between consecutive frames.
This constraint is achieved using our proposed novel loss
functions. Experiments on real-world indoor and outdoor
scenes show that our method can handle challenging camera trajectories and outperforms existing methods in terms
of novel view rendering quality and pose estimation accuracy. Our project page is https://nope- nerf.
active.vision.

1. Introduction
The photo-realistic reconstruction of a scene from a
stream of RGB images requires both accurate 3D geometry

reconstruction and view-dependent appearance modelling.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24] have demonstrated the ability to build high-quality results for generating
photo-realistic images from novel viewpoints given a sparse
set of images.
An important preparation step for NeRF training is the
estimation of camera parameters for the input images. A
current go-to option is the popular Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) library COLMAP [35]. Whilst easy to use, this preprocessing step could be an obstacle to NeRF research and
real-world deployments in the long term due to its long processing time and its lack of differentiability. Recent works
such as NeRFmm [46], BARF [18] and SC-NeRF [12] propose to simultaneously optimise camera poses and the neural implicit representation to address these issues. Nevertheless, these methods can only handle forward-facing scenes
when no initial parameters are supplied, and fail in dramatic
camera motions, e.g.a casual handheld captured video.
This limitation has two key causes. First, all these methods estimate a camera pose for each input image individually without considering relative poses between images.
Looking back to the literature of Simultaneous localisation
and mapping (SLAM) and visual odometry, pose estimation
can significantly benefit from estimating relative poses be-

4160

