This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class Prototypes based Contrastive Learning for Classifying Multi-Label and
Fine-Grained Educational Videos
Rohit Gupta 1 *

Anirban Roy 2

Madeline Cincebeaux 2
1

Claire Christensen 2

Ajay Divakaran 2

Sujeong Kim 2

Todd Grindal 2

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
rohitg@knights.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The recent growth in the consumption of online media
by children during early childhood necessitates data-driven
tools enabling educators to filter out appropriate educational content for young learners. This paper presents an
approach for detecting educational content in online videos.
We focus on two widely used educational content classes:
literacy and math. For each class, we choose prominent
codes (sub-classes) based on the Common Core Standards.
For example, literacy codes include ‘letter names’, ‘letter
sounds’, and math codes include ‘counting’, ‘sorting’. We
pose this as a fine-grained multilabel classification problem
as videos can contain multiple types of educational content
and the content classes can get visually similar (e.g., ‘letter
names’ vs ‘letter sounds’). We propose a novel class prototypes based supervised contrastive learning approach that
can handle fine-grained samples associated with multiple
labels. We learn a class prototype for each class and a loss
function is employed to minimize the distances between a
class prototype and the samples from the class. Similarly,
distances between a class prototype and the samples from
other classes are maximized. As the alignment between visual and audio cues are crucial for effective comprehension, we consider a multimodal transformer network to capture the interaction between visual and audio cues in videos
while learning the embedding for videos. For evaluation,
we present a dataset, APPROVE, employing educational
videos from YouTube labeled with fine-grained education
classes by education researchers. APPROVE consists of
193 hours of expert-annotated videos with 19 classes. The
proposed approach outperforms strong baselines on APPROVE and other benchmarks such as Youtube-8M, and
COIN. The dataset is available at https://nusci.
csl.sri.com/project/APPROVE.

* Work partly done during an internship at SRI International.

Sarah Gerard 2

Mubarak Shah 1
2

SRI International

anirban.roy@sri.com

1. Introduction
With the expansion of internet access and the ubiquitous
availability of smart devices, children increasingly spend a
significant amount of time watching online videos. A recent
nationally representative survey reported that 89% of parents of children aged 11 or younger say their child watches
videos on YouTube [4]. Moreover, it is estimated that young
children in the age range of two to four years consume 2.5
hours and five to eight years consume 3.0 hours per day on
average [45,46]. Childhood is typically a key period for education, especially for learning basic skills such as literacy
and math [20, 25]. Unlike generic online videos, watching appropriate educational videos supports healthy child
development and learning [7, 22, 23]. Thus, analyzing the
content of these videos may help parents, teachers, and media developers increase young children’s exposure to highquality education videos, which has been shown to produce
meaningful learning gains [22]. As the amount of online
content produced grows exponentially, automated content
understanding methods are essential to facilitate this.
In this work, given a video, our goal is to determine
whether the video contains any educational content and
characterize the content. Detecting educational content requires identifying multiple distinct types of content in a
video while distinguishing between similar content types.
The task is challenging as the education codes by Common Core Standards [3, 40] can be similar such as ‘letter
names’ and ‘letter sounds’, where the former focuses on the
name of the letter and the latter is based on the phonetic
sound of the letter. Also, understanding education content
requires analyzing both visual and audio cues simultaneously as both signals are to be present to ensure effective
learning [3, 40]. This is in contrast to standard video classification benchmarks such as the sports or generic YouTube
videos in UCF101 [54] Kinetics400 [53], YouTube-8M [1],
where visual cues are often sufficient to detect the different
classes. Finally, unlike standard well-known action videos,

19923

