This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task Residual for Tuning Vision-Language Models
Tao Yu1,2 * Zhihe Lu1∗ Xin Jin1,2 Zhibo Chen2 Xinchao Wang1†
1
National University of Singapore 2 University of Science and Technology of China
yutao666@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhihelu@nus.edu.sg, jinxustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

66

Large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) pre-trained
on billion-level data have learned general visual representations and broad visual concepts. In principle, the welllearned knowledge structure of the VLMs should be inherited
appropriately when being transferred to downstream tasks
with limited data. However, most existing efficient transfer
learning (ETL) approaches for VLMs either damage or are
excessively biased towards the prior knowledge, e.g., prompt
tuning (PT) discards the pre-trained text-based classifier and
builds a new one while adapter-style tuning (AT) fully relies
on the pre-trained features. To address this, we propose a
new efficient tuning approach for VLMs named Task Residual Tuning (TaskRes), which performs directly on the textbased classifier and explicitly decouples the prior knowledge
of the pre-trained models and new knowledge regarding a
target task. Specifically, TaskRes keeps the original classifier
weights from the VLMs frozen and obtains a new classifier
for the target task by tuning a set of prior-independent parameters as a residual to the original one, which enables reliable prior knowledge preservation and flexible task-specific
knowledge exploration. The proposed TaskRes is simple
yet effective, which significantly outperforms previous ETL
methods (e.g., PT and AT) on 11 benchmark datasets while
requiring minimal effort for the implementation. Our code is
available at https://github.com/geekyutao/TaskRes.

64

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep learning-based visual recognition models [10, 18, 28, 55, 58] have achieved great success.
These state-of-the-art models are often trained on a large
amount of image and discrete label pairs. The discrete label is generated by converting a detailed textual description,
e.g., “American curl cat”, into a simple scalar, which strikingly eases the computation of loss function. However, this
also results in two evident limitations: (i) the rich semantics
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Score (%)

Abstract

62
60

Zero-shot CLIP
CoOp
CLIP-Adapter
Tip-Adapter-F
TaskRes

58
0.0

2.5

1-shot
2-shot
4-shot
8-shot
16-shot

5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
Number of Tunable Parameters (M)

17.5

Figure 1. Performance comparison between Zero-shot CLIP
[49], CoOp [73], CLIP-Adapter [15], Tip-Adapter-F [71] and our
TaskRes on ImageNet with few shot settings.

in the textual description are underused, and (ii) the trained
models are limited to recognizing the close-set classes only.
Recent large-scale vision-language model (VLM) pretraining [1, 23, 33, 49, 69] eliminates those limitations by
learning visual representations via textual supervision. For
instance, texts and images are encoded and mapped into a
unified space via a contrastive loss during pre-training [49].
The pre-trained text encoder can then be used to synthesize
a text-based classifier for image recognition given the corresponding natural language descriptions as shown in Figure 2
(a). Those pre-trained VLMs have demonstrated a powerful
transferability on a variety of downstream tasks in a zero-shot
manner. However, the effectiveness of the aforementioned
models heavily relies on their large-scale architectures and
training datasets. For instance, CLIP [49] has up to 428 million parameters and is trained on 0.4 billion text-image pairs,
while Flamingo [1] boasts up to 80 billion parameters and is
trained on a staggering 2.1 billion pairs. This makes it impractical to fully fine-tune the model on downstream tasks in
a low-data regime.
For that reason, efficient transfer learning (ETL) [15,
71–73] on pre-trained VLMs has gained popularity. ETL
represents transfer learning to downstream tasks in both

10899

