This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Virtual Occlusions Through Implicit Depth
Jamie Watson1,3 Mohamed Sayed1,3 Zawar Qureshi1 Gabriel J. Brostow1,3
Sara Vicente1 Oisin Mac Aodha2 Michael Firman1
1
2
3
Niantic
University of Edinburgh
UCL
https://nianticlabs.github.io/implicit-depth

Abstract
For augmented reality (AR), it is important that virtual
assets appear to ‘sit among’ real world objects. The virtual
element should variously occlude and be occluded by real
matter, based on a plausible depth ordering. This occlusion should be consistent over time as the viewer’s camera
moves. Unfortunately, small mistakes in the estimated scene
depth can ruin the downstream occlusion mask, and thereby
the AR illusion. Especially in real-time settings, depths inferred near boundaries or across time can be inconsistent.
In this paper, we challenge the need for depth-regression as
an intermediate step.
We instead propose an implicit model for depth and use
that to predict the occlusion mask directly. The inputs to
our network are one or more color images, plus the known
depths of any virtual geometry. We show how our occlusion
predictions are more accurate and more temporally stable
than predictions derived from traditional depth-estimation
models. We obtain state-of-the-art occlusion results on the
challenging ScanNetv2 dataset and superior qualitative results on real scenes.

1. Introduction
Augmented reality and digital image editing usually entail compositing virtual rendered objects to look as if they
are present in a real-world scene. A key and elusive
part of making this effect realistic is occlusion. Looking
from a camera’s perspective, a virtual object should appear partially hidden when part of it passes behind a real
world object. In practice this comes down to estimating,
for each pixel, if the final rendering pipeline should display the real world object there vs. showing the virtual object [53, 24, 36].
Typically, this per-pixel decision is approached by first
estimating the depth of each pixel in the real world image
[19, 90, 36]. Obtaining the depth to each pixel on the virtual object is trivial, and can be computed via traditional
graphics pipelines [33]. The final mask can be estimated by

Figure 1. We address the problem of automatically estimating occlusion masks to realistically place virtual objects in real scenes.
Our approach, where we directly predict masks, leads to more accurate compositing compared with Lidar-based sensors or traditional state-of-the-art depth regression methods.

comparing the two depth maps: where the real world depth
value is smaller, the virtual content is occluded, i.e. masked.
We propose an alternative, novel approach. Given images of the real world scene and the depth map of the virtual
assets, our network directly estimates the mask for compositing. The key advantage is that the network no longer
has to estimate the real-valued depth for every pixel, and
instead focuses on the binary decision: is the virtual pixel
in front or behind the real scene here? Further, at inference time we can use the soft output of a sigmoid layer to
softly blend between the real and virtual, which can give
visually pleasing compositions [43], compared with those
created by hard thresholding of depth maps (see Figure 1).
Finally, temporal consistency can be improved using ideas
from temporal semantic segmentation that were difficult to
apply when regressing depth as an intermediate step.

9053

