This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Mesh Generation Through Sparse Latent Point Diffusion Models
Jinyi Wang1,2∗ Yuwei An1,4 Ya Zhang1,2 Dahua Lin1,3 Bo Dai1
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Tsinghua University
lyuzhaoyang@link.cuhk.edu.hk, jinyi.wang@sjtu.edu.cn
anyuwei@pjlab.org.cn, ya zhang@sjtu.edu.cn
dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, daibo@pjlab.org.cn

Zhaoyang Lyu1 *

Abstract
Mesh generation is of great value in various applications involving computer graphics and virtual content, yet
designing generative models for meshes is challenging due
to their irregular data structure and inconsistent topology
of meshes in the same category. In this work, we design a
novel sparse latent point diffusion model for mesh generation. Our key insight is to regard point clouds as an intermediate representation of meshes, and model the distribution of point clouds instead. While meshes can be generated
from point clouds via techniques like Shape as Points (SAP),
the challenges of directly generating meshes can be effectively avoided. To boost the efficiency and controllability
of our mesh generation method, we propose to further encode point clouds to a set of sparse latent points with pointwise semantic meaningful features, where two DDPMs are
trained in the space of sparse latent points to respectively
model the distribution of the latent point positions and features at these latent points. We find that sampling in this
latent space is faster than directly sampling dense point
clouds. Moreover, the sparse latent points also enable us to
explicitly control both the overall structures and local details of the generated meshes. Extensive experiments are
conducted on the ShapeNet dataset, where our proposed
sparse latent point diffusion model achieves superior performance in terms of generation quality and controllability
when compared to existing methods. Project page, code and
appendix: https://slide-3d.github.io.

1. Introduction
Being a fundamental representation of 3D objects in
computer graphics, meshes are widely used in applications
such as VR, AR, and games, and a generative model for
meshes is thus of great value. By representing 3D objects with vertices, edges, and faces, meshes lead to more
* Equal Contribution.

efficient modeling and computation of object geometries.
However, such a specialized design also results in several
intrinsic challenges for generative models. The first one is
the irregular data structure of meshes, where the discrete
vertex connections make it hard to define operations like
convolution and up-sampling on meshes. Moreover, unlike
point clouds and volumes, the topology of meshes is varying across different object instances in the same category.
Therefore template-based methods [11,14,21,34,36,39] can
only obtain meshes obeying the topology of used templates,
causing defects like self-intersection when the deformation
is significant.
Facing these challenges mentioned above, we propose to
generate meshes indirectly via an intermediate representation that is easier to model. Inspired by recent successes of
deep neural networks in modeling the distribution of point
clouds [2, 22, 24, 38, 43] and reconstructing meshes from
point clouds [11, 27], we propose to use point clouds as
an intermediate representation of meshes. Consequently,
the generation of meshes is effectively reformulated as the
generation of point clouds, followed by transforming point
clouds into meshes. Such a reformulation not only enables
us to take advantage of the advances of point cloud generation methods, but also successfully bypasses the aforementioned challenges, as the distribution of point clouds
is continuous and point clouds are unordered sets without
explicit topology. In this paper, we adopt denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [13, 32], demonstrated
promising results in modeling point clouds [22, 24, 43], to
learn the distribution of the point clouds. And Shape as
Points (SAP) [27] is employed to reconstruct meshes from
the generated point clouds, which is a powerful surface reconstruction technique that can extract high-quality watertight meshes from point clouds at low inference times.
With the introduction of point clouds as the intermediate representation of meshes, we can use DDPMs to model
the distribution of meshes. However, to ensure the quality of transformed meshes, the generated point clouds need

271

