This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quantum-Inspired Spectral-Spatial Pyramid Network for Hyperspectral Image
Classification

1

Jie Zhang1 , Yongshan Zhang2,1 *, Yicong Zhou1 *
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau, China
2
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
jiezh1997@gmail.com, yszhang.cug@gmail.com, yicongzhou@um.edu.mo

Abstract

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) are always represented by
three-order tensors that collected by remote sensors to
record the characteristics reflected by land covers. Each
HSI contains two spatial dimensions and one spectral di* Corresponding authors.

QSSPN
HiT
RvT
SSAN
SSRN
SSFTT

95

AA (%)

Hyperspectral image (HSI) classification aims at assigning a unique label for every pixel to identify categories
of different land covers. Existing deep learning models
for HSIs are usually performed in a traditional learning
paradigm. Being emerging machines, quantum computers
are limited in the noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ)
era. The quantum theory offers a new paradigm for designing deep learning models. Motivated by the quantum circuit (QC) model, we propose a quantum-inspired
spectral-spatial network (QSSN) for HSI feature extraction.
The proposed QSSN consists of a phase-prediction module
(PPM) and a measurement-like fusion module (MFM) inspired from quantum theory to dynamically fuse spectral
and spatial information. Specifically, QSSN uses a quantum
representation to represent an HSI cuboid and extracts joint
spectral-spatial features using MFM. An HSI cuboid and its
phases predicted by PPM are used in the quantum representation. Using QSSN as the building block, we further propose an end-to-end quantum-inspired spectral-spatial pyramid network (QSSPN) for HSI feature extraction and classification. In this pyramid framework, QSSPN progressively
learns feature representations by cascading QSSN blocks
and performs classification with a softmax classifier. It is
the first attempt to introduce quantum theory in HSI processing model design. Substantial experiments are conducted on three HSI datasets to verify the superiority of the
proposed QSSPN framework over the state-of-the-art methods.

90
85
80
75

FLOPs/M

Figure 1. Performance comparison between the proposed QSSPN
framework and existing methods. Average accuracies on Indian
Pines dataset are presented.

mension to reflect abundant spectral information and spatial
context, making it different from color images. HSI classification aims to determine land-cover categories of areas represented by every pixel according to rich spatial and spectral
information [21]. It has a broad range of applications, including target detection [42], mining [1] and agriculture [8].
Based on the recorded HSIs, samples in different categories
may be extremely imbalanced in some data sets. This makes
HSI classification very challenging [20, 49].
In recent decades, a large number of HSI classification models have been proposed. Existing models can be
divided into traditional learning methods and deep learning methods. Traditional classification models are simply
adopted for HSIs, such as support vector machine (SVM)
[27] and K-nearest neighbours (KNN) [19]. To achieve better results, advanced traditional learning models, e.g., extended morphological profile (EMP) [3] and extended multiattribute profile (EMAP) [7], first conduct feature extraction and then perform classification. These methods are
two-step learning models that cannot achieve satisfactory
performance. Deep learning models are promising to simultaneously conduct feature extraction and classification

9925

