This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Render Novel Views from Wide-Baseline Stereo Pairs
Cameron Smith
Ayush Tewari†
MIT CSAIL

Yilun Du

Vincent Sitzmann†

{yilundu, camsmith, ayusht, sitzmann}@mit.edu

Input: Wide-Baseline Stereo Image Pair

Output: Synthesized Novel Views

Figure 1. Novel view synthesis from a single wide-baseline stereo image pair. In a single forward pass, our method maps a wide-baseline
stereo image pair to features that enable fast rendering of novel views, trained using only posed multi-view images of static scenes without
ground-truth or proxy geometry. We outperform all prior art on novel view synthesis from sparse observations, taking a significant step
towards matching the quality of overfitting on single scenes in this challenging setting.

Abstract
We introduce a method for novel view synthesis given only
a single wide-baseline stereo image pair. In this challenging
regime, 3D scene points are regularly observed only once,
requiring prior-based reconstruction of scene geometry and
appearance. We find that existing approaches to novel view
synthesis from sparse observations fail due to recovering incorrect 3D geometry and due to the high cost of differentiable
rendering that precludes their scaling to large-scale training. We take a step towards resolving these shortcomings
by formulating a multi-view transformer encoder, proposing
an efficient, image-space epipolar line sampling scheme to
assemble image features for a target ray, and a lightweight
cross-attention-based renderer. Our contributions enable
training of our method on a large-scale real-world dataset of
indoor and outdoor scenes. We demonstrate that our method
learns powerful multi-view geometry priors while reducing
the rendering time. We conduct extensive comparisons on
held-out test scenes across two real-world datasets, signif† Equal Advising
Project website: https : / / yilundu . github . io / wide _
baseline/

icantly outperforming prior work on novel view synthesis
from sparse image observations and achieving multi-viewconsistent novel view synthesis.

1. Introduction
The goal of novel view synthesis is to render images of a
scene from unseen camera viewpoints given a set of image
observations. In recent years, the emergence of differentiable
rendering [26, 28, 44, 45, 50] has led to a leap in quality and
applicability of these approaches, enabling near photorealistic results for most real-world 3D scenes. However, methods
that approach photorealism require hundreds or even thousands of images carefully exploring every part of the scene,
where special care must be taken by the user to densely
image all 3D points in the scene from multiple angles.
In contrast, we are interested in the regime of novel view
synthesis from a sparse set of context views. Specifically,
this paper explores whether it is possible to sythesize novel
view images using an extremely sparse set of observations.
In the most challenging case, this problem reduces to using
input images such that every 3D point in the scene is only ob-

4970

