This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Distortion Invariant Representation for Image Restoration
from A Causality Perspective

1

Xin Li1 , Bingchen Li1 , Xin Jin2 , Cuiling Lan3†, Zhibo Chen1†
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Eastern Institute for Advanced Study
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{lixin666, lbc31415926}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jinxin@eias.ac.cn,
culan@microsoft.com, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

40

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) tasks [7, 8, 32, 51], including
image super-resolution [11, 24, 43, 46, 56, 57], deblurring [41, 75], denoising [3, 23, 40], compression artifacts
removal [28, 53], etc, have achieved amazing/uplifting performances, powered by deep learning. A series of backbones are elaborately and carefully designed to boost the
† Corresponding Author

36

PSNR(dB)

In recent years, we have witnessed the great advancement of Deep neural networks (DNNs) in image restoration.
However, a critical limitation is that they cannot generalize well to real-world degradations with different degrees
or types. In this paper, we are the first to propose a novel
training strategy for image restoration from the causality
perspective, to improve the generalization ability of DNNs
for unknown degradations. Our method, termed Distortion
Invariant representation Learning (DIL), treats each distortion type and degree as one specific confounder, and learns
the distortion-invariant representation by eliminating the
harmful confounding effect of each degradation. We derive our DIL with the back-door criterion in causality by
modeling the interventions of different distortions from the
optimization perspective. Particularly, we introduce counterfactual distortion augmentation to simulate the virtual
distortion types and degrees as the confounders. Then, we
instantiate the intervention of each distortion with a virtual
model updating based on corresponding distorted images,
and eliminate them from the meta-learning perspective. Extensive experiments demonstrate the generalization capability of our DIL on unseen distortion types and degrees.
Our code will be available at https://github.com/
lixinustc/Causal-IR-DIL.

38

36.23

36.10
33.97

34
32
30
28
26

31.95
30.18

30.16
26.30
24.00

24
22

= 20(seen)
= 30(unseen)
= 40(unseen)
= 50(unseen)

ERM

DIL

Figure 1. A comparison between ERM and our DIL with RRDB
as backbone. The results are tested on Set5 with Gaussian noise.

restoration performances for specific degradation. Convolution neural networks (CNNs) [20] and transformers [12, 34]
are two commonly-used designed choices for the backbones
of image restoration. However, these works inevitably suffer from severe performance drops when they encounter unseen degradations as shown in Fig. 1, where the restoration degree in training corresponds to the noise of standard
deviation 20 and the degrees in testing are different. The
commonly-used training paradigm in image restoration, i.e.,
empirical risk minimization (ERM), does not work well for
out-of-distribution degradations. Particularly, the restoration networks trained with ERM merely mine the correlation between distorted image Id and its ideal reconstructed
image Io by minimizing the distance between Io and the
corresponding clean image Ic . However, a spurious correlation [44] is also captured which introduces the bad confounding effects of specific degradation d. It means the
conditional probability P (Io |Id ) is also conditioned on the
distortion types or degrees d (i.e., d ̸⊥⊥ Io |Id ).
A robust/generalizable restoration network should be
distortion-invariant (i.e., d ⊥⊥ Io |Id ). For instance, given
two distorted images with the same content Ic but different degradations d1 and d2 , the robust restoration network
is expected to recover the same reconstructed image Io

1714

