This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Kaleidoscopic Space Sculpting
Byeongjoo Ahn, Michael De Zeeuw, Ioannis Gkioulekas, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We introduce a method that recovers full-surround 3D
reconstructions from a single kaleidoscopic image using
a neural surface representation. Full-surround 3D reconstruction is critical for many applications, such as augmented and virtual reality. A kaleidoscope, which uses a
single camera and multiple mirrors, is a convenient way of
achieving full-surround coverage, as it redistributes light
directions and thus captures multiple viewpoints in a single
image. This enables single-shot and dynamic full-surround
3D reconstruction. However, using a kaleidoscopic image for multi-view stereo is challenging, as we need to decompose the image into multi-view images by identifying
which pixel corresponds to which virtual camera, a process
we call labeling. To address this challenge, pur approach
avoids the need to explicitly estimate labels, but instead
“sculpts” a neural surface representation through the careful use of silhouette, background, foreground, and texture
information present in the kaleidoscopic image. We demonstrate the advantages of our method in a range of simulated
and real experiments, on both static and dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Generating digital replicas of real-world objects from
image measurements is a hard problem. Multi-view reconstruction approaches require a diverse set of viewpoints that
provide full-surround coverage. A single camera, even if
it is moving, can be insufficient for this problem, for example when the object under consideration undergoes dynamic
motion and has complex shape. To capture the shape of a
dynamic object, we would need simultaneous captures from
multiple viewpoints. While a multi-camera system can provide such information, its cost and complexity can be prohibitive when we need to acquire objects with very complex
appearance, geometry, and self-occlusions, and thus requiring very large numbers of viewpoints.
We use a kaleidoscope [6] to achieve single-shot fullsurround 3D reconstruction for general dynamic objects.
A kaleidoscope is a configuration of multiple interreflecting mirrors imaged by a camera, and dramatically increases

Figure 1. 3D printing of shape reconstructions. The proposed
neural kaleidoscopic space sculpting can generate replicas of real
objects with a range of shapes and reflectances. Reconstructed
meshes are available on the project webpage [2].

the number of viewpoints, thereby enabling a virtual timesynchronized multi-view system. However, 3D reconstruction with a kaleidoscope requires identifying the specific sequence of mirrors encountered by light reaching each camera pixel; this is equivalent to identifying the specific virtual view corresponding to the pixel, commonly referred
to as the labeling problem. This labeling problem can be
solved using time-of-flight cameras [36] or structured light
systems [3], but such active techniques require long scan
times that make them unsuitable for dynamic objects. On
the other hand, prior art with passive illumination first constructs the visual hull of the object, then uses it to estimate
its label [29]. This two-stage process often produces erroneous results, especially when the visual hull differs significantly from the true shape.
Contributions. We propose a technique for full-surround
3D reconstruction with a single kaleidoscopic image. Our
key insight is that a single pixel in a kaleidoscopic image
is equivalent to multiple such pixels in its multi-camera
counterpart. For example, the pre-image of the background
pixel, which is the collection of 3D points that map to that
pixel, in a kaleidoscope does not intersect with the object;
this implies that is also a background pixel in all virtual
views associated with it. Similarly, even a foreground pixel
that intersects with the object can be used to carve out space
since all of the light path prior to a ray’s intersection with

4349

