This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuralEditor: Editing Neural Radiance Fields via Manipulating Point Clouds
Jun-Kun Chen1†
Jipeng Lyu2†
Yu-Xiong Wang1
1
2
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Peking University
Equal Contribution
{junkun3, yxw}@illinois.edu
lvjipeng@pku.edu.cn

Figure 1. Our NeuralEditor offers native support for general and flexible shape editing of neural radiance fields via manipulating point
clouds. By generating a precise point cloud of the scene with a novel point cloud-guided NeRF model, our NeuralEditor produces highfidelity rendering results in both shape deformation and more challenging scene morphing tasks.

Abstract
This paper proposes NeuralEditor that enables neural
radiance fields (NeRFs) natively editable for general shape
editing tasks. Despite their impressive results on novel-view
synthesis, it remains a fundamental challenge for NeRFs to
edit the shape of the scene. Our key insight is to exploit the
explicit point cloud representation as the underlying structure to construct NeRFs, inspired by the intuitive interpretation of NeRF rendering as a process that projects or “plots”
the associated 3D point cloud to a 2D image plane. To
this end, NeuralEditor introduces a novel rendering scheme
based on deterministic integration within K-D tree-guided
density-adaptive voxels, which produces both high-quality
rendering results and precise point clouds through optimization. NeuralEditor then performs shape editing via
mapping associated points between point clouds. Extensive evaluation shows that NeuralEditor achieves state-ofthe-art performance in both shape deformation and scene
morphing tasks. Notably, NeuralEditor supports both zeroshot inference and further fine-tuning over the edited scene.
Our code, benchmark, and demo video are available at immortalco.github.io/NeuralEditor.

1. Introduction
Perhaps the most memorable shot of the film Transformers, Optimus Prime is seamlessly transformed between a

humanoid and a Peterbilt truck – such free-form editing of
3D objects and scenes is a fundamental task in 3D computer vision and computer graphics, directly impacting applications such as visual simulation, movie, and game industries. In these applications, often we are required to manipulate a scene or objects in the scene by editing or modifying its shape, color, light condition, etc., and generate
visually-faithful rendering results on the edited scene efficiently. Among the various editing operations, shape editing has received continued attention but remains challenging, where the scene is deformed in a human-guided way,
while all of its visual attributes (e.g., shape, color, brightness, and light condition) are supposed to be natural and
consistent with the ambient environment.
State-of-the-art rendering models are based on implicit
neural representations, as exemplified by neural radiance
field (NeRF) [27] and its variants [3, 33, 37, 39, 48]. Despite
their impressive novel-view synthesis results, most of the
NeRF models substantially lack the ability for users to adjust, edit, or modify the shape of scene objects. On the other
hand, shape editing operations can be natively applied to explicit 3D representations such as point clouds and meshes.
Inspired by this, we propose NeuralEditor – a general
and flexible approach to editing neural radiance fields via
manipulating point clouds (Fig. 1). Our key insight is to
benefit from the best of both worlds: the superiority in
rendering performance from implicit neural representation

12439

