This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AUNet: Learning Relations Between Action Units for Face Forgery Detection
Weiming Bai1,2 * Yufan Liu1,2∗ Zhipeng Zhang3∗ Bing Li1,4† Weiming Hu1,2,5
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
4
DiDiChuxing
People AI, Inc.
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{baiweiming2019,yufan.liu}@ia.ac.cn zhipeng.zhang.cv@outlook.com {bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Face forgery detection becomes increasingly crucial due
to the serious security issues caused by face manipulation techniques. Recent studies in deepfake detection have
yielded promising results when the training and testing face
forgeries are from the same domain. However, the problem
remains challenging when one tries to generalize the detector to forgeries created by unseen methods during training. Observing that face manipulation may alter the relation between different facial action units (AU), we propose the Action-Units Relation Learning framework to improve the generality of forgery detection. In specific, it consists of the Action Units Relation Transformer (ART) and
the Tampered AU Prediction (TAP). The ART constructs
the relation between different AUs with AU-agnostic Branch
and AU-specific Branch, which complement each other and
work together to exploit forgery clues. In the Tampered
AU Prediction, we tamper AU-related regions at the image
level and develop challenging pseudo samples at the feature
level. The model is then trained to predict the tampered
AU regions with the generated location-specific supervision. Experimental results demonstrate that our method can
achieve state-of-the-art performance in both the in-dataset
and cross-dataset evaluations.

1. Introduction
The success of the generative model, e.g., Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN) [21], rapidly improves the
quality of face forgery, which provokes researchers to pursue antithetical counter-detection methods to deal with potential social security issues. Though recent works have
demonstrated their effectiveness in identifying forgery images from known forging methods that are used in training [4,10,29,39,43], the generalization on unknown forgery
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The average correlation intensity (y-axis) between an
AU (x-axis) and other AUs under different data volume (top20% and bottom-80% samples from FF++ [42], respectively).
More details and results can be found in the supplementary. It can
be observed that the average correlation intensity between an AU
and other AUs is weakening after manipulation.

methods is not guaranteed [9, 17, 27, 52].
Some recent works [6, 31, 45, 49, 50, 55] have noticed
this imminent problem and attempted to capture more intrinsic forgery clues to improve the generalization of identification methods. In particular, these works can be roughly
categorized into two branches, 1) data modification which
applies carefully selected augmentations [50] or manually
generates forgery images [31, 45, 55] with only real images to enlarge training data diversity meanwhile avoiding
overfitting to specific defects, 2) auxiliary task integrating which defines an affinitive loss to help the model learn
underlying differences between real and fake faces [6, 55].
Despite their success, it is noticed that the relations between
face units that are general in biology research for understanding human facial characteristics are less explored, in-

24709

