This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D GAN Inversion with Facial Symmetry Prior
Fei Yin1 , Yong Zhang2², Xuan Wang3 , Tengfei Wang4 , Xiaoyu Li2 , Yuan Gong1 ,
5
È
Yanbo Fan2 , Xiaodong Cun2 , Ying Shan2 , Cengiz Oztireli
, Yujiu Yang1²,
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab spa 3 Ant Group spa 4 HKUST spa 5 University of Cambridge

1. Introduction
Recent 3D-aware generative adversarial networks (3D
GANs) have seen immense progress. By incorporating
a neural rendering engine into the generator network architecture, 3D GANs can synthesize view-consistent images. To increase the generation resolution, existing methods [5, 12, 25, 30, 31, 36±38, 41] boost the 3D inductive bias
Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
² Corresponding Author.

Ours
PTI

Source Image

Source Image

Ours

Recently, a surge of high-quality 3D-aware GANs have
been proposed, which leverage the generative power of neural rendering. It is natural to associate 3D GANs with GAN
inversion methods to project a real image into the generator’s latent space, allowing free-view consistent synthesis
and editing, referred as 3D GAN inversion. Although with
the facial prior preserved in pre-trained 3D GANs, reconstructing a 3D portrait with only one monocular image is
still an ill-pose problem. The straightforward application
of 2D GAN inversion methods focuses on texture similarity
only while ignoring the correctness of 3D geometry shapes.
It may raise geometry collapse effects, especially when reconstructing a side face under an extreme pose. Besides,
the synthetic results in novel views are prone to be blurry.
In this work, we propose a novel method to promote 3D
GAN inversion by introducing facial symmetry prior. We
design a pipeline and constraints to make full use of the
pseudo auxiliary view obtained via image flipping, which
helps obtain a view-consistent and well-structured geometry shape during the inversion process. To enhance texture
fidelity in unobserved viewpoints, pseudo labels from depthguided 3D warping can provide extra supervision. We design constraints to filter out conflict areas for optimization
in asymmetric situations. Comprehensive quantitative and
qualitative evaluations on image reconstruction and editing
demonstrate the superiority of our method.

PTI

Abstract

Original
View Image

Novel
View Image

Novel
View Shape

Figure 1. Visual examples of our inversion method. Direct applying 2D GAN inversion methods (PTI [28]) to the 3D GAN suffers
from inaccurate geometry in novel views. Our method excels in
synthesizing consistent geometry and high-fidelity texture in different views, even reconstructing a face under an extreme pose.

with an additional 2D CNN-based upsampler or an efficient
3D representation modeling method. With tremendous effort, 3D GANs can produce photorealistic images while enforcing strong 3D consistency across different views.
We are interested in the task of reconstructing a human
face with 3D geometry and texture given only one monocular image. It is an ill-posed problem and close to the harsh
condition of real scenarios. With the power of 3D GANs,
it seems achievable via projecting a target image onto the
manifold of a pre-trained generator. The process is referred
as 3D GAN inversion. A straightforward path is to follow
the 2D GAN inversion method [28], i.e., optimizing the latent code and the network parameters of the generator to
overfit the specific portrait.

342

