This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Image-Attention for Conditional Embeddings in Deep Metric Learning
Dmytro Kotovenko

Pingchuan Ma
Timo Milbich
LMU Munich, IWR Heidelberg, MCML

Abstract
Learning compact image embeddings that yield semantic similarities between images and that generalize to unseen test classes, is at the core of deep metric learning
(DML). Finding a mapping from a rich, localized image
feature map onto a compact embedding vector is challenging: Although similarity emerges between tuples of images,
DML approaches marginalize out information in an individual image before considering another image to which similarity is to be computed.
Instead, we propose during training to condition the embedding of an image on the image we want to compare it to.
Rather than embedding by a simple pooling as in standard
DML, we use cross-attention so that one image can identify relevant features in the other image. Consequently, the
attention mechanism establishes a hierarchy of conditional
embeddings that gradually incorporates information about
the tuple to steer the representation of an individual image.
The cross-attention layers bridge the gap between the original unconditional embedding and the final similarity and allow backpropagtion to update encodings more directly than
through a lossy pooling layer. At test time we use the resulting improved unconditional embeddings, thus requiring
no additional parameters or computational overhead. Experiments on established DML benchmarks show that our
cross-attention conditional embedding during training improves the underlying standard DML pipeline significantly
so that it outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning (DML) seeks embeddings that allow a predefined distance metric to not only express semantic similarities between training samples, but to also
transfers to unseen classes. The ability to learn compact
image representations that generalize well and transfer in
zero-shot manner to unseen test data distributions is crucial
for a wide range of visual perception tasks such as visual
retrieval [51, 63], image classification [44, 80, 88], clustering [7, 28], or person (re-)identification [11, 27, 69].
DML research has investigated important questions like

Björn Ommer

the effective mining of training samples [4, 54, 57, 65, 68],
the training loss function [51, 53, 68, 77, 81, 82], and ensemble strategies [18, 22, 55, 63, 86]. However, learning powerful embeddings is by definition a challenging problem:
we seek a mapping from a rich local feature encoding that
projects this tensor with all its comprehensive spatial information and local details onto a compact vector that acts
as a holistic embedding for an entire image. Local details
have to be aggregated and all the important spatial interrelations in an image, e.g., the spatial composition of a scene
or the relative configuration of different body parts to another, have to be summed up in a mere vector. However,
image similarity is multi-modal in nature—two images can
be similar with respect to one characteristic but different
in light of another. The challenge is consequently to learn
which local details to marginalize out and which to preserve
when the embedding function only sees one image and not
also the one we want to compute its similarity to. However,
during training we have access to all images and powerful loss functions such as multi-similarity loss [82] already
compare all image tuples. Thus, we could significantly simplify learning the embedding by conditioning it on another
image that we then compute the similarity to.
Contributions: During training we therefore compute
similarities using conditional embeddings of the image we
want to represent conditioned on another image we want to
compare against. Thus, the second image focuses the attention of the embedding function on characteristics that are
meaningful for a subsequent comparison. Rather then applying a mere pooling operation, we utilize cross-attention
to project standard image feature encodings (such as a
ResNet convolutional feature map [26]) onto an embedding
vector while conditioning it on an embedding of the other
image. Repeating these cross-attention blocks then creates a hierarchy of conditional embeddings by successively
adding the conditioning information and gradually transitioning from the challenging unconditional embedding to
the more accessible conditional one. The hierarchy therefore divides the difficult problem of learning an embedding
into several smaller steps. Moreover, due to cross-attention
error backpropagation from the similarity measure can now
directly update the image encoding and the embeddings

11070

