This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Marching-Primitives: Shape Abstraction from Signed Distance Function
Weixiao Liu1,2 Yuwei Wu1 Sipu Ruan1 Gregory S. Chirikjian1 *
1
National University of Singapore 2 Johns Hopkins University
{mpewxl, yw.wu, ruansp, mpegre}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Representing complex objects with basic geometric
primitives has long been a topic in computer vision.
Primitive-based representations have the merits of compactness and computational efficiency in higher-level tasks
such as physics simulation, collision checking, and robotic
manipulation. Unlike previous works which extract polygonal meshes from a signed distance function (SDF), in
this paper, we present a novel method, named MarchingPrimitives, to obtain a primitive-based abstraction directly
from an SDF. Our method grows geometric primitives (such
as superquadrics) iteratively by analyzing the connectivity
of voxels while marching at different levels of signed distance. For each valid connected volume of interest, we
march on the scope of voxels from which a primitive is
able to be extracted in a probabilistic sense and simultaneously solve for the parameters of the primitive to capture the underlying local geometry. We evaluate the performance of our method on both synthetic and real-world
datasets. The results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of accuracy, and is directly generalizable among different categories and scales.
The code is open-sourced at https://github.com/
ChirikjianLab/Marching-Primitives.git.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great progress in the areas
of 3D shape representation and environmental perception.
Low-level representations such as surface meshes, point
clouds, and occupancy grids are widely used as inputs to
high-level computer vision algorithms and artificial intelligence tasks. They have the advantage of being able to
represent and visualize objects with high accuracy and rich
local geometric features. However, the low-level representations are ineffective in delivering a general and intuitive
sense of structural geometry as well as part-level scene understanding. Studies [3, 20] show that human vision, unlike
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Primitive-base representation versus mesh. For each pair
of objects, the left one is the superquadric abstraction obtained by
our algorithm, and the right one is the original mesh. The mesh
of the chair is 6MB in size, while our representation only needs
4KB. An SDF representation discretized on a 1283 voxel grid occupies 19MB. Our abstraction is equivalent to an implicit continuous SDF, which is an approximation to the discrete SDF.

computer vision, tends to perceive and understand scenes
as combinations of simple primitive shapes. Human beings
perform well and robustly in complex tasks, providing a
basic geometric description of the scene is available [32].
Therefore, researchers turn to exploring the possibility of
interpreting complex objects and scenes with basic geometric primitives. Taking advantage of the primitive-based
representation, many higher-level tasks, such as segmentation [14, 16, 21, 30], scene understanding [29, 31, 41, 47],
grasping [33, 44, 45] and motion planning [35, 36], are able
to be solved efficiently.
However, it still remains challenging to extract primitivebased abstractions from low-level representations. Starting from the 1990s, Solina et al. [1, 17, 39] aim to extract
a single superquadric representation from a simple object
by minimizing the least-square error between the primitive
and the measured points. Later in [7, 22], their method is
extended to represent more complex objects with multiple
primitives. More recently, the authors of [24, 47] reformulate the task as a probabilistic inference problem with enhanced accuracy and robustness to noise and outliers. At
the same time, with the surge of data-driven techniques, researchers attempt to train neural networks to infer cuboids
[27,38,41,48,50] and superquadrics [29,31] representations
in an end-to-end fashion. However, both the computational
and learning-based approaches have their own limitations.
The computational methods are vulnerable to the inherent
ambiguity of the point-to-surface relationship. For exam-

8771

