This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-Grained Classification with Noisy Labels
Qi Wei1 , Lei Feng2 , Haoliang Sun1∗ , Ren Wang1 , Chenhui Guo1 , Yilong Yin1∗
1
School of Software, Shandong University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{1998v7, haolsun.cn, xxlifelover, guiguigh1998}@gmail.com, feng0093@e.ntu.edu.sg
ylyin@sdu.edu.cn

LNL - generic classification

Abstract
Learning with noisy labels (LNL) aims to ensure model
generalization given a label-corrupted training set. In this
work, we investigate a rarely studied scenario of LNL on
fine-grained datasets (LNL-FG), which is more practical
and challenging as large inter-class ambiguities among
fine-grained classes cause more noisy labels. We empirically show that existing methods that work well for LNL
fail to achieve satisfying performance for LNL-FG, arising the practical need of effective solutions for LNL-FG.
To this end, we propose a novel framework called stochastic noise-tolerated supervised contrastive learning (SNSCL)
that confronts label noise by encouraging distinguishable
representation. Specifically, we design a noise-tolerated
supervised contrastive learning loss that incorporates a
weight-aware mechanism for noisy label correction and selectively updating momentum queue lists. By this mechanism, we mitigate the effects of noisy anchors and avoid
inserting noisy labels into the momentum-updated queue.
Besides, to avoid manually-defined augmentation strategies
in contrastive learning, we propose an efficient stochastic module that samples feature embeddings from a generated distribution, which can also enhance the representation ability of deep models. SNSCL is general and compatible with prevailing robust LNL strategies to improve their
performance for LNL-FG. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of SNSCL.

1. Introduction
Learning from noisy labels [12, 13, 18, 21, 26, 40, 55, 58]
poses great challenges for training deep models, whose performance heavily relies on large-scaled labeled datasets [28,
47–49]. Annotating data with high confidence would be
resource-intensive, especially for some domains, such as
medical and remote sensing images [29, 36, 37, 41, 46].
∗ denotes corresponding author

Class 2

LNL-FG - fine-grained classification
Class 2

Random
Noise
Class 1

Class 1
Class 2

Class 2

Dependent
Noise
Class 1

Class 1

Figure 1. LNL-FG is more challenging than LNL on generic clasdenote mislabeled samples.
sification.

Thus, label noise would inevitably arise and then greatly
degrade the generalization performance of deep models.
Previous methods [1, 6, 7, 9, 18, 23, 38, 53, 54] in LNL always focus on generic classification (e.g. CIFAR-10 & 100)
and artificially construct random label noise [21, 23, 42, 43]
and dependent label noise [9, 18, 38, 53, 55] to evaluate the
performance of their algorithms. In this work, we extend
LNL to fine-grained classification, which is a rarely studied
task. Firstly, this scenario is more realistic since annotators are easier to be misguided by indistinguishable characteristics among fine-grained images and give an uncertain
target. Fig. 1 illustrates comparison between two types
of noise simulated on generic and fine-grained sets. Further, we extensively investigate the performance of prevailing LNL methods on our proposed LNL-FG task. The detailed results are shown in Fig. 2. Although these robust algorithms lead to statistically significant improvements over
vanilla softmax cross-entropy on LNL, these gains do not
transfer to LNL-FG task. Instead, some methods degrade
the generalization performance of deep models compared
to cross-entropy. Intuitively, due to large inter-class ambiguity among those classes in LNL-FG, the margin between
noisy samples and the decision boundary in the fine-grained
dataset is smaller than that in the generic dataset, leading
to severe overfitting of deep models to noisy labels. Despite this fact, the typical method for better representation,

11651

