This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frame-Event Alignment and Fusion Network for High Frame Rate Tracking
Jiqing Zhang1 , Yuanchen Wang1 , Wenxi Liu2 , Meng Li3 , Jinpeng Bai1 , Baocai Yin1 , Xin Yang1,⋆
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Fuzhou University, 3 HiSilicon(Shanghai) Technologies Co.,Ltd

Abstract
Most existing RGB-based trackers target low frame rate
benchmarks of around 30 frames per second. This setting
restricts the tracker’s functionality in the real world, especially for fast motion. Event-based cameras as bioinspired
sensors provide considerable potential for high frame rate
tracking due to their high temporal resolution. However,
event-based cameras cannot offer fine-grained texture information like conventional cameras. This unique complementarity motivates us to combine conventional frames and
events for high frame rate object tracking under various
challenging conditions. In this paper, we propose an end-toend network consisting of multi-modality alignment and fusion modules to effectively combine meaningful information
from both modalities at different measurement rates. The
alignment module is responsible for cross-style and crossframe-rate alignment between frame and event modalities
under the guidance of the moving cues furnished by events.
While the fusion module is accountable for emphasizing
valuable features and suppressing noise information by the
mutual complement between the two modalities. Extensive experiments show that the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art trackers by a significant margin in
high frame rate tracking. With the FE240hz dataset, our
approach achieves high frame rate tracking up to 240Hz.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental task in computer
vision, and deep learning-based methods [7,9,10,15,35,56]
have dominated this field. Limited by the conventional sensor, most existing approaches are designed and evaluated on
benchmarks [13,24,38,53] with a low frame rate of approximately 30 frames per second (FPS). However, the value
of a higher frame rate tracking in the real world has been
proved [16, 21–23]. For example, the shuttlecock can reach
speeds of up to 493km/h, and analyzing its position is essential for athletes to learn how to improve their skills [46].
Utilizing professional high-speed cameras is one strategy
⋆ Xin Yang (xinyang@dlut.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

ToMP-MF

DeT

HMFT

FENet

AFNet

GT

Figure 1. A comparison of our AFNet with SOTA trackers. All
competing trackers locate the target at time t + ∆t with conventional frames at time t and aggregated events at time t + ∆t as
inputs. Our method achieves high frame rate tracking up to 240Hz
on the FE240hz dataset. The two examples also show the complementary benefits of both modalities. (a) The event modality does
not suffer from HDR, but the frame does; (b) The frame modality
provides rich texture information, while the events are sparse.

for high frame rate tracking, but these cameras are inaccessible to casual users. Consumer devices with cameras,
such as smartphones, have made attempts to integrate sensors with similar functionalities into their systems. However, these sensors still suffer from large memory requirements and high power consumption [49].
As bio-inspired sensors, event-based cameras measure
light intensity changes and output asynchronous events to
represent visual information. Compared with conventional
frame-based sensors, event-based cameras offer a high measurement rate (up to 1MHz), high dynamic range (140 dB
vs. 60 dB), low power consumption, and high pixel bandwidth (on the order of kHz) [14]. These unique properties offer great potential for higher frame rate tracking in
challenging conditions. Nevertheless, event-based cameras
cannot measure fine-grained texture information like conventional cameras, thus inhibiting tracking performance.
Therefore, in this paper, we exploit to integrate the valuable
information from event-based modality with that of framebased modality for high frame rate single object tracking
under various challenging conditions.
To attain our objective, two challenges require to be addressed: (i) The measurement rate of event-based cameras
is much higher than that of conventional cameras. Hence

9781

