This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RIAV-MVS: Recurrent-Indexing an Asymmetric Volume for Multi-View Stereo
Changjiang Cai, Pan Ji, Qingan Yan, Yi Xu
OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology, Inc.

Abstract
This paper presents a learning-based method for multiview depth estimation from posed images. Our core idea is
a “learning-to-optimize” paradigm that iteratively indexes
a plane-sweeping cost volume and regresses the depth map
via a convolutional Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU). Since the
cost volume plays a paramount role in encoding the multiview geometry, we aim to improve its construction both at
pixel- and frame- levels. At the pixel level, we propose to
break the symmetry of the Siamese network (which is typically used in MVS to extract image features) by introducing
a transformer block to the reference image (but not to the
source images). Such an asymmetric volume allows the network to extract global features from the reference image to
predict its depth map. Given potential inaccuracies in the
poses between reference and source images, we propose to
incorporate a residual pose network to correct the relative
poses. This essentially rectifies the cost volume at the frame
level. We conduct extensive experiments on real-world MVS
datasets and show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance in terms of both within-dataset evaluation and
cross-dataset generalization.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to recover dense 3D geometry from multiple images captured from different viewpoints with calibrated cameras [28]. It is a fundamental problem in computer vision and has wide applications
ranging from autonomous driving [12, 55], remote sensing [3], augmented reality [50], to robotics [22]. Following the seminal MVSNet [59], many learning-based methods [17, 39, 40, 52, 53, 58, 60] have been proposed, achieving great improvements against their traditional counterparts [5, 14, 19, 44], in terms of accuracy or efficiency.
Most of the learning-based MVS methods [17,39,40,52,
58, 60] rely on traditional plane-sweeping [14, 19] approach
to generate a cost volume by comparing the CNN features
of reference image and source images at several depth hypotheses, and then apply 2D or 3D convolutional encoderdecoders to aggregate and regularize the cost volume. The

2D CNN methods [17] use multi-level features as skip connections to help decode the cost volume for depth regression. Even though the skip connections improve the depth
maps, they weaken the role of cost volume and the geometry knowledge embedded therein to some extent. Hence, 2D
CNN methods suffer from degraded generalization when
testing on unseen domains. The 3D CNN methods [31]
use soft-argmin to regress the depth map as the expectation
from the cost volume distribution, and hence cannot predict
the best candidate but instead an averaged one when dealing
with a flat or multi-modal distribution caused by textureless,
repeated, or occluded regions, etc. To mitigate these problems, we propose RIAV-MVS, a new paradigm to predict
the depth via learning to recurrently index an asymmetric
cost volume, obtaining improved accuracy and generalization. As depicted in Fig. 1, our RIAV-MVS features several
nontrivial novel designs.
First, we learn to index the cost volume by approaching the correct depth planes per pixel via an index field (a
grid of indices to identify the depth hypotheses), as shown
in Fig. 1-(e). The proposed recurrent estimate of the index
field enables the learning to be anchored at the cost volume
domain. Specifically, it recurrently predicts the residual index field in a descent direction of matching cost to retrieve
cost values for the next iteration. The newly updated index
field is used to directly index (i.e., sampling via linear interpolation) depth hypotheses to render a depth map, which
is iteratively optimized to approach the ground truth depth,
making the system end-to-end trainable.
Second, to facilitate the optimization, we propose to improve the cost volume at pixel- and frame- levels, respectively. At the pixel level, a transformer block is asymmetrically applied to the reference view (but not to the source
views). By capturing long-range global context via a transformer and pixel-wise local features via CNNs, we build an
asymmetric cost volume to store more accurate matching
similarity cues. At the frame level, we propose a residual
pose net to rectify the camera poses that are usually obtained via Visual SLAM [9, 16, 30] and inevitably contain
noise. The rectified poses are used to more accurately backward warp the reference features to match the counterparts
in source views.

919

