This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recurrence without Recurrence:
Stable Video Landmark Detection with Deep Equilibrium Models
Paul Micaelli
University of Edinburgh

Arash Vahdat
NVIDIA

Hongxu Yin
NVIDIA

Jan Kautz
NVIDIA

paul.micaelli@ed.ac.uk

avahdat@nvidia.com

dannyy@nvidia.com

jkautz@nvidia.com

Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA
pmolchanov@nvidia.com

Abstract
Cascaded computation, whereby predictions are recurrently refined over several stages, has been a persistent
theme throughout the development of landmark detection
models. In this work, we show that the recently proposed
Deep Equilibrium Model (DEQ) can be naturally adapted
to this form of computation. Our Landmark DEQ (LDEQ)
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging
WFLW facial landmark dataset, reaching 3.92 NME with
fewer parameters and a training memory cost of O(1) in
the number of recurrent modules. Furthermore, we show
that DEQs are particularly suited for landmark detection
in videos. In this setting, it is typical to train on still images due to the lack of labelled videos. This can lead to
a “flickering” effect at inference time on video, whereby a
model can rapidly oscillate between different plausible solutions across consecutive frames. By rephrasing DEQs as
a constrained optimization, we emulate recurrence at inference time, despite not having access to temporal data at
training time. This Recurrence without Recurrence (RwR)
paradigm helps in reducing landmark flicker, which we
demonstrate by introducing a new metric, normalized mean
flicker (NMF), and contributing a new facial landmark
video dataset (WFLW-V) targeting landmark uncertainty.
On the WFLW-V hard subset made up of 500 videos, our
LDEQ with RwR improves the NME and NMF by 10 and
13% respectively, compared to the strongest previously published model using a hand-tuned conventional filter.

1. Introduction
The field of facial landmark detection has been fueled
by important applications such as face recognition [49, 71],
facial expression recognition [33, 37, 39, 43, 79], and face

alignment [55,87,89]. Early approaches to landmark detection relied on a statistical model of the global face appearance and shape [19, 20, 25], but this was then superseded by
deep learning regression models [21,26,34,40,44,46,54,63,
68, 69, 73, 75, 77]. Both traditional and modern approaches
have relied upon cascaded computation, an approach which
starts with an initial guess of the landmarks and iteratively
produces corrected landmarks which match the input face
more finely. These iterations typically increase the training memory cost linearly, and do not have an obvious stopping criteria. To solve these issues, we adapt the recently
proposed Deep Equilibrium Model [9–11] to the setting of
landmark detection. Our Landmark DEQ (LDEQ) achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the WFLW dataset, while
enjoying a natural stopping criteria and a memory cost that
is constant in the number of cascaded iterations.
Furthermore, we explore the benefits of DEQs in landmark detection from facial videos. Since obtaining landmark annotation for videos is notoriously expensive, models are virtually always trained on still images and applied frame-wise on videos at inference time. When a
sequence of frames have ambiguous landmarks (e.g., occluded faces or motion blur), this leads to flickering landmarks, which rapidly oscillate between different possible
configurations across consecutive frames. This poor temporal coherence is particularly problematic in applications
where high precision is required, which is typically the case
for facial landmarks. These applications include face transforms [1, 2], face reenactment [84], video emotion recognition [33, 37, 39, 79], movie dubbing [28] or tiredness monitoring [35]. We propose to modify the DEQ objective at
inference time to include a new recurrent loss term that encourages temporal coherence. We measure this improvement on our new WFLW-Video dataset (WFLW-V), demonstrating superiority over traditional filters, which typically
reduce flickering at the cost of reducing landmark accuracy.

22814

