This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Node Interaction to Hop Interaction: New Effective and Scalable Graph
Learning Paradigm

1

Jie Chen1
Zilong Li1
Yin Zhu1
Junping Zhang1
Jian Pu2∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
{chenj19, yinzhu20, jpzhang, jianpu}@fudan.edu.cn, zilongli21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) follow the
message-passing mechanism that conducts information interaction among nodes iteratively. While considerable
progress has been made, such node interaction paradigms
still have the following limitation. First, the scalability limitation precludes the broad application of GNNs in largescale industrial settings since the node interaction among
rapidly expanding neighbors incurs high computation and
memory costs. Second, the over-smoothing problem restricts the discrimination ability of nodes, i.e., node representations of different classes will converge to indistinguishable after repeated node interactions. In this work, we
propose a novel hop interaction paradigm to address these
limitations simultaneously. The core idea is to convert the
interaction target among nodes to pre-processed multi-hop
features inside each node. We design a simple yet effective
HopGNN framework that can easily utilize existing GNNs to
achieve hop interaction. Furthermore, we propose a multitask learning strategy with a self-supervised learning objective to enhance HopGNN. We conduct extensive experiments on 12 benchmark datasets in a wide range of domains, scales, and smoothness of graphs. Experimental results show that our methods achieve superior performance
while maintaining high scalability and efficiency. The code
is at https://github.com/JC-202/HopGNN .

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently become
very popular and have demonstrated great results in a
wide range of graph applications, including social networks [38], point cloud analysis [37] and recommendation systems [21]. The core success of GNNs lies in the
message-passing mechanism that iteratively conducts infor-

Figure 1. Comparison of node interaction and hop interaction.
The hop interaction first pre-computes multi-hop features and then
conducts non-linear interaction among different hops via GNNs,
which enjoy high efficiency and effectiveness.

mation interaction among nodes [8, 17, 18]. Each node in
a graph convolution layer first aggregates information from
local neighbors and combines them with non-linear transformation to update the self-representation [20, 27, 42]. After stacking K layers, nodes can capture long-range K-hop
neighbor information and obtain representative representations for downstream tasks [29, 45]. However, despite the
success of such popular node interaction paradigms, the
number of neighbors for each node would grow exponentially with layers [2, 40], resulting in the well-known scalability and over-smoothing limitation of GNNs.
The scalability limitation precludes the broad application of GNNs in large-scale industrial settings since the
node interaction among rapidly expanding neighbors incurs high computation and memory costs [15, 51]. Al-

7876

