This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coreset Sampling from Open-Set for Fine-Grained Self-Supervised Learning
Sungnyun Kim*

Sangmin Bae*
KAIST AI

Se-Young Yun

{ksn4397, bsmn0223, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep learning in general domains has constantly been
extended to domain-specific tasks requiring the recognition
of fine-grained characteristics. However, real-world applications for fine-grained tasks suffer from two challenges: a
high reliance on expert knowledge for annotation and necessity of a versatile model for various downstream tasks in
a specific domain (e.g., prediction of categories, bounding
boxes, or pixel-wise annotations). Fortunately, the recent
self-supervised learning (SSL) is a promising approach to
pretrain a model without annotations, serving as an effective
initialization for any downstream tasks. Since SSL does not
rely on the presence of annotation, in general, it utilizes the
large-scale unlabeled dataset, referred to as an open-set. In
this sense, we introduce a novel Open-Set Self-Supervised
Learning problem under the assumption that a large-scale
unlabeled open-set is available, as well as the fine-grained
target dataset, during a pretraining phase. In our problem
setup, it is crucial to consider the distribution mismatch between the open-set and target dataset. Hence, we propose
SimCore algorithm to sample a coreset, the subset of an
open-set that has a minimum distance to the target dataset in
the latent space. We demonstrate that SimCore significantly
improves representation learning performance through extensive experimental settings, including eleven fine-grained
datasets and seven open-sets in various downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning in general computer vision
tasks has encouraged its widespread applications to specific
domains of industry and research [21, 46, 73], such as facial
recognition or vehicle identification. We particularly focus
on the visual recognition of fine-grained datasets, where the
goal is to differentiate between hard-to-distinguish images.
However, real-world application for fine-grained tasks poses
two challenges for practitioners and researchers developing
algorithms. First, it requires a number of experts for anno* equal contribution

tation, which incurs a large cost [3, 14, 60]. For example,
ordinary people do not have professional knowledge about
aircraft types or fine-grained categories of birds. Therefore,
a realistic presumption for a domain-specific fine-grained
dataset is that there may be no or very few labeled samples.
Second, fine-grained datasets are often re-purposed or used
for various tasks according to the user’s demand, which motivates development of a versatile pretrained model. One
might ask, as a target task, that bird images be classified
by species or even segmented into foreground and background. A good initialization model can handle a variety
of annotations for fine-grained datasets, such as multiple
attributes [43, 47, 74], pixel-level annotations [53, 74], or
bounding boxes [35, 47, 53].
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) [11, 14, 24, 28]
has enabled learning how to represent the data even without
annotations, such that the representations serve as an effective initialization for any future downstream tasks. Since
labeling is not necessary, SSL generally utilizes an openset, or large-scale unlabeled dataset, which can be easily
obtained by web crawling [23, 64], for the pretraining. In
this paper, we introduce a novel Open-Set Self-Supervised
Learning (OpenSSL) problem, where we can leverage the
open-set as well as the training set of fine-grained target
dataset. Refer to Figure 1 for the overview of OpenSSL.
In the OpenSSL setup, since the open-set may contain
instances irrelevant to the fine-grained dataset, we should
consider the distribution mismatch. A large distribution
mismatch might inhibit representation learning for the target
task. For instance, in Figure 2, SSL on the open-set (OS) does
not always outperform SSL on the fine-grained dataset (X)
because it depends on the semantic similarity between X and
OS. This is in line with the previous observations [21, 22, 64]
that the performance of self-supervised representation on
downstream tasks is correlated with similarity of pretraining
and fine-tuning datasets.
To alleviate this mismatch issue, we could exploit a coreset, a subset of an open-set, which shares similar semantics
with the target dataset. As a motivating experiment, we manually selected the relevant classes from ImageNet (OSoracle )
that are supposed to be helpful according to each target

7537

