This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZegCLIP: Towards Adapting CLIP for Zero-shot Semantic Segmentation
Ziqin Zhou1
Yinjie Lei2
Bowen Zhang1
Lingqiao Liu1 *
Yifan Liu1
1
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Sichuan University, China
{ziqin.zhou,b.zhang,lingqiao.liu,yifan.liu04}@adelaide.edu.au,yinjie@scu.edu.cn

Abstract

100

Recently, CLIP has been applied to pixel-level zero-shot
learning tasks via a two-stage scheme. The general idea is
to ﬁrst generate class-agnostic region proposals and then
feed the cropped proposal regions to CLIP to utilize its
image-level zero-shot classiﬁcation capability. While effective, such a scheme requires two image encoders, one
for proposal generation and one for CLIP, leading to a
complicated pipeline and high computational cost. In this
work, we pursue a simpler-and-efﬁcient one-stage solution that directly extends CLIP’s zero-shot prediction capability from image to pixel level. Our investigation starts
with a straightforward extension as our baseline that generates semantic masks by comparing the similarity between
text and patch embeddings extracted from CLIP. However,
such a paradigm could heavily overﬁt the seen classes and
fail to generalize to unseen classes. To handle this issue, we propose three simple-but-effective designs and ﬁgure out that they can signiﬁcantly retain the inherent zeroshot capacity of CLIP and improve pixel-level generalization ability. Incorporating those modiﬁcations leads to
an efﬁcient zero-shot semantic segmentation system called
ZegCLIP. Through extensive experiments on three public
benchmarks, ZegCLIP demonstrates superior performance,
outperforming the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin under both “inductive” and “transductive” zero-shot
settings. In addition, compared with the two-stage method,
our one-stage ZegCLIP achieves a speedup of about 5 times
faster during inference. We release the code at https:
//github.com/ZiqinZhou66/ZegCLIP.git.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks
in the computer vision ﬁeld, which aims to predict the
category of each pixel of an image [7, 15, 31, 41]. Extensive works have been proposed [8, 26, 30], e.g., Fully
Convolutional Networks [29], U-net [38], DeepLab family [4–6] and more recently Vision Transformer based methods [16, 53, 58].
* Corresponding author

mIoU(%)

80

Seen

76.5

71.1

91.9

89.9

Unseen

77.8

75.9

60
40.4

40
20

28.3
16.3

13.8

0

Figure 1. Quantitative improvements achieved by our proposed
designs on VOC dataset. (1)(2) represents our one-stage Baseline model of different versions (Fix or Fine-Tune CLIP image encoder), while (3)-(5) shows the effectiveness of applying our proposed designs, i.e., Deep Prompt Tuning (DPT), Non-mutually
Exclusive Loss (NEL), Relationship Descriptor (RD), on baseline model step by step. We highlight that our designs can dramatically increase the segmentation performance on unseen classes.

However, the success of the deep semantic segmentation
models heavily relies on the availability of a large amount
of annotated training images, which involves a substantial
amount of labor. This gives rise to a surging interest in lowsupervision-based semantic segmentation approaches, including semi-supervised [7], weakly-supervised [48], fewshot [46], and zero-shot semantic segmentation [3, 34, 44].
Among them, zero-shot semantic segmentation is particularly challenging and attractive since it is required to directly produce the semantic segmentation results based on
the semantic description of a given class. Recently, the pretrained vision-language model CLIP [36] has been adopted
into various dense prediction tasks, such as referring segmentation [43], semantic segmentation [33], and detection
[14]. It also offers a new paradigm and has made a breakthrough for zero-shot semantic segmentation. Initially built
for matching text and images, CLIP has demonstrated a remarkable capability for image-level zero-shot classiﬁcation.
However, zsseg [49] and Zegformer [12] follow the common strategy that needs two-stage processing that ﬁrst generates region proposals and then feeds the cropped regions
to CLIP for zero-shot classiﬁcation. Such a strategy requires two image encoding processes, one for generating
proposals and one for encoding each proposal via CLIP.

11175

