This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bootstrap Your Own Prior:
Towards Distribution-Agnostic Novel Class Discovery
Muli Yang1 , Liancheng Wang1 , Cheng Deng1 *, and Hanwang Zhang2
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{mlyang, lcwang9}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Novel Class Discovery (NCD) aims to discover unknown
classes without any annotation, by exploiting the transferable knowledge already learned from a base set of known
classes. Existing works hold an impractical assumption
that the novel class distribution prior is uniform, yet neglect
the imbalanced nature of real-world data. In this paper,
we relax this assumption by proposing a new challenging
task: distribution-agnostic NCD, which allows data drawn
from arbitrary unknown class distributions and thus renders existing methods useless or even harmful. We tackle
this challenge by proposing a new method, dubbed “Bootstrapping Your Own Prior (BYOP)”, which iteratively estimates the class prior based on the model prediction itself. At each iteration, we devise a dynamic temperature
technique that better estimates the class prior by encouraging sharper predictions for less-confident samples. Thus,
BYOP obtains more accurate pseudo-labels for the novel
samples, which are beneficial for the next training iteration. Extensive experiments show that existing methods suffer from imbalanced class distributions, while BYOP1 outperforms them by clear margins, demonstrating its effectiveness across various distribution scenarios.

1. Introduction
With the ever-increasing growth of massive unlabeled
data, our community is interested in mining and leveraging
the “dark” knowledge therein [2, 7, 28]. To this end, Novel
Class Discovery (NCD) [14] is considered as a pivotal step,
which aims to automatically recognize novel classes by partitioning the unlabeled data into different clusters with the
knowledge learned from a labeled base class set. Note
that the base knowledge is indispensable because clustering
without a prior is known as an ill-posed problem [20]—data
* Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/muliyangm/BYOP.

Labeled base data “dog”

Model

Labeled base data “cat”

Transfer
(a)

Model
With no prior
Unlabeled data (balanced)

(b)

Novel class 1

Novel class 2

Novel class 1

Novel class 2

Novel class 1

Novel class 2

Model
With uniform prior
Unlabeled data (balanced)

(c)

Model
With uniform prior

Unlabeled data (imbalanced)

Figure 1. Novel Class Discovery (NCD) in different scenarios. (a)
NCD with no prior on balanced unlabeled data. (b) NCD with
the uniform prior on balanced unlabeled data. (c) NCD with the
uniform prior on imbalanced unlabeled data.

can always be clustered w.r.t. any feature dimension, e.g.,
color and background. Hence, the base set provides a preliminary prior for defining class vs. non-class features, e.g.,
the object background feature is removed for discovering
new classes.
Yet, clustering is still ambiguous to other features not removed by the base knowledge. As shown in Fig. 1(a), if we
do not specify the class distribution prior, i.e., #sample per
class, the two clusters may be considered as red vs. other
color, but not the desired moose vs. cow. Therefore,
clustering with such a specified prior is a common practice
in existing NCD methods [11,34, 47]. However, they hold a
naı̈ve assumption that the class distribution in the unlabeled
data is balanced, i.e., the prior is uniform. This is impractical because the nature of data distribution—especially for

3459

