This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation with Mask-adapted CLIP
Feng Liang* 1 , Bichen Wu2 , Xiaoliang Dai2 , Kunpeng Li2 , Yinan Zhao2 , Hang Zhang† 3 ,
Peizhao Zhang2 , Peter Vajda2 , Diana Marculescu1
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Meta Reality Labs, 3 Cruise
{jeffliang,dianam}@utexas.edu, {wbc,stzpz,vajdap}@meta.com
https://jeff-liangf.github.io/projects/ovseg

Abstract
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation aims to segment an image into semantic regions according to text descriptions, which may not have been seen during training. Recent two-stage methods first generate class-agnostic
mask proposals and then leverage pre-trained visionlanguage models, e.g., CLIP, to classify masked regions. We
identify the performance bottleneck of this paradigm to be
the pre-trained CLIP model, since it does not perform well
on masked images. To address this, we propose to finetune
CLIP on a collection of masked image regions and their
corresponding text descriptions. We collect training data by
mining an existing image-caption dataset (e.g., COCO Captions), using CLIP to match masked image regions to nouns
in the image captions. Compared with the more precise and
manually annotated segmentation labels with fixed classes
(e.g., COCO-Stuff), we find our noisy but diverse dataset
can better retain CLIP’s generalization ability. Along with
finetuning the entire model, we utilize the “blank” areas in
masked images using a method we dub mask prompt tuning.
Experiments demonstrate mask prompt tuning brings significant improvement without modifying any weights of CLIP,
and it can further improve a fully finetuned model. In particular, when trained on COCO and evaluated on ADE20K150, our best model achieves 29.6% mIoU, which is +8.5%
higher than the previous state-of-the-art. For the first time,
open-vocabulary generalist models match the performance
of supervised specialist models in 2017 without dataset specific adaptations.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to group pixels into meaningful regions with corresponding semantic categories. Although remarkable progress has been made [6, 7, 9, 29, 41],
modern semantic segmentation models are mainly trained
with pre-defined categories, failing to generalize to unseen
classes. On the contrary, humans understand scenes in an
* Work done during an internship at Meta Reality Labs.
† Work done while at Meta Reality Labs.

open-vocabulary manner, typically with thousands of categories [2]. To approach human-level perception, this paper
studies open-vocabulary semantic segmentation where the
model segments an image by arbitrary categories described
by texts.
Vision-language models, e.g., CLIP [35], learn rich
multi-modal features from billion-scale image-text pairs.
Witnessing its superior open-vocabulary classification ability, prior works propose to use pre-trained vision-language
models for open-vocabulary segmentation [11, 16, 23, 40].
Among them, two-stage approaches have shown great potential: they first generate class-agnostic mask proposals and then leverage pre-trained CLIP to perform openvocabulary classification (see Figure 1(b)). Their success
relies on two assumptions: (1) the model can generate classagnostic mask proposals (2) pre-trained CLIP can transfer
its classification performance to masked image proposals.
To examine these two assumptions, we conduct the following analysis. First, we assume an “oracle” mask generator and an ordinary CLIP classifier. We use ground-truth
masks as region proposals, and feed masked images to a
pre-trained CLIP for classification. This model only reaches
an mIoU of 20.1% on the ADE20K-150 dataset. Next, we
assume an “oracle” classifier but an ordinary mask proposal
generator – a MaskFormer ( [9]) pre-trained on the COCO
dataset. We first extract masked region proposals, then compare each region with ground-truth object masks, find the
object with the highest overlap, and assign the object label to this extracted region. This model, despite imperfect region proposals, reaches a significantly higher mIoU
of 66.5%.
This analysis clearly shows that pre-trained CLIP can
not perform satisfactory classification over masked images,
and it is the performance bottleneck of two-stage openvocabulary segmentation models. We hypothesize that this
is caused by the significant domain gap between masked
images and CLIP’s training images. CLIP is pre-trained on
natural images with minimal data augmentation [35]. On
the other hand, mask proposals are cropped and re-sized
from original images, and are further corrupted by noisy
segmentation masks, see examples in Figure 1 (b).

7061

