This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PoseFormerV2: Exploring Frequency Domain for Efficient and Robust
3D Human Pose Estimation
Qitao Zhao1 * Ce Zheng2 Mengyuan Liu3 Pichao Wang4 Chen Chen2
1

Shandong University
3

2

Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida

4

Amazon Prime Video

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School

qitaozhao@mail.sdu.edu.cn

cezheng@knights.ucf.edu

pichaowang@gmail.com

nkliuyifang@gmail.com

chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Recently, transformer-based methods have gained↓ 0.9
significant success in sequential 2D-to-3D lifting human pose
estimation. As a pioneering work, PoseFormer captures
spatial relations of human joints in each video frame and
human dynamics across frames with cascaded transformer
layers and has achieved impressive performance. However,
↓
in real scenarios, the performance of PoseFormer and1.6its
follow-ups is limited by two factors: (a) The length of the
input joint sequence; (b) The quality of 2D joint detection.
Existing methods typically apply self-attention to all frames
of the input sequence, causing a huge computational burden
when the frame number is increased to obtain advanced estimation accuracy, and they are not robust to noise naturally brought by the limited capability of 2D joint detectors.
In this paper, we propose PoseFormerV2, which exploits a
compact representation of lengthy skeleton sequences in the
frequency domain to efficiently scale up the receptive field
and boost robustness to noisy 2D joint detection. With minimum modifications to PoseFormer, the proposed method
effectively fuses features both in the time domain and frequency domain, enjoying a better speed-accuracy trade-off
than its precursor. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets (i.e., Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP) demonstrate that the proposed approach significantly outperforms
the original PoseFormer and other transformer-based variants. Code is released at https://github.com/
QitaoZhao/PoseFormerV2.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) aims at localizing
human joints in 3-dimensional space based on monocular
videos (without intermediate 2D representations) [23,25] or
2D human joint sequences (referred to as 2D-to-3D lifting
* Work was done while Qitao was an intern mentored by Chen Chen.

↓ 0.9
↓ 1.0
↓ 1.2
↓ 1.6
↓ 1.1

↓ 0.9
↓ 0.8

Speedup 4.6x
↓ 1.6

Figure 1. Comparisons of PoseFormerV2 and PoseFormerV1 [41]
on Human3.6M [12]. RF denotes Receptive Field and k×RF indicates that the ratio between the full sequence length and the number of frames as input into the spatial encoder of PoseFormerV2
is k, i.e., the RF of the spatial encoder is expanded by k× with a
few low-frequency coefficients of the full sequence. The proposed
method outperforms PoseFormerV1 by a large margin in terms of
speed-accuracy trade-off, and the larger k brings more significant
improvements, e.g., 4.6× speedup with the k of 27.

approaches) [5, 17, 33, 39]. With the large availability of 2D
human pose detectors [6, 24] plus the lightweight nature of
2D skeleton representation of humans, lifting-based methods are now dominant in 3D human pose estimation. Compared to raw monocular videos, 2D coordinates of human
joints in each video frame are much more memory-friendly,
making it possible for lifting-based methods to utilize a long
joint sequence to boost pose estimation accuracy.
Transformers [32] first gain huge success in the field of
natural language processing (NLP) [3, 7] and then extend
their capacity to the computer vision community, becoming the de facto approach for several vision tasks, e.g., image classification [8, 18, 31], object detection [4, 42] and
video recognition [1,2,38]. The discreteness of human joint
representation and the requirement for long-range temporal

8877

