This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Everything in the Open World: Towards Universal Object Detection
Zhenyu Wang1,2
Antonio Torralba5

Yali Li1,2 ∗
Xi Chen3
Ser-Nam Lim4
Hengshuang Zhao3 *
Shengjin Wang1,2

1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
3
4
5
The University of Hong Kong
Meta AI
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2

wangzy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
chauncey0620@gmail.com, sernamlim@fb.com, torralba@csail.mit.edu, hszhao@cs.hku.hk

bus

bus

In this paper, we formally address universal object detection, which aims to detect every scene and predict every category. The dependence on human annotations, the
limited visual information, and the novel categories in the
open world severely restrict the universality of traditional
detectors. We propose UniDetector, a universal object detector that has the ability to recognize enormous categories
in the open world. The critical points for the universality of UniDetector are: 1) it leverages images of multiple sources and heterogeneous label spaces for training
through the alignment of image and text spaces, which guarantees sufficient information for universal representations.
2) it generalizes to the open world easily while keeping the
balance between seen and unseen classes, thanks to abundant information from both vision and language modalities. 3) it further promotes the generalization ability to
novel categories through our proposed decoupling training manner and probability calibration. These contributions allow UniDetector to detect over 7k categories, the
largest measurable category size so far, with only about
500 classes participating in training. Our UniDetector behaves the strong zero-shot generalization ability on largevocabulary datasets - it surpasses the traditional supervised
baselines by more than 4% on average without seeing any
corresponding images. On 13 public detection datasets with
various scenes, UniDetector also achieves state-of-the-art
performance with only a 3% amount of training data. 1

1. Introduction
Universal object detection aims to detect everything in
every scene. Although existing object detectors [18, 31, 42,
* corresponding author
1 Codes are available at https://github.com/zhenyuw16/UniDetector.

images from source 2

images from source 1

Abstract

person

person

bus

images from source 3
accordian

person

man

accordian

cue
car
camera

surfboard

label space: person, bus, car ...

man

label space: person, camera, cue...

shared categories source 1 specific categories
surfboard, sports ball …
person, car,
bus, cat,
chair …

source 2 specific categories

label space: person, man, accordian...

images of multiple sources

heterogeneous
label spaces

universal object detector

camera, cue, sneakers …

source 3 specific categories
man, accordian, helicopter …

generalizing to the open world
person

dock

detecting
every scene

boat

person

fish

dog

fish
knee pad

detecting
every category

…

dock
person

headquarter

ceiling

…

broccoli
knee pad

salmon fish
radiator

Figure 1. Illustration for the universal object detector. It aims to
detect every category in every scene and should have the ability to
utilize images of multiple sources with heterogeneous label spaces
for training and generalize to the open world for inference.

43] have made remarkable progress, they heavily rely on
large-scale benchmark datasets [12, 32]. However, object
detection varies in categories and scenes (i.e., domains).
In the open world, where significant difference exists compared to existing images and unseen classes appear, one has
to reconstruct the dataset again to guarantee the success of
object detectors, which severely restricts their open-world
generalization ability. In comparison, even a child can generalize well rapidly in new environments. As a result, universality becomes the main gap between AI and humans.
Once trained, a universal object detector can directly work
in unknown situations without any further re-training, thus
significantly approaching the goal of making object detection systems as intelligent as humans.
A universal object detector should have the following
two abilities. First, it should utilize images of multiple

11433

