This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DexArt: Benchmarking Generalizable Dexterous Manipulation with
Articulated Objects

1

Chen Bao1* Helin Xu2* Yuzhe Qin3 Xiaolong Wang3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tsinghua University 3 UC San Diego

(a) DexArt Task Suite

(b) Seen Objects

(c) Unseen Objects

Figure 1. Overview. (a) We propose DexArt, a task suite of Dexterous manipulation with Articulated object using point cloud observation.
(b) We experiment with extensive benchmark methods that learn category-level manipulation policy on seen objects. (c) We evaluate the
policies’ generalizability on a collection of unseen objects, as well as their robustness to camera viewpoint change.

Abstract
To enable general-purpose robots, we will require the
robot to operate daily articulated objects as humans do.
Current robot manipulation has heavily relied on using a
parallel gripper, which restricts the robot to a limited set of
objects. On the other hand, operating with a multi-finger
robot hand will allow better approximation to human behavior and enable the robot to operate on diverse articulated objects. To this end, we propose a new benchmark
called DexArt, which involves Dexterous manipulation with
Articulated objects in a physical simulator. In our benchmark, we define multiple complex manipulation tasks, and
the robot hand will need to manipulate diverse articulated
objects within each task. Our main focus is to evaluate the
generalizability of the learned policy on unseen articulated
objects. This is very challenging given the high degrees of
freedom of both hands and objects. We use Reinforcement
* Equal contributions. Work done while interning at UC San Diego.

Learning with 3D representation learning to achieve generalization. Through extensive studies, we provide new insights into how 3D representation learning affects decision
making in RL with 3D point cloud inputs. More details can
be found at https://www.chenbao.tech/dexart/.

1. Introduction
Most tools and objects humans interact with are articulated objects. To allow household robots to facilitate our
daily life, we will need to enable them to manipulate diverse articulated objects with multi-finger hands as humans do. However, learning dexterous manipulation remains a challenging task given the high Degree-of-Freedom
(DoF) joints of the robot hands. While recent work has
shown encouraging progress in using Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1, 8, 29, 69] for dexterous manipulation, most research focuses on manipulating a single rigid object. The
manipulation of diverse articulated objects not only adds

21190

