This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Rolling Shutter Bundle Adjustment:
Toward Accurate and Fast Solution
Bangyan Liao1,2,∗
Delin Qu1,3,∗
Yifei Xue4
Huiqing Zhang1
Yizhen Lao1,†
1
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
2
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Jiangxi Provincial Natural Resources Cause Development Center

Abstract
We propose an accurate and fast bundle adjustment (BA)
solution that estimates the 6-DoF pose with an independent
RS model of the camera and the geometry of the environment based on measurements from a rolling shutter (RS)
camera. This tackles the challenges in the existing works,
namely, relying on high frame rate video as input, restrictive assumptions on camera motion and poor efficiency. To
this end, we first verify the positive influence of the image
point normalization to RSBA. Then we present a novel visual residual covariance model to standardize the reprojection error during RSBA, which consequently improves
the overall accuracy. Besides, we demonstrate the combination of Normalization and covariance standardization
Weighting in RSBA (NW-RSBA) can avoid common planar
degeneracy without the need to constrain the filming manner. Finally, we propose an acceleration strategy for NWRSBA based on the sparsity of its Jacobian matrix and Schur
complement. The extensive synthetic and real data experiments verify the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed
solution over the state-of-the-art works.

1. Introduction
Bundle adjustment (BA) is the problem of simultaneously refining the cameras’ relative pose and the observed
points’ coordinate in the scene by minimizing the reprojection errors over images and points [8]. It has made great
success in the past two decades as a vital step for two 3D
computer vision applications: structure-from-motion (SfM)
and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM).
The CMOS camera has been widely equipped with the
rolling shutter (RS) due to its inexpensive cost, lower en∗ Authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author: yizhenlao@hnu.edu.cn
Project page: https://delinqu.github.io/NW-RSBA

(a) GS

(b) RS

(c) Ground-truth

(d) Orb-SLAM

(e) Orb-SLAM +
NM-RSBA

(f) Orb-SLAM +
NW-RSBA (ours)

Figure 1. Images were captured at the same time with fast motion
with (a) global shutter and (b) rolling shutter in sequence 10 of the
TUM-RSVI dataset [21]. (c) classical Orb-SLAM [18] with GS
input. (d) classical Orb-SLAM [18] with RS input. (e) Orb-SLAM
with NM-RSBA [2]. (f) Orb-SLAM with proposed NW-RSBA.

ergy consumption, and higher frame rate. Compared with
the CCD camera and its global shutter (GS) counterpart, RS
camera is exposed in a scanline-by-scanline fashion. Consequently, as shown in Fig. 1(a)(b), images captured by moving RS cameras produce distortions known as the RS effect [17], which defeats vital steps (e.g. absolute [1] and
relative [4] pose estimation) in SfM and SLAM, including
BA [2, 9, 11, 12, 14]. Hence, handling the RS effect in BA is
crucial for 3D computer vision applications.

1.1. Related Work
Video-based Methods. Hedborg et al. [10] use an RS video
sequence to solve RSSfM and present an RSBA algorithm
under the smooth motion assumption between consecutive
frames in [9]. Similarly, Im et al. [11] propose a small
motion interpolation-based RSBA algorithm specifically for
narrow-baseline RS image sequences. Zhuang et al. [24]
further address this setting by presenting 8pt and 9pt linear
solvers, which are developed to recover the relative pose of

4863

