This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You Are Catching My Attention: Are Vision Transformers Bad Learners under
Backdoor Attacks?
Zenghui Yuan1 Pan Zhou1 * Kai Zou2 Yu Cheng3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security,
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Protagolabs Inc 3 Microsoft Research
{zenghuiyuan, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn, kz@protagolabs.com, yu.cheng@microsoft.com
1

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs), which made a splash in the
field of computer vision (CV), have shaken the dominance
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, in
the process of industrializing ViTs, backdoor attacks have
brought severe challenges to security. The success of ViTs
benefits from the self-attention mechanism. However, compared with CNNs, we find that this mechanism of capturing
global information within patches makes ViTs more sensitive to patch-wise triggers. Under such observations, we
delicately design a novel backdoor attack framework for
ViTs, dubbed BadViT, which utilizes a universal patch-wise
trigger to catch the model’s attention from patches beneficial for classification to those with triggers, thereby manipulating the mechanism on which ViTs survive to confuse
itself. Furthermore, we propose invisible variants of BadViT
to increase the stealth of the attack by limiting the strength
of the trigger perturbation. Through a large number of experiments, it is proved that BadViT is an efficient backdoor
attack method against ViTs, which is less dependent on the
number of poisons, with satisfactory convergence, and is
transferable for downstream tasks. Furthermore, the risks
inside of ViTs to backdoor attacks are also explored from
the perspective of existing advanced defense schemes.

1. Introduction
Transformers, which are all-powerful in the field of natural language processing (NLP) [6, 13, 57], have recently
set off a wave of frenetic research in computer vision (CV).
Thanks to the self-attention mechanism, vision transformers (ViTs) have broken the perennial domination of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [17], and have been de* Corresponding author.

veloped in hot areas like image classification [36, 53, 66],
object detection [3, 7] and semantic segmentation [46, 64].
The architecture optimization researches of ViTs are also
continuously improving the performance and efficiency
[26, 40, 45, 53], and providing vitality for advancing the deployment of ViTs in industry.
Unfortunately, manifold threats in deep learning pose severe challenges to ViTs. For instance, adversarial attacks
[10, 11, 25, 28, 31, 32, 49, 50, 76] confuse the deep model to
make wrong predictions by adding subtle perturbations to
the input. In addition, backdoor attacks are also extremely
threatening to deep models [22, 27, 48, 51, 68]. More and
more deep learning tasks are “outsourced” training or directly fine-tuning on pre-trained models [22, 75], allowing
attackers to implant backdoors into the model by establishing a strong association between the trigger and the attack
behavior. In response, a growing number of researchers
have paid attention to the security of ViTs under adversarial
attacks [1,4,20,39,44] and backdoor attacks [16,37,47,73].
However, previous ViT backdoor works have not systematically compared with CNN to elucidate the vulnerability
source of ViTs to backdoor attacks, and have not considered balancing attack concealment and attack benefit, so
that triggers can be easily detected by the naked eye.
To fill this gap, we systemically discuss the robustness of
ViTs and CNNs under basic backdoor attacks with different trigger settings and find that ViTs seem to be more vulnerable to patch-wise triggers rather than image-blending
triggers. Delving into the essence of ViTs, images are divided into patches as tokens to calculate attentions, which
can capture more interaction information between patches
at the global level than CNNs [44]. Thus the patch-wise
perturbation has been shown to sufficiently affect the selfattention mechanism of ViTs [20] and make ViTs weaker
learners than CNNs. Inspired by this, a natural and interesting question is whether backdoor attacks with the patch-

24605

