This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Trade-off between Robustness and Accuracy of Vision Transformers
Yanxi Li, Chang Xu
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
yali0722@uni.sydney.edu.au, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown
great successes in computer vision tasks, they are vulnerable to perturbations on inputs, and there exists a trade-off
between the natural accuracy and robustness to such perturbations, which is mainly caused by the existence of robust
non-predictive features and non-robust predictive features.
Recent empirical analyses find Vision Transformers (ViTs)
are inherently robust to various kinds of perturbations, but
the aforementioned trade-off still exists for them. In this
work, we propose Trade-off between Robustness and Accuracy of Vision Transformers (TORA-ViTs), which aims to
efficiently transfer ViT models pretrained on natural tasks
for both accuracy and robustness. TORA-ViTs consist of
two major components, including a pair of accuracy and
robustness adapters to extract predictive and robust features, respectively, and a gated fusion module to adjust the
trade-off. The gated fusion module takes outputs of a pretrained ViT block as queries and outputs of our adapters
as keys and values, and tokens from different adapters at
different spatial locations are compared with each other to
generate attention scores for a balanced mixing of predictive and robust features. Experiments on ImageNet with
various robust benchmarks show that our TORA-ViTs can
efficiently improve the robustness of naturally pretrained
ViTs while maintaining competitive natural accuracy. Our
most balanced setting (TORA-ViTs with λ = 0.5) can maintain 83.7% accuracy on clean ImageNet and reach 54.7%
and 38.0% accuracy under FGSM and PGD white-box attacks, respectively. In terms of various ImageNet variants,
it can reach 39.2% and 56.3% accuracy on ImageNet-A and
ImageNet-R and reach 34.4% mCE on ImageNet-C.

1. Introduction
In the past few decades, deep neural networks (DNNs)
have been well developed to achieve or even surpass the performance of humans on computer vision tasks [13,23,24,54,
55]. However, a fatal drawback of them is that they are vulnerable to perturbations on inputs [8, 14, 15, 17, 32], which
will cause dramatically drop in their accuracy. Furthermore,
recent studies demonstrate that there exists a trade-off be-

tween natural accuracy and adversarial robustness [48, 57],
which means improving the robustness of a network typically leads to a decrease in accuracy on natural samples.
A popular theory explains this trade-off by the existence
of two kinds of different features [22, 48, 53]. The first kind
of feature is moderately correlated to the task and robust
to attacks, while the second kind of feature is weakly correlated to the task and therefore non-robust. It is unfortunate that those moderately correlated and robust features
only have limited contributions to accurate predictions (robust and non-predictive), and further improving the accuracy heavily relies on those weakly related and non-robust
features (predictive and non-robust) [48]. Therefore, this
trade-off is usually considered an inherent characteristic of
DNNs. Although there are many efforts that aim to control
or improve this trade-off [26,40,41,50,57], it is still hard to
efficiently and effectively improve it on large-scale datasets
such as ImageNet [3].
Recently, a new family of vision models, namely Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [6,44,47], has outperformed CNNs on
various kinds of tasks. There are many subsequent works
that discuss diverse variants of ViTs to improve their performance. TNT [11] divides patches in ViTs into smaller
sub-patches and applies a transformer-in-transformer architecture with an additional inner transformer. T2T-ViT [56]
introduces local feature aggregation to boost local information. Swin [29] performs local attention within various windows, and a shifted window partitioning approach is introduced for cross-window connections.
However, the aforementioned works mainly focus on the
natural accuracy on clean data. Although empirical analyses have demonstrated that ViTs demonstrates robustness
against various kinds of perturbations [1, 33, 37], there are
only a limited number of works [9, 19, 34, 60] focus on improving the robustness. Besides, how to boost a naturally
pretrained ViT for robustness has been ignored by existing methods. A pretrained ViT has high utility because it
can extract predictive features to ensure high accuracy on
downstream tasks. Despite the high utility, it also has low
reliability, because its non-robust features are vulnerable to
perturbations. Therefore, it is worth studying how to obtain
a useful and reliable ViT.

7558

