This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape-Erased Feature Learning for Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3
Jiawei Feng1
Ancong Wu1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
fengjw3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract

Target
Information

Guide

Due to the modality gap between visible and infrared images with high visual ambiguity, learning diverse modalityshared semantic concepts for visible-infrared person reidentification (VI-ReID) remains a challenging problem.
Body shape is one of the significant modality-shared cues
for VI-ReID. To dig more diverse modality-shared cues, we
expect that erasing body-shape-related semantic concepts
in the learned features can force the ReID model to extract more and other modality-shared features for identification. To this end, we propose shape-erased feature learning paradigm that decorrelates modality-shared features in
two orthogonal subspaces. Jointly learning shape-related
feature in one subspace and shape-erased features in the
orthogonal complement achieves a conditional mutual information maximization between shape-erased feature and
identity discarding body shape information, thus enhancing
the diversity of the learned representation explicitly. Extensive experiments on SYSU-MM01, RegDB, and HITSZVCM datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Recently, person re-identification (ReID) for pedestrian
matching in non-overlapping camera views has experienced
fast development. However, ReID is still challenging when
people appear both in the daytime and in low-light situations where only infrared cameras can clearly capture their
appearances, raising the task of visible-infrared ReID (VIReID). Many remarkable works [4, 5, 14, 15, 27, 30] have
been witnessed in the field of VI-ReID. For realistic scenarios, discovering rich and diverse modality-shared semantic concepts usually helps to improve the effectiveness of
VI-ReID [31, 39]. So far, diverse modality-shared feature
learning remains challenging.
* Corresponding author

Others...

Erased
Information
Body
Shape Prior

Visible modality
Body shape

Others...

Others...

Identity

Decorrelate
Body shape

Others...

Body shape

Infrared Modality
Body shape

Figure 1. An illustration of our motivation on VI-ReID. It is assumed that body shape information and identity-related modalityshared information (presented in dashed box) are partially overlapped with each other. To make extracted features more diverse, we propose shape-erased feature learning paradigm that decomposes the representation into shape-related feature and shapeerased one. Learning shape-erased feature drives the model to discover richer modality-shared semantic concepts other than body
shape.

Among the cues for VI-ReID, we can identify pedestrians by their body shapes in many situations, for it contains modality-invariant information and also robust to light
changes. Nevertheless, body shape is not the only or a
sufficient semantic concept that interprets the identity of
a person. It may be hard in some situations to tell the
difference only depending on the body shape, but we can
still distinguish them by other semantic concepts, such as
their belongings, hairstyles or face structures. Inspired
by this, we illustrate an information theoretic measure between visible and infrared modality as a Venn diagram on
the left of the dashed line in Fig. 1. It is assumed that
body shape (presented in red) and identity-related modalityshared information (presented in dashed box) are partially
overlapped with each other. Note that partially is also due
to there exists identity-unrelated information contained in
body shape map, e.g., human pose. This partially overlapped assumption indicates that the target information for

22752

