This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MV-JAR: Masked Voxel Jigsaw and Reconstruction for LiDAR-Based
Self-Supervised Pre-Training
Runsen Xu1,2

Tai Wang1,2 Wenwei Zhang3,2 Runjian Chen4 Jinkun Cao5
Jiangmiao Pang2
Dahua Lin1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 S-Lab, NTU
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 Carnegie Mellon University
{runsenxu,wt019,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, wenwei001@ntu.edu.sg, rjchen@connect.hku.hk,
jinkunc@andrew.cmu.edu, pangjiangmiao@gmail.com

67 Accelerating Convergence

Abstract

1. Introduction
Self-supervised pre-training has gained considerable attention, owing to its exceptional performance in visual representation learning. Recent advancements in contrastive
Corresponding author.

66

60

65

56

L2 mAPH

64

L2 mAPH

This paper introduces the Masked Voxel Jigsaw and
Reconstruction (MV-JAR) method for LiDAR-based selfsupervised pre-training and a carefully designed dataefficient 3D object detection benchmark on the Waymo
dataset. Inspired by the scene-voxel-point hierarchy in
downstream 3D object detectors, we design masking and reconstruction strategies accounting for voxel distributions in
the scene and local point distributions within the voxel. We
employ a Reversed-Furthest-Voxel-Sampling strategy to address the uneven distribution of LiDAR points and propose
MV-JAR, which combines two techniques for modeling the
aforementioned distributions, resulting in superior performance. Our experiments reveal limitations in previous dataefficient experiments, which uniformly sample fine-tuning
splits with varying data proportions from each LiDAR sequence, leading to similar data diversity across splits. To
address this, we propose a new benchmark that samples
scene sequences for diverse fine-tuning splits, ensuring adequate model convergence and providing a more accurate evaluation of pre-training methods. Experiments on
our Waymo benchmark and the KITTI dataset demonstrate
that MV-JAR consistently and significantly improves 3D
detection performance across various data scales, achieving up to a 6.3% increase in mAPH compared to training
from scratch. Codes and the benchmark are available at
https://github.com/SmartBot-PJLab/MV-JAR.

63

52

62

48

61

44

MV-JAR
Random

60
59

Data-Efficient Results

64

0

5

10

15

Epoch

20

25

40

MV-JAR
Random
0

10

20

30

Data (%)

40

50

Figure 1. 3D object detection results on the Waymo dataset. Our
MV-JAR pre-training accelerates model convergence and greatly
improves the performance with limited fine-tuning data.

learning [4, 6, 8, 16, 45] and masked autoencoders [1, 7, 15,
36, 47] for images have sparked interest among researchers
and facilitated progress in modalities such as point clouds.
However, LiDAR point clouds differ from images and
dense point clouds obtained by reconstruction as they are
naturally sparse, unorganized, and irregularly distributed.
Developing effective self-supervised proxy tasks for these
unique properties remains an open challenge. Constructing matching pairs for contrastive learning in geometrydominant scenes is more difficult [20, 40], as points or regions with similar geometry may be assigned as negative
samples, leading to ambiguity during training. To address
this, our study explores masked voxel modeling paradigms
for effective LiDAR-based self-supervised pre-training.
Downstream LiDAR-based 3D object detectors [12, 19,
33, 38, 41, 50] typically quantize the 3D space into voxels and encode point features within them. Unlike pixels, which are represented by RGB values, the 3D space
presents a scene-voxel-point hierarchy, introducing new

13445

