This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimpleNet: A Simple Network for Image Anomaly Detection and Localization
Zhikang Liu1
Yiming Zhou2
Yuansheng Xu2
Zilei Wang1 *
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China1
Meka Technology Co.,Ltd2
lzk@mail.ustc.edu.cn

zhouyiming.donal@gmail.com

xys-tc@hotmail.com

zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Ours

99.5

PatchCore-WRN50-1024-10%
PatchCore-WRN50_1024-1%
CS-Flow
ReverseDistillation

99.0

Hazelnut

Transistor

Pill

Cable

Wood

Bottle

Carpet

Metal_nut

Grid

I-AUROC%

Screw

98.5

DRÆM

98.0

PaDiM-WRN50-550d

97.5
97.0

Toothbrush

Leather

Zipper

Capsule

Tile

Figure 1. Visualization of samples in MVTec AD. The produced
anomaly maps superimposed on the images. Anomaly region of
high anomaly score is colored with orange. The red boundary denotes contours of actual segmentation maps for anomalies.

Abstract
We propose a simple and application-friendly network
(called SimpleNet) for detecting and localizing anomalies. SimpleNet consists of four components: (1) a pretrained Feature Extractor that generates local features, (2)
a shallow Feature Adapter that transfers local features towards target domain, (3) a simple Anomaly Feature Generator that counterfeits anomaly features by adding Gaussian
noise to normal features, and (4) a binary Anomaly Discriminator that distinguishes anomaly features from normal
features. During inference, the Anomaly Feature Generator
would be discarded. Our approach is based on three intuitions. First, transforming pre-trained features to targetoriented features helps avoid domain bias. Second, generating synthetic anomalies in feature space is more effective, as defects may not have much commonality in the
image space. Third, a simple discriminator is much efficient and practical. In spite of simplicity, SimpleNet outperforms previous methods quantitatively and qualitatively. On
* Corresponding author

PaDiM-RN18-100d
0

10

20

30

40

50

Frames per second(FPS)

60

70

80

Figure 2. Inference speed (FPS) versus I-AUROC on MVTec AD
benchmark. SimpleNet outperforms all previous methods on both
accuracy and efficiency by a large margin.

the MVTec AD benchmark, SimpleNet achieves an anomaly
detection AUROC of 99.6%, reducing the error by 55.5%
compared to the next best performing model. Furthermore, SimpleNet is faster than existing methods, with a
high frame rate of 77 FPS on a 3080ti GPU. Additionally,
SimpleNet demonstrates significant improvements in performance on the One-Class Novelty Detection task. Code:
https://github.com/DonaldRR/SimpleNet.

1. Introduction
Image anomaly detection and localization task aims to
identify abnormal images and locate abnormal subregions.
The technique to detect the various anomalies of interest has
a broad set of applications in industrial inspection [3, 6]. In
industrial scenarios, anomaly detection and localization is
especially hard, as abnormal samples are scarce and anomalies can vary from subtle changes such as thin scratches to
large structural defects, e.g. missing parts. Some examples
from the MVTec AD benchmark [3] along with results from
our proposed method are shown in Figure 1. This situation

20402

