This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DA-DETR: Domain Adaptive Detection Transformer with Information Fusion
Jingyi Zhang1, * Jiaxing Huang1,∗ Zhipeng Luo1,2 Gongjie Zhang1,3 Xiaoqin Zhang4 Shijian Lu1,†
1
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research
3
Black Sesame Technologies 4 Wenzhou University

Abstract
The recent detection transformer (DETR) simplifies the
object detection pipeline by removing hand-crafted designs
and hyperparameters as employed in conventional twostage object detectors. However, how to leverage the simple yet effective DETR architecture in domain adaptive object detection is largely neglected. Inspired by the unique
DETR attention mechanisms, we design DA-DETR, a domain adaptive object detection transformer that introduces
information fusion for effective transfer from a labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target domain. DA-DETR
introduces a novel CNN-Transformer Blender (CTBlender)
that fuses the CNN features and Transformer features ingeniously for effective feature alignment and knowledge transfer across domains. Specifically, CTBlender employs the
Transformer features to modulate the CNN features across
multiple scales where the high-level semantic information
and the low-level spatial information are fused for accurate object identification and localization. Extensive experiments show that DA-DETR achieves superior detection performance consistently across multiple widely adopted domain adaptation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims to predict a bounding box and
a class label for interested objects in images and it has
been a longstanding challenge in the computer vision research. Most existing work adopts a two-stage detection
pipeline that involves heuristic anchor designs, complicated
post-processing such as non-maximum suppression (NMS),
etc. The recent detection transformer (DETR) [5] has attracted increasing attention which greatly simplifies the
two-stage detection pipeline by removing hand-crafted anchors [21, 22, 49] and NMS [21, 22, 49]. Despite its great
detection performance under a fully supervised setup, how
to leverage the simple yet effective DETR architecture in
domain adaptive object detection is largely neglected.
* Equal contribution, {jingyi.zhang, jiaxing.huang}@ntu.edu.sg.
† Corresponding author, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg.

Figure 1. The vanilla Deformable-DETR [81] trained with labeled source data cannot handle target data well due to crossdomain shift. The introduction of adversarial feature alignment
in Deformable-DETR + Direct-align [19] improves the detection
clearly. The proposed DA-DETR fuses CNN features and transformer features ingeniously which achieves superior unsupervised
domain adaptation consistently across four widely adopted benchmarks including Cityscapes → Foggy cityscapes in (a), SIM 10k
→ Cityscapes in (b), KITTI → Cityscapes in (c) and PASCAL
VOC → Clipart1k in (d).

Different from the conventional CNN-based detection
architectures such as Faster RCNN [49], DETR has a CNN
backbone followed by a transformer head consisting of an
encoder-decoder structure. The CNN backbone and the
transformer head learn different types of features [17,48,69]
- the former largely captures low-level localization features
(e.g., edges and lines around object boundaries) while the
latter largely captures global inter-pixel relationship and
high-level semantic features. At the other end, many prior
studies show that fusing different types of features often
is often helpful in various visual recognition tasks [9, 11].
Hence, it is very meaningful to investigate how to fuse the
two types of DETR features to address the domain adaptive
object detection challenge effectively.
We design DA-DETR, a simple yet effective Domain
Adaptive DETR that introduces information fusion into
the DETR architecture for effective domain adaptive object detection. The core design is a CNN-Transformer
Blender (CTBlender) that employs the high-level semantic

23787

