This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sphere-Guided Training of Neural Implicit Surfaces
Andreea Dogaru1,2 Andrei Timotei Ardelean1,2 Savva Ignatyev1
Egor Zakharov1 Evgeny Burnaev1,3
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology 2 Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
3
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute

Figure 1. We propose a new hybrid approach for learning neural implicit surfaces from multi-view images. In previous methods, the
volumetric ray marching training procedure is applied for the whole bounding sphere of the scene (middle left). Instead, we train a coarse
sphere-based surface reconstruction (middle right) alongside the neural surface to guide the ray sampling and ray marching. As a result, our
method achieves an increased sampling efficiency by pruning empty scene space and better quality of reconstructions (right).

Abstract
In recent years, neural distance functions trained via
volumetric ray marching have been widely adopted for multiview 3D reconstruction. These methods, however, apply
the ray marching procedure for the entire scene volume,
leading to reduced sampling efficiency and, as a result, lower
reconstruction quality in the areas of high-frequency details.
In this work, we address this problem via joint training
of the implicit function and our new coarse sphere-based
surface reconstruction. We use the coarse representation
to efficiently exclude the empty volume of the scene from
the volumetric ray marching procedure without additional
forward passes of the neural surface network, which leads to
an increased fidelity of the reconstructions compared to the
base systems. We evaluate our approach by incorporating
it into the training procedures of several implicit surface
modeling methods and observe uniform improvements across
both synthetic and real-world datasets. Our codebase can
be accessed via the project page† .

† https://andreeadogaru.github.io/SphereGuided

1. Introduction
The task of multi-view 3D reconstruction remains the
focus of modern computer vision and graphics research.
It has major practical significance in AR/VR metaverses,
synthetic media, medical imaging, and the special effects
industry. This task is classically addressed via the multi-view
stereo (MVS) reconstruction systems [3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 26, 38],
which estimate the underlying scene geometry in the form
of a point cloud using a photometric consistency between
the different views. However, in recent years they have been
largely phased out by the methods that represent the scene
as neural implicit fields [5, 14, 16–19, 22, 29, 31–33, 35–37].
These approaches have multiple advantages compared to the
classical MVS. For example, they can easily accommodate
non-Lambertian and texture-less surfaces [8], are good at
interpolating unseen parts of the geometry by leveraging
regularization [12], and at the same time can achieve an
impressive quality of renders [2].
This work focuses on improving the subset of such methods specialized in opaque surface reconstruction [5, 22, 31,
35]. Most of these approaches employ neural signed distance fields [23] (SDFs) trained using volumetric ray marching [5, 31, 35]. The training step of this procedure contains

20844

