This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ObjectStitch: Object Compositing with Diffusion Model
Yizhi Song1∗ , Zhifei Zhang2 , Zhe Lin2 , Scott Cohen2 , Brian Price2 ,
Jianming Zhang2 , Soo Ye Kim2 , Daniel Aliaga1
Purdue University1 , Adobe Research2
1
{song630,aliaga}@purdue.edu, 2 {zzhang,zlin,scohen,bprice,jianmzha,sooyek}@adobe.com

Figure 1. Example results of object compositing with (a) copy-and-paste scheme, (b) traditional compositing pipeline and (c) ours (ObjectStitch). Traditional compositing pipeline is done with best possible off-the-shelf models including foreground/background color harmonization [19, 47], poisson blending [34], and shadow synthesis [42]. ObjectStitch achieves more realistic results, and can address geometry
correction, harmonization, shadow generation, and view synthesis all-in-one while preserving similar appearance to the reference object.

Abstract
Object compositing based on 2D images is a challenging problem since it typically involves multiple processing
stages such as color harmonization, geometry correction
and shadow generation to generate realistic results. Furthermore, annotating training data pairs for compositing
requires substantial manual effort from professionals, and
is hardly scalable. Thus, with the recent advances in generative models, in this work, we propose a self-supervised
framework for object compositing by leveraging the power
of conditional diffusion models. Our framework can hollistically address the object compositing task in a unified
model, transforming the viewpoint, geometry, color and
shadow of the generated object while requiring no manual
labeling. To preserve the input object’s characteristics, we
introduce a content adaptor that helps to maintain categori* Work done during internship at Adobe.

cal semantics and object appearance. A data augmentation
method is further adopted to improve the fidelity of the generator. Our method outperforms relevant baselines in both
realism and faithfulness of the synthesized result images in
a user study on various real-world images.

1. Introduction
Image compositing is an essential task in image editing
that aims to insert an object from a given image into another
image in a realistic way. Conventionally, many sub-tasks
are involved in compositing an object to a new scene, including color harmonization [6, 7, 19, 51], relighting [52],
and shadow generation [16, 29, 43] in order to naturally
blend the object into the new image. As shown in Tab. 1,
most previous methods [6, 7, 16, 19, 28, 43] focus on a single sub-task required for image compositing. Consequently,
they must be appropriately combined to obtain a composite
image where the input object is re-synthesized to have the

18310

