This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human-Art: A Versatile Human-Centric Dataset
Bridging Natural and Artificial Scenes

1

Xuan Ju1,2 * † , Ailing Zeng1 * ‡ , Jianan Wang1 , Qiang Xu2 , Lei Zhang1
International Digital Economy Academy, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{xju22, qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {zengailing, wangjianan, leizhang}@idea.edu.cn

https://github.com/IDEA-Research/HumanArt

Abstract
Humans have long been recorded in a variety of forms
since antiquity. For example, sculptures and paintings were
the primary media for depicting human beings before the invention of cameras. However, most current human-centric
computer vision tasks like human pose estimation and human image generation focus exclusively on natural images
in the real world. Artificial humans, such as those in sculptures, paintings, and cartoons, are commonly neglected,
making existing models fail in these scenarios.
As an abstraction of life, art incorporates humans in both
natural and artificial scenes. We take advantage of it and
introduce the Human-Art dataset to bridge related tasks in
natural and artificial scenarios. Specifically, Human-Art
contains 50k high-quality images with over 123k person
instances from 5 natural and 15 artificial scenarios, which
are annotated with bounding boxes, keypoints, self-contact
points, and text information for humans represented in both
2D and 3D. It is, therefore, comprehensive and versatile
for various downstream tasks. We also provide a rich set
of baseline results and detailed analyses for related tasks,
including human detection, 2D and 3D human pose estimation, image generation, and motion transfer. As a challenging dataset, we hope Human-Art can provide insights for
relevant research and open up new research questions.

1. Introduction
" Art is inspired by life but beyond it."

Human-centric computer vision (CV) tasks such as human detection [39], pose estimation [30], motion transfer [59], and human image generation [35] have been intensively studied and achieved remarkable performances in
the past decade, thanks to the advancement of deep learning
techniques. Most of these works use datasets [14,23,27,39]
* Equal contribution.
† Work in part done during an internship at IDEA.
‡ Corresponding author.

that focus on humans in natural scenes captured by cameras
due to the practical demands and easy accessibility.
However, besides being captured by cameras, humans
are frequently present and recorded in various other forms,
from ancient murals on walls to portrait paintings on paper to computer-generated virtual figures in digital form.
However, existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) human detection
and pose estimation models [64, 71] trained on commonly
used datasets such as MSCOCO [27] generally work poorly
on these scenarios. For instance, the average precision of
such models can be as high as 63.2% and 79.8% on natural
scenes but drops significantly to 12.6% and 28.7% on the
sculpture scene. A fundamental reason is the domain gap
between natural and artificial scenes. Also, the scarcity of
datasets with artificial human scenes significantly restricts
the development of tasks such as anime character image
generation [9, 67, 74], character rendering [29], and character motion retargeting [1, 37, 68] in computer graphics
and other areas. With the growing interest in virtual reality
(VR), augmented reality (AR), and metaverse, this problem
is exacerbated and demands immediate attention.
There are a few small datasets incorporating humans in
artificial environments in the literature. Sketch2Pose [4]
and ClassArch [33] collect images in sketch and vase painting respectively. Consequently, they are only applicable to
the corresponding context. People-Art [61] is a human detection dataset that consists of 1490 paintings. It covers artificial scenes in various painting styles, but its categories are
neither mutually exclusive nor collectively comprehensive.
More importantly, the annotation type and image number
in People-Art are limited, and hence this dataset is mainly
used for testing (instead of training) object detectors.
Art presents humans in both natural and artificial scenes
in various forms, e.g., dance, paintings, and sculptures. In
this paper, we take advantage of the classification of visual arts to introduce Human-Art, a versatile human-centric
dataset, to bridge the gap between natural and artificial
scenes. Human-Art is hierarchically structured and includes
high-quality human scenes in rich scenarios with precise

618

