This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Deep Generative Models with Generalized Empirical Likelihoods
Suman Ravuri, Mélanie Rey, Shakir Mohamed
DeepMind
London, UK

Marc Peter Deisenroth
University College London
London, UK

{ravuris,melanierey,shakir}@deepmind.com

m.deisenroth@ucl.ac.uk

Understanding how well a deep generative model captures a distribution of high-dimensional data remains an
important open challenge. It is especially difficult for certain model classes, such as Generative Adversarial Networks
and Diffusion Models, whose models do not admit exact
likelihoods. In this work, we demonstrate that generalized
empirical likelihood (GEL) methods offer a family of diagnostic tools that can identify many deficiencies of deep
generative models (DGMs). We show, with appropriate specification of moment conditions, that the proposed method
can identify which modes have been dropped, the degree
to which DGMs are mode imbalanced, and whether DGMs
sufficiently capture intra-class diversity. We show how to
combine techniques from Maximum Mean Discrepancy and
Generalized Empirical Likelihood to create not only distribution tests that retain per-sample interpretability, but also
metrics that include label information. We find that such tests
predict the degree of mode dropping and mode imbalance up
to 60% better than metrics such as improved precision/recall.

1. Introduction
In an era that has witnessed deep generative models
(DGMs) produce photorealistic images from text descriptions [55, 62, 63], speech rivaling that of professional voice
actors [8, 20, 49], and text seemingly indistinguishable from
writing on the internet [5, 50], it perhaps seems quaint to
focus on better evaluation of such models. One might
reasonably claim that such evaluation may have been
useful prior to the development of these models, but such
evaluation is certainly less important now. They might
further bolster their claim by noting that researchers have
already proposed reasonable metrics for these modalities —
Fréchet Inception Distance for images [26], Mean Opinion
Score (MOS) for speech, and perplexity for text —, and
the results have been so compelling that researchers
and practitioners have begun to deploy such models in
downstream tasks [1, 3, 48, 80]. So why should we focus on
better evaluation now?
We are advocating for better and more nuanced evaluation
now precisely because DGMs have reached sufficient matu-

Figure 1. Empirical Likelihood methods can identify model samples outside of the data distribution, and data samples outside of
the model distribution. In this example, we use a two-sample generalized empirical likelihood test to evaluate how well a Cascaded
Diffusion Model trained on ImageNet captures the “Frilled Lizard”
class. The three samples on the bottom right show samples from
the data distribution the model is not likely to represent, and those
on the top right show samples from the model not likely to be in
the data distribution. These examples have 0 probability in the
empirical likelihood test.

rity to be used in downstream tasks. When Deep Generative
Models struggled to produce realistic 32 ⇥ 32 images, a researcher working on the model may not have found nuanced
evaluation useful. Now that DGMs can credibly produce realistic megapixel images from text input, that same researcher
may find more nuanced evaluation helpful to understand
what deficiencies still exist. This view reflects recent trends
in generative model evaluation, as researchers have now
started to adopt metrics such as precision/recall [42] to better
understand how the model is misspecified.
Our approach comprises three parts: a moment condition
on the DGM and data distributions that tells us if the model
captured a salient property of the data distribution; a score
that indicates how well a moment condition is satisfied; and
a decomposition of that score that shows how each test point
contributed. From these three elements, we can diagnose
how a DGM is misspecified.
We observe that many evaluation metrics can be expressed as a set of moment conditions — for example,
Fréchet Inception Distance can be recast as the condition
1
24395

