This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decomposed Soft Prompt Guided Fusion Enhancing for Compositional
Zero-Shot Learning
Xiaocheng Lu1 , Song Guo*,1,2 , Ziming Liu1 , Jingcai Guo*,1,2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute
{xiaoclu, song.guo}@polyu.edu.hk, {ziming.liu, jingcai.guo}@connect.polyu.hk
1

Abstract
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims to recognize novel concepts formed by known states and objects
during training. Existing methods either learn the combined
state-object representation, challenging the generalization
of unseen compositions, or design two classifiers to identify
state and object separately from image features, ignoring
the intrinsic relationship between them. To jointly eliminate
the above issues and construct a more robust CZSL system,
we propose a novel framework termed Decomposed Fusion
with Soft Prompt (DFSP)1 , by involving vision-language
models (VLMs) for unseen composition recognition. Specifically, DFSP constructs a vector combination of learnable
soft prompts with state and object to establish the joint representation of them. In addition, a cross-modal decomposed
fusion module is designed between the language and image
branches, which decomposes state and object among language features instead of image features. Notably, being
fused with the decomposed features, the image features can
be more expressive for learning the relationship with states
and objects, respectively, to improve the response of unseen compositions in the pair space, hence narrowing the
domain gap between seen and unseen sets. Experimental
results on three challenging benchmarks demonstrate that
our approach significantly outperforms other state-of-theart methods by large margins.

1. Introduction
Given an unseen concept, such as green tiger, even
though this is a nonexistent stuff humans have never seen,
they may associate the known state green with an image of
tiger immediately. Inspired by this, Compositional ZeroShot Learning (CZSL) is proposed with the purpose of
* Song Guo and Jingcai Guo are the corresponding authors
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/Forest- art/

DFSP.git

fv  f s 
DFSP

fv  fo 

old dry

Fusion
narrow the

domian gap

old cat
(unseen)

fs
fo

cat dog

learn the joint
representation
a photo of

fv

f t [state] [object]
seen unseen

Figure 1. The overview of DFSP. Our method aims to narrow
the domain gap between seen and unseen compositions by fusing decomposed features fo and fs with image feature fv , while
learn the joint representation between state and object in language
branch. Being fused with the state and object features, image feature can learn the response of them respectively and improve the
sensitiveness of unseen compositions.

equipping models with the ability to recognize novel concepts generated as humans do. Specifically, CZSL learns
on visible primitive composed concepts (state and object)
in the training phase, and recognizes unseen compositions
in the inference phase.
Some prior algorithms [20, 26] design two classifiers
to identify state and object separately, while these models overlook the intrinsic relation between them. After the
primitive concepts are obtained, the association between
state and object could be established again through graph
neural network (GNN) [24] or external knowledge compositions [14]. Nevertheless, these are post-processing methods and these classifiers are separated from image features
with strong correlation, ignoring entanglement. Some other
methods [28, 29] are to directly treat the combination as an
entity, converting CZSL into a general zero-shot recognition
problem. Generally, the visual features are projected into a
shared semantic space and the distance between entities is
optimized, such as Euclidean distance [44]. If too much

23560

