This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BioNet: A Biologically-inspired Network for Face Recognition
Pengyu Li
Terminus Labs, Terminus Group, China.
lipengyu007@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, whether and how cutting-edge Neuroscience
findings can inspire Artificial Intelligence (AI) confuse both
communities and draw much discussion. As one of the most
critical fields in AI, Computer Vision (CV) also pays much
attention to the discussion. To show our ideas and experimental evidence to the discussion, we focus on one of the
most broadly researched topics both in Neuroscience and
CV fields, i.e., Face Recognition (FR). Neuroscience studies
show that face attributes are essential to the human facerecognizing system. How the attributes contribute also be
explained by the Neuroscience community. Even though a
few CV works improved the FR performance with attribute
enhancement, none of them are inspired by the human facerecognizing mechanism nor boosted performance significantly. To show our idea experimentally, we model the
biological characteristics of the human face-recognizing
system with classical Convolutional Neural Network Operators (CNN Ops) purposely. We name the proposed
Biologically-inspired Network as BioNet. Our BioNet consists of two cascade sub-networks, i.e., the Visual Cortex Network (VCN) and the Inferotemporal Cortex Network (ICN). The VCN is modeled with a classical CNN
backbone. The proposed ICN comprises three biologicallyinspired modules, i.e., the Cortex Functional Compartmentalization, the Compartment Response Transform, and the
Response Intensity Modulation. The experiments prove
that: 1) The cutting-edge findings about the human facerecognizing system can further boost the CNN-based FR
network. 2) With the biological mechanism, both identityrelated attributes (e.g., gender) and identity-unrelated attributes (e.g., expression) can benefit the deep FR models.
Surprisingly, the identity-unrelated ones contribute even
more than the identity-related ones. 3) The proposed BioNet
significantly boosts state-of-the-art on standard FR benchmark datasets. For example, BioNet boosts IJB-B@1e-6
from 52.12% to 68.28% and MegaFace from 98.74% to
99.19%. The source code is released in1 .
1 https://github.com/pengyuLPY/BioNet.git

Figure 1. (A) Face recognition mechanism of human brains. (B)
Architecture of BioNet.

1. Introduction
It sparked much discussion in both communities that
Zador, Bengio et al. [54] claimed fundamental Neuroscience research must be invested to accelerate AI progress.
Some researchers agree with Zador’s opinion. For example,
LeCun et al. [52] and Goodfellow et al. [10] proposed the
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) inspired by past classical Neuroscience discoveries about the human visual cortex. However, other researchers have some concerns, e.g.,
1) Except for the high-level and abstract senses from Neuroscience, can their specific studies support the AI fields? 2)
Since CNN [9,10,26,52] was proposed many years ago, few
AI works have been inspired by recent Neuroscience findings. It results in a lack of evidence to support that the latest
Neuroscience studies can continue to drive AI progress.
To show an idea and some experimental evidence to
this discussion, we focus on one of the most broadly researched topics in both fields, i.e., Face Recognition (FR).
The latest Neuroscience studies [1, 2, 7, 38, 51] found that

10344

