This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARO-Net: Learning Implicit Fields from Anchored Radial Observations
Yizhi Wang1,2 ,* Zeyu Huang1 ,* Ariel Shamir3 , Hui Huang1 , Hao Zhang2 , Ruizhen Hu1†
1
Shenzhen University 2 Simon Fraser University 3 Reichman University
Airplanes

Abstract
We introduce anchored radial observations (ARO), a novel
shape encoding for learning implicit field representation of
3D shapes that is category-agnostic and generalizable amid
significant shape variations. The main idea behind our work
is to reason about shapes through partial observations from
a set of viewpoints, called anchors. We develop a general and
unified shape representation by employing a fixed set of anchors, via Fibonacci sampling, and designing a coordinatebased deep neural network to predict the occupancy value of
a query point in space. Differently from prior neural implicit
models that use global shape feature, our shape encoder
operates on contextual, query-specific features. To predict
point occupancy, locally observed shape information from
the perspective of the anchors surrounding the input query
point are encoded and aggregated through an attention module, before implicit decoding is performed. We demonstrate
the quality and generality of our network, coined ARO-Net,
on surface reconstruction from sparse point clouds, with
tests on novel and unseen object categories, “one-shape”
training, and comparisons to state-of-the-art neural and
classical methods for reconstruction and tessellation.

1. Introduction
Despite the substantial progress made in deep learning in
recent years, transferability and generalizability issues still
persist due to domain shifts and the need to handle diverse,
out-of-distribution test cases. For 3D shape representation
learning, a reoccurring challenge has been the inability of
trained neural models to generalize to unseen object categories and diverse shape structures, as these models often
overfit to or “memorize" the training data.
In this paper, we introduce a novel shape encoding for
learning an implicit field [34] representation of 3D shapes
that is category-agnostic and generalizable amid significant
shape variations. In Figure 1 (top), we show 3D reconstructions from sparse point clouds obtained by our approach
that is trained on chairs but tested on airplanes, riffles, and
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author. E-mail: ruizhen.hu@gmail.com

Rifles

Animals

Input

ARO-Net

GT mesh
3D Reconstruction from sparse point clouds by ARO-Net trained on 4K chairs
ARO-Net trained on only the Fertility model with rotation and scaling
Input

ARO-Net
......

GT mesh
Training data

Figure 1. Neural 3D reconstruction using ARO-Net from sparse
point clouds (1,024 or 2,048 points). Top: reconstruction results
on airplanes, riffles, and animals when the network was trained
only on chairs. Bottom: reconstruction of a variety of shapes when
the network was train on numerous versions of one model - the
Fertility. See comparison to other methods in Section 4.

animals. Our model can even reconstruct a variety of shapes
when the training data consists of only one shape, augmented
with rotation and scaling; see Figure 1 (bottom).
The main idea behind our work is to reason about shapes
from partial observations at a set of viewpoints, called anchors, and apply this reasoning to learn implicit fields. We
develop a general and unified shape representation by designating a fixed set of anchors and designing a coordinatebased neural network to predict the occupancy at a query
point. In contrast to classical neural implicit models such as
IM-Net [8], OccNet [23], and DeepSDF [24], which learn
global shape features for occupancy/distance prediction, our
novel encoding scheme operates on local shape features
obtained by viewing the query point from the anchors.
Specifically, for a given query point x, we collect locally
observable shape information surrounding x, as well as directional and distance information toward x, from the perspective of the set of anchors, and encode such information using

3572

