This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Set Likelihood Maximization for Few-Shot Learning
Malik Boudiaf ∗
ÉTS Montreal

Etienne Bennequin*
Sicara - MICS †

Pablo Piantanida
ILLS - MILA - McGill - CNRS

Celine Hudelot
MICS†

Abstract
We tackle the Few-Shot Open-Set Recognition (FSOSR)
problem, i.e. classifying instances among a set of classes for
which we only have a few labeled samples, while simultaneously detecting instances that do not belong to any known
class. We explore the popular transductive setting, which
leverages the unlabelled query instances at inference. Motivated by the observation that existing transductive methods
perform poorly in open-set scenarios, we propose a generalization of the maximum likelihood principle, in which
latent scores down-weighing the influence of potential outliers are introduced alongside the usual parametric model.
Our formulation embeds supervision constraints from the
support set and additional penalties discouraging overconfident predictions on the query set. We proceed with a blockcoordinate descent, with the latent scores and parametric
model co-optimized alternately, thereby benefiting from each
other. We call our resulting formulation Open-Set Likelihood Optimization (OSLO). OSLO is interpretable and
fully modular; it can be applied on top of any pre-trained
model seamlessly. Through extensive experiments, we show
that our method surpasses existing inductive and transductive methods on both aspects of open-set recognition, namely
inlier classification and outlier detection. Code is available at https://github.com/ebennequin/fewshot-open-set.

1. Introduction
Few-shot classification consists in recognizing concepts
for which we have only a handful of labeled examples. These
form the support set, which, together with a batch of unlabeled instances (the query set), constitute a few-shot task.
* Equal
contribution.
Corresponding authors:
lik.boudiaf.1@etsmtl.net, etienneb@sicara.com}
† MICS, CentraleSupélec, Université Paris-Saclay

Myriam Tami
MICS †

{ma-

Antoine Toubhans
Sicara
Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal

Most few-shot methods classify the unlabeled query samples
of a given task based on their similarity to the support instances in some feature space [36]. This implicitly assumes
a closed-set setting for each task, i.e. query instances are
supposed to be constrained to the set of classes explicitly
defined by the support set. However, the real world is open
and this closed-set assumption may not hold in practice,
especially for limited support sets. Whether they are unexpected items circulating on an assembly line, a new dress
not yet included in a marketplace’s catalog, or a previously
undiscovered species of fungi, open-set instances occur everywhere. When they do, a closed-set classifier will falsely
label them as the closest known class.
This drove the research community toward open-set
recognition i.e. recognizing instances with the awareness
that they may belong to unknown classes. In large-scale
settings, the literature abounds of methods designed specifically to detect open-set instances while maintaining good
accuracy on closed-set instances [1, 32, 51]. Very recently,
the authors of [21] introduced a Few-Shot Open-Set Recognition (FSOSR) setting, in which query instances may not
belong to any known class. The study in [21], together with
other recent follow-up works [15, 16], exposed FSOSR to be
a difficult task.
To help alleviate the scarcity of labeled data, transduction
[38] was recently explored for few-shot classification [24],
and has since become a prominent research direction, fueling a large body of works, e.g. [3, 4, 9, 14, 23, 26, 40, 43, 52],
among many others. By leveraging the statistics of the query
set, transductive methods yield performances that are substantially better than their inductive counterparts [4, 40] in
the standard closed-set setting.
In this work, we seek to explore transduction for the
FSOSR setting. We argue that theoretically, transduction
has the potential to enable both classification and outlier
detection (OD) modules to act symbiotically. Indeed, the
classification module can reveal valuable structure of the

24007

