This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PLIKS: A Pseudo-Linear Inverse Kinematic Solver for 3D Human Body
Estimation
Karthik Shetty1,2 Annette Birkhold2 Srikrishna Jaganathan1,2 Norbert Strobel2,3
Markus Kowarschik2 Andreas Maier1 Bernhard Egger1
1

FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany 2 Siemens Healthineers AG, Forchheim, Germany
3
University of Applied Sciences Würzburg-Schweinfurt, Germany
karthik.shetty@fau.de

Pixel aligned prediction

Abstract
We introduce PLIKS (Pseudo-Linear Inverse Kinematic
Solver) for reconstruction of a 3D mesh of the human body
from a single 2D image. Current techniques directly regress
the shape, pose, and translation of a parametric model from
an input image through a non-linear mapping with minimal flexibility to any external influences. We approach the
task as a model-in-the-loop optimization problem. PLIKS
is built on a linearized formulation of the parametric SMPL
model. Using PLIKS, we can analytically reconstruct the
human model via 2D pixel-aligned vertices. This enables
us with the flexibility to use accurate camera calibration
information when available. PLIKS offers an easy way to
introduce additional constraints such as shape and translation. We present quantitative evaluations which confirm that
PLIKS achieves more accurate reconstruction with greater
than 10% improvement compared to other state-of-the-art
methods with respect to the standard 3D human pose and
shape benchmarks while also obtaining a reconstruction error improvement of 12.9 mm on the newer AGORA dataset.

1. Introduction
Estimating human surface meshes and poses from single
images is one of the core research directions in computer vision, allowing for multiple applications in computer graphics, robotics and augmented reality [14, 46]. Since humans
have complex body articulations and the scene parameters
are typically unknown, we are essentially dealing with an
ill-posed problem that is difficult to solve in general.
Thanks to models such as SMPL [35] and SMPL-X [44]
additional constraints on body shape and pose became available. They made the problem somewhat more tractable.
Most state-of-the-art methods [19, 21, 24, 27, 52] directly
regress the shape and pose parameters from a given input
image. These approaches rely completely on neural net-

Cropped region
pose estimate

v

d

u

Closed form solution
argminAx=b
θ,β,t

Figure 1. Network predicts a pixel-aligned vertex map (u, v, d)
which is used to obtain an initial pose estimate. Then a closedform solution is made use of to solve the Inverse kinematics
between the 2D pixel-aligned vertex map (u, v) and a pseudoparametric model given the detected bounding-box camera intrinsic and initial pose estimate.

works, while making several assumptions about the image
generation process. One typical assumption is the use of a
simplified camera model such as the weak perspective camera. In this scenario, the camera is assumed to be far away
from the subject, which is generally realized by setting a
large focal length constant for all images. A weak perspective camera can be described based on three parameters, two
with respect to translation in the horizontal and vertical directions, and the third being scale. While these methods can
estimate plausible shape and pose parameters, it can happen
that the resulting meshes are either misaligned in the 2D
image space or in the 3D object space. This is because the
underlying optimization problem is often not constrained
enough such that it is difficult for the underlying networks
to optimize between the 2D re-projection loss and the 3D
loss.
Some existing methods [23, 25, 31] propose a
workaround by tackling the problem using a hybrid

574

