This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KD-DLGAN: Data Limited Image Generation via Knowledge Distillation
Kaiwen Cui1 , Yingchen Yu1 , Fangneng Zhan2 , Shengcai Liao3 , Shijian Lu1 ,* Eric Xing4
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{Kaiwen.Cui, Yingchen.Yu, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg, fzhan@mpi-inf.mpg.de
shengcai.liao@inceptioniai.org, Eric.Xing@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) rely heavily
on large-scale training data for training high-quality image generation models. With limited training data, the GAN
discriminator often suffers from severe overfitting which directly leads to degraded generation especially in generation diversity. Inspired by the recent advances in knowledge
distillation (KD), we propose KD-DLGAN, a knowledgedistillation based generation framework that introduces
pre-trained vision-language models for training effective
data-limited generation models. KD-DLGAN consists of
two innovative designs. The first is aggregated generative
KD that mitigates the discriminator overfitting by challenging the discriminator with harder learning tasks and distilling more generalizable knowledge from the pre-trained
models. The second is correlated generative KD that improves the generation diversity by distilling and preserving the diverse image-text correlation within the pre-trained
models. Extensive experiments over multiple benchmarks
show that KD-DLGAN achieves superior image generation
with limited training data. In addition, KD-DLGAN complements the state-of-the-art with consistent and substantial
performance gains. Note that codes will be released.

120
100

FID( ) with ImageNet Data
BigGAN
DA
LeCam-GAN
DA + KD
KD-DLGAN

80
60
40
20
10% data

5% data

2.5% data

Figure 1. With limited training samples, state-of-the-art GANs
such as BigGAN suffer from clear discriminator overfitting which
directly leads to degraded generation. The recent work attempts to
mitigate the overfitting via mass data augmentation in DA [53] or
regularization in LeCam-GAN [40]. The proposed KD-DLGAN
distills the rich and diverse text-image knowledge from the powerful visual-language model to the discriminator which greatly mitigates the discriminator overfitting. Additionally, KD-DLGAN is
designed specifically for image generation tasks, which also outperforms the vanilla knowledge distillation (DA+KD) greatly.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12] have become the cornerstone technique in various image generation
tasks. On the other hand, effective training of GANs relies
heavily on large-scale training images that are usually laborious and expensive to collect. With limited training data,
the discriminator in GANs often suffers from severe overfitting [40, 53], leading to degraded generation as shown in
Fig. 1. Recent works attempt to address this issue from two
major perspectives: i) massive data augmentation that aims
* corresponding author.

to expand the distribution of the limited training data [53];
ii) model regularization that introduces regularizers to modulate the discriminator learning [40]. We intend to mitigate
the discriminator overfitting from a new perspective.
Recent studies show that knowledge distillation (KD)
from powerful vision-language models such as CLIP [36]
can effectively relieve network overfitting in visual recognition tasks [2, 9, 29, 42]. Inspired by these prior studies, we
explore KD for data-limited image generation, aiming to
mitigate the discriminator overfitting by distilling the rich

3872

