This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OTAvatar : One-shot Talking Face Avatar with Controllable Tri-plane Rendering
Zhiyuan Ma1,2 *

Xiangyu Zhu3 *
Guojun Qi4
Zhen Lei1,2,3†
Lei Zhang1
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
4
OPPO Research
zm2354.ma@connect.polyu.hk, xiangyu.zhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
guojunq@gmail.com, zlei@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Controllability, generalizability and efficiency are the
major objectives of constructing face avatars represented
by neural implicit field. However, existing methods have
not managed to accommodate the three requirements simultaneously. They either focus on static portraits, restricting the representation ability to a specific subject, or suffer
from substantial computational cost, limiting their flexibility. In this paper, we propose One-shot Talking face Avatar
(OTAvatar), which constructs face avatars by a generalized controllable tri-plane rendering solution so that each
personalized avatar can be constructed from only one portrait as the reference. Specifically, OTAvatar first inverts a
portrait image to a motion-free identity code. Second, the
identity code and a motion code are utilized to modulate
an efficient CNN to generate a tri-plane formulated volume,
which encodes the subject in the desired motion. Finally,
volume rendering is employed to generate an image in any
view. The core of our solution is a novel decoupling-byinverting strategy that disentangles identity and motion in
the latent code via optimization-based inversion. Benefiting from the efficient tri-plane representation, we achieve
controllable rendering of generalized face avatar at 35 FPS
on A100. Experiments show promising performance of
cross-identity reenactment on subjects out of the training
set and better 3D consistency. The code is available at
https://github.com/theEricMa/OTAvatar.

1. Introduction
Neural rendering has achieved remarkable progress and
promising results in 3D reconstruction. Thanks to the differentiability in neuron computation, the neural rendering
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Single
Reference

OTAvatar
ID Motion

Convs

Figure 1. OTAvatar animation results. The source subjects in
HDTF [43] dataset are animated by OTAvatar using a single portrait as the reference. We use the pose and expression coefficients
of 3DMM to represent motion and drive the avatar. Note that these
subjects are not included in the training data of OTAvatar.

methods bypass the expensive cost of high-fidelity digital 3D modeling, thus attracting the attention of many researchers from academia and industry. In this work, we aim
to generate a talking face avatar via neural rendering techniques, which is controllable by driving signals like video
and audio segments. Such animation is expected to inherit
the identity from reference portraits, while the expression
and pose can keep in sync with the driving signals.
The early works about talking face focus on expression
animation consistent with driving signals in constrained
frontal face images [5, 7, 27]. It is then extended to in-thewild scenes with pose variations [18, 35, 46, 47]. Many

16901

