This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stare at What You See: Masked Image Modeling without Reconstruction
Hongwei Xue1,2 ,* Peng Gao2,3†, Hongyang Li2†, Yu Qiao2 , Hao Sun4 , Houqiang Li1 , Jiebo Luo5
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
4
China Telecom Corporation Ltd. Data&AI Technology Company 5 University of Rochester

Abstract
Masked Autoencoders (MAE) have been prevailing
paradigms for large-scale vision representation pretraining. By reconstructing masked image patches from
a small portion of visible image regions, MAE forces the
model to infer semantic correlation within an image. Recently, some approaches apply semantic-rich teacher models to extract image features as the reconstruction target,
leading to better performance. However, unlike the lowlevel features such as pixel values, we argue the features
extracted by powerful teacher models already encode rich
semantic correlation across regions in an intact image. This
raises one question: is reconstruction necessary in Masked
Image Modeling (MIM) with a teacher model? In this paper,
we propose an efficient MIM paradigm named MaskAlign.
MaskAlign simply learns the consistency of visible patch
features extracted by the student model and intact image
features extracted by the teacher model. To further advance the performance and tackle the problem of input inconsistency between the student and teacher model, we propose a Dynamic Alignment (DA) module to apply learnable alignment. Our experimental results demonstrate that
masked modeling does not lose effectiveness even without reconstruction on masked regions. Combined with
Dynamic Alignment, MaskAlign can achieve state-of-theart performance with much higher efficiency. Code and
models will be available at https://github.com/
OpenPerceptionX/maskalign.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Vision Transformers are showing
tremendous potential in computer vision area [8, 40, 41].
Following the big success of masked modeling in the natural language processing [24], Masked Image Modeling
* This work was performed when Hongwei Xue was visiting Shanghai
AI Laboratory as a research intern.
† Corresponding authors.

Decoder

Encoder

Add Position Embedding

(a)
Visible

Encoder

Masked

Encoder

Target
Head

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Comparison with existing paradigms of masked image modeling. (a) Inpainting-style: BEiT [3], MaskFeat [43],
MVP [44], BEiT V2 [33], etc. They take the whole image with
some mask token replacement as the input of Encoder. Then a
Linear head is applied to predict masked feature. (b) Decoderstyle: MAE [13], CAE [5], MCMAE [11], etc. They drop most
tokens and take the rest as the input of Encoder. Then a multi-layer
Transformer is applied to decode masked features from visible tokens. (c) Ours.: Our paradigm take some visible tokens as the
input of Encoder and align visible tokens with target features only.

(MIM) has demonstrated a great ability of self-supervised
learning [3, 13], while alleviating the data-hungry issue
of Transformer architectures. The visual representation
learned through MIM shows promising performance on
various downstream vision tasks, outperforming the contrastive learning paradigms [4, 6].
Existing Masked Image Modeling (MIM) methods aim
to hallucinate the intact image from a small portion of visible image regions. As depicted in Fig. 1, existing MIM
methods are mainly divided into two types: (a) inpaintingstyle [3, 43, 46] and (b) decoder-style [5, 11, 13]. These two
types both require the model to reconstruct masked regions.
The inpainting-style models replace image regions with
learnable vectors then fill them by the interaction within the
encoder. The decoder-style models drop image regions then
decode features from masked regions’ positions based on

22732

