This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Token Contrast for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Lixiang Ru1 Heliang Zheng2 Yibing Zhan2 Bo Du1 *
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science,
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software and Hubei Key Laboratory
of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, China.
2
JD Explore Academy, China
{rulixiang, dubo}@whu.edu.cn

{zhengheliang,zhanyibing}@jd.com

Abstract
Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) using image-level labels typically utilizes Class Activation
Map (CAM) to generate the pseudo labels. Limited by the
local structure perception of CNN, CAM usually cannot
identify the integral object regions. Though the recent Vision Transformer (ViT) can remedy this flaw, we observe it
also brings the over-smoothing issue, i.e., the final patch tokens incline to be uniform. In this work, we propose Token
Contrast (ToCo) to address this issue and further explore
the virtue of ViT for WSSS. Firstly, motivated by the observation that intermediate layers in ViT can still retain semantic diversity, we designed a Patch Token Contrast module (PTC). PTC supervises the final patch tokens with the
pseudo token relations derived from intermediate layers, allowing them to align the semantic regions and thus yield
more accurate CAM. Secondly, to further differentiate the
low-confidence regions in CAM, we devised a Class Token
Contrast module (CTC) inspired by the fact that class tokens
in ViT can capture high-level semantics. CTC facilitates the
representation consistency between uncertain local regions
and global objects by contrasting their class tokens. Experiments on the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets show
the proposed ToCo can remarkably surpass other singlestage competitors and achieve comparable performance
with state-of-the-art multi-stage methods. Code is available
at https://github.com/rulixiang/ToCo.

1. Introduction
To reduce the expensive annotation costs of deep semantic segmentation models, weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) is proposed to predict pixel-level predictions with only weak and cheap annotations, such as imagelevel labels [2], points [4], scribbles [51] and bounding
* Corresponding author. This work was done when Lixiang Ru was a
research intern at JD Explore Academy.

CAM

Map

CAM

Map
1

0
1

0
1

0

(a) Image

(b) ViT baseline

(c) Ours

Figure 1. The generated CAM and the pairwise cosine similarity of patch tokens (sim. map). Our method can address the
over-smoothing issue well and produce accurate CAM. Here we
use ViT-Base.

boxes [23]. Among all these annotation forms, the imagelevel label is the cheapest and contains the least information. This work also falls in the field of WSSS using only
image-level labels.
Prevalent works of WSSS using image-level labels typically derive Class Activation Map (CAM) [53] or its variants [35] as pseudo labels. The pseudo labels are then processed with alternative refinement methods [1, 2] and used
to train regular semantic segmentation models. However,
CAM is usually flawed since it typically only identifies the
most discriminative semantic regions, severely weakening
the final performance of semantic segmentation [1, 19, 43].
The recent works [15, 34, 47] show one reason is that previous methods usually generate CAM with CNN, in which
convolution only perceives local features and fails to activate the integral object regions. To ameliorate this problem
and generate more accurate pseudo labels for WSSS, these
works propose solutions based on the recent Vision Transformer (ViT) architecture [12], which inherently models the
global feature interactions with self-attention blocks.
However, as demonstrated in [29, 42], self-attention in
ViT is essentially a low-pass filter, which inclines to reduce the variance of input signals. Therefore, stacking selfattention blocks is equivalent to repeatedly performing spatial smoothing operations, which encourages the patch to-

3093

