This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JacobiNeRF: NeRF Shaping with Mutual Information Gradients
Xiaomeng Xu1,∗
1

Yanchao Yang2,3,∗,†

Kaichun Mo3,4

Boxiao Pan3

Li Yi1,5,6

Leonidas Guibas3,7

Tsinghua University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Stanford University 4 NVIDIA Research
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory 6 Shanghai Qizhi Institute 7 Google Research

Figure 1. Left: a physical scene is composed of mutually-correlated entities, e.g., points belonging to the same part or object. We pursue a
subspace of the parameters of an implicit scene representation so that when the scene is perturbed along the gradient of a specific point, a
resonance emerges with other points having high mutual information. For example, if the brightness of a point p on the wall changes, the
other wall points should also change coherently (while points on the ceiling should be unaffected). Right: a comparison between responses
to perturbations along the gradient of the highlighted red point in the scene. The response from the original NeRF spreads all over the
scene, while the localized response from the proposed JacobiNeRF demonstrates coherence between points with similar semantics.

Abstract
We propose a method that trains a neural radiance field
(NeRF) to encode not only the appearance of the scene but
also semantic correlations between scene points, regions, or
entities – aiming to capture their mutual co-variation patterns. In contrast to the traditional first-order photometric reconstruction objective, our method explicitly regularizes the learning dynamics to align the Jacobians of highlycorrelated entities, which proves to maximize the mutual
information between them under random scene perturbations. By paying attention to this second-order information,
we can shape a NeRF to express semantically meaningful
synergies when the network weights are changed by a delta
along the gradient of a single entity, region, or even a point.
To demonstrate the merit of this mutual information modeling, we leverage the coordinated behavior of scene entities
* Equal Contributions
† Corresponding Author <yanchaoy@hku.hk>. The author is also af-

filiated with the HKU Musketeers Foundation Institute of Data Science.

that emerges from our shaping to perform label propagation
for semantic and instance segmentation. Our experiments
show that a JacobiNeRF is more efficient in propagating
annotations among 2D pixels and 3D points compared to
NeRFs without mutual information shaping, especially in
extremely sparse label regimes – thus reducing annotation
burden. The same machinery can further be used for entity
selection or scene modifications. Our code is available at
https://github.com/xxm19/jacobinerf.

1. Introduction
When a real-world scene is perturbed, the response is
generally local and semantically meaningful, e.g., a slight
knock on a chair will result in a small displacement of just
that chair. Such coherence in the perturbation of a scene
evidences high mutual information between certain scene
points or entities that can be leveraged to discover instances
or semantic groups [37, 38]. A NeRF scene representation,
however, solely supervised with 2D photometric loss may
not converge to a configuration that reflects the actual scene

16498

