This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ASPnet: Action Segmentation with Shared-Private Representation
of Multiple Data Sources
Beatrice van Amsterdam1,2 , Abdolrahim Kadkhodamohammadi2 , Imanol Luengo2 , Danail Stoyanov1,2
1
Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences,
2
Medtronic plc

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art methods for action segmentation
are based on single input modalities or naı̈ve fusion of multiple data sources. However, effective fusion of complementary information can potentially strengthen segmentation models and make them more robust to sensor noise
and more accurate with smaller training datasets. In order
to improve multimodal representation learning for action
segmentation, we propose to disentangle hidden features
of a multi-stream segmentation model into modality-shared
components, containing common information across data
sources, and private components; we then use an attention
bottleneck to capture long-range temporal dependencies in
the data while preserving disentanglement in consecutive
processing layers. Evaluation on 50salads, Breakfast and
RARP45 datasets shows that our multimodal approach outperforms different data fusion baselines on both multiview
and multimodal data sources, obtaining competitive or better results compared with the state-of-the-art. Our model is
also more robust to additive sensor noise and can achieve
performance on par with strong video baselines even with
less training data.

1. Introduction
Action segmentation is the task of predicting which action is occurring at each frame in untrimmed videos of complex and semantically structured human activities [18, 32].
While conventional methods for human action understanding focus on classification of short video clips [6, 27, 34],
action segmentation models have to learn the semantics of
This research was funded in part by the Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Interventional and Surgical Sciences (WEISS) [203145/Z/16/Z];
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
[EP/P012841/1]; and the Royal Academy of Engineering Chair in Emerging Technologies Scheme. For the purpose of open access, the author
has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any author accepted
manuscript version arising from this submission.

Figure 1. Different paradigms for multi-source data fusion via
(a) early fusion, (b) disentanglement of modality-shared and
modality-specific representations (our model) and (c) late fusion;
(d) Example from 50salads highlighting shared and private information that can be extracted from video and accelerometer data.
While both modalities can detect the activation of relevant tools
and common motion cues, RGB videos additionally capture fundamental details about objects without acceleration sensors and their
state (e.g. chopped tomatoes), the overall spatial configuration and
the localization of motion in the scene. Accelerometer signals,
on the other hand, contain explicit and complementary information about 3D fine motion patterns of activated objects and their
co-occurrence. In the presence of noise (e.g. video occlusions) or
other variability factors, some shared attributes could become part
of the private space of the uncorrupted modality.

all action classes as well as their temporal boundaries and
contextual relations, which is challenging and requires the
design of efficient strategies to capture long range temporal
information and inter-action correlations.
Recent methods for action segmentation input precomputed low-dimensional visual features [6, 11] into different long-range temporal processing units, such as temporal convolutions [11, 19], temporal self-attention [38, 45]
or graph neural networks [46]. While these methods utilize

2384

