This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A New Comprehensive Benchmark for
Semi-supervised Video Anomaly Detection and Anticipation
Congqi Cao†
Yue Lu
Peng Wang
Yanning Zhang
ASGO, School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
congqi.cao@nwpu.edu.cn zugexiaodui@mail.nwpu.edu.cn {peng.wang, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised video anomaly detection (VAD) is a
critical task in the intelligent surveillance system. However, an essential type of anomaly in VAD named scenedependent anomaly has not received the attention of researchers. Moreover, there is no research investigating
anomaly anticipation, a more significant task for preventing
the occurrence of anomalous events. To this end, we propose a new comprehensive dataset, NWPU Campus, containing 43 scenes, 28 classes of abnormal events, and 16
hours of videos. At present, it is the largest semi-supervised
VAD dataset with the largest number of scenes and classes
of anomalies, the longest duration, and the only one considering the scene-dependent anomaly. Meanwhile, it is
also the first dataset proposed for video anomaly anticipation. We further propose a novel model capable of detecting and anticipating anomalous events simultaneously.
Compared with 7 outstanding VAD algorithms in recent
years, our method can cope with scene-dependent anomaly
detection and anomaly anticipation both well, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on ShanghaiTech, CUHK Avenue, IITB Corridor and the newly proposed NWPU Campus datasets consistently. Our dataset and code is available
at: https://campusvad.github.io.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) is widely applied in
public safety and intelligent surveillance due to its ability to
detect unexpected abnormal events in videos. Since anomalous events are characterized by unbounded categories and
rare occurrence in practice, VAD is commonly set as a semisupervised task, that is, there are only normal events without
specific labels in the training set [1, 2]. The model trained
only on the normal events needs to distinguish anomalous
events from normal events in the testing phase.
Semi-supervised VAD has been studied for years. Espe† Corresponding author

cially in recent years, reconstruction-based and predictionbased methods [3–21] have made leaps and bounds in performance on existing datasets. For example, the framelevel AUCs (area under curve) on UCSD Ped1 and Ped2
datasets [22] have reached over 97% [2]. Despite the emergence of a few challenging datasets, researchers still overlook an important type of anomaly, i.e., the scene-dependent
anomaly [2]. Scene dependency refers to that an event is
normal in one scene but abnormal in another. For example,
playing football on the playground is a normal behavior,
but playing on the road is abnormal. Note that single-scene
datasets cannot contain any scene-dependent anomaly. Nevertheless, the existing multi-scene datasets (e.g., ShanghaiTech [23], UBnormal [24]) also have not taken this type
of anomaly into account. As a result, there is currently no
algorithm for studying scene-dependent anomaly detection,
limiting the comprehensive evaluation of VAD algorithms.
In addition to detecting various types of anomalies, we argue that there is another task that also deserves the attention
of researchers, which is to anticipate the occurrence of abnormal events in advance. If we can make an early warning
before the anomalous event occurs based on the trend of
the event, it is of great significance to prevent dangerous
accidents and avoid loss of life and property. However, according to our investigation, there is no research on video
anomaly anticipation, and no dataset or algorithm has been
proposed for this field.
In this paper, we work on semi-supervised video
anomaly detection and anticipation. First and foremost,
to address the issue that the VAD datasets lack scenedependent anomalies and are not suitable for anomaly anticipation, we propose a new large-scale dataset, NWPU
Campus. Compared with existing datasets, our proposed
dataset mainly has the following three advantages. First,
to the best of our knowledge, the NWPU Campus is the
largest semi-supervised VAD dataset to date. It contains
43 scenes, whose number is 3 times that of ShanghaiTech,
the real recorded dataset with the largest number of scenes
among the existing datasets. The total video duration of the
NWPU Campus is 16 hours, which is more than 3 times that

20392

