This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vector Quantization with Self-Attention for Quality-Independent
Representation Learning
Zhou Yang1

Weisheng Dong 1 * Xin Li2 Mengluan Huang1 Yulin Sun1
1
Xidian University 2 West Virginia University

{yang zhou,mlhuang}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
xin.li@mail.wvu.edu

Guangming Shi1

{wsdong,gmshi}@mail.xidian.edu.cn
daitusun@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, the robustness of deep neural networks has
drawn extensive attention due to the potential distribution
shift between training and testing data (e.g., deep models trained on high-quality images are sensitive to corruption during testing). Many researchers attempt to make
the model learn invariant representations from multiple
corrupted data through data augmentation or image-pairbased feature distillation to improve the robustness. Inspired by sparse representation in image restoration, we opt
to address this issue by learning image-quality-independent
feature representation in a simple plug-and-play manner,
that is, to introduce discrete vector quantization (VQ) to remove redundancy in recognition models. Specifically, we
first add a codebook module to the network to quantize
deep features. Then we concatenate them and design a
self-attention module to enhance the representation. During
training, we enforce the quantization of features from clean
and corrupted images in the same discrete embedding space
so that an invariant quality-independent feature representation can be learned to improve the recognition robustness
of low-quality images. Qualitative and quantitative experimental results show that our method achieved this goal effectively, leading to a new state-of-the-art result of 43.1 %
mCE on ImageNet-C with ResNet50 as the backbone. On
other robustness benchmark datasets, such as ImageNet-R,
our method also has an accuracy improvement of almost
2%. The source code is available at https://see.
xidian.edu.cn/faculty/wsdong/Projects/
VQSA.htm

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the remarkable development of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) in
many recognition tasks, such as classification [9,20,31,46],
* Corresponding author.

(a) Image

(b) Clean

(c) QualNet

(d) Ours

Figure 1. The Grad-CAM [45] maps of different models on defocus blur images. (a) The clean images. (b) The maps of vanilla
ResNet50 [20] model on clean images. (c) and (d) show the maps
of QualNet50 [29] and our proposed method on defocus blur images with severity level 3. The results show that our method still
can focus on the salient object area without being seriously affected by corruption. Best viewed in color.

detection [43, 48] and segmentation [5, 19]. Although
its performance has exceeded that of humans in some
datasets, its robustness still lags behind [10, 15]. Many researchers [11, 21, 22, 53] have shown that the performance
of deep models trained in high-quality data decreases dramatically with low-quality data encountered during deployment, which usually contain common corruptions, including blur, noise, and weather influence. For example, the
vanilla ResNet50 model has an accuracy of 76 % in the
clean ImageNet validation set, but its average accuracy is
less than 30 % in the same dataset contaminated by Gaussian noise.
As shown in Fig. 1, the model’s attention map is seriously affected by image quality. That is, the model pays

24438

