This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imagic: Text-Based Real Image Editing with Diffusion Models
Bahjat Kawar˚ 1,2
Huiwen Chang1
1

Input Image

Google Research

Edited Image

Target Text:

“A bird spreading
wings”

Target Text:

“A sitting dog”

Shiran Zada˚ 1
Tali Dekel1,3
2

Oran Lang1
Inbar Mosseri1
3

Technion

Input Image

Omer Tov1
Michal Irani1,3

Weizmann Institute of Science

Edited Image

“A person giving
the thumbs up”

Input Image

Edited Image

“A goat jumping
over a cat”

“Two kissing
“A children’s drawing
parrots”
of a waterfall”
Figure 1. Imagic – Editing a single real image. Our method can perform various text-based semantic edits on a single real input image,
including highly complex non-rigid changes such as posture changes and editing multiple objects. Here, we show pairs of 1024ˆ1024
input (real) images, and edited outputs with their respective target texts.

Abstract
Text-conditioned image editing has recently attracted
considerable interest. However, most methods are currently limited to one of the following: speciﬁc editing types
(e.g., object overlay, style transfer), synthetically generated
images, or requiring multiple input images of a common
object. In this paper we demonstrate, for the very ﬁrst
time, the ability to apply complex (e.g., non-rigid) textbased semantic edits to a single real image. For example, we can change the posture and composition of one
or multiple objects inside an image, while preserving its
original characteristics. Our method can make a standing dog sit down, cause a bird to spread its wings, etc.
– each within its single high-resolution user-provided natural image. Contrary to previous work, our proposed
method requires only a single input image and a target
text (the desired edit). It operates on real images, and
˚ Equal contribution.

The ﬁrst author performed this work as an intern at Google Research.
Project page: https://imagic-editing.github.io/.

does not require any additional inputs (such as image
masks or additional views of the object). Our method,
called Imagic, leverages a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model for this task. It produces a text embedding
that aligns with both the input image and the target text,
while ﬁne-tuning the diffusion model to capture the imagespeciﬁc appearance. We demonstrate the quality and versatility of Imagic on numerous inputs from various domains,
showcasing a plethora of high quality complex semantic
image edits, all within a single uniﬁed framework. To better
assess performance, we introduce TEdBench, a highly challenging image editing benchmark. We conduct a user study,
whose ﬁndings show that human raters prefer Imagic to previous leading editing methods on TEdBench.

1. Introduction
Applying non-trivial semantic edits to real photos has
long been an interesting task in image processing [41].
It has attracted considerable interest in recent years, enabled by the considerable advancements of deep learningbased systems. Image editing becomes especially impres-

6007

