This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual DNA:
Representing and Comparing Images using Distributions of Neuron Activations
Benjamin Ramtoula
Matthew Gadd
Paul Newman
Daniele De Martini
Mobile Robotics Group, University of Oxford
{benjamin, mattgadd, pnewman, daniele}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Selecting appropriate datasets is critical in modern computer vision. However, no general-purpose tools exist to
evaluate the extent to which two datasets differ. For this, we
propose representing images – and by extension datasets –
using Distributions of Neuron Activations (DNAs). DNAs fit
distributions, such as histograms or Gaussians, to activations of neurons in a pre-trained feature extractor through
which we pass the image(s) to represent. This extractor is
frozen for all datasets, and we rely on its generally expressive power in feature space. By comparing two DNAs, we
can evaluate the extent to which two datasets differ with
granular control over the comparison attributes of interest, providing the ability to customise the way distances
are measured to suit the requirements of the task at hand.
Furthermore, DNAs are compact, representing datasets of
any size with less than 15 megabytes. We demonstrate the
value of DNAs by evaluating their applicability on several
tasks, including conditional dataset comparison, synthetic
image evaluation, and transfer learning, and across diverse
datasets, ranging from synthetic cat images to celebrity
faces and urban driving scenes.

Target domain

…
BDD100K

Project page and code: bramtoula.github.io/vdna

IDD

KITTI

(a) When deploying a vision model in a new target domain, selecting models pre-trained on the most relevant datasets can help. However, there are
no methods to measure dataset similarities automatically. A general distance between datasets would be sensitive to many variation types, but
DNAs provide sufficient granularity to customise the comparison to focus
on features of interest. For example, DNA comparisons can be customised
to ignore weather conditions or focus on semantic content

1. Introduction
Being able to compare datasets and understanding how
they differ is critical for many applications, including deciding which labelled dataset is best to train a model for deployment in an unlabelled application domain, sequencing
curricula with gradually increasing domain gap, evaluating
the quality of synthesised images, and curating images to
mitigate dataset biases.
However, we currently lack such capabilities. For example, driving datasets available covering many domains [2,
4, 9, 16, 17, 22, 35, 54, 62, 64] were collected under diverse
conditions typically affecting image appearance (e.g. location, sensor configuration, weather conditions, and post-

WildDash

Real horses

Fake horse

Person 1

Person 2

(b) The DNA can also be used to compare individual images to datasets
– for example, to measure the realism and semantic consistency of a synthetic image – or pairs of images – for example, to verify the presence of
similar attributes such as smiling or wearing a hat.

Figure 1. Example use-cases of the DNA representation.

processing). Yet, users are limited to coarse or insufficient
meta-information to understand these differences. Moreover, depending on the application, it might be desirable to

11113

