This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient Norm Aware Minimization Seeks First-Order Flatness and Improves
Generalization
Xingxuan Zhang† , Renzhe Xu† , Han Yu, Hao Zou, Peng Cui*
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, xrz199721@gmail.com
yuh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zouh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

ZOF

FOF
ρ

(a)
Testing

ZOF

Training

FOF

†Equal contribution, *Corresponding author

ZOF

Current neural networks have achieved promising results
in a wide range of fields [36, 53, 55, 67, 73–75, 78], yet they
are typically heavily over-parameterized [2, 3]. Such heavy
overparameterization leads to severe overfitting and poor
generalization to unseen data when the model is learned
simply with common loss functions (e.g., cross-entropy)
[27]. Thus effective training algorithms are required to limit
the negative effects of overfitting training data and find gen-

ρ

FOF

1. Introduction

Testing
FOF

Recently, flat minima are proven to be effective for improving generalization and sharpness-aware minimization
(SAM) achieves state-of-the-art performance. Yet the current definition of flatness discussed in SAM and its followups are limited to the zeroth-order flatness (i.e., the worstcase loss within a perturbation radius). We show that the
zeroth-order flatness can be insufficient to discriminate minima with low generalization error from those with high generalization error both when there is a single minimum or
multiple minima within the given perturbation radius. Thus
we present first-order flatness, a stronger measure of flatness focusing on the maximal gradient norm within a perturbation radius which bounds both the maximal eigenvalue
of Hessian at local minima and the regularization function
of SAM. We also present a novel training procedure named
Gradient norm Aware Minimization (GAM) to seek minima
with uniformly small curvature across all directions. Experimental results show that GAM improves the generalization of models trained with current optimizers such as SGD
and AdamW on various datasets and networks. Furthermore, we show that GAM can help SAM find flatter minima
and achieve better generalization. The code is available at
https://github.com/xxgege/GAM .

Training

ZOF

Abstract

ρ

ρ

(b)

Figure 1. The comparison of the zeroth-order flatness (ZOF) and
first-order flatness (FOF). Given a perturbation radius ρ, ZOF can
fail to indicate generalization error both when there are multiple minima (1a) and a single minimum (1b) in the radius while
FOF remains discriminative. The height of blue rectangles in
curly brackets is the value of ZOF and the height of gray triangles (which indicates the slope) is the value of FOF. In Figure 1a,
when ρ is large and enough to cover multiple minima, ZOF can
not measure the fluctuation frequency while FOF prefers the flatter valley which has a smaller gradient norm. When ρ is small
and covers only a single minimum, the maximum loss in ρ can be
misleading as it can be misaligned with the uptrend of loss. As
shown in Figure 1b, ZOF prefers the valley on the right, which has
a larger generalization error (the orange dotted line), while FOF
prefers the left one.

eralizable solutions.
Many studies try to improve model generalization by
modifying the training procedure, such as batch normalization [26], dropout [24], and data augmentation [13, 68,
72]. Especially, some works discuss the connection between the geometry of the loss landscape and generalization [19, 22, 27]. A branch of effective approaches,
sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) [19] and its variants
[16, 17, 34, 43, 48, 77], minimizes the worst-case loss within
a perturbation radius, which we call zeroth-order flatness. It
is proven that optimizing the zeroth-order flatness leads to
lower generalization error and achieves state-of-the-art per-

20247

