This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Egocentric Video Task Translation
Zihui Xue1,2 * Yale Song2 Kristen Grauman1,2 Lorenzo Torresani2
1
2
The University of Texas at Austin
FAIR, Meta AI
Abstract

projects/egot2/.

g?
Who is speakin

...

Did the object go
through a state change?

EgoT2

Holistic
Egocentric
Perception

small

* Work done during an internship at FAIR, Meta AI.
1 Project webpage:
https : / / vision . cs . utexas . edu /

What will I
do next?

Task Relatedness

In recent years, the introduction of large-scale
video datasets (e.g., Kinetics [6, 33] and SomethingSomething [22]) have enabled the application of powerful
deep learning models to video understanding and have
led to dramatic advances. These third-person datasets,
however, have overwhelmingly focused on the single task
of action recognition in trimmed clips [12, 36, 47, 64].
Unlike curated third-person videos, our daily life involves
frequent and heterogeneous interactions with other humans, objects, and environments in the wild. First-person
videos from wearable cameras capture the observer’s
perspective and attention as a continuous stream. As such,

What am I doing
?

large

1. Introduction

When did I
knead dough?

g
talkin
Is she e?
m
to

Task of Interest

Different video understanding tasks are typically treated
in isolation, and even with distinct types of curated data
(e.g., classifying sports in one dataset, tracking animals
in another). However, in wearable cameras, the immersive egocentric perspective of a person engaging with the
world around them presents an interconnected web of video
understanding tasks—hand-object manipulations, navigation in the space, or human-human interactions—that unfold continuously, driven by the person’s goals. We argue
that this calls for a much more unified approach. We propose EgoTask Translation (EgoT2), which takes a collection of models optimized on separate tasks and learns to
translate their outputs for improved performance on any or
all of them at once. Unlike traditional transfer or multitask learning, EgoT2’s “flipped design” entails separate
task-specific backbones and a task translator shared across
all tasks, which captures synergies between even heterogeneous tasks and mitigates task competition. Demonstrating our model on a wide array of video tasks from Ego4D,
we show its advantages over existing transfer paradigms
and achieve top-ranked results on four of the Ego4D 2022
benchmark challenges.1

Is she looking at me?

What will I do next?
[Task 1][Task 2][Task 3][Task 4]

Auxiliary Tasks

Figure 1. Given a set of diverse egocentric video tasks, the proposed EgoT2 leverages synergies among the tasks to improve each
individual task performance. The attention maps produced by
EgoT2 offer good interpretability on inherent task relations.

they are better equipped to reveal these multi-faceted,
spontaneous interactions. Indeed egocentric datasets, such
as EPIC-Kitchens [9] and Ego4D [23], provide suites
of tasks associated with varied interactions. However,
while these benchmarks have promoted a broader and
more heterogeneous view of video understanding, they
risk perpetuating the fragmented development of models
specialized for each individual task.
In this work, we argue that the egocentric perspective
offers an opportunity for holistic perception that can beneficially leverage synergies among video tasks to solve all
problems in a unified manner. See Figure 1.
Imagine a cooking scenario where the camera wearer actively interacts with objects and other people in an environment while preparing dinner. These interactions relate to
each other: a hand grasping a knife suggests the upcoming
action of cutting; the view of a tomato on a cutting board
suggests that the object is likely to undergo a state transition from whole to chopped; the conversation may further
reveal the camera wearer’s ongoing and planned actions.

2310

