This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imagen Editor and EditBench: Advancing and Evaluating
Text-Guided Image Inpainting
Su Wang∗ Chitwan Saharia∗ Ceslee Montgomery∗
Jordi Pont-Tuset Shai Noy Stefano Pellegrini Yasumasa Onoe
Sarah Laszlo David J. Fleet Radu Soricut Jason Baldridge
Mohammad Norouzi† Peter Anderson† William Chan†

Google Research

Figure 1. A sequence of edits by Imagen Editor. Given an image, a user defined mask, and a text prompt, Imagen Editor makes localized
edits to the designated areas. The model meaningfully incorporates the user’s intent and performs photorealistic edits.

Abstract
Text-guided image editing can have a transformative impact in supporting creative applications. A key challenge
is to generate edits that are faithful to input text prompts,
while consistent with input images. We present Imagen Editor, a cascaded diffusion model built, by fine-tuning Imagen [36] on text-guided image inpainting. Imagen Editor’s edits are faithful to the text prompts, which is accomplished by using object detectors to propose inpainting masks during training. In addition, Imagen Editor captures fine details in the input image by conditioning the cascaded pipeline on the original high resolution image. To improve qualitative and quantitative evaluation, we introduce
EditBench, a systematic benchmark for text-guided image
inpainting. EditBench evaluates inpainting edits on natural and generated images exploring objects, attributes, and
scenes. Through extensive human evaluation on EditBench,
we find that object-masking during training leads to acrossthe-board improvements in text-image alignment – such that
Imagen Editor is preferred over DALL-E 2 [31] and Stable
Diffusion [33] – and, as a cohort, these models are better
at object-rendering than text-rendering, and handle material/color/size attributes better than count/shape attributes.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generation has seen a surge of recent interest [31, 33, 36, 50, 51]. While these generative models are
surprisingly effective, users with specific artistic and design needs do not typically obtain the desired outcome in a
single interaction with the model. Text-guided image editing can enhance the image generation experience by supporting interactive refinement [13, 17, 34, 46]. We focus on
text-guided image inpainting, where a user provides an image, a masked area, and a text prompt and the model fills
the masked area, consistent with both the prompt and the
image context (Fig. 1). This complements mask-free editing [13, 17, 46] with the precision of localized edits [5, 27].
This paper contributes to the modeling and evaluation of
text-guided image inpainting. Our modeling contribution is
Imagen Editor,2 a text-guided image editor that combines
large scale language representations with fine-grained control to produce high fidelity outputs. Imagen Editor is a
cascaded diffusion model that extends Imagen [36] through
finetuning for text-guided image inpainting. Imagen Editor adds image and mask context to each diffusion stage via
three convolutional downsampling image encoders (Fig. 2).
A key challenge in text-guided image inpainting is ensuring that generated outputs are faithful to the text prompts.
The standard training procedure uses randomly masked re-

∗ Equal contribution. † Equal advisory contribution.

2 https://imagen.research.google/editor/

18359

