This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Controllable Light Diffusion for Portraits
David Futschik1,2 Kelvin Ritland1 James Vecore1 Sean Fanello1
Sergio Orts-Escolano1 Brian Curless1,3 Daniel Sýkora1,2 Rohit Pandey1
1

Google Research

2

CTU in Prague, FEE

3

University of Washington

Figure 1. Our method enables control over the diffuseness of light in arbitrary portrait images. We first extract specular/shadow maps from
the input image and then produce a fully diffuse image. Additionally, we show how to recover a uniformly lit image, i.e. tinted by the
average light color, from which we can estimate the untinted albedo. The bottom row illustrates the application of editing the input photo
by gradually increasing the amount of light diffusion.

Abstract
We introduce light diffusion, a novel method to improve lighting in portraits, softening harsh shadows and
specular highlights while preserving overall scene illumination. Inspired by professional photographers’ diffusers
and scrims, our method softens lighting given only a single
portrait photo. Previous portrait relighting approaches focus on changing the entire lighting environment, removing
shadows (ignoring strong specular highlights), or removing
shading entirely. In contrast, we propose a learning based
method that allows us to control the amount of light diffusion and apply it on in-the-wild portraits. Additionally, we
design a method to synthetically generate plausible external
shadows with sub-surface scattering effects while conforming to the shape of the subject’s face. Finally, we show how
our approach can increase the robustness of higher level vision applications, such as albedo estimation, geometry estimation and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
High quality lighting of a subject is essential for capturing beautiful portraits. Professional photographers go to
great lengths and cost to control lighting. Outside the studio, natural lighting can be particularly harsh due to direct
sunlight, resulting in strong shadows and pronounced specular effects across a subject’s face. While the effect can be
dramatic, it is usually not the desired look. Professional
photographers often address this problem with a scrim or
diffuser (Figure 2), mounted on a rig along the line of sight
from the sun to soften the shadows and specular highlights,
leading to much more pleasing portraits [9]. Casual photographers, however, generally lack the equipment, expertise,
or even the desire to spend time in the moment to perfect the
lighting in this way. We take inspiration from professional
photography and propose to diffuse the lighting on a subject in an image, i.e., directly estimating the appearance of
the person as though the lighting had been softer, enabling
anyone to improve the lighting in their photos after the shot

8412

