This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ECON: Explicit Clothed humans Optimized via Normal integration
Yuliang Xiu1

Jinlong Yang1

Xu Cao2

Dimitrios Tzionas3

Michael J. Black1

1

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Osaka University, Japan 3 University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

{yuliang.xiu, jinlong.yang, black}@tue.mpg.de

cao.xu@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

d.tzionas@uva.nl

Back

Front

d-BiNI

Input Image

Front & Back Normal Estimation (2D)

Shape Completion

Front & Back d-BiNI Surfaces (2.5D)

Full Clothed Human Mesh (3D)

Figure 1. Human digitization from a color image. ECON combines the best aspects of free-form implicit representation, and explicit
anthropomorphic regularization to infer high-fidelity 3D humans, even with loose clothing or in challenging poses. It does so in three steps:
(1) It infers detailed 2D normal maps for the front and back side (Sec. 3.1). (2) The normal maps are converted into detailed, yet incomplete,
2.5D front and back surfaces guided by a SMPL-X estimate (Sec. 3.2). (3) It then “inpaints” the missing geometry between two surfaces
(Sec. 3.3). Face or hands can be optionally replaced with the cleaner ones from SMPL-X. See the video on our website for more results.

Abstract
The combination of deep learning, artist-curated scans,
and Implicit Functions (IF), is enabling the creation of detailed, clothed, 3D humans from images. However, existing
methods are far from perfect. IF-based methods recover
free-form geometry, but produce disembodied limbs or degenerate shapes for novel poses or clothes. To increase
robustness for these cases, existing work uses an explicit
parametric body model to constrain surface reconstruction,
but this limits the recovery of free-form surfaces such as
loose clothing that deviates from the body. What we want is
a method that combines the best properties of implicit representation and explicit body regularization. To this end, we
make two key observations: (1) current networks are better
at inferring detailed 2D maps than full-3D surfaces, and (2)
a parametric model can be seen as a “canvas” for stitching together detailed surface patches. Based on these, our
method, ECON, has three main steps: (1) It infers detailed
2D normal maps for the front and back side of a clothed person. (2) From these, it recovers 2.5D front and back surfaces,
called d-BiNI, that are equally detailed, yet incomplete, and
registers these w.r.t. each other with the help of a SMPL-X

body mesh recovered from the image. (3) It “inpaints” the
missing geometry between d-BiNI surfaces. If the face and
hands are noisy, they can optionally be replaced with the
ones of SMPL-X. As a result, ECON infers high-fidelity 3D
humans even in loose clothes and challenging poses. This
goes beyond previous methods, according to the quantitative
evaluation on the CAPE and Renderpeople datasets. Perceptual studies also show that ECON’s perceived realism is
better by a large margin. Code and models are available for
research purposes at econ.is.tue.mpg.de

1. Introduction
Human avatars will be key for future games and movies,
mixed-reality, tele-presence and the “metaverse”. To build realistic and personalized avatars at scale, we need to faithfully
reconstruct detailed 3D humans from color photos taken in
the wild. This is still an open problem, due to its challenges;
people wear all kinds of different clothing and accessories,
and they pose their bodies in many, often imaginative, ways.
A good reconstruction method must accurately capture these,
while also being robust to novel clothing and poses.

512

