This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spider GAN: Leveraging Friendly Neighbors to Accelerate GAN Training
Siddarth Asokan∗
Robert Bosch Center for Cyber-Physical Systems
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru - 50012, India
siddartha@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Training Generative adversarial networks (GANs) stably
is a challenging task. The generator in GANs transform
noise vectors, typically Gaussian distributed, into realistic
data such as images. In this paper, we propose a novel approach for training GANs with images as inputs, but without
enforcing any pairwise constraints. The intuition is that
images are more structured than noise, which the generator
can leverage to learn a more robust transformation. The
process can be made efficient by identifying closely related
datasets, or a “friendly neighborhood” of the target distribution, inspiring the moniker, Spider GAN. To define friendly
neighborhoods leveraging proximity between datasets, we
propose a new measure called the signed inception distance
(SID), inspired by the polyharmonic kernel. We show that
the Spider GAN formulation results in faster convergence,
as the generator can discover correspondence even between
seemingly unrelated datasets, for instance, between TinyImageNet and CelebA faces. Further, we demonstrate cascading Spider GAN, where the output distribution from a
pre-trained GAN generator is used as the input to the subsequent network. Effectively, transporting one distribution to
another in a cascaded fashion until the target is learnt – a
new flavor of transfer learning. We demonstrate the efficacy
of the Spider approach on DCGAN, conditional GAN, PGGAN, StyleGAN2 and StyleGAN3. The proposed approach
achieves state-of-the-art Fréchet inception distance (FID)
values, with one-fifth of the training iterations, in comparison to their baseline counterparts on high-resolution small
datasets such as MetFaces, Ukiyo-E Faces and AFHQ-Cats.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1] are designed
to model the underlying distribution of a target dataset (with
∗ Siddarth Asokan is funded by the Qualcomm Innovation Fellowship,
and the Robert Bosch Center for Cyber-Physical Systems Ph.D. Fellowship.

Chandra Sekhar Seelamantula
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru - 50012, India
css@iisc.ac.in

underlying distribution pd ) through a min-max optimization between the generator G and the discriminator D networks. The generator transforms an input z ∼ pz , typically
Gaussian or uniform distributed, into a generated sample
G(z) ∼ pg . The discriminator is trained to classify samples
drawn from pg or pd as real or fake. The optimal generator
is the one that outputs images that confuse the discriminator.
Inputs to the GAN generator: The input distribution plays
a definitive role in the quality of GAN output. Lowdimensional latent vectors have been shown to help disentangle the representations and control features of the target being learnt [2, 3]. Prior work on optimizing the latent
distribution in GANs has been motivated by the need to
improve the quality of interpolated images. Several works
have considered replacing the Gaussian prior with Gaussian
mixtures, Gamma, non-parametric distributions, etc [4–9].
Alternatively, the GAN generator can be trained with the
latent-space distribution of the target dataset, as learnt by
variational autoencoders [10, 11]. However, such approaches
are not in conformity with the low-dimensional manifold
structure of real data. Khayatkhoei et al. [12] attributed the
poor quality of the interpolates to the disjoint structure of
data distribution in high-dimensions, which motivates the
need for an informed choice of the input distribution.
GANs and image-to-image translation: GANs that accept
images as input fall under the umbrella of image translation.
Here, the task is to modify particular features of an image, either within domain (style transfer) or across domains
(domain adaptation). Examples for in-domain translation
include changing aspects of face images, such as the expression, gender, accessories, etc. [13–15], or modifying the
illumination or seasonal characteristics of natural scenes [16].
On the other hand, domain adaptation tasks aim at transforming the image from one style to another. Common applications include simulation to real-world translation [17–20], or
translating images across styles of artwork [21–23]. While
the supervised Pix2Pix framework [22] originally proposed
training GANs with pairs of images drawn from the source
and target domains, semi-supervised and unsupervised ex-

3883

