This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GRES: Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation
Chang Liu†
Henghui Ding†
Xudong Jiang
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
https://henghuiding.github.io/GRES

Image

(1). "The kid in red"

(2). "All people"

"Two people
(3). "Standing people" (4).
on the far left"

(5).

"Everyone except
(6). "The kid in blue"
the kid in white"

(Empty)

RES ✓

GRES ✓

RES ✗

GRES ✓

RES ✗ GRES ✓

RES ✗ GRES ✓

RES ✗ GRES ✓

RES ✗ GRES ✓

Figure 1. Classic Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) only supports expressions that indicate a single target object, e.g., (1).
Compared with classic RES, the proposed Generalized Referring Expression Segmentation (GRES) supports expressions indicating
an arbitrary number of target objects, for example, multi-target expressions like (2)-(5), and no-target expressions like (6).

Abstract
Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) aims to generate a segmentation mask for the object described by a
given language expression. Existing classic RES datasets
and methods commonly support single-target expressions
only, i.e., one expression refers to one target object. Multitarget and no-target expressions are not considered. This
limits the usage of RES in practice. In this paper, we
introduce a new benchmark called Generalized Referring
Expression Segmentation (GRES), which extends the classic
RES to allow expressions to refer to an arbitrary number of
target objects. Towards this, we construct the first largescale GRES dataset called gRefCOCO that contains multitarget, no-target, and single-target expressions. GRES and
gRefCOCO are designed to be well-compatible with RES,
facilitating extensive experiments to study the performance
gap of the existing RES methods on the GRES task. In the
experimental study, we find that one of the big challenges
of GRES is complex relationship modeling. Based on
this, we propose a region-based GRES baseline ReLA
that adaptively divides the image into regions with subinstance clues, and explicitly models the region-region and
region-language dependencies. The proposed approach
ReLA achieves new state-of-the-art performance on the
both newly proposed GRES and classic RES tasks. The
† Equal contribution.

Corresponding author (henghui.ding@gmail.com).

proposed gRefCOCO dataset and method are available at
https://henghuiding.github.io/GRES.

1. Introduction
Referring Expression segmentation (RES) is one of the
most important tasks of multi-modal information processing. Given an image and a natural language expression that
describes an object in the image, RES aims to find this target
object and generate a segmentation mask for it. It has great
potential in many applications, such as video production,
human-machine interaction, and robotics. Currently, most
of the existing methods follow the RES rules defined in the
popular datasets ReferIt [20] and RefCOCO [34, 47] and
have achieved great progress in recent years.
Limitations of classic RES. However, most classic
RES methods have some strong pre-defined constraints to
the task. First, the classic RES does not consider notarget expressions that do not match any object in the
image. This means that the behavior of the existing RES
methods is undefined if the target does not exist in the input
image. When it comes to practical applications under such
constraint, the input expression has to match an object in
the image, otherwise problems inevitably occur. Second,
most existing datasets, e.g., the most popular RefCOCO
[34, 47], do not contain multi-target expressions that point
to multiple instances. This means that multiple inputs are
needed to search objects one by one. E.g., in Fig. 1,
four distinct expressions with four times of model calls are

23592

