This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inferring and Leveraging Parts from Object Shape for
Improving Semantic Image Synthesis

1

Yuxiang Wei1,2 Zhilong Ji3 Xiaohe Wu1( ) Jinfeng Bai3 Lei Zhang2 Wangmeng Zuo1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 3 Tomorrow Advancing Life

yuxiang.wei.cs@gmail.com

{wuxiaohe, wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn

cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

OASIS
[33]
(a) Shape-aware Position Descriptor [25]
support

SAFM
[25]

Ours

PartNet
(b) Ours PartNet

(c) Comparison of synthesized results

(d) Part Editing

Figure 1. Illustration of our iPOSE for part map prediction and semantic image synthesis. (a) Calculation of SPD [25]. (b) Our PartNet for
part map prediction. (c) Comparison of results with existing methods [25, 33]. (d) Part editing results of our iPOSE.

Abstract
Despite the progress in semantic image synthesis, it remains a challenging problem to generate photo-realistic
parts from input semantic map. Integrating part segmentation map can undoubtedly benefit image synthesis, but is
bothersome and inconvenient to be provided by users. To
improve part synthesis, this paper presents to infer Parts
from Object ShapE (iPOSE) and leverage it for improving
semantic image synthesis. However, albeit several part segmentation datasets are available, part annotations are still
not provided for many object categories in semantic image
synthesis. To circumvent it, we resort to few-shot regime
to learn a PartNet for predicting the object part map with
the guidance of pre-defined support part maps. PartNet
can be readily generalized to handle a new object category when a small number (e.g., 3) of support part maps
for this category are provided. Furthermore, part semantic
modulation is presented to incorporate both inferred part
map and semantic map for image synthesis. Experiments
show that our iPOSE not only generates objects with rich
part details, but also enables to control the image synthesis flexibly. And our iPOSE performs favorably against the
state-of-the-art methods in terms of quantitative and qualitative evaluation. Our code will be publicly available at
https://github.com/csyxwei/iPOSE.

1. Introduction
Semantic image synthesis allows to generate an image
with input semantic map, which provides significant flexibility for controllable image synthesis. Recently, it has attracted intensive attention due to its wide applications, e.g.,
content generation and image editing [28,36], and extensive
benefits for many vision tasks [33].
Albeit rapid progress has been made in semantic image synthesis [10, 25, 28, 30, 33, 36, 43–45], it is still challenging to generate photo-realistic parts from the semantic
map. Most methods [28, 33] tackle semantic image synthesis with a spatially adaptive normalization architecture,
while other frameworks are also explored, such as StyleGAN [19] and diffusion model [43, 45], etc. However, due
to the lack of fine-grained guidance (e.g., object part information), these methods only exploited the object-level semantic information for image synthesis, and usually failed
to generate photo-realistic object parts (see the top row of
Fig. 1(c)). SAFM [25] adopted the shape-aware position
descriptor to exploit the pixel’s position feature inside the
object. However, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the obtained descriptor tends to be only region-aware instead of part-aware,
leading to limited improvement in synthesized results (see
the middle row of Fig. 1(c)).
To improve image parts synthesis, one straightforward
solution is to ask the user to provide part segmentation
map and integrate it into semantic image synthesis dur-

11248

