This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scene-aware Egocentric 3D Human Pose Estimation
Jian Wang1,2
Diogo Luvizon1,2
Weipeng Xu3
Lingjie Liu1,2
Kripasindhu Sarkar4
Christian Theobalt1,2
1
2
MPI Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus 3 Meta Reality Labs 4 Google
{jianwang,dluvizon,lliu,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

xuweipeng@fb.com

krsarkar@google.com

Abstract
Egocentric 3D human pose estimation with a single
head-mounted fisheye camera has recently attracted attention due to its numerous applications in virtual and augmented reality. Existing methods still struggle in challenging poses where the human body is highly occluded or is
closely interacting with the scene. To address this issue, we
propose a scene-aware egocentric pose estimation method
that guides the prediction of the egocentric pose with scene
constraints. To this end, we propose an egocentric depth
estimation network to predict the scene depth map from a
wide-view egocentric fisheye camera while mitigating the
occlusion of the human body with a depth-inpainting network. Next, we propose a scene-aware pose estimation
network that projects the 2D image features and estimated
depth map of the scene into a voxel space and regresses
the 3D pose with a V2V network. The voxel-based feature representation provides the direct geometric connection between 2D image features and scene geometry, and
further facilitates the V2V network to constrain the predicted pose based on the estimated scene geometry. To enable the training of the aforementioned networks, we also
generated a synthetic dataset, called EgoGTA, and an inthe-wild dataset based on EgoPW, called EgoPW-Scene.
The experimental results of our new evaluation sequences
show that the predicted 3D egocentric poses are accurate
and physically plausible in terms of human-scene interaction, demonstrating that our method outperforms the stateof-the-art methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Egocentric 3D human pose estimation with head- or
body-mounted cameras is extensively researched recently
because it allows capturing the person moving around in a
large space, while the traditional pose estimation methods
can only record in a fixed volume. With this advantage, the
egocentric pose estimation methods show great potential in
various applications, including the xR technologies and mo-

Image

EgoPW

Ours

Figure 1. Previous egocentric pose estimation methods like
EgoPW predict body poses that may suffer from body floating issue (the first row) or body-environment penetration issue (the second row). Our method predicts accurate and plausible poses complying with the scene constraints. The red skeletons are the ground
truth poses and the green skeletons are the predicted poses.

bile interaction applications.
In this work, we estimated the full 3D body pose from
a single head-mounted fisheye camera. A number of
works have been proposed, including Mo2 Cap2 [39], xRegopose [32], Global-EgoMocap [36], and EgoPW [35].
These methods have made significant progress in estimating egocentric poses. However, when taking account of the
interaction between the human body and the surrounding
environment, they still suffer from artifacts that contrast the
physics plausibility, including body-environment penetrations or body floating (see the EgoPW results in Fig. 1),
which is mostly ascribed to the ambiguity caused by the
self-occluded and highly distorted human body in the egocentric view. This problem will render restrictions on subsequent applications including action recognition, humanobject interaction recognition, and motion forecasting.
To address this issue, we propose a scene-aware pose
estimation framework that leverages the scene context to
constrain the prediction of an egocentric pose. This frame-

13031

