This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sequential training of GANs against GAN-classifiers reveals correlated
“knowledge gaps” present among independently trained GAN instances
Arkanath Pathak
Nicholas Dufour
Google Research
{arkanath,ndufour}@google.com

Abstract
Modern Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) generate realistic images remarkably well. Previous work has
demonstrated the feasibility of “GAN-classifiers” that are
distinct from the co-trained discriminator, and operate on
images generated from a frozen GAN. That such classifiers
work at all affirms the existence of “knowledge gaps” (out-ofdistribution artifacts across samples) present in GAN training. We iteratively train GAN-classifiers and train GANs that
“fool” the classifiers (in an attempt to fill the knowledge gaps),
and examine the effect on GAN training dynamics, output
quality, and GAN-classifier generalization. We investigate
two settings, a small DCGAN architecture trained on low
dimensional images (MNIST), and StyleGAN2, a SOTA GAN
architecture trained on high dimensional images (FFHQ).
We find that the DCGAN is unable to effectively fool a heldout GAN-classifier without compromising the output quality.
However, the StyleGAN2 can fool held-out classifiers with
no change in output quality, and this effect persists over
multiple rounds of GAN/classifier training which appears to
reveal an ordering over optima in the generator parameter
space. Finally, we study different classifier architectures and
show that the architecture of the GAN-classifier has a strong
influence on the set of its learned artifacts.

1. Introduction
GAN [8] architectures like StyleGAN2 [17] generate
high-resolution images that appear largely indistinguishable
from real images to the untrained eye [14, 18, 24]. While
there are many positive applications, the ability to generate
large amounts of realistic images is also a source of concern
given its potential application in scaled abuse and misinformation. In particular, GAN-generated human faces are
widely available (e.g., thispersondoesnotexist.com) and have
been used for creating fake identities on the internet [12].
Detection of GAN-generated images is an active research
area (see [9] for a survey of approaches), with some us-

ing custom methods and others using generic CNN-based
classifiers. Such classifiers are distinct from the discriminator networks that are trained alongside the generator in the
archetypal GAN setup. Given the adversarial nature of the
training loss for GANs, the existence of the GAN-classifiers
suggest consistent generator knowledge gaps (i.e., artifacts
present across samples that distinguish generated images
from those of the underlying distribution) left by discriminators during training. Specialized classifiers [31] are able
to detect images sampled from held-out GAN instances and
even from held-out GAN architectures. These generalization
capabilities imply that the knowledge gaps are consistent
not only across samples from a GAN generator but across
independent GAN generator instances.
In this work we modify the GAN training loss in order
to fool a GAN-classifier in addition to the co-trained discriminator, and examine the effect on training dynamics and
output quality. We conduct multiple rounds of training independent pools (initialized differently) of GANs followed
by GAN-classifiers, and gain new insights into the GAN
optimization process. We investigate two different settings:
in the first setting, we choose the low-dimensional domain
of handwritten digits (MNIST [19]), using a small DCGAN
[25] architecture and a vanilla GAN-classifier architecture.
For the second setting, we choose a high-dimensional domain of human faces (FFHQ [16]) with StyleGAN2 (SG2)
as a SOTA GAN architecture, and three different GANclassifier architectures (ResNet-50 [10], Inception-v3 [28],
and MobileNetV2 [27]). Our findings in this paper are as
follows:
• Samples drawn from a GAN instance exhibit a space of
“artifacts” that are exploited by the classifiers, and this
space is strongly correlated with those of other GAN
generator instances. This effect is present in both the
DCGAN and SG2 settings.
• Upon introducing the need to fool held-out classifiers,
the DCGAN is unable to generate high quality outputs.
• In the high dimensional setting, however, SG2 gener-

24460

