This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Light Touch Approach to Teaching Transformers Multi-view Geometry
Yash Bhalgat

João F. Henriques Andrew Zisserman
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford

{yashsb,joao,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Transformers are powerful visual learners, in large part
due to their conspicuous lack of manually-specified priors. This flexibility can be problematic in tasks that involve multiple-view geometry, due to the near-infinite possible variations in 3D shapes and viewpoints (requiring flexibility), and the precise nature of projective geometry (obeying rigid laws). To resolve this conundrum, we propose
a “light touch” approach, guiding visual Transformers to
learn multiple-view geometry but allowing them to break
free when needed. We achieve this by using epipolar lines to
guide the Transformer’s cross-attention maps during training, penalizing attention values outside the epipolar lines
and encouraging higher attention along these lines since
they contain geometrically plausible matches. Unlike previous methods, our proposal does not require any camera
pose information at test-time. We focus on pose-invariant
object instance retrieval, where standard Transformer networks struggle, due to the large differences in viewpoint
between query and retrieved images. Experimentally, our
method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches at object
retrieval, without needing pose information at test-time.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer vision have been characterized by using increasingly generic models fitted with
large amounts of data, with attention-based models (e.g.
Transformers) at one extreme [12, 13, 20, 24, 34, 41]. There
are many such recent examples, where shedding priors in
favour of learning from more data has proven to be a successful strategy, from image classification [1, 13, 20, 29, 90],
action recognition [7, 23, 27, 50, 58], to text-image matching [36, 45, 62, 71] and 3D recognition [40, 91]. One area
where this strategy has proven more difficult to apply is
solving tasks that involve reasoning about multiple-view geometry, such as object retrieval – i.e. finding all instances of
an object in a database given a single query image. This has
applications in image search [37, 39, 51, 82, 92], including

Figure 1. Top-4 retrieved images with (1) global retrieval (left
column), (2) Reranking Transformer (RRT) [74] (middle), and (3)
RRT trained with our proposed Epipolar Loss (right column). Correct retrievals are green, incorrect ones are red. The Epipolar Loss
imbues RRT with an implicit geometric understanding, allowing it
to match images from extremely diverse viewpoints.

identifying landmarks from images [53, 61, 85], recognizing artworks in images [80], retrieving relevant product images in e-commerce databases [14,55] or retrieving specific
objects from a scene [3, 38, 46, 60].
The main challenges in object retrieval include overcoming variations in viewpoint and scale. The difficulty
in viewpoint-invariant object retrieval can be partially explained by the fact that it requires disambiguating similar
objects by small differences in their unique details, which
can have a smaller impact on an image than a large varia-

4958

