This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DejaVu: Conditional Regenerative Learning to Enhance Dense Prediction
Shubhankar Borse

Debasmit Das *

Hyojin Park *
Hong Cai
Fatih Porikli
Qualcomm AI Research †

Risheek Garrepalli

{sborse, debadas, hyojinp, hongcai, rgarrepa, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
We present DejaVu, a novel framework which leverages
conditional image regeneration as additional supervision
during training to improve deep networks for dense prediction tasks such as segmentation, depth estimation, and
surface normal prediction. First, we apply redaction to the
input image, which removes certain structural information
by sparse sampling or selective frequency removal. Next,
we use a conditional regenerator, which takes the redacted
image and the dense predictions as inputs, and reconstructs
the original image by filling in the missing structural information. In the redacted image, structural attributes like
boundaries are broken while semantic context is largely
preserved. In order to make the regeneration feasible, the
conditional generator will then require the structure information from the other input source, i.e., the dense predictions. As such, by including this conditional regeneration
objective during training, DejaVu encourages the base network to learn to embed accurate scene structure in its dense
prediction. This leads to more accurate predictions with
clearer boundaries and better spatial consistency. When it
is feasible to leverage additional computation, DejaVu can
be extended to incorporate an attention-based regeneration module within the dense prediction network, which further improves accuracy. Through extensive experiments on
multiple dense prediction benchmarks such as Cityscapes,
COCO, ADE20K, NYUD-v2, and KITTI, we demonstrate
the efficacy of employing DejaVu during training, as it outperforms SOTA methods at no added computation cost.

1. Introduction
Dense prediction tasks produce per-pixel classification
or regression results, such as semantic or panoptic class labels, depth or disparity values, and surface normal angles.
These tasks are critical for many vision applications to better perceive their surroundings for XR, autonomous driving,
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Training within the DejaVu framework enables dense
prediction models to improve their initial predictions using our
proposed loss. The segmentation results are for the same OCR [87]
model with and without DejaVu. The surface normal results are for
SegNet-XTC [43].

robotics, visual surveillance, and so on. There has been significant success in adopting neural networks to solve dense
prediction tasks through innovative architectures, data augmentations and training optimizations. For example, [46]
addresses pixel level sampling bias and [7] incorporates
boundary alignment objectives. Orthogonal to existing
methods, we explore novel regeneration-based ideas to understand how additional gradients from reconstruction tasks
complement the established training pipelines for dense
prediction tasks and input representations.
There are works [69, 94] in classification settings that
leverage reconstructions and likelihood-based objectives as
auxiliary loss functions to enhance the quality of feature
representations and also improve Open-set/OOD Detection
[25, 48, 49, 55]. The core intuition is that, for discriminative tasks the model needs a minimal set of features to solve
the task and any feature which does not have discriminative

19466

