This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FLAG3D: A 3D Fitness Activity Dataset with Language Instruction
Yansong Tang∗,†,1 , Jinpeng Liu∗,1 , Aoyang Liu∗,1 ,
Bin Yang1 , Wenxun Dai1 , Yongming Rao2 , Jiwen Lu⋄,2 , Jie Zhou2 , Xiu Li⋄,1
∗

equal contribution, † project lead, ⋄ corresponding authors

{1 Shenzhen International Graduate School, 2 Department of Automation}, Tsinghua University

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed FLAG3D dataset, which contains 180K videos of 60 daily fitness activities. Our dataset is comprised
of (a) 3D activity sequences captured from advanced MoCap system, (b) rendered videos of different people with their SMPL parameters,
and (c) real-world videos obtained by cost-effective phones from both indoor and outdoor natural environments. FLAG3D also provides a
series of detailed and professional sentence-level language instructions for each fitness activity. All figures are best viewed in color.

Abstract
With the continuously thriving popularity around the
world, fitness activity analytic has become an emerging research topic in computer vision. While a variety of new
tasks and algorithms have been proposed recently, there
are growing hunger for data resources involved in highquality data, fine-grained labels, and diverse environments.
In this paper, we present FLAG3D, a large-scale 3D fitness activity dataset with language instruction containing
180K sequences of 60 categories. FLAG3D features the
following three aspects: 1) accurate and dense 3D human pose captured from advanced MoCap system to handle
the complex activity and large movement, 2) detailed and
professional language instruction to describe how to perform a specific activity, 3) versatile video resources from
a high-tech MoCap system, rendering software, and costeffective smartphones in natural environments. Extensive
experiments and in-depth analysis show that FLAG3D contributes great research value for various challenges, such

as cross-domain human action recognition, dynamic human
mesh recovery, and language-guided human action generation. Our dataset and source code are publicly available at
https://andytang15.github.io/FLAG3D.

1. Introduction
With the great demand of keeping healthy, reducing high
pressure from working and staying in shape, fitness activity
has become more and more important and popular during
the past decades [22]. According to the statistics1 , there are
over 200,000 fitness clubs and 170 million club members all
over the world. More recently, because of the high expense
of coaches and out-breaking of COVID-19, increasing people choose to exclude gym membership and do the workout by watching the fitness instructional videos from fitness
apps or YouTube channels (e.g., FITAPP, ATHLEAN-X,
The Fitness Marshall, etc.). Therefore, it is desirable to ad1 https://policyadvice.net/insurance/insights/fitness-industry-statistics

22106

