This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LOCATE: Localize and Transfer
Object Parts for Weakly Supervised Affordance Grounding
Gen Li1

Varun Jampani2
1

Object Image

Deqing Sun2
2

University of Edinburgh

Hotspots [38]

Cross-view-AG [33]

Laura Sevilla-Lara1

Google Research

Cross-view-AG+ [32]

LOCATE (Ours)

GT

Figure 1. State-of-the-art methods in weakly supervised affordance grounding often fail to make accurate predictions for objects with
complex structures, e.g., chairs and bicycles. To address this, our model (LOCATE) focuses on localizing and transferring features of
object parts, which is able to produce more accurate results.

Abstract
Humans excel at acquiring knowledge through observation. For example, we can learn to use new tools by watching demonstrations. This skill is fundamental for intelligent
systems to interact with the world. A key step to acquire
this skill is to identify what part of the object affords each
action, which is called affordance grounding. In this paper,
we address this problem and propose a framework called
LOCATE that can identify matching object parts across images, to transfer knowledge from images where an object
is being used (exocentric images used for learning), to images where the object is inactive (egocentric ones used to
test). To this end, we first find interaction areas and extract
their feature embeddings. Then we learn to aggregate the
embeddings into compact prototypes (human, object part,
and background), and select the one representing the object
part. Finally, we use the selected prototype to guide affordance grounding. We do this in a weakly supervised manner,
learning only from image-level affordance and object labels. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin on
both seen and unseen objects.1
1 Project page: https://reagan1311.github.io/locate.

1. Introduction
A fundamental skill of humans is learning to interact
with objects just by observing someone else performing
those interactions [5]. For instance, even if we have never
played tennis, we can easily learn where to hold the racket
just by looking at a single or few photographs of those interactions. Such learning capabilities are essential for intelligent agents to understand what actions can be performed on
a given object. Current visual systems often focus primarily
on recognizing what objects are in the scene (passive perception), rather than on how to use objects to achieve certain functions (active interaction). To this end, a growing
number of studies [3, 12, 26, 47] have begun to utilize affordance [17] as a medium to bridge the gap between passive
perception and active interaction. In computer vision and
robotics [2, 20], affordance typically refers to regions of an
object that are available to perform a specific action, e.g., a
knife handle affords holding, and its blade affords cutting.
In this paper, we focus on the task of affordance grounding, i.e, locating the object regions used for a given action.
Previous methods [10, 12, 14, 37, 39] have often treated affordance grounding as a fully supervised semantic segmentation task, which requires costly pixel-level annotations.
Instead, we follow the more realistic setting [32, 33, 38]

10922

