This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-View Reconstruction using Signed Ray Distance Functions (SRDF)
Pierre Zins1,2

Yuanlu Xu2 Edmond Boyer1,3 Stefanie Wuhrer1
1
Inria centre at the University Grenoble Alpes
2
Meta Reality Labs, Sausalito, USA
3
Meta Reality Labs, Zurich, Switzerland

Tony Tung2

name.surname@inria.fr, merayxu@gmail.com, tony.tung@fb.com

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a new optimization framework for multi-view 3D shape reconstructions. Recent
differentiable rendering approaches have provided breakthrough performances with implicit shape representations
though they can still lack precision in the estimated geometries. On the other hand multi-view stereo methods can
yield pixel wise geometric accuracy with local depth predictions along viewing rays. Our approach bridges the gap
between the two strategies with a novel volumetric shape
representation that is implicit but parameterized with pixel
depths to better materialize the shape surface with consistent signed distances along viewing rays. The approach retains pixel-accuracy while benefiting from volumetric integration in the optimization. To this aim, depths are optimized by evaluating, at each 3D location within the volumetric discretization, the agreement between the depth
prediction consistency and the photometric consistency for
the corresponding pixels. The optimization is agnostic to
the associated photo-consistency term which can vary from
a median-based baseline to more elaborate criteria, e.g.
learned functions. Our experiments demonstrate the benefit of the volumetric integration with depth predictions.
They also show that our approach outperforms existing approaches over standard 3D benchmarks with better geometry estimations.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D shape geometries from 2D image
observations has been a core issue in computer vision
for decades. Applications are numerous and range from
robotics to augmented reality and human digitization,
among others. When images are available in sufficient
numbers, multi-view stereo (MVS) is a powerful strategy
that has emerged in the late 90s (see [58]). In this strategy,
3D geometric models are built by searching for surface

Figure 1. Reconstructions with various methods using 14 images
of a model from BlendedMVS [70].

locations in 3D where 2D image observations concur, a
property called photo-consistency. This observation consistency strategy has been later challenged by approaches
in the field that seek instead for observation fidelity
using differentiable rendering. Given a shape model that
includes appearance information, rendered images can
be compared to observed images and the model can thus
be optimized. Differentiable rendering adapts to several
shape representations including point clouds, meshes and,
more recently, implicit shape representations. The latter
can account for occupancy, distance functions or densities,
which are estimated either directly over discrete grids or
through continuous MLP network functions. Associated to
differentiable rendering these implicit representations have
provided state-of-the-art approaches to recover both the
geometry and the appearance of 3D shapes from 2D images.
With the objective to improve the precision of the reconstructed geometric models and their computational costs,
we investigate an approach that takes inspiration from differentiable rendering methods while retaining beneficial aspects of MVS strategies. Following volumetric methods we
use a volumetric signed ray distance representation which
we parameterize with depths along viewing rays, a representation we call the Signed Ray Distance Function or
SRDF. This representation makes the shape surface explicit
with depths while keeping the benefit of better distributed
gradients with a volumetric discretization. To optimize this

16696

