This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Person Image Synthesis via Denoising Diffusion Model
Ankan Kumar Bhunia1 Salman Khan1,2 Hisham Cholakkal1 Rao Muhammad Anwer1,4
Jorma Laaksonen4 Mubarak Shah5 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE 2 Australian National University, Australia
3
Linköping University, Sweden 4 Aalto University, Finland 5 University of Central Florida, USA
Abstract
The pose-guided person image generation task requires
synthesizing photorealistic images of humans in arbitrary
poses. The existing approaches use generative adversarial networks that do not necessarily maintain realistic
textures or need dense correspondences that struggle to
handle complex deformations and severe occlusions. In
this work, we show how denoising diffusion models can
be applied for high-fidelity person image synthesis with
strong sample diversity and enhanced mode coverage of
the learnt data distribution. Our proposed Person Image
Diffusion Model (PIDM) disintegrates the complex transfer problem into a series of simpler forward-backward denoising steps. This helps in learning plausible sourceto-target transformation trajectories that result in faithful
textures and undistorted appearance details. We introduce a ‘texture diffusion module’ based on cross-attention
to accurately model the correspondences between appearance and pose information available in source and target
images. Further, we propose ‘disentangled classifier-free
guidance’ to ensure close resemblance between the conditional inputs and the synthesized output in terms of both
pose and appearance information. Our extensive results
on two large-scale benchmarks and a user study demonstrate the photorealism of our proposed approach under
challenging scenarios. We also show how our generated
images can help in downstream tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/ankanbhunia/PIDM.

(a)

Pose

Style

𝒚 𝑇 ~𝒩(0, 𝐈)

𝑇 Diffusion steps

Output

(b)

Inputs NTED

Ours

GT

Inputs NTED

Ours

GT

Figure 1. (a) Our proposed PIDM is a denoising diffusion model
where the generative path is conditioned on the pose and style.
PIDM breaks down the problem into a series of forward-backward
diffusion steps to learn the plausible transfer trajectories. (b) Comparison of PIDM with the recently introduced NTED [18]. PIDM
accurately retains the appearance of the source style image while
also producing images that are more natural and sharper while
NTED struggles to adequately preserve the source appearance in
complex scenarios (marked in red boxes).

images can be used to improve performance on downstream
tasks such as person re-identification [30]. The challenge is
to generate photorealistic outputs tightly conforming with
the given pose and appearance information.
In the literature, person synthesis problem is generally
tackled using Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [4]
which try to generate a person in a desired pose using a
single forward pass. However, preserving a coherent structural, appearance and global body composition in the new
pose is a challenging task to achieve in one shot. The resulting outputs commonly experience deformed textures and
unrealistic body shapes, especially when synthesizing occluded body parts (see Fig. 1). Further, GANs are prone
to unstable training behaviour due to adversarial min-max
objective and lead to limited diversity in the generated samples. Similarly, Variational Autoencoder [8] based solutions

1. Introduction
The Pose-guided person image synthesis task [19,23,30]
aims to render a person’s image with a desired pose and appearance. Specifically, the appearance is defined by a given
source image and the pose by a set of keypoints. Having
control over the synthesized person images in terms of pose
and style is an important requisite for applications such as ecommerce, virtual reality, metaverse and content generation
for the entertainment industry. Furthermore, the generated

5968

