This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Top-Down Visual Attention from Analysis by Synthesis
Baifeng Shi
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Xin Wang
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Current attention algorithms (e.g., self-attention) are
stimulus-driven and highlight all the salient objects in an
image. However, intelligent agents like humans often guide
their attention based on the high-level task at hand, focusing only on task-related objects. This ability of taskguided top-down attention provides task-adaptive representation and helps the model generalize to various tasks. In
this paper, we consider top-down attention from a classic
Analysis-by-Synthesis (AbS) perspective of vision. Prior
work indicates a functional equivalence between visual attention and sparse reconstruction; we show that an AbS
visual system that optimizes a similar sparse reconstruction objective modulated by a goal-directed top-down signal naturally simulates top-down attention. We further propose Analysis-by-Synthesis Vision Transformer (AbSViT),
which is a top-down modulated ViT model that variationally
approximates AbS, and achieves controllable top-down attention. For real-world applications, AbSViT consistently
improves over baselines on Vision-Language tasks such
as VQA and zero-shot retrieval where language guides
the top-down attention. AbSViT can also serve as a general backbone, improving performance on classification, semantic segmentation, and model robustness. Project page:
https://sites.google.com/view/absvit.

1. Introduction
Human visual attention is often task-guided, i.e., we
tend to focus on different objects when processing different
tasks [7, 69]. For example, when we answer different questions about one image, we only attend to the objects that are
relevant to the question (Fig. 1 (b-c)). This stands in contrast
with the widely-used self-attention [17], which is completely
stimulus-driven, i.e., it highlights all the salient objects in the
image without task-guided selection (Fig. 1 (a)). While the
stimulus-driven bottom-up attention has shown promising
results in visual representation learning [6], current vision
transformers still lack the ability of task-guided top-down
attention, which provides task-adaptive representation and

Figure 1. Top-down vs. bottom-up attention. (a) Bottom-up
attention is stimulus-driven, i.e., any salient objects (dog and cat)
in the image may attract attention. (b-c) Top-down attention is
task-guided. For example, when the task is to answer a question
about a specific object, the attention will only center on that object
and ignore the others. In this way, a more focused representation
can be extracted for the current goal.

potentially improves task-specific performances [1, 64, 65].
Although some algorithms of top-down attention are proposed in the literature [1, 9, 46, 64, 65], they are incompatible with self-attention-based transformers and principled
and unified designs are still missing.
Previous work [5, 10, 34, 35, 50] has studied the mechanism of top-down attention in human vision systems, hypothesizing top-down attention is a result of the human visual system performing Analysis by Synthesis (AbS). AbS [32, 68]
is a classic idea that suggests the human visual perception
depends on both the input image and a high-level prior about
the latent cause of the image, and different priors can lead
to different ways to perceive the same image (e.g., visual
illusion [33] and bistable perception [55]). This is formulated as Bayesian inference maxz p(h|z)p(z), where h is
the input image, and z is the latent representation. It is hypothesized that the high-level goal can be formulated as a
prior to direct the low-level recognition of different objects
through AbS, achieving top-down attention. Still, existing
works [10, 44, 67] are conceptual and hardly guide model
designs in practice.

2102

