This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Logical Implications for Visual Question Answering Consistency
Sergio Tascon-Morales

Pablo Márquez-Neila
University of Bern

Raphael Sznitman

{sergio.tasconmorales, pablo.marquez, raphael.sznitman}@unibe.ch

Conventional VQA

Abstract
Despite considerable recent progress in Visual Question
Answering (VQA) models, inconsistent or contradictory answers continue to cast doubt on their true reasoning capabilities. However, most proposed methods use indirect
strategies or strong assumptions on pairs of questions and
answers to enforce model consistency. Instead, we propose
a novel strategy intended to improve model performance by
directly reducing logical inconsistencies. To do this, we introduce a new consistency loss term that can be used by a
wide range of the VQA models and which relies on knowing the logical relation between pairs of questions and answers. While such information is typically not available in
VQA datasets, we propose to infer these logical relations
using a dedicated language model and use these in our proposed consistency loss function. We conduct extensive experiments on the VQA Introspect and DME datasets and
show that our method brings improvements to state-of-theart VQA models while being robust across different architectures and settings.

1. Introduction
Visual Questioning Answering (VQA) models have
drawn recent interest in the computer vision community as
they allow text queries to question image content. This
has given way to a number of novel applications in the
space of model reasoning [8, 29, 54, 56], medical diagnosis [21,37,51,60] and counterfactual learning [1,2,11]. With
the ability to combine language and image information in a
common model, it is unsurprising to see a growing use of
VQA methods.
Despite this recent progress, however, a number of important challenges remain when making VQAs more proficient. For one, it remains extremely challenging to build
VQA datasets that are void of bias. Yet this is critical to
ensure subsequent models are not learning spurious correlations or shortcuts [49]. This is particularly daunting
in applications where domain knowledge plays an important role (e.g., medicine [15, 27, 33]). Alternatively, ensur-

Yes

Is it the middle of summer?

VQA
Is there snow on the ground?

Yes

Inconsistent

Our Method

No

Is it the middle of summer?

VQA
Is there snow on the ground?

It is the middle of summer

Yes

Consistent

There is no snow on the ground
Relation

Figure 1. Top: Conventional VQA models tend to produce inconsistent answers as a consequence of not considering the relations
between question and answer pairs. Bottom: Our method learns
the logical relation between question and answer pairs to improve
consistency.

ing that responses of a VQA are coherent, or consistent, is
paramount as well. That is, VQA models that answer differently about similar content in a given image imply inconsistencies in how the model interprets the inputs. A number of
recent methods have attempted to address this using logicbased approaches [19], rephrashing [44], question generation [18, 40, 41] and regularizing using consistency constraints [47]. In this work, we follow this line of research
and look to yield more reliable VQA models.
We wish to ensure that VQA models are consistent in answering questions about images. This implies that if multiple questions are asked about the same image, the model’s
answers should not contradict themselves. For instance, if
one question about the image in Fig. 1 asks “Is there snow
on the ground?”, then the answer inferred should be consistent with that of the question “Is it the middle of summer?”
As noted in [43], such question pairs involve reasoning and
perception, and consequentially lead the authors to define
inconsistency when the reasoning and perception questions
are answered correctly and incorrectly, respectively. Along
this line, [47] uses a similar definition of inconsistency to

6725

