This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIST : Multi-modal Iterative Spatial-Temporal Transformer for Long-form
Video Question Answering
Difei Gao1 , Luowei Zhou2 *, Lei Ji3 , Linchao Zhu4 , Yi Yang4 , Mike Zheng Shou1†
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore, 2 Microsoft,
3
Microsoft Research Asia, 4 Zhejiang University

Abstract
To build Video Question Answering (VideoQA) systems
capable of assisting humans in daily activities, seeking
answers from long-form videos with diverse and complex
events is a must. Existing multi-modal VQA models achieve
promising performance on images or short video clips,
especially with the recent success of large-scale multimodal pre-training. However, when extending these methods to long-form videos, new challenges arise. On the
one hand, using a dense video sampling strategy is computationally prohibitive. On the other hand, methods relying on sparse sampling struggle in scenarios where multievent and multi-granularity visual reasoning are required.
In this work, we introduce a new model named M ultimodal Iterative Spatial-temporal Transformer (MIST) to
better adapt pre-trained models for long-form VideoQA.
Specifically, MIST decomposes traditional dense spatialtemporal self-attention into cascaded segment and region
selection modules that adaptively select frames and image
regions that are closely relevant to the question itself. Visual concepts at different granularities are then processed
efficiently through an attention module. In addition, MIST
iteratively conducts selection and attention over multiple
layers to support reasoning over multiple events. The experimental results on four VideoQA datasets, including AGQA,
NExT-QA, STAR, and Env-QA, show that MIST achieves
state-of-the-art performance and is superior at efficiency.
The code is available at github.com/showlab/mist.

1. Introduction
One of the ultimate goals of Video Question Answering
(VideoQA) systems is to assist people in solving problems
in everyday life [13, 27, 41], e.g., helping users find something, reminding them what they did, and assisting them
while accomplishing complex tasks, etc. To achieve such
* Currently at Google Brain.
† Corresponding author.

𝑡

drink from a bottle put a bottle on a table

picking up a book grasping a doorknob

holding a phone

Multi-event:
Q1. Did the person interact with a doorknob before or after putting
something on a table? Answer: After
Multi-grained Visual Concepts:
Q2. Which object were they touching between drinking from a bottle
and picking up a book? Answer: Phone
Causality:
Q3. Why does the person put the bottle on a table?
Answer: She has finished drinking

Figure 1. Main challenges of long-form VideoQA. The questions for long-form VideoQA usually involve multi-event, multigrained, and causality reasoning.

functions, the systems should be able to understand and
seek the answer from long-form videos with diverse events
about users’ activities.
Compared to understanding and reasoning over short
videos, many unique challenges arise when the duration of
the video increases, as shown in Fig. 1: 1) Multi-event reasoning. The long-form videos usually record much more
events. The questions about these videos thus naturally require the systems to perform complex temporal reasoning,
e.g., multi-event reasoning (Q1 in Fig. 1), causality (Q3),
etc. 2) Interactions among different granularities of visual
concepts. The questions of short-clip videos usually involve
the interactions of objects or actions that happened simultaneously, while questions for long-form videos could involve
more complex interactions of objects, relations, and events
across different events, e.g., Q2 in Fig. 1.
Current vision-language methods [2, 7, 10, 24, 29, 31,
32, 51, 52] excel at QA over images or short clips spanning several seconds. In other words, they excel at learning multi-modal correspondences between a single caption with one or few events. Their tremendous progress
over these years is fueled by 1) pre-training on largescale image-language [22, 37, 38] and short-clip-language

14773

