This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LargeKernel3D: Scaling up Kernels in 3D Sparse CNNs
Yukang Chen1 * Jianhui Liu2∗
1

Xiangyu Zhang3

Xiaojuan Qi2

Jiaya Jia1,4

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 MEGVII 4 SmartMore

Abstract
Recent advance in 2D CNNs has revealed that large kernels are important. However, when directly applying large
convolutional kernels in 3D CNNs, severe difficulties are
met, where those successful module designs in 2D become
surprisingly ineffective on 3D networks, including the popular depth-wise convolution. To address this vital challenge, we instead propose the spatial-wise partition convolution and its large-kernel module. As a result, it avoids
the optimization and efficiency issues of naive 3D large kernels. Our large-kernel 3D CNN network, LargeKernel3D,
yields notable improvement in 3D tasks of semantic segmentation and object detection. It achieves 73.9% mIoU
on the ScanNetv2 semantic segmentation and 72.8% NDS
nuScenes object detection benchmarks, ranking 1st on the
nuScenes LIDAR leaderboard. The performance further
boosts to 74.2% NDS with a simple multi-modal fusion.
In addition, LargeKernel3D can be scaled to 17×17×17
kernel size on Waymo 3D object detection. For the first
time, we show that large kernels are feasible and essential
for 3D visual tasks. Our code and models is available at
github.com/dvlab-research/LargeKernel3D.

1. Introduction
3D Sparse convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been widely used as feature extractors in 3D tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation [9,24] and object detection [55,65,75].
The advantages of efficiency and convenient usage ensure its important role in various applications, such as
autonomous driving and robotics. However, 3D sparse
CNNs are recently challenged by transformer-based methods [45,46,79], mainly from the aspect of building effective
receptive fields. Both global and local [21,45] self-attention
mechanisms are able to capture context information from
a large spatial scope. 2D Vision Transformers (ViTs) also
emphasize their advantages in modeling long-range dependencies [20, 42, 51]. In contrast, common 3D sparse CNNs
are limited in this regard. It is because the receptive fields
* Equal Contribution.

of default 3D sparse CNN are constrained by small kernel
sizes and spatial disconnection of sparse features (due to the
property of submanifold sparse convolution [25]).
Literature about 2D CNNs [18, 43, 62] presents a series
of methods, combined with large kernels, to enlarge the receptive fields and model capacity. ConvNeXt [43] employs
7×7 depth-wise convolution as a strong design, combing
with other training techniques to challenge its Swin Transformer counterpart [42]. RepLKNet [18] pursues extremely
large kernel sizes of 31×31 to boost the performance of different tasks. To ensure the effectiveness of RepLKNet [18],
additional factors, including depth-wise convolution, are
also required. Other work [27] also emphasizes the importance of depth-wise convolution. Due to differences between 3D and 2D tasks, these methods, however, are found
not a good solution for 3D sparse CNNs.
We first analyze the difficulties of 3D large-kernel CNN
design in two aspects. The first challenge is efficiency. It
is easy to understand that 3D convolution is with the cubic
kernel size and computation increases fast. For example,
the model size increases 10+ times when kernels change
from 3×3×3 to 7×7×7. The second difficulty exists in
the optimization procedure. 3D datasets may contain only
thousands of scenes, which cannot match 2D image benchmarks [15, 40] in terms of scales. In addition, 3D point
clouds or voxels are sparse, instead of dense images. Thus,
it might be insufficient to optimize the proliferated parameters of large kernels and leads to over-fitting.
In this paper, we propose spatial-wise partition convolution as the 3D large-kernel design. It is a new family of
group convolution by sharing weights among spatially adjacent locations, rather than depth-wise convolution [29] of
channel-level groups. As shown in Fig. 1, spatial-wise partition convolution remaps a large kernel (e.g., 7×7) as a small
one (e.g., 3×3) via grouping spatial neighbors, while the absolutely large spatial size remains unchanged. With regard
to the efficiency issue, it occupies few model sizes to keep
parameters the same as those of small kernels. Moreover, it
takes less latency, compared with plain large kernel counterparts. As for the optimization challenge, weight-sharing
among spatial dimensions gives parameters more chance to
update and overcome the over-fitting issue.

13488

