This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Continual Semantic Adaptation through Neural Rendering
Jonas Frey1,2
Roland Siegwart1
Francesco Milano1 *
Hermann Blum1†
Cesar Cadena1†
1
2
ETH Zurich
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems

Zhizheng Liu1 *

(a) Pseudo-label formation

(b) Adaptation through joint training and long-term memory

Figure 1. We propose a method to continually adapt a semantic segmentation model f in an unsupervised fashion across multiple scenes,
using neural rendering. For each scene Si : a) RGB(-D) images Ii from multiple viewpoints Pi and their corresponding predictions
Sθi−1 (Ii ) by the latest model fθi−1 are used to supervise a (Semantic-)NeRF model Nϕi ; b) Adaptation on Si is performed through a joint
training, in which the segmentation network is supervised using the 3D-aware, view-consistent pseudo-labels Ŝϕi rendered from Nϕi and
the NeRF model through the smooth predictions of fθi−1 . For each scene, the NeRF model can be compactly stored in a long-term memory,
from which images and pseudo-labels from arbitrary viewpoints P̂ can be rendered into a fixed-size rendering buffer and mixed with the
renderings from the current scene to reduce forgetting. Bold and dotted lines denote supervision signals and inputs/outputs, respectively.

Abstract
An increasing amount of applications rely on datadriven models that are deployed for perception tasks across
a sequence of scenes. Due to the mismatch between training
and deployment data, adapting the model on the new scenes
is often crucial to obtain good performance. In this work,
we study continual multi-scene adaptation for the task of
semantic segmentation, assuming that no ground-truth labels are available during deployment and that performance
on the previous scenes should be maintained. We propose
training a Semantic-NeRF network for each scene by fusing
the predictions of a segmentation model and then using the
view-consistent rendered semantic labels as pseudo-labels
to adapt the model. Through joint training with the segmentation model, the Semantic-NeRF model effectively enables 2D-3D knowledge transfer. Furthermore, due to its
compact size, it can be stored in a long-term memory and
subsequently used to render data from arbitrary viewpoints
to reduce forgetting. We evaluate our approach on ScanNet, where we outperform both a voxel-based baseline and
a state-of-the-art unsupervised domain adaptation method.
* Authors share first authorship.

† Authors share senior authorship.

1. Introduction
Data-driven models trained for perception tasks play an
increasing role in applications that rely on scene understanding, including, e.g., mixed reality and robotics. When
deploying these models on real-world systems, however,
mismatches between the data used for training and those encountered during deployment can lead to poor performance,
prompting the need for an adaptation of the models to the
new environment. Oftentimes, the supervision data required
for this adaptation can only be obtained through a laborious labeling process. Furthermore, even when such data are
available, a naı̈ve adaptation to the new environment results
in decreased performance on the original training data, a
phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [19, 23].
In this work, we focus on the task of adapting a semantic segmentation network across multiple indoor scenes, under the assumption that no labeled data from the new environment are available. Similar settings are explored in the
literature in the areas of unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) [23, 38] and continual learning (CL) [19]. However, works in the UDA literature usually focus on a single source-to-target transfer where the underlying assump-

3031

