This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Landmark Detection with 3D Queries
Prashanth Chandran

Gaspard Zoss
Paulo Gotardo∗
DisneyResearch|Studios

Derek Bradley

prashanth.chandran,gaspard.zoss,derek.bradley@disneyresearch.com, gotardop@gmail.com

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

g)

Figure 1. This paper presents a continuous landmark detector that is controlled intuitively with 3D queries. Once trained, a single model
can be evaluated with the standard 68 landmarks layout (a), any arbitrarily dense layout (b), and can even be evaluated off-surface to get
bone landmarks (c) and (d), which can be used to fit plausible skull and jaw meshes (e) to images. The same network can also be used to
infer extremely dense landmarks, enabling applications such as face segmentation (f) or monocular performance capture (g).

Abstract
Neural networks for facial landmark detection are notoriously limited to a fixed set of landmarks in a dedicated
layout, which must be specified at training time. Dedicated datasets must also be hand-annotated with the corresponding landmark configuration for training. We propose the first facial landmark detection network that can
predict continuous, unlimited landmarks, allowing to specify the number and location of the desired landmarks at inference time. Our method combines a simple image feature
extractor with a queried landmark predictor, and the user
can specify any continuous query points relative to a 3D
template face mesh as input. As it is not tied to a fixed set of
landmarks, our method is able to leverage all pre-existing
2D landmark datasets for training, even if they have inconsistent landmark configurations. As a result, we present a
very powerful facial landmark detector that can be trained
once, and can be used readily for numerous applications
like 3D face reconstruction, arbitrary face segmentation,
and is even compatible with helmeted mounted cameras,
and therefore could vastly simplify face tracking workflows
for media and entertainment applications.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection has become extremely popular
in computer vision and graphics applications. In particular,
many applications in visual effects such as 3D facial reconstruction, tracking, face swapping and re-enactment rely on
0 Now at Google

accurate facial landmark detection as one of the first steps in
the process. It is therefore a crucial task and has been studied extensively for the past several decades, and the field has
seen immense progress thanks to advances in deep learning.
State-of-the-art solutions for facial landmark detection
are based on neural networks, and they operate by training the network to predict a fixed set of landmarks, leveraging large datasets of hand-annotated images. Most standard algorithms predict a set of 68 sparse landmarks spread
across the face (Fig. 1 (a)), in a very specific and predefined layout [33]. However, recent work has shown that
predicting denser landmarks on the face is better for tasks
like face reconstruction [43]. This brings up the question of
how many landmarks one has to predict for optimal performance (depending on the application), and what is the preferred layout of these landmarks? One of the biggest issues
with traditional facial landmark detectors is that you need
to decide on the number and layout of the landmarks ahead
of time, then obtain annotated data with the corresponding
landmarks and ultimately train the detector. Later, at runtime, the landmark layout cannot be changed.
An ideal landmark detector would not be bound to a specific fixed landmark layout. Such a detector could be trained
once and then used in several applications with different
landmark configurations. For example, in face image segmentation you may want to track landmarks corresponding
to segment boundaries, but then in 3D reconstruction you
might want to track landmarks corresponding to the vertices of your 3D face mesh. For individuals with specific
face details like freckles or moles, you might want a de-

16858

