This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CFA: Class-wise Calibrated Fair Adversarial Training

1

Zeming Wei1 , Yifei Wang1 , Yiwen Guo2 , Yisen Wang3,4 *
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University 2 Independent Researcher
3
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Adversarial training has been widely acknowledged as
the most effective method to improve the adversarial robustness against adversarial examples for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). So far, most existing works focus on enhancing the overall model robustness, treating each class
equally in both the training and testing phases. Although
revealing the disparity in robustness among classes, few
works try to make adversarial training fair at the class
level without sacrificing overall robustness. In this paper,
we are the first to theoretically and empirically investigate
the preference of different classes for adversarial configurations, including perturbation margin, regularization, and
weight averaging. Motivated by this, we further propose
a Class-wise calibrated Fair Adversarial training framework, named CFA, which customizes specific training configurations for each class automatically. Experiments on
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed CFA
can improve both overall robustness and fairness notably
over other state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/PKU-ML/CFA.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in a variety of tasks, but their vulnerability
against adversarial examples [11, 20] have caused serious
concerns about their application in safety-critical scenarios [6, 15]. DNNs can be easily fooled by adding small,
even imperceptible perturbations to the natural examples.
To address this issue, numerous defense approaches have
been proposed [2, 9, 17, 18, 28], among which Adversarial
Training (AT) [16, 25] has been demonstrated as the most
effective method to improve the model robustness against
such attacks [1, 27]. Adversarial training can be formulated
as the following min-max optimization problem:
min E(x,y)∼D
θ

max

∥x′ −x∥≤ϵ

L(θ; x′ , y),

* Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn)

(1)

where D is the data distribution, ϵ is the margin of perturbation and L is the loss function, e.g. the cross-entropy
loss. Generally, Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) attack [16] has shown satisfactory effectiveness to find adversarial examples in the perturbation bound B(x, ϵ) = {x′ :
∥x′ −x∥ ≤ ϵ}, which is commonly used in solving the inner
maximization problem in (1):
xt+1 = ΠB(x,ϵ) (xt + α · sign(∇xt L(θ; xt , y))),

(2)

where Π is the projection function and α controls the step
size of gradient ascent. TRADES [30] is another variant of
AT, which adds a regularization term to adjust the trade-off
between robustness and accuracy [22, 24]:
min E(x,y)∼D {L(θ; x, y) + β
θ

max

∥x′ −x∥≤ϵ

K(fθ (x), fθ (x′ ))},

(3)
where K(·) is the KL divergence and β is the robustness
regularization to adjust the robustness-accuracy trade-off.
Although certain robustness has been achieved by AT
and its variants, there still exists a stark difference among
class-wise robustness in adversarially trained models, i.e.,
the model may exhibit strong robustness on some classes
while it can be highly vulnerable on others, as firstly revealed in [4, 21, 29]. This disparity raises the issue of robustness fairness, which can lead to further safety concerns
of DNNs, as the models that exhibit good overall robustness
may be easily fooled on some specific classes, e.g., the stop
sign in automatic driving. To address this issue, Fair Robust
Learning (FRL) [29] has been proposed, which adjusts the
margin and weight among classes when fairness constraints
are violated. However, this approach only brings limited
improvement on robust fairness while causing a drop on
overall robustness.
In this paper, we first present some theoretical insights on
how different adversarial configurations impact class-wise
robustness, and reveal that strong attacks can be detrimental to the hard classes (classes that have lower clean accuracy). This finding is further empirically confirmed through
evaluations of models trained under various adversarial configurations. Additionally, we observe that the worst robust-

8193

