This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Intra-class Variation Factors with Learnable Cluster Prompts for
Semi-supervised Image Synthesis
Yunfei Zhang1∗ , Xiaoyang Huo1∗, Tianyi Chen1 , Si Wu1,2,3† , and Hau San Wong4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
PAZHOU LAB
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{cszhangyunfei, csxyhuo, csttychen}@mail.scut.edu.cn, cswusi@scut.edu.cn,
cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

Learnable prompt: “? ? ? ? [class_name]”

Semi-supervised class-conditional image synthesis is
typically performed by inferring and injecting class labels
into a conditional Generative Adversarial Network (GAN).
The supervision in the form of class identity may be inadequate to model classes with diverse visual appearances. In
this paper, we propose a Learnable Cluster Prompt-based
GAN (LCP-GAN) to capture class-wise characteristics and
intra-class variation factors with a broader source of supervision. To exploit partially labeled data, we perform soft
partitioning on each class, and explore the possibility of associating intra-class clusters with learnable visual concepts
in the feature space of a pre-trained language-vision model,
e.g., CLIP. For class-conditional image generation, we design a cluster-conditional generator by injecting a combination of intra-class cluster label embeddings, and further
incorporate a real-fake classiﬁcation head on top of CLIP
to distinguish real instances from the synthesized ones, conditioned on the learnable cluster prompts. This signiﬁcantly strengthens the generator with more semantic language
supervision. LCP-GAN not only possesses superior generation capability but also matches the performance of the
fully supervised version of the base models: BigGAN and
StyleGAN2-ADA, on multiple standard benchmarks.

“? ? ? ?” ൎ “Wavy Hair”

Class

“? ? ? ?” ൎ “Smiling”

Intra-class cluster

Figure 1. Different from generic class-conditional GANs conditioned on discrete class labels, LCP-GAN learns intra-class
cluster-speciﬁc prompts to guide the generation process and capture underlying variation factors.

process, object category is typically represented in the form
of a discrete label, which is injected into both generator and
discriminator through learnable embedding layers. However, sufﬁcient labeled training data may be difﬁcult to collect
in real-world applications. Signiﬁcant efforts have been devoted to semi-supervised generative learning that aims to reduce the dependence of class-conditional GANs on labeled
training data [6, 15, 29, 33].
In the semi-supervised setting, the amount of unlabeled
training samples can be signiﬁcantly greater than that of labeled ones. As one of the early attempts, CatGAN [44]
trained a discriminator to infer the class labels of real images with high conﬁdence, but not for the synthesized
ones. Both TripleGAN [29] and Δ-GAN [15] incorporated an auxiliary classiﬁer to focus on class label prediction in the adversarial training process. The unlabeled
images with pseudo labels were used to train the class-

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have achieved
considerable success in modeling complex data distributions and generating high-ﬁdelity images from random vectors [2, 18, 25]. To control class semantics in the generation
∗ Joint ﬁrst authors.

† Corresponding author.

7392

