This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DKM: Dense Kernelized Feature Matching for Geometry Estimation
Johan Edstedt,

Ioannis Athanasiadis,

Mårten Wadenbäck,

Michael Felsberg

Computer Vision Laboratory
Linköping University
Abstract
Feature matching is a challenging computer vision task
that involves finding correspondences between two images
of a 3D scene. In this paper we consider the dense approach
instead of the more common sparse paradigm, thus striving to find all correspondences. Perhaps counter-intuitively,
dense methods have previously shown inferior performance
to their sparse and semi-sparse counterparts for estimation
of two-view geometry. This changes with our novel dense
method, which outperforms both dense and sparse methods
on geometry estimation. The novelty is threefold: First, we
propose a kernel regression global matcher. Secondly, we
propose warp refinement through stacked feature maps and
depthwise convolution kernels. Thirdly, we propose learning dense confidence through consistent depth and a balanced sampling approach for dense confidence maps.
Through extensive experiments we confirm that our proposed dense method, Dense Kernelized Feature Matching,
sets a new state-of-the-art on multiple geometry estimation
benchmarks. In particular, we achieve an improvement on
MegaDepth-1500 of +4.9 and +8.9 AUC@5◦ compared to
the best previous sparse method and dense method respectively. Our code is provided at the following repository:
https://github.com/Parskatt/DKM .

1. Introduction
Two-view geometry estimation is a classical computer
vision problem with numerous important applications, including 3D reconstruction [38], SLAM [30], and visual relocalisation [27]. The task can roughly be divided into two
steps. First, a set of matching pixel pairs between the images is produced. Then, using the matched pairs, two-view
geometry, e.g., relative pose, is estimated. In this paper, we
focus on the first step, i.e., feature matching. This task is
challenging, as image pairs may exhibit extreme variations
in illumination [1], viewpoint [22], time of day [37], and
even season [46]. This stands in contrast to small baseline
stereo and optical flow tasks, where the changes in view-

A

B

Previous SotA
warp ⊙ certainty

DKM

warp ⊙ certainty

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison. We compare our proposed
approach DKM with the previous SotA method PDC-Net+ [48]
on Milan Cathedral. Top row, image A and B. Middle row and
bottom row, forward and reverse warps for PDC-Net+ and DKM
weighted by certainty. DKM provides both superior match accuracy and certainty estimation compared to previous methods.

point and illumination are typically small.
Traditionally, feature matching has been performed by
sparse keypoint and descriptor extraction, followed by
matching [26,36]. The main issue with this approach is that
accurate localization of reliable and repeatable keypoints
is difficult in challenging scenes. This leads to errors in
matching and estimation [13,23]. To tackle this issue, semisparse or detector-free methods such as LoFTR [41] and
Patch2Pix [53] were introduced. These methods do not detect keypoints directly but rather perform global matching at
a coarse level, followed by mutual nearest neighbour extraction and sparse match refinement. While those methods degrade less in low-texture scenes, they are still limited by the
fact that the sparse matches are produced at a coarse scale,
leading to problems with, e.g., repeatability due to grid ar-

17765

