This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuralangelo: High-Fidelity Neural Surface Reconstruction
Zhaoshuo Li1,2

Thomas Müller1 Alex Evans1 Russell H. Taylor2
Ming-Yu Liu1 Chen-Hsuan Lin1
1

NVIDIA Research

2

Mathias Unberath2

Johns Hopkins University

https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/neuralangelo

Neuralangelo

3D surface
reconstruction

surface
normal

Figure 1. We present Neuralangelo, a framework for high-fidelity 3D surface reconstruction from RGB images using neural volume
rendering, even without auxiliary data such as segmentation or depth. Shown in the figure is an extracted 3D mesh of a courthouse.

Abstract
Neural surface reconstruction has been shown to be powerful for recovering dense 3D surfaces via image-based neural rendering. However, current methods struggle to recover
detailed structures of real-world scenes. To address the
issue, we present Neuralangelo, which combines the representation power of multi-resolution 3D hash grids with
neural surface rendering. Two key ingredients enable our approach: (1) numerical gradients for computing higher-order
derivatives as a smoothing operation and (2) coarse-to-fine
optimization on the hash grids controlling different levels of
details. Even without auxiliary inputs such as depth, Neuralangelo can effectively recover dense 3D surface structures
from multi-view images with fidelity significantly surpassing previous methods, enabling detailed large-scale scene
reconstruction from RGB video captures.

1. Introduction
3D surface reconstruction aims to recover dense geometric scene structures from multiple images observed at different viewpoints [9]. The recovered surfaces provide structural
information useful for many downstream applications, such
as 3D asset generation for augmented/virtual/mixed reality or environment mapping for autonomous navigation of
robotics. Photogrammetric surface reconstruction using a
monocular RGB camera is of particular interest, as it equips
users with the capability of casually creating digital twins of
the real world using ubiquitous mobile devices.
Classically, multi-view stereo algorithms [6, 16, 29, 34]
had been the method of choice for sparse 3D reconstruction. An inherent drawback of these algorithms, however, is
their inability to handle ambiguous observations, e.g. regions
with large areas of homogeneous colors, repetitive texture

8456

