This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Exploit the Sequence-Specific Prior Knowledge for
Image Processing Pipelines Optimization
Haina Qin1,2

Longfei Han3

Weihua Xiong1

Juan Wang1

Wentao Ma4

Bing Li1( )
Weiming Hu1,2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Technology and Business University 4 Zeku Technology, Shanghai
1

{qinhaina2020@,bli@nlpr.,wmhu@nlpr.}ia.ac.cn longfeihan@btbu.edu.cn Wallace.xiong@gmail.com

Abstract
The hardware image signal processing (ISP) pipeline is
the intermediate layer between the imaging sensor and the
downstream application, processing the sensor signal into
an RGB image. The ISP is less programmable and consists of a series of processing modules. Each processing
module handles a subtask and contains a set of tunable hyperparameters. A large number of hyperparameters form
a complex mapping with the ISP output. The industry typically relies on manual and time-consuming hyperparameter
tuning by image experts, biased towards human perception.
Recently, several automatic ISP hyperparameter optimization methods using downstream evaluation metrics come
into sight. However, existing methods for ISP tuning treat
the high-dimensional parameter space as a global space for
optimization and prediction all at once without inducing the
structure knowledge of ISP. To this end, we propose a sequential ISP hyperparameter prediction framework that utilizes the sequential relationship within ISP modules and the
similarity among parameters to guide the model sequence
process. We validate the proposed method on object detection, image segmentation, and image quality tasks.

1. Introduction
Hardware ISPs are low-level image processing pipelines
that convert RAW images into high-quality RGB images.
Typically, ISPs include a series of processing modules [5],
each of which handles a subtask such as denoising, white
balance, demosaicing, or sharpening. Compared to software image processing pipelines, hardware ISPs are faster,
more power-efficient, and widely used in real-time products [7, 34], including cameras [28], smartphones, surveil-

lance [21], IoT and driven-assistance systems. ISPs are
highly modular and less programmable but with a set of tunable hyperparameters. The industry always relies on manual and costly hyperparameter tuning by image experts [1]
to adapt the ISP to different application scenarios.
The ISP is always designed as a sequential pipeline [5]
and the configurable hyperparameters of various modules
from any ISP aggregate to be a complex parameter space
(with tens to hundreds of parameters), making the manual
tuning process time-consuming. It is also difficult to subjectively find optimal hyperparameters settings for various
downstream tasks (such as object detection and image segmentation [29, 30]). Recently, several automatic ISP hyperparameter optimization methods [17, 31] using downstream
evaluation metrics come into sight. These methods tuning
hyperparameters for downstream tasks include derivativefree [18] or gradient methods [12, 25, 27] based on differentiable approximation. There are also methods to demonstrate the potential of predicting specific hyperparameters
for each image or scene [22]. However, existing methods treat the high-dimensional parameter space as a global
black-box space for optimization and prediction all at once,
while ignoring the inherent sequence of the ISP modules
and the critical intra-correlation among hyperparameters.
Inspired by the operating principles and structure knowledge of ISPs, we first propose a sequential ISP hyperparameter prediction framework (as shown in Fig. 1) that contains Sequential CNN model and Global Similarity Grouping. The sequential CNN model runs recurrently by predicting a group of parameters from several ISP modules, not all
parameters, at each step. Meanwhile, the predicted parameters, along with the network’s hidden layer and the input
data, are in turn encoded as prior knowledge for predicting
the following grouping of parameters. The Global Similarity Grouping module divides ISP parameters into multiple

22314

