This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-Aware Object Goal Navigation
via Simultaneous Exploration and Identification
Jiazhao Zhang1,2,∗
Liu Dai3 *
Xuelin Chen5

Fanpeng Meng4
Qingnan Fan5
6
Kai Xu
He Wang1†

1

4

CFCS, Peking University 2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 3 CEIE, Tongji University
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 5 Tencent AI Lab 6 National University of Defense Technology

A

Abstract
Object goal navigation (ObjectNav) in unseen environments is a fundamental task for Embodied AI. Agents in existing works learn ObjectNav policies based on 2D maps,
scene graphs, or image sequences. Considering this task
happens in 3D space, a 3D-aware agent can advance its
ObjectNav capability via learning from fine-grained spatial information. However, leveraging 3D scene representation can be prohibitively unpractical for policy learning in
this floor-level task, due to low sample efficiency and expensive computational cost. In this work, we propose a framework for the challenging 3D-aware ObjectNav based on two
straightforward sub-policies. The two sub-polices, namely
corner-guided exploration policy and category-aware identification policy, simultaneously perform by utilizing online fused 3D points as observation. Through extensive experiments, we show that this framework can dramatically
improve the performance in ObjectNav through learning
from 3D scene representation. Our framework achieves the
best performance among all modular-based methods on the
Matterport3D and Gibson datasets, while requiring (up to
30x) less computational cost for training. The code will be
released to benefit the community.1

1. Introduction
As a vital task for intelligent embodied agents, object
goal navigation (ObjectNav) [38, 49] requires an agent to
find an object of a particular category in an unseen and
unmapped scene. Existing works tackle this task through
end-to-end reinforcement learning (RL) [27, 36, 47, 51] or
modular-based methods [9, 14, 35]. End-to-end RL based
methods take as input the image sequences and directly
output low-level navigation actions, achieving competitive
* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author: hewang@pku.edu.cn
1 Homepage: https://pku-epic.github.io/3D-Aware-ObjectNav/

B

C

: cushion
: sofa
: chair

C

A

B

C

Looking for a chair

Figure 1. We present a 3D-aware ObjectNav framework along
with simultaneous exploration and identification policies: A→B,
the agent was guided by an exploration policy to look for its target;
B → C, the agent consistently identified a target object and finally
called STOP.

performance while suffering from lower sample efficiency
and poor generalizability across datasets [3, 27]. Therefore,
we favor modular-based methods, which usually contain the
following modules: a semantic scene mapping module that
aggregates the RGBD observations and the outputs from
semantic segmentation networks to form a semantic scene
map; an RL-based goal policy module that takes as input
the semantic scene map and learns to online update a goal
location; finally, a local path planning module that drives
the agent to that goal. Under this design, the semantic accuracy and geometric structure of the scene map are crucial
to the success of object goal navigation.
We observe that the existing modular-based methods
mainly construct 2D maps [8, 9], scene graphs [34, 56] or
neural fields [43] as their scene maps. Given that objects
lie in 3D space, these scene maps are inevitably deficient in
leveraging 3D spatial information of the environment comprehensively and thus have been a bottleneck for further
improving object goal navigation. In contrast, forming a
3D scene representation naturally offers more accurate, spatially dense and consistent semantic predictions than its 2D
counterpart, as proved by [12, 31, 45]. Hence, if the agent
could take advantage of the 3D scene understanding and

6672

