This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neuralizer: General Neuroimage Analysis without Re-Training
Steffen Czolbe
University of Copenhagen and MGH

Adrian V. Dalca
MIT, and MGH, Harvard Medical School

per.sc@di.ku.dk

adalca@mit.edu

Abstract
Input

Neuroimage processing tasks like segmentation, reconstruction, and registration are central to the study of neuroscience. Robust deep learning strategies and architectures used to solve these tasks are often similar. Yet, when
presented with a new task or a dataset with different visual characteristics, practitioners most often need to train
a new model, or fine-tune an existing one. This is a timeconsuming process that poses a substantial barrier for the
thousands of neuroscientists and clinical researchers who
often lack the resources or machine-learning expertise to
train deep learning models. In practice, this leads to a lack
of adoption of deep learning, and neuroscience tools being
dominated by classical frameworks.
We introduce Neuralizer, a single model that generalizes to previously unseen neuroimaging tasks and modalities without the need for re-training or fine-tuning. Tasks do
not have to be known a priori, and generalization happens
in a single forward pass during inference. The model can
solve processing tasks across multiple image modalities, acquisition methods, and datasets, and generalize to tasks and
modalities it has not been trained on. Our experiments on
coronal slices show that when few annotated subjects are
available, our multi-task network outperforms task-specific
baselines without training on the task.

1. Introduction
Computational methods for the processing and analysis
of neuroimages have enabled a deep understanding of the
human brain. The field has also led to advanced patient
care by facilitating non-invasive methods of diagnosis and
treatment. Recent deep learning research promises to substantially increase the accuracy and speed of neuroimaging
analysis methods.
A drawback of most current deep-learning-based approaches is that each model is limited to solving the task
it has been trained on, on the type of data it has been
trained on. Generalization to new tasks and domains, such
as different acquisition protocols or new segmentation, is

One Model
for all Tasks

Prediction

Context Set informs Task

Figure 1. Neuralizer can solve a broad range of image processing
tasks, including new ones not seen during training, with a single
model by conditioning the prediction on a context set of examples.
After training on a diverse set of tasks, the model can generalize
to new tasks in a single forward pass without re-training or finetuning. The model is highly flexible, requiring no prior definition
of the set of tasks, and can be conditioned with context sets of any
length.

a main barrier to adoption [62]. Performing neuroimaging tasks like segmentation, registration, reconstruction, or
motion correction requires different models for each processing step, despite operating on the same input data and
methods exhibiting strong similarities in network architecture [13,45,85]. Yet, designing and training models to solve
these tasks on each dataset is prohibitively expensive. To
train a deep learning model, a dataset needs to be compiled
and often manually annotated, and the network, training,
and data loading logic needs to be implemented. All these
steps generally require machine learning and neuroimaging
expertise. In addition, computational resources like specialized graphics processing hardware and software infrastructure needs to be available. These requirements are particularly problematic in clinical research settings due to a high
cost of annotation and a lack of machine learning expertise
and hardware.

6217

