This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobileBrick: Building LEGO for 3D Reconstruction on Mobile Devices
Kejie Li1 , Jia-Wang Bian1 , Robert Castle2 , Philip H.S. Torr1 , Victor Adrian Prisacariu1
1
University of Oxford, 2 Apple

Figure 1. Sample LEGO models and RGBD images in the MobileBrick dataset. The left and right column shows instances in the “realworld model set” and the “random model set” respectively. We overlay the 3D models after pose alignment to RGB images.

Abstract
High-quality 3D ground-truth shapes are critical for 3D
object reconstruction evaluation. However, it is difficult to
create a replica of an object in reality, and even 3D reconstructions generated by 3D scanners have artefacts that
cause biases in evaluation. To address this issue, we introduce a novel multi-view RGBD dataset captured using
a mobile device, which includes highly precise 3D groundtruth annotations for 153 object models featuring a diverse
set of 3D structures. We obtain precise 3D ground-truth
shape without relying on high-end 3D scanners by utilising
LEGO models with known geometry as the 3D structures for
image capture. The distinct data modality offered by highresolution RGB images and low-resolution depth maps captured on a mobile device, when combined with precise 3D
geometry annotations, presents a unique opportunity for future research on high-fidelity 3D reconstruction. Furthermore, we evaluate a range of 3D reconstruction algorithms
on the proposed dataset.

the key to enabling immersive and realistic Augment Reality applications. For instance, a virtual object would not
blend in the physical environment realistically even if it is
a few millimetres off because the lighting is reflected incorrectly. Many approaches (e.g., Visual SLAM [13], Depth
Fusion [24], Multi-View Stereo [27]) have been proposed
to address this problem. Neural fields have also emerged
as a promising technique for 3D reconstruction [33, 39] and
novel view synthesis [23]. Advances in most of these algorithms are made possible with reliable datasets for benchmarking.

1. Introduction

However, building the exact 3D model of an object for
benchmarking is extremely difficult. Some datasets [17, 19,
29] resort to high-end 3D scanners to create pseudo-groundtruth models for evaluation, but these 3D models still suffer from artefacts due to noisy measurements, as shown
in Fig. 2. Therefore, the DTU dataset [17], a widely-used
dataset for multi-view stereo, is reluctant to call their reconstructed models ground truth, but chose the term “evaluation reference”. This deviation from the actual ground-truth
shape can cause significant biases when evaluating highfidelity object reconstruction, where millimetres matters.

High-fidelity 3D object reconstruction from images has
always been a “holy grail” in computer vision. It is also

In addition to the lack of 3D ground-truth, most existing datasets in multi-view reconstruction are not captured

4892

