This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A2J-Transformer: Anchor-to-Joint Transformer Network for 3D Interacting
Hand Pose Estimation from a Single RGB Image
Changlong Jiang1 , Yang Xiao1† , Cunlin Wu1 , Mingyang Zhang2 , Jinghong Zheng1 , Zhiguo Cao1 ,
and Joey Tianyi Zhou3,4
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education, School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
2
Alibaba Group
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
changlongj, Yang Xiao, cunlin wu@hust.edu.cn, changhai.zmy@alibaba-inc.com,
deepzheng,zgcao@hust.edu.cn, zhouty@cfar.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
3D interacting hand pose estimation from a single RGB
image is a challenging task, due to serious self-occlusion
and inter-occlusion towards hands, confusing similar appearance patterns between 2 hands, ill-posed joint position mapping from 2D to 3D, etc.. To address these, we
propose to extend A2J-the state-of-the-art depth-based 3D
single hand pose estimation method-to RGB domain under
interacting hand condition. Our key idea is to equip A2J
with strong local-global aware ability to well capture interacting hands’ local fine details and global articulated
clues among joints jointly. To this end, A2J is evolved under Transformer’s non-local encoding-decoding framework
to build A2J-Transformer. It holds 3 main advantages over
A2J. First, self-attention across local anchor points is built
to make them global spatial context aware to better capture joints’ articulation clues for resisting occlusion. Secondly, each anchor point is regarded as learnable query
with adaptive feature learning for facilitating pattern fitting
capacity, instead of having the same local representation
with the others. Last but not least, anchor point locates
in 3D space instead of 2D as in A2J, to leverage 3D pose
prediction. Experiments on challenging InterHand 2.6M
demonstrate that, A2J-Transformer can achieve state-ofthe-art model-free performance (3.38mm MPJPE advancement in 2-hand case) and can also be applied to depth
domain with strong generalization. The code is avaliable
at https://github.com/ChanglongJiangGit/
A2J-Transformer.

†Yang Xiao is corresponding author(Yang Xiao@hust.edu.cn).

Input RGB Image
Interacting 3D Anchors

Output 3D Joints
Predicted Offsets

Predicted 3D Joint

Figure 1. The main idea of A2J-Transformer. 3D anchors are
uniformly set and act as local regressors to predict each hand
joint. Meanwhile, they are also used as queries, and the interaction
among them is established to acquire global context.

1. Introduction
3D interacting hand pose estimation from a single RGB
image can be widely applied to the fields of virtual reality,
augmented reality, human-computer interaction, etc.. [32,
34, 37]. Although the paid efforts, it still remains as a
challenging research task due to the main issues of serious
self-occlusion and inter-occlusion towards hands [7, 12, 16,
22, 27], confusing similar appearance patterns between 2
hands [12, 19, 27], and the ill-posed characteristics of estimating 3D hand pose via monocular RGB image [7,16,28].
The existing methods can be generally categorized into
model-based [1,2,21,29,30,35,39,41,48] and model-free [5,
7,12,17,19,22,26,27,29,43] groups. Due to model’s strong
prior knowledge on hands, the former paradigm is overall of more promising performance. However, model-based
methods generally require complex personalized model calibration, which is sensitive to initialization and susceptible

8846

