This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Upcycling Models under Domain and Category Shift
Sanqing Qu1 *, Tianpei Zou1 * , Florian Röhrbein2 , Cewu Lu3 , Guang Chen1†,
Dacheng Tao4,5 , Changjun Jiang1
1
3

Tongji University, 2 Chemnitz University of Technology,

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 JD Explore Academy, 5 The University of Sydney

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) often perform poorly in
the presence of domain shift and category shift. How to upcycle DNNs and adapt them to the target task remains an
important open problem. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA), especially recently proposed Source-free Domain Adaptation (SFDA), has become a promising technology to address this issue. Nevertheless, existing SFDA
methods require that the source domain and target domain
share the same label space, consequently being only applicable to the vanilla closed-set setting. In this paper, we
take one step further and explore the Source-free Universal Domain Adaptation (SF-UniDA). The goal is to identify “known” data samples under both domain and category
shift, and reject those “unknown” data samples (not present
in source classes), with only the knowledge from standard
pre-trained source model. To this end, we introduce an
innovative global and local clustering learning technique
(GLC). Speciﬁcally, we design a novel, adaptive one-vs-all
global clustering algorithm to achieve the distinction across
different target classes and introduce a local k-NN clustering strategy to alleviate negative transfer. We examine the
superiority of our GLC on multiple benchmarks with different category shift scenarios, including partial-set, open-set,
and open-partial-set DA. Remarkably, in the most challenging open-partial-set DA scenario, GLC outperforms UMAD
by 14.8% on the VisDA benchmark. The code is available
at https://github.com/ispc-lab/GLC.

1. Introduction
At the expensive cost of given large-scale labeled data
and huge computation resources, deep neural networks
(DNNs) have made remarkable progress in various tasks.
However, DNNs often generalize poorly to the unseen new
domain under domain shift and category shift. How to
upcycle DNNs and adapt them to target tasks is still a
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author: guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

Source Domain

Target Domain Upcycling

Ʋ
Source data

Partial-set

¥
Source model

Openpartial-set
GLC
Tech

Open-set
Which type category shift are we
facing? We have no idea ...

Upcycled
target model

Figure 1. The illustration of Source-free Universal Domain Adaptation (SF-UniDA). The goal is to realize model upcycling under
both domain shift and category shift. It is extremely challenging as
only one source closed-set model is provided as supervision rather
than raw data. And we do not have any prior knowledge about
category shift between domains in advance.

long-standing open problem. In the last decade, many efforts have been devoted to unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) [12, 16, 28, 40], which capitalizes on labeled source
data and unlabeled target data in a transduction manner, and
has achieved signiﬁcant success. Despite this, the access to
source raw data is inefﬁcient and may violate the increasingly stringent data privacy policies [45]. Recently, Sourcefree Domain Adaptation (SFDA) [22, 35, 46] has become a
promising technology to alleviate this issue, where only a
pre-trained source model is provided as supervision rather
than raw data. However, to avoid model collapse, most existing methods [22, 35, 46] assume that the label space is
identical across the source and target domain, thus being
only applicable to vanilla closed-set scenarios.
In reality, target data may come from a variety of scenarios. Therefore, it is too difﬁcult to hold such a strict
assumption. For a better illustration, we suppose Ys and
Yt as the label space of source domain and target domain,
respectively. In addition to the well-studied vanilla closedset (Ys = Yt .), we often encounter several other situations,
e.g., the partial-set (Ys ⊃ Yt ), the open-set (Ys ⊂ Yt ), and
the open-partial-set (Ys ∩ Yt = ∅, Ys  Yt , Ys  Yt ).
Currently, there have been several source data-dependent
works [4,5,26,32,38,47] developed to target category shift.
However, methods devised for one situation are commonly

20019

