This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIVOT: Prompting for Video Continual Learning
Andrés Villa1,2 , Juan León Alcázar2 , Motasem Alfarra2 , Kumail Alhamoud2 , Julio Hurtado3 ,
Fabian Caba Heilbron4 , Alvaro Soto1 , Bernard Ghanem2
1

Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
3
University of Pisa, 4 Adobe Research
afvilla@uc.cl, {juancarlo.alcazar,motasem.alfarra,kumail.hamoud}@kaust.edu.sa

julio.hurtado@di.unipi.it, caba@adobe.com, asoto@ing.puc.cl, bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Modern machine learning pipelines are limited due to
data availability, storage quotas, privacy regulations, and
expensive annotation processes. These constraints make it
difficult or impossible to train and update large-scale models on such dynamic annotated sets. Continual learning directly approaches this problem, with the ultimate goal of
devising methods where a deep neural network effectively
learns relevant patterns for new (unseen) classes, without
significantly altering its performance on previously learned
ones. In this paper, we address the problem of continual learning for video data. We introduce PIVOT, a novel
method that leverages extensive knowledge in pre-trained
models from the image domain, thereby reducing the number of trainable parameters and the associated forgetting.
Unlike previous methods, ours is the first approach that effectively uses prompting mechanisms for continual learning
without any in-domain pre-training. Our experiments show
that PIVOT improves state-of-the-art methods by a significant 27% on the 20-task ActivityNet setup.

1. Introduction
Modern Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are at the core
of many state-of-the-art methods in machine vision [10,
20, 21, 38, 44, 46] tasks. To achieve their remarkable
performance, most DNNs rely on large-scale pre-training
[11, 26, 36, 46], thereby enabling feature reuse in related
downstream tasks [4]. However, adapting and fine-tuning
a pre-trained DNN on a novel dataset commonly leads to
catastrophic forgetting [16]. This phenomenon explains
how the effectiveness of the fine-tuned DNNs drastically
reduces in the original training distribution, in favor of increased performance on the downstream task.
This undesirable property has driven multiple research
efforts in the area of Continual Learning (CL) [7, 8, 18, 25,

Figure 1. Performance improvement by each PIVOT component. We report the average accuracy on all tasks under the
10-task CIL on UCF101 and ActivityNet. We report the performance of basic CLIP, and then gradually equip it with other
components: Spatial Prompting, Memory Buffer, Multi-modal
Contrastive Learning, Temporal Encoder, to finally reach our proposed PIVOT method. The addition of each proposed component
generally boosts the performance on both datasets. Stars represent
the upper bound performance on each benchmark.

29], yielding techniques that enable fine-tuning a DNN on
a sequence of tasks while mitigating the performance drop
along the intermediate steps. One of the most challenging
scenarios for the study of CL is Class Incremental Learning
(CIL), where the labels and data are mutually exclusive between tasks, training data is available only for the current
task, and there are no task identifiers on the validation step
(i.e task boundaries are not available at test time). Such a
setup requires learning one model that, despite the continuous adaptation to novel tasks, performs well on all the seen
classes. Recent advances in mitigating catastrophic forgetting rely on deploying episodic memory or regularization
techniques [2, 8, 25, 37]. Nevertheless, most of this progress
has been directed toward analyzing the catastrophic forgetting of DNNs in the image domain. The works of [34,35,47]
introduced the CIL setup to the video domain, in particular
the action recognition task. Unlike its image counterpart,

24214

