This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowGrad: Controlling the Output of Generative ODEs with Gradients
Xingchao Liu1 , Lemeng Wu1 , Shujian Zhang1 , Chengyue Gong1 , Wei Ping2 , Qiang Liu1
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 NVIDIA
{xcliu,lmwu,szhang19,cygong}@utexas.edu,wping@nvidia.com,lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Generative modeling with ordinary differential equations (ODEs) has achieved fantastic results on a variety of
applications. Yet, few works have focused on controlling
the generated content of a pre-trained ODE-based generative model. In this paper, we propose to optimize the output of ODE models according to a guidance function to
achieve controllable generation. We point out that, the gradients can be efficiently back-propagated from the output
to any intermediate time steps on the ODE trajectory, by
decomposing the back-propagation and computing vectorJacobian products. To further accelerate the computation
of the back-propagation, we propose to use a non-uniform
discretization to approximate the ODE trajectory, where
we measure how straight the trajectory is and gather the
straight parts into one discretization step. This allows us
to save ∼ 90% of the back-propagation time with ignorable error. Our framework, named FlowGrad, outperforms
the state-of-the-art baselines on text-guided image manipulation. Moreover, FlowGrad enables us to find global semantic directions in frozen ODE-based generative models
that can be used to manipulate new images without extra
optimization.

1. Introduction
Controllable generation is very important for image editing [2, 11, 43], text-guided image manipulation [19, 30, 33],
etc.. Traditionally, we use GAN and optimize the latent embedding with the desirable objective functions [2, 7, 11, 29,
31, 38, 49]. But the disadvantage is that, it is difficult to
embed the image into the GAN space honestly and the performance is limited by the pre-trained GANs, which suffer
from training instability and mode collapse.
Recently, diffusion models (or stochastic differential
equation (SDE)-based generative models) has been popular [9, 12, 30, 39, 40, 42, 45], and there has been a number of
works on controlled generation based on diffusion models,
such as [9, 28]. But due to the diffusion noise, it is hard to
accurately control the output, especially when it comes to

optimizing a complex loss function such as CLIP [35]. To
achieve controlled generation, existing methods either requires training a noised version of the guidance [9, 30, 40],
or fine-tuning the whole diffusion model [13, 19].
In contrast, ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based
generative models represent a simpler alternative than diffusion without involving the diffusion noise and the Ito
calculus machinery. Recently, it has been shown that 1)
ODEs can be trained directly without resorting to SDEs,
and 2) ODE can perform comparable or even better than
SDE [16, 21, 36, 44].
Due to the deterministic nature of ODEs, they form an
ideal model for controlled generation, as they enjoy both
the rich latent space as SDEs and the explicit optimization
framework as GANs. The goal of this work is to fully explore its potential in terms of controlled generation, with unconditioned pre-trained ODEs. Technically, 1) We present a
simple way to control the output of ODE-based deep generative models with gradients; 2) We present a novel strategy
to speedup the gradient computation by explore the straightness of ODE trajectories. By measuring the straightness at
each time step during the simulation with Euler discretization, we can approximate the ODE trajectory with a fewstep non-uniform discretization, and consequently reduce a
great amount of time in back-propagation.
Our fast gradient computation scheme, named FlowGrad, allows us to efficiently control the generated contents of ODEs with any differentiable loss functions. In
particular, we test FlowGrad on a challenging objective
function, the CLIP loss, to manipulate user-provided images with text prompts. Moreover, by optimizing a set of
training images together, FlowGrad can find semantically
meaningful global directions in pre-trained ODE models,
which allow manipulating new images for free. Equipped
with advanced ODE-based generative models, FlowGrad
outperforms state-of-the-art CLIP-guided diffusion models
and GANs.

2. Background
In this section, we introduce background knowledge of
ODE-based generative models.

24335

