This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Better Stability and Adaptability: Improve Online Self-Training for
Model Adaptation in Semantic Segmentation
Dong Zhao, Shuang Wang, Qi Zang, Dou Quan, Xiutiao Ye, Licheng Jiao
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China
shwang@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) in semantic
segmentation transfers the knowledge of the source domain
to the target one to improve the adaptability of the segmentation model in the target domain. The need to access
labeled source data makes UDA unable to handle adaptation scenarios involving privacy, property rights protection, and confidentiality. In this paper, we focus on unsupervised model adaptation (UMA), also called source-free
domain adaptation, which adapts a source-trained model
to the target domain without accessing source data. We find
that the online self-training method has the potential to be
deployed in UMA, but the lack of source domain loss will
greatly weaken the stability and adaptability of the method.
We analyze two reasons for the degradation of online selftraining, i.e. inopportune updates of the teacher model and
biased knowledge from the source-trained model. Based
on this, we propose a dynamic teacher update mechanism
and a training-consistency based resampling strategy to improve the stability and adaptability of online self-training.
On multiple model adaptation benchmarks, our method obtains new state-of-the-art performance, which is comparable or even better than state-of-the-art UDA methods. The
code is available at https://github.com/DZhaoXd/DT-ST.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has received
extensive attention on semantic segmentation tasks [49, 59,
60, 63], which transfers the knowledge in the source domains (e.g. synthetic scene) to the target ones (e.g. real
scene). UDA in semantic segmentation aims to alleviate
the dependence of deep neural network-based models on
dense annotations [18, 46, 61] and improve their generalizaThis work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China(No.62271377, No.62201407), the Key Research and Development
Program of Shannxi (No.2021ZDLGY01-06, No.2022ZDLGY01-12), the
National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2021ZD0110404), the China
Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2022M722496), the Foreign Scholars in University Research and Teaching Program’s 111 Project (B07048).

Figure 1. Under the unsupervised model adaptation (UMA) setting, the mIoU score (%) of different methods on the validation set
throughout the training in GTA5 → Cityscapes adaptation task.
The dashed line represents the self-training UDA methods, and
the solid line represents the MDA methods.

tion ability to target domains [5, 12, 15]. However, in proprietary, privacy, or profit-related concerns, source domain
data is often unavailable, which presents new challenges for
UDA [9, 27, 55]. To this end, the setting of Unsupervised
Model Adaptation (UMA) is proposed [6,9,21,30,35], aiming to adapt the source-trained model to the unlabeled target
domain without using source domain data.
In UMA, the knowledge in the source-trained model
becomes the only available supervision signal, making
self-training on pseudo-labels the mainstream in the field.
Most existing UMA methods [26, 36, 57] adopt offline selftraining methods, which iteratively updates the pseudolabels and retrains the models. Although some improvements have been made, iterative self-training requires expert intervention [1,59], as ill-suited rounds and termination
often make it under-adapted.
The recently proposed online self-training (ONST)
methods [1, 31, 59] in UDA avoid the iterative training by
online co-evolving pseudo labels, showing great potential.
Then can ONST be applied to UMA scenarios without accessing source data? We deploy the state-of-the-art ONST

11733

