This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VGFlow: Visibility guided Flow Network for Human Reposing
Rishabh Jain*
MDSR Adobe

Krishna Kumar Singh
Adobe Research

Mausoom Sarkar
MDSR Adobe

Mayur Hemani
MDSR Adobe

Duygu Ceylan
Adobe Research

Jingwan Lu
Adobe Research

Balaji Krishnamurthy
MDSR Adobe

Abstract
The task of human reposing involves generating a realistic image of a person standing in an arbitrary conceivable
pose. There are multiple difficulties in generating perceptually accurate images, and existing methods suffer from
limitations in preserving texture, maintaining pattern coherence, respecting cloth boundaries, handling occlusions,
manipulating skin generation, etc. These difficulties are further exacerbated by the fact that the possible space of pose
orientation for humans is large and variable, the nature
of clothing items is highly non-rigid, and the diversity in
body shape differs largely among the population. To alleviate these difficulties and synthesize perceptually accurate
images, we propose VGFlow. Our model uses a visibilityguided flow module to disentangle the flow into visible and
invisible parts of the target for simultaneous texture preservation and style manipulation. Furthermore, to tackle distinct body shapes and avoid network artifacts, we also incorporate a self-supervised patch-wise ”realness” loss to
improve the output. VGFlow achieves state-of-the-art results as observed qualitatively and quantitatively on different image quality metrics (SSIM, LPIPS, FID). Results can
be downloaded from Project Webpage

1. Introduction
People are frequently featured in creative content like
display advertisements and films. As a result, the ability to
easily edit various aspects of humans in digital visual media
is critical for rapidly producing such content. Changing the
pose of humans in images, for example, enables several applications, such as automatically generating movies of people in action and e-commerce merchandising. This paper
presents a new deep-learning-based framework for reposing
* rishabhj@adobe.com

Figure 1. Human reposing involves changing the orientation of a
source image to a desired target pose. To get accurate results, we
learn to preserve the region visible (green) in the source image and
transfer the appropriate style to the invisible region (red)

humans guided by a target pose, resulting in high-quality
and realistic output.
Recent approaches for human-image reposing based on
deep-learning neural networks, such as [19,26,39], require a
person image, their current pose, represented as a sequence
of key-points or a 2D projection of a 3D body-pose map,
and the target pose represented similarly. These methods
fail to reproduce accurate clothing patterns, textures, or realistic reposed human images. This mainly happens when
either the target pose differs significantly from the current
(source) pose, there are heavy bodily occlusions, or the garments are to be warped in a non-rigid manner to the target
pose. Many of these failures can be attributed to the inability of these networks to discern regions of the source
image that would be visible in the target pose from those
that would be invisible. This is an important signal to determine which output pixels must be reproduced from the input directly and which must be predicted from the context.
We present VGFlow, a framework for human image reposing that employs a novel visibility-aware detail extraction
mechanism to effectively use the visibility input for preserving details present in the input image.
VGFlow consists of two stages - encoding the changes

21088

