This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noisy Correspondence Learning with Meta Similarity Correction
Haochen Han1 , Kaiyao Miao2 , Qinghua Zheng1 , Minnan Luo1 *
1 School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China

{hhc1997, miaoky814}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {qhzheng, minnluo}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the success of multimodal learning in crossmodal retrieval task, the remarkable progress relies on the
correct correspondence among multimedia data. However, collecting such ideal data is expensive and timeconsuming. In practice, most widely used datasets are harvested from the Internet and inevitably contain mismatched
pairs. Training on such noisy correspondence datasets
causes performance degradation because the cross-modal
retrieval methods can wrongly enforce the mismatched data
to be similar. To tackle this problem, we propose a Meta
Similarity Correction Network (MSCN) to provide reliable
similarity scores. We view a binary classification task as
the meta-process that encourages the MSCN to learn discrimination from positive and negative meta-data. To further alleviate the influence of noise, we design an effective
data purification strategy using meta-data as prior knowledge to remove the noisy samples. Extensive experiments
are conducted to demonstrate the strengths of our method in
both synthetic and real-world noises, including Flickr30K,
MS-COCO, and Conceptual Captions. Our code is publicly
available.1

1. Introduction
Recently, cross-modal retrieval has drawn much attention with the rapid growth of multimedia data. Given a
query sample of specific modality, cross-modal retrieval
aims to retrieve relevant samples across different modalities. Existing cross-modal retrieval works [1, 6, 11] usually learn a comparable common space to bridge different
modalities, which achieved remarkable progress in many
applications, including video-audio retrieval [1, 33], visual
question answering [11, 26], and image-text matching [44].
Despite the promise, a core assumption in cross-modal
retrieval is the correct correspondence among multiple
* Minnan Luo is the corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/hhc1997/MSCN

Figure 1. Illustration of noisy correspondence in image-text retrieval. A standard triplet loss is used to enforce the positive pairs
to be closer than negatives in the common space. Noisy correspondence is the mismatched pairs but wrongly considered as positive
ones, and thus results in model performance degradation.

modalities. However, collecting such ideal data is expensive and time-consuming. In practice, most widely used
datasets are harvested from the Internet and inevitably contain noisy correspondence [31]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the
cross-modal retrieval method will wrongly enforce the mismatched data to be similar when learning with noisy correspondence, which may significantly affect the retrieval performance. To date, few effort has been made to address
this. Huang [15] first researches this issue and proposes the
NCR method to train from the noisy image-text pairs robustly. Inspired by the prior success for noisy labels [20],
NCR divides the data into clean and noisy partitions and
rectifies the correspondence with an adaptive model. However, NCR based on the memorization effect of DNNs [3],
which leads to poor performance under high noise ratio.
To tackle the challenge, we propose a Meta Similarity
Correction Network (MSCN) which aims to provide reliable similarity scores for the noisy features from main net.
We view a binary classification task as the meta-process:
given a multimodal sample, the MSCN will learn to determine whether the modalities correspond to each other or
not, where the prediction of MSCN can be naturally regarded as the similarity score. Specifically, a small amount
of clean pairs is used to construct positive and negative
meta-data, both viewed as meta-knowledge that encourages
MSCN to learn the discrimination. Meanwhile, the main net

7517

