This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling up GANs for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Minguk Kang1,3
Jun-Yan Zhu2
Richard Zhang3
Jaesik Park1
Eli Shechtman3
Sylvain Paris3
Taesung Park3
1

POSTECH

2

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The recent success of text-to-image synthesis has taken
the world by storm and captured the general public’s imagination. From a technical standpoint, it also marked a drastic change in the favored architecture to design generative
image models. GANs used to be the de facto choice, with
techniques like StyleGAN. With DALL·E 2, autoregressive
and diffusion models became the new standard for largescale generative models overnight. This rapid shift raises
a fundamental question: can we scale up GANs to benefit
from large datasets like LAION? We find that naı̈vely increasing the capacity of the StyleGAN architecture quickly
becomes unstable. We introduce GigaGAN, a new GAN architecture that far exceeds this limit, demonstrating GANs
as a viable option for text-to-image synthesis. GigaGAN
offers three major advantages. First, it is orders of magnitude faster at inference time, taking only 0.13 seconds
to synthesize a 512px image. Second, it can synthesize
high-resolution images, for example, 16-megapixel images
in 3.66 seconds. Finally, GigaGAN supports various latent
space editing applications such as latent interpolation, style
mixing, and vector arithmetic operations.

1. Introduction
Recently released models, such as DALL·E 2 [53], Imagen [59], Parti [73], and Stable Diffusion [58], have ushered
in a new era of image generation, achieving unprecedented
levels of image quality and model flexibility. The nowdominant paradigms, diffusion models and autoregressive
models, both rely on iterative inference. This is a doubleedged sword, as iterative methods enable stable training
with simple objectives but incur a high computational cost
during inference.
Contrast this with Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [5,17,33,51], which generate images through a single forward pass and thus inherently efficient. While such
models dominated the previous “era” of generative modeling, scaling them requires careful tuning of the network

3

Adobe Research

architectures and training considerations due to instabilities
in the training procedure. As such, GANs have excelled at
modeling single or multiple object classes, but scaling to
complex datasets, much less an open world, has remained
challenging. As a result, ultra-large models, data, and compute resources are now dedicated to diffusion and autoregressive models. In this work, we ask – can GANs continue
to be scaled up and potentially benefit from such resources,
or have they plateaued? What prevents them from further
scaling, and can we overcome these barriers?
We first experiment with StyleGAN2 [34] and observe
that simply scaling the backbone causes unstable training.
We identify several key issues and propose techniques to
stabilize the training while increasing the model capacity.
First, we effectively scale the generator’s capacity by retaining a bank of filters and taking a sample-specific linear
combination. We also adapt several techniques commonly
used in the diffusion context and confirm that they bring
similar benefits to GANs. For instance, interleaving both
self-attention (image-only) and cross-attention (image-text)
with the convolutional layers improves performance.
Furthermore, we reintroduce multi-scale training, finding a new scheme that improves image-text alignment and
low-frequency details of generated outputs. Multi-scale
training allows the GAN-based generator to use parameters
in low-resolution blocks more effectively, leading to better
image-text alignment and image quality. After careful tuning, we achieve stable and scalable training of a one-billionparameter GAN (GigaGAN) on large-scale datasets, such as
LAION2B-en [63]. Our results are shown in Figure 1.
In addition, our method uses a multi-stage approach [12,
76]. We first generate at 64 × 64 and then upsample to
512 × 512. These two networks are modular and robust
enough to be used in a plug-and-play fashion. We show that
our text-conditioned GAN-based upsampling network can
be used as an efficient, higher-quality upsampler for a base
diffusion model such as DALL·E 2, despite never having
seen diffusion images at training time (Figures 1).
Together, these advances enable our GigaGAN to go
far beyond previous GANs: 36× larger than StyleGAN2 [34] and 6× larger than StyleGAN-XL [62] and

10124

