This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LayoutDM: Discrete Diffusion Model for Controllable Layout Generation
Naoto Inoue1

Kotaro Kikuchi1
Edgar Simo-Serra2
Mayu Otani1
1
2
CyberAgent, Japan
Waseda University, Japan

Kota Yamaguchi1

{inoue naoto, kikuchi kotaro xa}@cyberagent.co.jp ess@waseda.jp
{otani mayu, yamaguchi kota}@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract

Initial layout

Final layout

corrupt

Graphic layouts play a critical role in visual communication. Automatically creating a visually pleasing layout has
tremendous application benefits that range from authoring
of printed media [45] to designing application user interface [5], and there has been a growing research interest in
the community. The task of layout generation considers the
arrangement of elements, where each element has a tuple
of attributes, such as category, position, or size, and depending on the task setup, there could be optional control
inputs that specify part of the elements or attributes. Due
to the structured nature of layout data, it is crucial to consider relationships between elements in a generation. For
this reason, current generation approaches either build an
autoregressive model [2, 11] or develop a dedicated inference strategy to explicitly consider relationships [19–21].
In this paper, we propose to utilize discrete state-space
1 Please find the code and models at:
https://cyberagentailab.github.io/layout-dm.

...

condition

M

M

...

M

M

M

1

...

3

M

(optional)

1

4

...

3

2

Generated layout(s)

LayoutDM

Completion

Category

Category +size

.

1. Introduction

...
denoise

..

Controllable layout generation aims at synthesizing
plausible arrangement of element bounding boxes with optional constraints, such as type or position of a specific element. In this work, we try to solve a broad range of layout generation tasks in a single model that is based on discrete state-space diffusion models. Our model, named LayoutDM, naturally handles the structured layout data in the
discrete representation and learns to progressively infer a
noiseless layout from the initial input, where we model the
layout corruption process by modality-wise discrete diffusion. For conditional generation, we propose to inject layout constraints in the form of masking or logit adjustment
during inference. We show in the experiments that our LayoutDM successfully generates high-quality layouts and outperforms both task-specific and task-agnostic baselines on
several layout tasks.1

+

Refinement

Category+relationship

Figure 1. Overview of LayoutDM. Top: LayoutDM is trained to
gradually generate a complete layout from a blank state in discrete
state space. Bottom: During sampling, we can steer LayoutDM
to perform various conditional generation tasks without additional
training or external models.

diffusion models [3, 9, 14] for layout generation tasks. Diffusion models have shown promising performance for various generation tasks, including images and texts [13].
We formulate the diffusion process for layout structure by
modality-wise discrete diffusion, and train a denoising backbone network to progressively infer the complete layout
with or without conditional inputs. To support variablelength layout data, we extend the discrete state-space with
a special PAD token instead of the typical end-of-sequence
token used in autoregressive models. Our model can incorporate complex layout constraints via logit adjustment, so
that we can refine an existing layout or impose relative size
constraints between elements without additional training.
We discuss two key advantages of LayoutDM over existing models for conditional layout generation. Our model
avoids the immutable dependency chain issue [20] that hap-

10167

