This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Critical Learning Periods for Multisensory Integration in Deep Networks
Michael Kleinman1 * Alessandro Achille2 Stefano Soatto2
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 AWS AI Labs
michael.kleinman@ucla.edu {aachille,soattos}@amazon.com
Abstract
We show that the ability of a neural network to integrate
information from diverse sources hinges critically on being exposed to properly correlated signals during the early
phases of training. Interfering with the learning process
during this initial stage can permanently impair the development of a skill, both in artificial and biological systems
where the phenomenon is known as a critical learning period. We show that critical periods arise from the complex
and unstable early transient dynamics, which are decisive
of final performance of the trained system and their learned
representations. This evidence challenges the view, engendered by analysis of wide and shallow networks, that early
learning dynamics of neural networks are simple, akin to
those of a linear model. Indeed, we show that even deep
linear networks exhibit critical learning periods for multisource integration, while shallow networks do not. To better understand how the internal representations change according to disturbances or sensory deficits, we introduce a
new measure of source sensitivity, which allows us to track
the inhibition and integration of sources during training.
Our analysis of inhibition suggests cross-source reconstruction as a natural auxiliary training objective, and indeed
we show that architectures trained with cross-sensor reconstruction objectives are remarkably more resilient to critical periods. Our findings suggest that the recent success
in self-supervised multi-modal training compared to previous supervised efforts may be in part due to more robust
learning dynamics and not solely due to better architectures
and/or more data.

1. Introduction
Learning generally benefits from exposure to diverse
sources of information, including different sensory modalities, views, or features. Multiple sources can be more informative than the sum of their parts. For instance, both
views of a random-dot stereogram are needed to extract the
* Work conducted during an internship at AWS AI Labs.

synergistic information, which is absent in each individual
view [17]. More generally, multiple sources can help identify latent common factors of variation relevant to the task,
and separate them from source-specific nuisance variability,
as done in contrastive learning.
Much information fusion work in Deep Learning focuses
on the design of the architecture, as different sources may
require different architectural biases to be efficiently encoded. We instead focus on the learning dynamics, since
effective fusion of different sources relies on complex phenomena beginning during the early epochs of training. In
fact, even slight interference with the learning process during this critical period can permanently damage a network’s
ability to harvest synergistic information. Even in animals,
which excel at multi-sensor fusion, a temporary deficit in
one source during early development can permanently impair the learning process: congenital strabismus in humans
can cause permanent loss of stereopsis if not corrected sufficiently early; similarly, visual/auditory misalignment can
impair the ability of barn owls to localize prey [18]. In artificial networks, the challenge of integrating different sources
has been noted in visual question answering (VQA), where
the model often resorts to encoding less rich but more readily accessible textual information [2, 6], ignoring the visual
modality, or in audio-visual processing, where acoustic information is often washed out by visual information [32].
Such failures are commonly attributed to the mismatch
in learning speed between sources, or their “information
asymmetry” for the task. It has also been suggested, based
on limiting analysis for wide networks, that the initial dynamics of DNNs are very simple [16], seemingly in contrast
with evidence from biology. In this paper, we instead argue
that the early learning dynamics of information fusion in
deep networks are both highly complex and brittle, to the
point of exhibiting critical learning periods similar to biological systems.
In Sect. 2, we show that shallow networks do not exhibit
critical periods when learning to fuse diverse sources of information, but deep networks do. Even though, unlike animals, artificial networks do not age, their learning success
is still decided during the early phases of training. The ex-

24296

