This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-time Multi-person Eyeblink Detection in the Wild for Untrimmed Video
Wenzheng Zeng1 , Yang Xiao1† , Sicheng Wei1 , Jinfang Gan1 , Xintao Zhang1 , Zhiguo Cao1 ,
Zhiwen Fang2,3 and Joey Tianyi Zhou4,5
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education, School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
2
School of Biomedical Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China
3
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510280, China
4
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
5
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
{wenzhengzeng, Yang Xiao, sichengwei, jinfangan, u202115202, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn,
fzw310@smu.edu.cn, zhouty@cfar.a-star.edu.sg
https://github.com/wenzhengzeng/MPEblink

8.38s

Abstract
Real-time eyeblink detection in the wild can widely serve
for fatigue detection, face anti-spoofing, emotion analysis,
etc. The existing research efforts generally focus on singleperson cases towards trimmed video. However, multiperson scenario within untrimmed videos is also important for practical applications, which has not been well
concerned yet. To address this, we shed light on this research field for the first time with essential contributions on
dataset, theory, and practices. In particular, a large-scale
dataset termed MPEblink that involves 686 untrimmed
videos with 8748 eyeblink events is proposed under multiperson conditions. The samples are captured from unconstrained films to reveal “in the wild” characteristics. Meanwhile, a real-time multi-person eyeblink detection method
is also proposed. Being different from the existing counterparts, our proposition runs in a one-stage spatio-temporal
way with end-to-end learning capacity. Specifically, it simultaneously addresses the sub-tasks of face detection, face
tracking, and human instance-level eyeblink detection. This
paradigm holds 2 main advantages: (1) eyeblink features
can be facilitated via the face’s global context (e.g., head
pose and illumination condition) with joint optimization
and interaction, and (2) addressing these sub-tasks in parallel instead of sequential manner can save time remarkably
to meet the real-time running requirement. Experiments on
MPEblink verify the essential challenges of real-time multiperson eyeblink detection in the wild for untrimmed video.
Our method also outperforms existing approaches by large
margins and with a high inference speed.
†Yang Xiao is corresponding author (Yang Xiao@hust.edu.cn).

9.04s

8.54s

9.21s

Timeline
Person 1 blink

Person 1

Person 2 blink

Person 2
8.71s

8.88s

9.21s

9.38s

9.50s

9.63s

Timeline

Figure 1. The illustration on multi-person eyeblink detection. This
task aims at being aware of the presence of people and detecting
their eyeblink activities at instance level.

1. Introduction
Real-time eyeblink detection in the wild is a recently
emerged challenging research task [19] that can widely
serve for fatigue detection [2], face anti-spoofing [34], affective analysis [7], etc. Although remarkable progress has
been made [9, 10, 19], the existing methods generally focus on single-person cases within trimmed videos. Multiperson scenario within untrimmed videos has not been well
concerned yet. However, detecting long-term eyeblink behaviors at multi-instance level is more preferred for some
practical application scenarios. For example, it can be used
to estimate attendees’ attention level and emotional state
change during social interaction [9, 33]. Thus, effective
and real-time multi-person eyeblink detection in the wild
for untrimmed video is indeed required.
To this end, we shed the light on this research problem
with essential contributions on dataset, theory, and practices. First, a challenging labeled multi-person eyeblink de-

13854

