This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MDL-NAS: A Joint Multi-domain Learning Framework for Vision Transformer
Shiguang Wang1,3
1

Tao Xie2,3

Jian Cheng1, * Xingcheng Zhang3

Haijun Liu4

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
3
SenseTime Research 4 Chongqing University
xiaohu wyyx@163.com

chenjian@uestc.edu.cn

xietao1997@hit.edu.cn

zhangxingcheng@sensetime.com

Multiple dataset
domains

Abstract
In this work, we introduce MDL-NAS, a unified framework that integrates multiple vision tasks into a manageable supernet and optimizes these tasks collectively under diverse dataset domains. MDL-NAS is storage-efficient
since multiple models with a majority of shared parameters can be deposited into a single one. Technically, MDLNAS constructs a coarse-to-fine search space, where the
coarse search space offers various optimal architectures
for different tasks while the fine search space provides finegrained parameter sharing to tackle the inherent obstacles
of multi-domain learning. In the fine search space, we suggest two parameter sharing policies, i.e., sequential sharing policy and mask sharing policy. Compared with previous works, such two sharing policies allow for the partial sharing and non-sharing of parameters at each layer
of the network, hence attaining real fine-grained parameter
sharing. Finally, we present a joint-subnet search algorithm
that finds the optimal architecture and sharing parameters
for each task within total resource constraints, challenging the traditional practice that downstream vision tasks
are typically equipped with backbone networks designed for
image classification. Experimentally, we demonstrate that
MDL-NAS families fitted with non-hierarchical or hierarchical transformers deliver competitive performance for all
tasks compared with state-of-the-art methods while maintaining efficient storage deployment and computation. We
also demonstrate that MDL-NAS allows incremental learning and evades catastrophic forgetting when generalizing to
a new task.

1. Introduction
Recently, transformers have become the standard pattern
for natural language processing (NLP) tasks due to their
efficacy in modelling long-range relationships via the self* Corresponding author.

haijun liu@126.com

Multiple
tasks

Output1
Layer L

Layer L

Layer L

Layer 3

Layer 3

Layer 3

Layer 2

Layer 2

Layer 2

Layer 1

Layer 1

Layer 1

Many-to-one

One-to-many

Iutput1
Many-to-many(MDL)

Figure 1. Illustration of differences between multi-domain learning (MDL) and other learning paradigms. MDL-NAS jointly optimizes multiple vision tasks under different dataset domains. L
denotes the layer numbers in the backbone.

attention mechanism [41]. Such success and good properties of transformers have spawned a slew of subsequent
works that apply them to a wide variety of computer vision
tasks, such as image classification [6, 27, 32, 49], object detection [5, 57], semantic segmentation [55], and video understanding [56], achieving impressive results. However,
these methods only apply transformer to a specific domain.
After observing the success of transformers, a naive question arises: could a transformer simultaneously handle multiple vision tasks under a variety of dataset domains ?
While a few works have investigated the usage of transformers to handle multiple input modalities (i.e., images
and text), they typically concentrate on a particular task,
such as visual question answering [20, 24], i.e., many-toone mapping. Also, some methods [2, 26] explore to simultaneously performing depth estimation, surface normal estimation, and semantic segmentation on a given input image.
However, these methods are restricted to a single-domain
setting, where all inputs are the same, i,e,, one-to-many
mapping. In addition, there are some works [19, 28] that
employ transformers to solve different tasks under multiple
domains (multi-domain learning), which is more realistic,
i.e., many-to-many mapping, as shown in Fig. 1. Never-

20094

