This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Azimuth Super-Resolution for FMCW Radar in Autonomous Driving
Yu-Jhe Li1
Shawn Hunt2
Jinhyung Park1
Matthew O’Toole1
Kris Kitani1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
DENSO International America, Inc.
{yujheli, jinhyun1, motoole2, kmkitani}@andrew.cmu.edu, {shawn.hunt}@na.denso.com

Abstract
We tackle the task of Azimuth (angular dimension) superresolution for Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave
(FMCW) multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) radar.
FMCW MIMO radar is widely used in autonomous driving alongside Lidar and RGB cameras. However, compared to Lidar, MIMO radar is usually of low resolution
due to hardware size restrictions. For example, achieving
1◦ azimuth resolution requires at least 100 receivers, but a
single MIMO device usually supports at most 12 receivers.
Having limitations on the number of receivers is problematic since a high-resolution measurement of azimuth angle
is essential for estimating the location and velocity of objects. To improve the azimuth resolution of MIMO radar,
we propose a light, yet efficient, Analog-to-Digital superresolution model (ADC-SR) that predicts or hallucinates
additional radar signals using signals from only a few receivers. Compared with the baseline models that are applied to processed radar Range-Azimuth-Doppler (RAD)
maps, we show that our ADC-SR method that processes raw
ADC signals achieves comparable performance with 98%
(50 times) fewer parameters. We also propose a hybrid
super-resolution model (Hybrid-SR) combining our ADCSR with a standard RAD super-resolution model, and show
that performance can be improved by a large margin. Experiments on our Pitt-Radar dataset and the RADIal dataset
validate the importance of leveraging raw radar ADC signals. To assess the value of our super-resolution model for
autonomous driving, we also perform object detection on
the results of our super-resolution model and find that our
super-resolution model improves detection performance by
around 4% in mAP. The Pitt-Radar and the code will be
released at the link.

1. Introduction
We address the task of azimuth angle super-resolution
for Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) [25]
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) [26] radar in autonomous driving. In addition to Lidar and RGB cam-

Ours

Input ADC signals

Predicted uncaptured ADC signals

ADC
Super
Resolution

Antennas

FFT

Hallucinated antennas

FFT

Previous work
Low-resolution
RA maps

Range-Azimuth (RA)
Super Resolution

Hight-resolution
RA maps

Figure 1. Previous work perform super-resolution from lowresolution and high-resolution Range-Azimuth maps after applying Discrete Time Fourier Transform (FFT). Instead, we aim to
predict more ADC uncaptured signals before they are transformed
into Range-Azimuth (RA) maps.

eras, Radar has been commonly used for autonomous vehicles [4, 5] due to its robustness in adverse weather conditions (e.g., fog, snow, rain) with longer wavelength. FMCW
MIMO radar uses a line array of receiver antennas to capture reflected signals of multiple chirps sent out by a line
array of transmitters. We can characterize the location
(orientation and distance) and velocity of nearby objects
from a radar’s Range-Azimuth-Doppler (RAD) map. The
RAD map is computed using the Discrete Time Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) [11, 26] on the discretized receiver signals after Analog-to-Digital conversion (ADC). In the domain of autonomous driving, MIMO [26] radar devices typically have low resolution due to the physical constraint on
the size of the sensors. For example, a device with eight
antenna receivers has at most an angle resolution of about
15◦ [11]. Thus, it is important to develop new technologies
which can increase the azimuth resolution of radar sensing,

17504

