This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mod-Squad: Designing Mixtures of Experts As Modular Multi-Task Learners
Zitian Chen1 , Yikang Shen2 , Mingyu Ding3 , Zhenfang Chen2 ,
Hengshuang Zhao3 , Erik Learned-Miller1 , Chuang Gan1,2
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Optimization in multi-task learning (MTL) is more challenging than single-task learning (STL), as the gradient
from different tasks can be contradictory. When tasks are related, it can be beneficial to share some parameters among
them (cooperation). However, some tasks require additional
parameters with expertise in a specific type of data or discrimination (specialization). To address the MTL challenge,
we propose Mod-Squad, a new model that is Modularized
into groups of experts (a ‘Squad’). This structure allows
us to formalize cooperation and specialization as the process of matching experts and tasks. We optimize this matching process during the training of a single model. Specifically, we incorporate mixture of experts (MoE) layers into
a transformer model, with a new loss that incorporates the
mutual dependence between tasks and experts. As a result,
only a small set of experts are activated for each task. This
prevents the sharing of the entire backbone model between
all tasks, which strengthens the model, especially when the
training set size and the number of tasks scale up. More
interestingly, for each task, we can extract the small set of
experts as a standalone model that maintains the same performance as the large model. Extensive experiments on the
Taskonomy dataset with 13 vision tasks and the PASCALContext dataset with 5 vision tasks show the superiority
of our approach. The project page can be accessed at
https://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/mod-squad.

1. Introduction
Computer vision involves a great number of tasks including recognition, depth estimation, edge detection, etc. Some
of them have a clear and strong relationship: they are likely
to benefit from shared features. An example would be a
task to classify cars and pedestrians and a task to segment
the same classes. Other tasks appear to be less related: it is
not clear what features they would share. An example could
be tumor detection in medical images and face recognition.
Multi-task learning (MTL) aims to model the relationships among tasks and build a unified model for a diverse

Experts

Tasks

Shared Experts

Expert Group

Expert Group

Task Pool

Task Pool

Mod-Squad

MoE ViT

Figure 1. A comparison between Mod-Squad and MoE ViT.
Our key motivation is that experts should leverage commonalities
in some tasks (cooperation) but focus on a subset of tasks that
require specific features and do not interfere with each other (specialization).

set of tasks. On the one hand, tasks often benefit by sharing parameters, i.e., cooperation. On the other hand, some
tasks may require specialized expertise that only benefits
that single task, i.e., specialization. A good MTL system
should be flexible to optimize experts for the dual purposes
of cooperation and specialization.
There are two well-known challenges in MTL: (1) gradient conflicts across tasks [5, 38]; and (2) how to design architectures that have both high accuracy and computational
efficiency.
To address these challenges, we introduce ModSquad, a new model that constructs a Mixture of Experts (MoE) [31] to be modularized multi-task learners (a
squad). Our design allows experts to cooperate on tasks
when it is helpful, rather than penalizing experts that do not
participate in every task. At the same time, some experts
naturally develop a deep specialization in particular tasks,
improving performance. The left figure in Fig. 1 shows an
example of the specialization and cooperation of experts in
Mod-Squad. A further and important side benefit, discussed
below, is that this sparsification of experts allows our model
to be decomposed into much smaller single-task models that
perform extremely well.
We achieve these goals by first integrating mixture of ex-

11828

