This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NerVE: Neural Volumetric Edges for Parametric Curve
Extraction from Point Cloud
Xiangyu Zhu12∗ Dong Du1 * Weikai Chen3 Zhiyou Zhao1
Yinyu Nie4 Xiaoguang Han12†
1

SSE, CUHKSZ

2

FNii, CUHKSZ

3

Tencent America

4

Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Extracting parametric edge curves from point clouds is
a fundamental problem in 3D vision and geometry processing. Existing approaches mainly rely on keypoint detection,
a challenging procedure that tends to generate noisy output, making the subsequent edge extraction error-prone. To
address this issue, we propose to directly detect structured
edges to circumvent the limitations of the previous point-wise
methods. We achieve this goal by presenting NerVE, a novel
neural volumetric edge representation that can be easily
learned through a volumetric learning framework. NerVE
can be seamlessly converted to a versatile piece-wise linear (PWL) curve representation, enabling a unified strategy
for learning all types of free-form curves. Furthermore, as
NerVE encodes rich structural information, we show that
edge extraction based on NerVE can be reduced to a simple
graph search problem. After converting NerVE to the PWL
representation, parametric curves can be obtained via offthe-shelf spline fitting algorithms. We evaluate our method
on the challenging ABC dataset [19]. We show that a simple network based on NerVE can already outperform the
previous state-of-the-art methods by a great margin.

1. Introduction
The advances of 3D scanning techniques have enabled us
to digitize and reconstruct the physical world, benefiting a
wide range of applications including 3D modeling, industrial
design, robotic vision, etc. However, point clouds, the raw
output of a 3D scanner, are typically noisy, unstructured, and
can exhibit strong sampling bias. Hence, extracting structured features, such as the feature edges, from an unordered
point cloud is a vital geometry processing task. Sharp geometric edges can be used as an abstraction of a complex
3D shape, facilitating downstream tasks including surface
* Xiangyu Zhu and Dong Du contribute equally.
† Corresponding author’s email: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

Figure 1. We present NerVE, a neural volumetric edge representation for parametric curve extraction from point clouds. Our method
can predict structured NerVE instead of unstructured edge points
in previous methods, and directly convert NerVE into piece-wise
linear (PWL) curves, reducing the error-prone post-processing of
previous methods into simple graph search on PWL curves. Postprocessing includes (a) Endpoint detection;(b) Graph structure
analysis;(c) Points thinning;(d) Special treatment for closed curves.

reconstruction, normal estimation, and shape classification.
Previous state-of-the-art methods mainly resort to a keypoint
fitting strategy to extract parametric edge curves from a point
cloud. Specifically, they first detect a sparse set of keypoints,
such as the endpoints or points on sharp edges, and then
group these points into individual sets according to predefined topologies. Finally, each point set is converted into a
parametric curve using spline fitting.
Recent approaches have strove to improve the accuracy of
edge point detection by using hand-crafted features [26] or
deep neural networks [2, 25, 36, 41]. Despite the impressive
progress that has been made, existing works still have the
following limitations. 1) The widely adopted point-wise classification approaches tend to generate noisy estimations – the
predicted edge points typically contain a spurious set of candidate points (see Fig. 5), which requires further processing
for keypoint cleaning and increases the risk of false/missing
connections. 2) The grouping procedure highly relies on the
accuracy of endpoint detection. However, it remains difficult

13601

