This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intrinsic Physical Concepts Discovery with Object-Centric Predictive Models
Qu Tang 1,2⋆ Xiangyu Zhu 1,2⋆ Zhen Lei 1,2,3 Zhaoxiang Zhang 1,2,3 *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
{tangqu2020,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, {xiangyu.zhu,zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Why do objects bounce off after the collision? Why do
magnets attract or repel each other? Objects cover many
complex physical concepts which define how they interact
with the world [5]. Humans have the ability to discover
abstract concepts about how the world works through just
observation. In a preserved video, some concepts are obvious in the visual appearances of objects, like location, size,
velocity, etc, while some concepts are hidden in the behaviors of objects. For example, intrinsic physical concepts
* Corresponding

author.

⋆ Equal contribution

PHYCINE
shape, size ..

dynamics

mass charge
Object 1
Object 2
Object 3

…

The ability to discover abstract physical concepts and
understand how they work in the world through observing
lies at the core of human intelligence. The acquisition of this
ability is based on compositionally perceiving the environment in terms of objects and relations in an unsupervised
manner. Recent approaches learn object-centric representations and capture visually observable concepts of objects,
e.g., shape, size, and location. In this paper, we take a step
forward and try to discover and represent intrinsic physical
concepts such as mass and charge. We introduce the PHYsical Concepts Inference NEtwork (PHYCINE), a system that
infers physical concepts in different abstract levels without supervision. The key insights underlining PHYCINE
are two-fold, commonsense knowledge emerges with prediction, and physical concepts of different abstract levels
should be reasoned in a bottom-up fashion. Empirical evaluation demonstrates that variables inferred by our system
work in accordance with the properties of the corresponding physical concepts. We also show that object representations containing the discovered physical concepts variables
could help achieve better performance in causal reasoning
tasks, i.e., ComPhy.

Figure 1. Given a video from the ComPhy [5] dataset, PHYCINE
decomposes the scene into multi-object representations that contain physical concepts of different abstraction levels, including visual attributes, dynamics, mass, and charge. (shown in different
colors).

like mass and charge, are unobservable from static scenes
and can only be discovered from the object dynamics. Objects carrying the same or opposite charge will exert a repulsive or attractive force on each other. After a collision,
the lighter object will undergo larger changes in its motion
compared with the massive one. How can machines learn
to reveal and represent such common sense knowledge?
We believe the answer lies in two key steps: decomposing
the world into object-centric representations, and building
a predictive model with abstract physical concepts as latent
variables to handle uncertainty.
Object-centric representation learning [3,9,18,22,23,29]
aims at perceiving the world in a structured manner to improve the generalization ability of intelligent systems and
achieve higher-level cognition. VAE [13]-based models,

23252

