This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Second-Order Plane Adjustment
Lipu Zhou
Meituan, Beijing, China
zhoulipu@meituan.com

Abstract
Planes are generally used in 3D reconstruction for depth
sensors, such as RGB-D cameras and LiDARs. This paper
focuses on the problem of estimating the optimal planes and
sensor poses to minimize the point-to-plane distance. The
resulting least-squares problem is referred to as plane adjustment (PA) in the literature, which is the counterpart of
bundle adjustment (BA) in visual reconstruction. Iterative
methods are adopted to solve these least-squares problems.
Typically, Newton’s method is rarely used for a large-scale
least-squares problem, due to the high computational complexity of the Hessian matrix. Instead, methods using an approximation of the Hessian matrix, such as the LevenbergMarquardt (LM) method, are generally adopted. This paper adopts the Newton’s method to efficiently solve the PA
problem. Specifically, given poses, the optimal plane have
a close-form solution. Thus we can eliminate planes from
the cost function, which significantly reduces the number
of variables. Furthermore, as the optimal planes are functions of poses, this method actually ensures that the optimal
planes for the current estimated poses can be obtained at
each iteration, which benefits the convergence. The difficulty lies in how to efficiently compute the Hessian matrix
and the gradient of the resulting cost. This paper provides
an efficient solution. Empirical evaluation shows that our
algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Planes ubiquitously exist in man-made environments, as
demonstrated in Fig. 1. Thus they are generally used in
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) systems
for depth sensors, such as RGB-D cameras [6, 9, 12–14]
and LiDARs [16, 21, 22, 24, 26]. Just as bundle adjustment (BA) [3, 8, 20, 25] is important for visual reconstruction [1,5,18,19], jointly optimizing planes and depth sensor
poses, which is called plane adjustment (PA) [24,26], is critical for 3D reconstruction using depth sensors. This paper
focuses on efficiently solving the large-scale PA problem.
The BA and PA problems both involve jointly optimiz-

Figure 1. We use Gaussian noises to perturb the poses of dataset
D in Fig. 3. The standard deviations for rotation and translation
are 3◦ and 0.3m, respectively. The resulting point cloud (a) is in a
mess. Fig. (b) shows the result from our algorithm. Our algorithm
can quickly align the planes, as shown in Fig. 5.

ing 3D structures and sensor poses. As the two problems are
similar, it is straightforward to apply the well-studied solutions for BA to PA, as done in [23, 26]. However, planes
in PA can be eliminated, so that the cost function of the PA
problem only depends on sensor poses, which significantly
reduces the number of variables. This property provides
a promising direction to efficiently solve the PA problem.
However, it is difficult to compute the Hessian matrix and
the gradient vector of the resulting cost. Although this problem was studied in several previous works [10, 16], no efficient solution has been proposed. This paper seeks to solve
this problem.
The main contribution of this paper is an efficient PA
solution using Newton’s method. We derive a closed-form
solution for the Hessian matrix and the gradient vector for
the PA problem whose computational complexity is inde-

13113

