This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Minimizing Maximum Model Discrepancy for Transferable
Black-box Targeted Attacks

1

Anqi Zhao1 Tong Chu1 Yahao Liu1 Wen Li2 * Jingjing Li1 Lixin Duan1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhaoanqiii, uestcchutong, lyhaolive, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com, lijin117@yeah.net

Abstract
In this work, we study the black-box targeted attack problem from the model discrepancy perspective. On the theoretical side, we present a generalization error bound for
black-box targeted attacks, which gives a rigorous theoretical analysis for guaranteeing the success of the attack. We
reveal that the attack error on a target model mainly depends on empirical attack error on the substitute model and
the maximum model discrepancy among substitute models.
On the algorithmic side, we derive a new algorithm for
black-box targeted attacks based on our theoretical analysis, in which we additionally minimize the maximum model
discrepancy (M3D) of the substitute models when training
the generator to generate adversarial examples. In this way,
our model is capable of crafting highly transferable adversarial examples that are robust to the model variation,
thus improving the success rate for attacking the black-box
model. We conduct extensive experiments on the ImageNet
dataset with different classification models, and our proposed approach outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin. The code will be available at
https://github.com/Asteriajojo/M3D.

1. Introduction
Recently, researchers have shown that Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples [9, 28, 36]. It has been demonstrated that by adding
small and human-imperceptible perturbations, images can
be easily misclassified by deep-learning models. Even
worse, adversarial examples are shown may have transferability, i.e., adversarial examples generated by one model
can successfully attack another model with a high probability [23, 28, 37]. Consequently, there is an increasing
interest in developing new techniques to attack an unseen
black-box model by constructing adversarial examples on
* The corresponding author

a substitute model, which is also known as black-box attack [5, 6, 14–16, 20, 39, 40].
While almost all existing black-box attack works implicitly assume the transferability of adversarial examples, the
theoretical analysis of the transferability is still absent. To
this end, in this work, we aim to answer the question of
to what extent the adversarial examples generated on one
known model can be used to successfully attack another unseen model. In particular, we are specifically interested in
the targeted attack task, i.e., constructing adversarial examples that can mislead the unseen black-box model by outputting a highly dangerous specified class. We first present
a generalization error bound for black-box targeted attacks
from the model discrepancy perspective, in which we reveal
that the attack error on a target model depends on the attack
error on a substitute model and the model discrepancy between the substitute model and the black-box model. Furthermore, the latter term can be bounded by the maximum
model discrepancy on the underlying hypothesis set, which
is irrelevant to the unseen target model, making it possible to construct adversarial examples by directly minimizing this term and thus the generalization error.
Based on the generalization error bound, we then design
a novel method called Minimizing Maximum Model Discrepancy (M3D) attack to produce highly transferable perturbations for black-box targeted attack. Specifically, we
exploit two substitute models which are expected to maintain their model discrepancy as large as possible. At the
same time, we train a generator that takes an image as input and generates an adversarial example to attack these two
substitute models and simultaneously minimize the discrepancy between the two substitute models. In other words,
the generator and the two substitute models are trained in
an adversarial manner to play a min-max game in terms of
the model discrepancy. In this way, the generator is expected to generate adversarial examples that are robust to
the variation of the substitute models, thus being capable
of attacking the black-box target model successfully with a
high chance.

8153

