This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NoisyTwins: Class-Consistent and Diverse Image Generation through StyleGANs
Lavish Bansal1,3∗ Kartik Sharma1,4 Tejan Karmali2
Varun Jampani2 R. Venkatesh Babu1
1
Vision and AI Lab, IISc Bangalore 2 Google Research 3 IIT BHU Varanasi 4 BITS Pilani
Harsh Rangwani1 *

Real

Abstract
StyleGANs are at the forefront of controllable image
generation as they produce a latent space that is semantically disentangled, making it suitable for image editing
and manipulation. However, the performance of StyleGANs
severely degrades when trained via class-conditioning on
large-scale long-tailed datasets. We find that one reason
for degradation is the collapse of latents for each class in
the W latent space. With NoisyTwins, we first introduce an
effective and inexpensive augmentation strategy for class
embeddings, which then decorrelates the latents based on
self-supervision in the W space. This decorrelation mitigates collapse, ensuring that our method preserves intraclass diversity with class-consistency in image generation.
We show the effectiveness of our approach on large-scale
real-world long-tailed datasets of ImageNet-LT and iNaturalist 2019, where our method outperforms other methods
by ∼ 19% on FID, establishing a new state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
StyleGANs [21, 22] have shown unprecedented success
in image generation, particularly on well-curated and articulated datasets (eg. FFHQ for face images, etc.). In addition
to generating high fidelity and diverse images, StyleGANs
also produce a disentangled latent space, which is extensively used for image editing and manipulation tasks [49].
As a result, StyleGANs are being extensively used in various applications like face-editing [11, 41], video generation [46, 52], face reenactment [3], etc., which are a testament to their usability and generality. However, despite being successful on well-curated datasets, training
StyleGANs on in-the-wild and multi-category datasets is
still challenging. A large-scale conditional StyleGAN (i.e.
StyleGAN-XL) on ImageNet was recently trained successfully by Sauer et al. [39] using the ImageNet pre-trained
model through the idea of a projection discriminator [38].
While the StyleGAN-XL uses additional pre-trained mod* Equal Contribution. Link: rangwani-harsh.github.io/NoisyTwins

StyleGAN2-ADA

+ NoisyTwins (Ours)

T1 (32)

T2 (35)

T3 (40)

T4 (45)

Figure 1. Qualitative Comparison on tail classes (T1-T4) for
iNaturalist 2019. We provide sample(s) from real class (with
class frequency), generated by StyleGAN2-ADA and after adding
proposed NoisyTwins. NoisyTwins achieves remarkable diversity,
class-consistency and quality by just using 38 samples on average.

els, obtaining such models for distinctive image domains
like medical, forensics, and fine-grained data may not be
feasible, which limits its generalization across domains.
In this work, we aim to train vanilla class-conditional
StyleGAN without any pre-trained models on challenging
real-world long-tailed data distributions. As training StyleGAN with augmentations [20, 54] leads to low recall [24]
(which measures diversity in the generated images) and
mode collapse, particularly for minority (i.e. tail) classes.
For investigating this phenomenon further, we take a closer
look at the latent W space of StyleGAN that is produced
by a fully-connected mapping network that takes the conditioning variables z (i.e. random noise) and class embedding
c as inputs. The vectors w in W space are used for conditioning various layers of the generator (Fig. 2). We find
that output vectors w from the mapping network hinge on
the conditioning variable c and become invariant to random
conditioning vector z. This collapse of latents leads to un-

5987

