This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Generalized Framework for Video Instance Segmentation
Miran Heo1
Sukjun Hwang1
Jeongseok Hyun1
Hanjung Kim1
Seoung Wug Oh2
Joon-Young Lee2
Seon Joo Kim1
1

Yonsei University

2

Adobe Research

Abstract
The handling of long videos with complex and occluded
sequences has recently emerged as a new challenge in the
video instance segmentation (VIS) community. However,
existing methods have limitations in addressing this challenge. We argue that the biggest bottleneck in current approaches is the discrepancy between training and inference.
To effectively bridge this gap, we propose a Generalized
framework for VIS, namely GenVIS, that achieves stateof-the-art performance on challenging benchmarks without
designing complicated architectures or requiring extra postprocessing. The key contribution of GenVIS is the learning
strategy, which includes a query-based training pipeline
for sequential learning with a novel target label assignment. Additionally, we introduce a memory that effectively
acquires information from previous states. Thanks to the
new perspective, which focuses on building relationships
between separate frames or clips, GenVIS can be flexibly
executed in both online and semi-online manner. We evaluate our approach on popular VIS benchmarks, achieving
state-of-the-art results on YouTube-VIS 2019/2021/2022 and
Occluded VIS (OVIS). Notably, we greatly outperform the
state-of-the-art on the long VIS benchmark (OVIS), improving 5.6 AP with ResNet-50 backbone. Code is available at
https://github.com/miranheo/GenVIS.

1. Introduction
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) is the task of identifying, segmenting, and tracking all objects in videos simultaneously. With the emergence of datasets containing long
and complex sequences, the research community is taking
a step towards real-world applications. While many papers
have proposed solutions, the most notable performance improvement has been achieved by recent online methods using
image-based backbones [14, 34]. These results challenge
the common belief that end-to-end semi-online or offline approaches (i.e., [5, 13, 15, 30, 33, 38]) trained on longer video
clips would better model long-range object relationships.
We hypothesize that reason behind this somewhat surpris-

Frame

Clip & Video

Heuristic
Association

Training

Heuristic-free
Association

Inference
...

(a) Online
...

(b) Semi-Online & Offline
...

(c) GenVIS (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison between current VIS paradigms and our
approach. (a, b) While current methods use two separate paradigms
based on the number of frames processed, we argue that the key
challenge in processing real-world videos is building inter-clip
assocications. (b) Our proposed GenVIS addresses this challenge
and can operate effectively in both online and semi-online manner
without requiring hand-crafted post-processing.

ing result is the presence or absence of an object association
scheme between frames or clips that can scale to long videos.
Recent VIS methods, regardless of the approach, are driven
by powerful image-level detectors [6, 8], so detection and
segmentation quality are already robust and comparable to
each other. To operate robustly in long videos, what the VIS
really needs to focus on is the long-range tracking quality.
Although semi-online and offline methods are suitable for
tracking objects within clips, they need to associate objects
between clips to infer long videos, which is usually achieved
using simple heuristics such as IoU matching [1, 15].
While online methods are more robust than semionline/offline VIS solutions in processing long videos, we
still see a significant room for improvement in their tracking
approach. These methods only consider local contexts between adjacent frames during training, while test videos can
exceed hundreds of frames [27]. We believe that there is a
better way to learn long-range temporal modeling that could
fundamentally change the current VIS landscape.
In this paper, we argue that the biggest bottleneck in
handling long videos is the discrepancy between the training
and inference scenarios. Regardless of the previously defined
paradigms (e.g., how many frames a method processes at

14623

