This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-Tailed Visual Recognition via Self-Heterogeneous Integration with
Knowledge Excavation
Yan Jin1,2
1

Mengke Li3

Yiu-ming Cheung4

Yang Lu1,2 *

Hanzi Wang1,2

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China

3

Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
4

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China

jinyan7973@gmail.com limengke@gml.ac.cn {luyang, Hanzi.Wang}@xmu.edu.cn ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made incredible progress in visual
recognition tasks during the past few years. With welldesigned models, e.g., ResNet [18], and Transformer [57],
* Corresponding author: Yang Lu, luyang@xmu.edu.cn

Shallow branch 1
Many

Shallow branch 2
Medium

Deep branch
Few

500

0.8

400

0.6

300

0.4

200

0.2

100

0.0

Frequency

Maximum accuracy

Deep neural networks have made huge progress in the
last few decades. However, as the real-world data often exhibits a long-tailed distribution, vanilla deep models tend
to be heavily biased toward the majority classes. To address this problem, state-of-the-art methods usually adopt a
mixture of experts (MoE) to focus on different parts of the
long-tailed distribution. Experts in these methods are with
the same model depth, which neglects the fact that different
classes may have different preferences to be fit by models
with different depths. To this end, we propose a novel MoEbased method called Self-Heterogeneous Integration with
Knowledge Excavation (SHIKE). We first propose Depthwise Knowledge Fusion (DKF) to fuse features between different shallow parts and the deep part in one network for
each expert, which makes experts more diverse in terms of
representation. Based on DKF, we further propose Dynamic
Knowledge Transfer (DKT) to reduce the influence of the
hardest negative class that has a non-negligible impact on
the tail classes in our MoE framework. As a result, the classification accuracy of long-tailed data can be significantly
improved, especially for the tail classes. SHIKE achieves
the state-of-the-art performance of 56.3%, 60.3%, 75.4%
and 41.9% on CIFAR100-LT (IF100), ImageNet-LT, iNaturalist 2018, and Places-LT, respectively. The source code is
available at https://github.com/jinyan-06/SHIKE.

1.0

0

20

40

Class index

60

80

0
100

Figure 1. Comparison of test accuracy of a ResNet-32 model with
two shallow branches and a deep branch. The model is jointly
trained on CIFAR100-LT with an imbalance factor of 100. Only
the highest accuracy among the three branches is shown for each
class.

deep learning techniques have outperformed humans in
many visual applications, like image classification [32], semantic segmentation [17, 42], and object detection [50, 52].
One key factor in the success of deep learning is the availability of large-scale datasets [13, 55, 70], which are usually
manually constructed and annotated with balanced training samples for each class. However, in real-world applications, data typically follows a long-tailed distribution,
where a small fraction of classes possess massive samples,
but the others are with only a few samples [5,12,26,41,44].
Such imbalanced data distribution leads to a significant accuracy drop for deep learning models trained by empirical
risk minimization (ERM) [56] as the model tends to be biased towards the head classes and ignore the tail classes to
a great extent. Thus, the model’s generalization ability on
tail classes is severely degraded.
The most straightforward action for long-tailed recognition often focuses on re-balancing the learning process
from either a data processing [3, 27, 46] or cost-sensitive
perspective [12, 28, 71]. Recently, methods proposed for

23695

