This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleSync: High-Fidelity Generalized and Personalized Lip Sync
in Style-based Generator
Jiazhi Guan1,2 * Zhanwang Zhang1 * Hang Zhou1† Tianshu Hu1† Kaisiyuan Wang3
Dongliang He1 Haocheng Feng1 Jingtuo Liu1 Errui Ding1 Ziwei Liu4 Jingdong Wang1
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc. 2 Tsinghua University
3
The University of Sydney 4 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
guanjz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {zhangzhanwang,zhouhang09,hutianshu01}@baidu.com

Target
Template

Lip-Synced
Video

and
Conditional
Audio

Personalized
Lip-Sync
Results

Figure 1. Personalized lip-sync results generated by our StyleSync framework. Our method not only supports high-fidelity modification
to any target template video according to conditional audio but can further adapt to specific styles with personalized optimization. In this
figure, our lip-sync results should have the same mouth shapes as the lip-synced video of the conditional audio.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in syncing lip movements with
any audio waves, current methods still struggle to balance
generation quality and the model’s generalization ability.
Previous studies either require long-term data for training
or produce a similar movement pattern on all subjects with
low quality. In this paper, we propose StyleSync, an effective framework that enables high-fidelity lip synchronization. We identify that a style-based generator would sufficiently enable such a charming property on both one-shot

and few-shot scenarios. Specifically, we design a maskguided spatial information encoding module that preserves
the details of the given face. The mouth shapes are accurately modified by audio through modulated convolutions.
Moreover, our design also enables personalized lip-sync by
introducing style space and generator refinement on only
limited frames. Thus the identity and talking style of a target person could be accurately preserved. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in
producing high-fidelity results on a variety of scenes. Resources can be found at https://hangz-nju-cuhk.
github.io/projects/StyleSync.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

1505

