This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Blind Motion Deblurring with Deep Expectation Maximization
Ji Li, Weixi Wang, Yuesong Nan, and Hui Ji
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
matliji@nus.edu.sg, wangweixi@u.nus.edu, nanyuesong@u.nus.edu, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
When taking a picture, any camera shake during the
shutter time can result in a blurred image. Recovering a
sharp image from the one blurred by camera shake is a challenging yet important problem. Most existing deep learning
methods use supervised learning to train a deep neural network (DNN) on a dataset of many pairs of blurred/latent
images. In contrast, this paper presents a dataset-free deep
learning method for removing uniform and non-uniform
blur effects from images of static scenes. Our method involves a DNN-based re-parametrization of the latent image,
and we propose a Monte Carlo Expectation Maximization
(MCEM) approach to train the DNN without requiring any
latent images. The Monte Carlo simulation is implemented
via Langevin dynamics. Experiments showed that the proposed method outperforms existing methods significantly in
removing motion blur from images of static scenes.

1. Introduction
Motion blur occurs when the camera shakes during the
shutter time, resulting in a blurring effect. Blur is uniform
when the scene depth is constant and moves along the image plane. For other camera movements, the blur is nonuniform. In dynamic scenes with moving objects, the blur
is also non-uniform. Different types of motion blur are illustrated in Figure 1. This paper aims to address the problem
of removing uniform and non-uniform motion blur caused
by camera shake from an image. Removing motion blur
from an image is a blind deblurring problem. It is a challenging task as it requires estimating two unknowns the latent image and blurring operator from a single input.
Deep learning, particularly supervised learning, has recently emerged as a powerful tool for solving various image restoration problems, including blind deblurring. Many
of these works rely on supervised learning, as seen in
e.g. [1–15]. Typically, these supervised deep learning methods train a deep neural network (DNN) on a large number
of training samples, which consist of pairs of latent/blur images. Furthermore, to address general blurring effects, most

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Different motion-blurring effects. (a)–(b) Uniform and
non-uniform blurring caused by camera shake; (c) Non-uniform
blurring of the dynamic scene (not addressed in this paper).

methods take a physics-free approach. In other words, these
methods directly learn a model that maps a blurred image to
a latent image without using any prior information about the
blurring process.
The advantage of a physics-free supervised learning
method is its ability to handle many types of motion blur
effects. However, it has a significant disadvantage: to
achieve good generalization, the training dataset must cover
all motion-blurring effects. Because motion blur is determined by both 3D camera motion (six parameters) and
scene depth, which can vary significantly among images,
an enormous number of training samples are required to adequately cover the motion blur effects. This task can be very
costly and challenging. One possible solution is to synthesize blurred images. However, as shown in [16], a model
trained on samples synthesized using existing techniques
(e.g. [17]) does not generalize well to real-world images.
Some approaches consider the physics of motion blur.
Phong et al. [18] proposed learning a family of blurring operators in an encoded blur kernel space, and Li et al. [19]
proposed learning a more general class of degradation operators from input images. However, these physics-aware
methods also rely on supervised learning and thus face the
same dataset limitations as the physics-free methods.

1.1. Discussion on existing dataset-free methods
Motivated by the challenge of practical data collection, there is a growing interest in relaxing the requirement for training data when developing deep learning solutions for motion deblurring. Some approaches require spe-

13986

