This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeMo: 3D Neural Motion Fields from Multiple Video Instances of the Same Action

VIBE
NeMo

VIBE

Tennis Serve

NeMo

Baseball Pitch

Kuan-Chieh Wang† , Zhenzhen Weng, Maria Xenochristou, João Pedro Araújo, Jeffrey Gu,
C. Karen Liu‡ , Serena Yeung⊺
Stanford University
†
‡
wangkua1@stanford.edu, karenliu@cs.stanford.edu, ⊺ syyeung@stanford.edu

Figure 1. We propose the Neural Motion (NeMo) field that learns the global 3D motion from multiple video instances of the same action.
NeMo can accurately recover the dynamic ranges of athletic motion. To illustrate, VIBE, a baseline video-based HMR method, fails to capture
the large step taken by the subject in the “Baseball Pitch” example, and swaps the arms in “Tennis Serve”. Visit our project page for video
visualization, our code, and the NeMo-MoCap dataset: https://sites.google.com/view/nemo-neural-motion-field.

Abstract
The task of reconstructing 3D human motion has wideranging applications. The gold standard Motion capture
(MoCap) systems are accurate but inaccessible to the general
public due to their cost, hardware, and space constraints. In
contrast, monocular human mesh recovery (HMR) methods
are much more accessible than MoCap as they take singleview videos as inputs. Replacing the multi-view MoCap
systems with a monocular HMR method would break the current barriers to collecting accurate 3D motion thus making
exciting applications like motion analysis and motion-driven
animation accessible to the general public. However, the
performance of existing HMR methods degrades when the
video contains challenging and dynamic motion that is not
in existing MoCap datasets used for training. This reduces

its appeal as dynamic motion is frequently the target in 3D
motion recovery in the aforementioned applications. Our
study aims to bridge the gap between monocular HMR and
multi-view MoCap systems by leveraging information shared
across multiple video instances of the same action. We introduce the Neural Motion (NeMo) field. It is optimized to
represent the underlying 3D motions across a set of videos
of the same action. Empirically, we show that NeMo can recover 3D motion in sports using videos from the Penn Action
dataset, where NeMo outperforms existing HMR methods in
terms of 2D keypoint detection. To further validate NeMo
using 3D metrics, we collected a small MoCap dataset mimicking actions in Penn Action, and show that NeMo achieves
better 3D reconstruction compared to various baselines.

22129

