This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Self-Similarity: Structural Embedding for Image Retrieval
Seongwon Lee
Suhyeon Lee
Hongje Seong
Euntai Kim*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{won4113, hyeon93, hjseong, etkim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite advances in global image representation, existing image retrieval approaches rarely consider geometric
structure during the global retrieval stage. In this work,
we revisit the conventional self-similarity descriptor from
a convolutional perspective, to encode both the visual and
structural cues of the image to global image representation.
Our proposed network, named Structural Embedding Network (SENet), captures the internal structure of the images
and gradually compresses them into dense self-similarity
descriptors while learning diverse structures from various
images. These self-similarity descriptors and original image features are fused and then pooled into global embedding, so that global embedding can represent both geometric and visual cues of the image. Along with this novel
structural embedding, our proposed network sets new stateof-the-art performances on several image retrieval benchmarks, convincing its robustness to look-alike distractors.
The code and models are available: https://github.
com/sungonce/SENet.

1. Introduction
Content-based image retrieval is the task of searching
for images with the same content present in the query image in the large-scale database. What across images represents the same content are two things: the visual properties and the geometrical structure, so comparing them
well is the key to the image retrieval task. To achieve
this goal, two image representation types have been extensively explored in many image retrieval solutions. The first
one is local features [1–3, 5, 19–22, 24, 47] that comprise
visual descriptors and spatial information about local regions of the image, and the other one is a global descriptor
[3,11–13,18,24–26,28,33,43], also known as global embedding, that summarizes the local features of the entire image.
In a general sense, the global descriptor loses spatial information of local features during the summarization process.
Thus, many image retrieval solutions [3, 18, 24, 35, 36, 42]
first retrieve coarse candidates with similar visual proper* Corresponding author.

Positive Image

Query Image

Negative Image

Visual
Property

SelfSimilarity

Figure 1. Images of the same content share both similar image
properties and internal self-similarities. Our proposed networks
leverage both visual features and self-similarity features and encode them to global embedding in an end-to-end manner.

ties for the query using global embeddings (typically referred to as global retrieval) and further verify that coarse
candidates have geometrically similar shapes to the query
using local features (typically referred to as local feature reranking). This separation of tasks may sound reasonable at
first glance. However, in fact, they miss the opportunities to
perform robust retrieval by comparing structural information also in the global retrieval stage.
In computer vision, a self-similarity descriptor [31] has
long been used as a regional descriptor for matching images
based on the aggregation of local internal structures. This
work has shown its effectiveness in challenging matching
problems even in situations where the visual properties of
images are not shared at all (e.g. matching between drawing and photo domains). However, their self-similarity encoding process is neither learnable nor differentiable. And
it also completely ignores visual properties, making it difficult to use directly for image retrieval tasks where visual
properties are also valuable cues.
In this paper, we revisit the self-similarity descriptor in
a convolutional manner and propose a novel global embedding network named Structural Embedding Network
(SENet). The proposed network captures the internal structures of the images and encodes them to self-similarity de-

23412

