This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Bag of Regions for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Size Wu1 Wenwei Zhang1 Sheng Jin2,3 Wentao Liu3,4 Chen Change Loy1 *
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{size001, wenwei001, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

{jinsheng, liuwentao}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) learn to
align vision and language representations on large-scale
datasets, where each image-text pair usually contains a bag
of semantic concepts. However, existing open-vocabulary
object detectors only align region embeddings individually
with the corresponding features extracted from the VLMs.
Such a design leaves the compositional structure of semantic
concepts in a scene under-exploited, although the structure
may be implicitly learned by the VLMs. In this work, we
propose to align the embedding of bag of regions beyond individual regions. The proposed method groups contextually
interrelated regions as a bag. The embeddings of regions
in a bag are treated as embeddings of words in a sentence,
and they are sent to the text encoder of a VLM to obtain the
bag-of-regions embedding, which is learned to be aligned
to the corresponding features extracted by a frozen VLM.
Applied to the commonly used Faster R-CNN, our approach
surpasses the previous best results by 4.6 box AP50 and 2.8
mask AP on novel categories of open-vocabulary COCO
and LVIS benchmarks, respectively. Code and models are
available at https://github.com/wusize/ovdet.

1. Introduction
A traditional object detector can only recognize categories
learned in the training phase, restricting its application in
the real world with a nearly unbounded concept pool. Openvocabulary object detection (OVD), a task to detect objects
whose categories are absent in training, has drawn increasing
research attention in recent years.
A typical solution to OVD, known as the distillationbased approach, is to distill the knowledge of rich and
unseen categories from pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) [21, 38]. In particular, VLMs learn aligned
image and text representations on large-scale image-text
pairs (Fig. 1(a)). Such general knowledge is beneficial for
OVD. To extract the knowledge, most distillation-based ap* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) Typical vision-language models (VLMs) learn to align
representations of images and captions with rich compositional
structure. (b) Existing distillation-based object detectors align each
individual region embedding to features extracted by the frozen
image encoder of VLMs. (c) Instead, the proposed method aligns
the embedding of bag of regions. The region embeddings in a bag
are projected to the word embedding space (dubbed as pseudo
words), formed as a sentence, and then sent to the text encoder
to obtain the bag-of-regions embedding, which is aligned to the
corresponding image feature extracted by the frozen VLMs.

proaches [10, 15, 52] align each individual region embedding to the corresponding features extracted from the VLM
(Fig. 1(b)) with some carefully designed strategies.
We believe VLMs have implicitly learned the inherent
compositional structure of multiple semantic concepts (e.g.,
co-existence of stuff and things [1, 23]) from a colossal
amount of image-text pairs. A recent study, MaskCLIP [57],
leverages such a notion for zero-shot segmentation. Existing
distillation-based OVD approaches, however, have yet to
fully exploit the compositional structures encapsulated in

15254

