This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning A Sparse Transformer Network for Effective Image Deraining
Xiang Chen1 Hao Li1 Mingqiang Li2 Jinshan Pan1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Information Science Academy, China Electronics Technology Group Corporation

Abstract
Transformers-based methods have achieved significant
performance in image deraining as they can model the
non-local information which is vital for high-quality image reconstruction. In this paper, we find that most existing Transformers usually use all similarities of the tokens from the query-key pairs for the feature aggregation. However, if the tokens from the query are different from those of the key, the self-attention values estimated from these tokens also involve in feature aggregation,
which accordingly interferes with the clear image restoration. To overcome this problem, we propose an effective
DeRaining network, Sparse Transformer (DRSformer) that
can adaptively keep the most useful self-attention values
for feature aggregation so that the aggregated features better facilitate high-quality image reconstruction. Specifically, we develop a learnable top-k selection operator to
adaptively retain the most crucial attention scores from the
keys for each query for better feature aggregation. Simultaneously, as the naive feed-forward network in Transformers does not model the multi-scale information that is
important for latent clear image restoration, we develop
an effective mixed-scale feed-forward network to generate better features for image deraining. To learn an enriched set of hybrid features, which combines local context from CNN operators, we equip our model with mixture of experts feature compensator to present a cooperation refinement deraining scheme. Extensive experimental results on the commonly used benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed method achieves favorable performance against state-of-the-art approaches. The source code
and trained models are available at https://github.
com/cschenxiang/DRSformer.

1. Introduction
Single image deraining is a typical low-level vision problem emerging in the last decade. It aims to recover the clean
* Corresponding author.

(a) Rainy Input

(b) Uformer [48]

(c) Restormer [58]

(d) IDT [50]

(e) Ours

(f) Ground Truth

Figure 1. Image deraining results between our method and recent
Transformer-based methods [48,50,58]. Our method can generate
high-quality image with more accurate detail and texture recovery.

image from the observed rainy one. As the clear image and
rain streaks are unknown, it is an ill-posed inverse problem.
To solve this problem, early approaches [20, 24, 60] usually impose various priors based on statistical properties of
rain streaks and clear images. In fact, these handcrafted priors are not robust to complex and varying rainy scenarios,
which limit the deraining performance.
Recently, numerous learning-based methods [4, 19, 23,
36, 52, 53, 56] have resorted to diverse CNN architectures
as a preferable choice compared to traditional algorithms.
However, the intrinsic characteristics of convolutional operation, i.e, local receptive fields and independence of input
content, hinder the model’s capacity to eliminate long-range
rain degradation perturbation. To alleviate such limitations,
Transformers [2, 26, 35, 50] have been applied to image deraining and have achieved decent performance as they can
better model the non-local information for high-quality image reconstruction. Nevertheless, the image details, which
are local features of images, are not modeled well by these
approaches when restoring clear images as shown in Figure 1. One main reason is that the self-attention in Transformers does not model the local invariant properties that

5896

