This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-directional Feature Fusion Generative Adversarial Network for Ultra-high
Resolution Pathological Image Virtual Re-staining

1

Kexin Sun1 , Zhineng Chen1, 2 *, Gongwei Wang3 , Jun Liu3 , Xiongjun Ye4 , Yu-Gang Jiang1
School of Computer Science & Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing,
Fudan University
2
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
3
Peking University People’s Hospital
4
Department of Urology, National Cancer Center & National Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College
sunkx21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhinchen, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn,
wgw4300@126.com, hmuliujun@163.com, yexiongjun@cicams.ac.cn

Abstract
The cost of pathological examination makes virtual restaining of pathological images meaningful. However, due
to the ultra-high resolution of pathological images, traditional virtual re-staining methods have to divide a WSI image into patches for model training and inference. Such a
limitation leads to the lack of global information, resulting in observable differences in color, brightness and contrast when the re-stained patches are merged to generate
an image of larger size. We summarize this issue as the
square effect. Some existing methods try to solve this issue through overlapping between patches or simple postprocessing. But the former one is not that effective, while
the latter one requires carefully tuning. In order to eliminate the square effect, we design a bi-directional feature
fusion generative adversarial network (BFF-GAN) with a
global branch and a local branch. It learns the interpatch connections through the fusion of global and local
features plus patch-wise attention. We perform experiments
on both the private dataset RCC and the public dataset ANHIR. The results show that our model achieves competitive
performance and is able to generate extremely real images
that are deceptive even for experienced pathologists, which
means it is of great clinical significance.

1. Introduction
Pathological examination is the primary method of cancer diagnosis. Different dyes can interact with different
components in tissues or cells, making it easier to distin* Zhineng Chen is the corresponding author.

guish different microstructures, abnormal substances and
lesions. Among various staining methods, the most common and basic one is the hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining.
However, given the result of HE staining, it is not always
enough to make a diagnosis. Therefore, immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining based on specific binding of antigen and
antibody is also necessary in diagnosis, even though it is
complex, time-consuming and expensive [7, 25].
Due to the cost of IHC, some researchers have tried to
generate one type of staining images from another type
(usually HE) via computational methods. This can reduce
the consumption of materials, money and time during diagnosis. Such a task is usually called virtual re-staining.
This task is close to the style transfer of natural images, so
it is possible to apply style transfer methods to virtual restaining. Since pathological images are usually unpaired,
virtual re-staining is generally done by unsupervised methods, such as [4, 19, 22]. These approaches are all based
on style transfer models for natural images. Researchers
made some improvements according to the characteristics
of pathological images, and finally achieved better results.
However, on the other hand, pathological images have
their own characteristics. For example, the reliability of the
results is more critical for this task due to the clinical significance of pathological examination. Meanwhile, the resolution of pathological images is usually higher than that of
natural images, reaching 10k ×10k or more. Therefore, virtual re-staining requires additional computational resources
as the GPU memory is limited. Most of the existing virtual re-staining models solve this problem by splitting WSI
(whole-slide imaging) images into smaller patches for training and inference, and then incorporating these patches into
WSI images through post-processing. This results in dif-

3904

