This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neumann Network with Recursive Kernels for Single Image Defocus Deblurring
Yuhui Quan1,2
1

Zicong Wu1,2

Hui Ji3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510335, China
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, cszicongwu@mail.scut.edu.cn, matjh@nus.edu.sg *

Abstract
Single image defocus deblurring (SIDD) refers to recovering an all-in-focus image from a defocused blurry one. It
is a challenging recovery task due to the spatially-varying
defocus blurring effects with significant size variation. Motivated by the strong correlation among defocus kernels of
different sizes and the blob-type structure of defocus kernels, we propose a learnable recursive kernel representation (RKR) for defocus kernels that expresses a defocus kernel by a linear combination of recursive, separable and positive atom kernels, leading to a compact yet effective and
physics-encoded parametrization of the spatially-varying
defocus blurring process. Afterwards, a physics-driven and
efficient deep model with a cross-scale fusion structure is
presented for SIDD, with inspirations from the truncated
Neumann series for approximating the matrix inversion of
the RKR-based blurring operator. In addition, a reblurring
loss is proposed to regularize the RKR learning. Extensive
experiments show that, our proposed approach significantly
outperforms existing ones, with a model size comparable to
that of the top methods.

is determined by the distance between the lens and the film.
For the objects away from the focal plane, the light rays
will spread out, resulting in big illuminated circles (called
circle(s) of confusion, CoC) that overlap with others. As a
result, these objects appear blurry in the image.
As defocus blurring can cause the loss of image details
that are crucial for subsequent vision tasks, many applications can benefit from the recovery of all image details
from a defocused image, such as photo refocusing, semantic segmentation, text recognition, and object detection; see
e.g. [25]. Single image defocus deblurring (SIDD) is a technique for this purpose, i.e., recovering an all-in-focus (AIF)
image with sharp and clear details from a defocused image.
In a defocused image, each pixel is associated with a defocus kernel Kh,w related to CoC. As the CoC of a pixel
is determined by the distance of its scene point to the focal
plane, pixels with different scene depths will have different defocus kernels, i.e., the defocus blurring is spatiallyvarying. The relation between a defocused image Y and its
AIF counterpart X can be expressed as Y = D ◦ X, i.e.
applying a blurring operator D to X as follows:
X
Y [h, w] = (D◦X)[h, w] :=
Kh,w [r, c]X[h−r, w−c].
r,c

1. Introduction
Defocus blurring is a type of degradation that can occur
in optical systems when capturing an image with varying
scene depths. In an optical system, in order to project an image of objects onto film, a lens is used to bend the incoming
light inwards, causing the light rays to trace out the shape
of a cone and converge at the cone apex. When the distance
between an object and the lens makes the cone apex just
touch the film, the light rays will produce tiny illuminated
circles and the object will appear in focus. In other words,
the captured image is only clear for objects that are at a certain distance from the lens, known as the focal plane, which
* This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2022A1515011755 and 2023A1515012841),
and Singapore MOE AcRF Tier 1 Grant (WBS No. A-8000981-00-00).

SIDD then needs to estimate X and {Kh,w }h,w , which is a
challenging non-uniform blind deblurring problem.
Most existing studies on SIDD are a by-product of defocus map estimation [4,7,9,16,17,20,26,29,37,42,44,50,51].
That is, a defocused image is deblurred by calling some
non-blind deblurring method using the defocus kernels derived from an estimated defocus map; see e.g. [10, 18, 19,
22,26,33,43]. Such an approach often suffers from the sensitivity of non-blind deblurring to kernel estimation errors
and is usually computationally expensive. In recent years, it
has emerged as a promising approach to train an end-to-end
deep neural network (DNN) for SIDD using one or more
datasets; see e.g. [1, 14, 21, 25, 27, 32, 35, 49]. However, existing work still has a large room for performance improvement. The aim of this paper is to develop an end-to-end

5754

