This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARKitTrack: A New Diverse Dataset for Tracking Using Mobile RGB-D Data
Haojie Zhao1† Junsong Chen1† Lijun Wang1* Huchuan Lu1,2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{haojie zhao,jschen}@mail.dlut.edu.cn

{ljwang,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Figure 1. Samples from ARKitTrack. We capture both indoor and outdoor sequences (1st row) in many scenes, including zoo, market,
office, square, corridor, etc. Lots of scenarios are presented in our dataset, e.g., low or high light conditions (2nd row), surrounding clutter
(3rd row), out-of-plane rotation, motion blur, deformation, etc. (4th row). Besides, we annotate each frame with object masks.

Abstract
Compared with traditional RGB-only visual tracking,
few datasets have been constructed for RGB-D tracking. In
this paper, we propose ARKitTrack, a new RGB-D tracking dataset for both static and dynamic scenes captured
by consumer-grade LiDAR scanners equipped on Apple’s
iPhone and iPad. ARKitTrack contains 300 RGB-D sequences, 455 targets, and 229.7K video frames in total.
Along with the bounding box annotations and frame-level
attributes, we also annotate this dataset with 123.9K pixellevel target masks. Besides, the camera intrinsic and camera pose of each frame are provided for future developments. To demonstrate the potential usefulness of this
dataset, we further present a unified baseline for both boxlevel and pixel-level tracking, which integrates RGB features with bird’s-eye-view representations to better explore
cross-modality 3D geometry. In-depth empirical analy† Equal contribution
* Corresponding author: Dr. Lijun Wang, ljwang@dlut.edu.cn

sis has verified that the ARKitTrack dataset can significantly facilitate RGB-D tracking and that the proposed
baseline method compares favorably against the state of
the arts. The code and dataset is available at https:
//arkittrack.github.io.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental and longstanding problem in computer
vision, visual tracking has been studied for decades and
achieved significant progress in recent years with many advanced RGB trackers [6, 7, 9, 20, 37, 39] and datasets [11,
14, 29, 45] being developed. Nonetheless, there still exist
many challenging situations such as occlusion, distraction,
extreme illumination, etc., which have not been well addressed. With the wide application of commercially available RGB-D sensors, many recent works [15, 33, 42, 54, 55]
have focused on the RGB-D tracking problem, as depth can
provide additional 3D geometry cues for tracking in complicated environments. The development of RGB-D track-

5126

