This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Neural Parametric Head Models

Technical University of Munich

3D Scans

NPHM

MLP

2

Synthesia

3

Martin Rünz2

University College London

Learned Representation

Depth
Observation

Reconstruction

+

MLP
MLP
MLP

en
tit
y

1

Tobias Kirschstein1 Markos Georgopoulos2
Lourdes Agapito3 Matthias Nießner1

expression

id

Simon Giebenhain1

Training

Inference

Figure 1. We propose to learn a neural parametric head model based on neural fields: first, we capture a large dataset of over 3700 highfidelity head scans with varying shapes and expressions (left). We then non-rigidly register these scans to generate our training data. As
a result of training, we obtain a disentangled latent that spans the space of shapes zid and expressions zex (middle). At inference time, we
can leverage the prior of our learned representation by fitting our model to a sparse input point cloud by solving for the latent codes (right).

Abstract
We propose a novel 3D morphable model for complete
human heads based on hybrid neural fields. At the core of
our model lies a neural parametric representation that disentangles identity and expressions in disjoint latent spaces.
To this end, we capture a person’s identity in a canonical
space as a signed distance field (SDF), and model facial expressions with a neural deformation field. In addition, our
representation achieves high-fidelity local detail by introducing an ensemble of local fields centered around facial
anchor points. To facilitate generalization, we train our
model on a newly-captured dataset of over 3700 head scans
from 203 different identities using a custom high-end 3D
scanning setup. Our dataset significantly exceeds comparable existing datasets, both with respect to quality and completeness of geometry, averaging around 3.5M mesh faces
per scan1 . Finally, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of fitting error
and reconstruction quality.

1 We will publicly release our dataset along with a public benchmark for
both neural head avatar construction as well as an evaluation on a hidden
test-set for inference-time fitting.

1. Introduction
Human faces and heads lie at the core of human visual
perception, and hence are key to creating digital replica of
someones identity, likeliness, and appearance. In particular,
3D reconstruction of human heads from sparse inputs, such
as point clouds, is central to a wide range of applications
in the context of gaming, augmented and virtual reality, and
digitization in our modern digital era. One of the most successful lines of research to address this challenging problem are parametric face models, which represent both shape
identities and expressions featuring a low-dimensional parametric space. These Blendshape and 3D morphable models
(3DMMs) have achieved incredible success, since they can
be fitted to sparse inputs, regularize out noise, and provide
a compact 3D representation. As a result, many practical
settings could be realized, ranging from face tracking and
3D avatar creation to facial-reenactment applications [49].
Traditionally, 3DMMs, are based on a low-rank approximation of the underlying 3D mesh geometry. To this end,
a template mesh with fixed topology is non-rigidly registered to a series of 3D scans. From this template registration, a 3DMM can be computed using dimensionality
Website: https://simongiebenhain.github.io/NPHM

21003

