This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FJMP: Factorized Joint Multi-Agent Motion Prediction over Learned Directed
Acyclic Interaction Graphs
Luke Rowe*, Martin Ethier, Eli-Henry Dykhne, Krzysztof Czarnecki
School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
{l6rowe, methier, ehdykhne, krzysztof.czarnecki}@uwaterloo.ca

https://rluke22.github.io/FJMP

Abstract
Predicting the future motion of road agents is a critical task in an autonomous driving pipeline. In this work,
we address the problem of generating a set of scene-level,
or joint, future trajectory predictions in multi-agent driving scenarios. To this end, we propose FJMP, a Factorized
Joint Motion Prediction framework for multi-agent interactive driving scenarios. FJMP models the future scene interaction dynamics as a sparse directed interaction graph,
where edges denote explicit interactions between agents.
We then prune the graph into a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) and decompose the joint prediction task into a sequence of marginal and conditional predictions according
to the partial ordering of the DAG, where joint future trajectories are decoded using a directed acyclic graph neural
network (DAGNN). We conduct experiments on the INTERACTION and Argoverse 2 datasets and demonstrate that
FJMP produces more accurate and scene-consistent joint
trajectory predictions than non-factorized approaches, especially on the most interactive and kinematically interesting agents. FJMP ranks 1st on the multi-agent test leaderboard of the INTERACTION dataset.

1. Introduction
Multi-agent motion prediction is an important task in
a self-driving pipeline, and it involves forecasting the future positions of multiple agents in complex driving environments. Most existing works in multi-agent motion prediction predict a set of marginal trajectories for each agent
[14, 19, 21, 30, 32, 40, 46], and thus fail to explicitly account
for agent interactions in the future. This results in trajectory predictions that are not consistent with each other. For
example, the most likely marginal prediction for two interacting agents may collide with each other, when in reality
a negotiation between agents to avoid collision is far more
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An illustration of the directed acyclic interaction graph,
comprised of colored nodes and red arrows. The dotted black lines
denote the ground-truth futures over a short time horizon. FJMP
first produces marginal predictions for the green (dashed) nodes,
followed by a conditional prediction for the yellow (dotted) node
and a conditional prediction for the purple (solid) node, with conditioning on the predicted future of the parent nodes in the graph.

likely. As scene-consistent future predictions are critical for
downstream planning, recent work has shifted toward generating a set of scene-level, or joint, future trajectory predictions [5, 7, 8, 17, 34, 38], whereby each mode consists of a
future trajectory prediction for each agent and the predicted
trajectories are consistent with each other.
In this work, we focus on the problem of generating a set
of joint future trajectory predictions in multi-agent driving
scenarios. Unlike marginal prediction, the joint trajectory
prediction space grows exponentially with the number of
agents in the scene, which makes this prediction setting particularly challenging. A common approach for this setting
is to simultaneously predict the joint futures for all agents
in the scene [5, 8, 17, 18, 34]; however, this approach fails to
explicitly reason about future interactions in the joint pre-

13745

