This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wide-angle Rectification via Content-aware Conformal Mapping
Qi Zhang1
1

Hongdong Li2

Qing Wang3

Tencent AI Lab 2 Australian National University 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University

(a) Input wide-angle image

(b) Mercator projection

(c) Perspective projection

(e) Image content analysis

(f) Carroll’s rectification

(g) Shih’s rectification

(d) Stereographic projection

(h) Our rectification

Figure 1. Given a wide-angle image (as shown in (a) e.g.), this paper proposes a new image rectification method which automatically
corrects evident wide-angle lens distortions (e.g. curved ceiling lines, and skewed face), and obtains a rectified image (e.g. (h)). This is
achieved by deep-learning based image content analysis ((e)), as well as content-aware conformal mapping. Our method effectively reduces
wide-angle distortions, and at the same time maintains the original ultra-wide field of view, without sacrificing salient image contents. For
comparison, we also show results by previous methods in (b,c,d,f,g). Our method achieves the best results. For more comparisons please
see the paper as well as the supplemental material. Better viewed on screen with zooming in.

Abstract
Despite the proliferation of ultra wide-angle lenses on
smartphone cameras, such lenses often come with severe
image distortion (e.g. curved linear structure, unnaturally
skewed faces). Most existing rectification methods adopt a
global warping transformation to undistort the input wideangle image, yet their performances are not entirely satisfactory, leaving many unwanted residue distortions uncorrected or at the sacrifice of the intended wide FoV (fieldof-view). This paper proposes a new method to tackle these
challenges. Specifically, we derive a locally-adaptive polardomain conformal mapping to rectify a wide-angle image.
Parameters of the mapping are found automatically by analyzing image contents via deep neural networks. Experiments on a large number of photos have confirmed the superior performance of the proposed method compared with
all available previous methods.

1. Introduction
It has become trendy to equip modern smartphone cameras with ultra wide-angle lenses, to allow the user to shoot
photographs of natural landscapes or buildings with a wide
field-of-view (FoV), or capture a group-selfie in a tight
space. This trend can be easily seen on high-end phones
for example iPhone 13 which features a rear camera with
120◦ FoV, or Samsung S21 that is 123◦ .
While such lenses provide the user with an immersive visual experience, they also induce apparent and unavoidable
image distortions, resulting in e.g. curved straight lines or
sheared human faces. Traditional methods for lens distortion removal solve this problem by finding a global parametric geometric transformation to warp the input image.
Their performances are however far from satisfactory, with
either obvious residual distortions on linear structure or local shapes, or missing image contents at the image boundaries due to a much compromised field of view.
In contrast, human eyes, while enjoying a wide field of

17357

