This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You Can Ground Earlier than See: An Effective and Efficient Pipeline for
Temporal Sentence Grounding in Compressed Videos
Xiang Fang1* Daizong Liu2* Pan Zhou1† Guoshun Nan3
1
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data
Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Peking University 3 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
xfang9508@gmail.com

dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

panzhou@hust.edu.cn

nanguo2021@bupt.edu.cn

Query: The man mixes up various ingredients and begins laying plaster on the floor.
Video:

Given an untrimmed video, temporal sentence grounding (TSG) aims to locate a target moment semantically according to a sentence query. Although previous respectable
works have made decent success, they only focus on highlevel visual features extracted from the consecutive decoded frames and fail to handle the compressed videos for
query modelling, suffering from insufficient representation
capability and significant computational complexity during
training and testing. In this paper, we pose a new setting, compressed-domain TSG, which directly utilizes compressed videos rather than fully-decompressed frames as
the visual input. To handle the raw video bit-stream input, we propose a novel Three-branch Compressed-domain
Spatial-temporal Fusion (TCSF) framework, which extracts
and aggregates three kinds of low-level visual features (Iframe, motion vector and residual features) for effective
and efficient grounding. Particularly, instead of encoding
the whole decoded frames like previous works, we capture
the appearance representation by only learning the I-frame
feature to reduce delay or latency. Besides, we explore the
motion information not only by learning the motion vector
feature, but also by exploring the relations of neighboring
frames via the residual feature. In this way, a three-branch
spatial-temporal attention layer with an adaptive motionappearance fusion module is further designed to extract
and aggregate both appearance and motion information
for the final grounding. Experiments on three challenging
datasets shows that our TCSF achieves better performance
than other state-of-the-art methods with lower complexity.

Ground Truth (s):

119.10

Previous supervised TSG model

Decoded
Frames

...
Codec
MV

Compressed
Video

MV

...

...

Res

I-frame
MV: motion vector
Res: residual

P-frame

...

Res

I-frame

P-frame

...

Our compressed-domain TSG model

(b) Comparison between previous model and our model.

Figure 1. (a) Example of the temporal sentence grounding (TSG).
(b) Comparison between previous supervised TSG models and our
compressed-domain TSG model. Previous models first decode the
video into consecutive frames and then feed them into their networks, while our compressed-domain model directly leverages the
compressed video as the visual input.

attention due to its various applications, such as video understanding [12–17, 25, 44, 76, 77, 79–81, 84] and temporal
action localization [63, 71]. Given a long untrimmed video,
the TSG task aims to locate the specific start and end timestamps of a video segment with an activity that semantically
corresponds to a given sentence query. As shown in Figure 1(a), most of video contents are query-irrelevant, where
only a short video segment matches the query. It is substantially more challenging since a well-designed method
needs to not only model the complex multi-modal interaction among video and query, but also capture complicated
context information for cross-modal semantics alignment.
By treating a video as a sequence of independent frames,
most TSG methods [3,17,29,34,36–41,43,46,65,90,93,98]
refer to the fully-supervised setting, where each frame is
firstly fully decompressed from a video bit-stream and then
manually annotated as query-relevant or query-irrelevant.

1. Introduction
As a significant yet challenging computer vision task,
temporal sentence grounding (TSG) has drawn increasing
⇤ Equal contributions.

41.85

(a) Example of temporal sentence grounding.

† Corresponding author.

2448

