This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Verification of Neural Networks against LVM-based Specifications
Harleen Hanspal
Imperial College London & Safe Intelligence
London, United Kingdom

Alessio Lomuscio
Safe Intelligence
London, United Kingdom

h.hanspal21@imperial.ac.uk

alessio@safeintelligence.ai

Abstract
The deployment of perception systems based on neural networks in safety critical applications requires assurance on their robustness. Deterministic guarantees on network robustness require formal verification. Standard approaches for verifying robustness analyse invariance to analytically defined transformations, but not the diverse and
ubiquitous changes involving object pose, scene viewpoint,
occlusions, etc. To this end, we present an efficient approach for verifying specifications definable using Latent
Variable Models that capture such diverse changes. The approach involves adding an invertible encoding head to the
network to be verified, enabling the verification of latent
space sets with minimal reconstruction overhead. We report verification experiments for three classes of proposed
latent space specifications, each capturing different types of
realistic input variations. Differently from previous work in
this area, the proposed approach is relatively independent
of input dimensionality and scales to a broad class of deep
networks and real-world datasets by mitigating the inefficiency and decoder expressivity dependence in the present
state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The deployment of perception systems based on neural networks in safety-critical applications requires assurance on their performance, notably accuracy and robustness. Formal verification contributes to this requirement by
providing provable and deterministic guarantees that a network meets a given specification. Typically, specifications
are mathematically expressed constraints on the network’s
intended input/output and may encode desirable properties, such as robustness to noise (including adversarial attacks) [35], geometric changes [1,2], bias-field changes [14]
and beyond.
While the above is useful, practical applications require
robustness against diverse changes in a scene, including
changes in the pose of objects, viewpoints, occlusions, etc.

Such changes cannot be efficiently mathematically defined,
but may be encoded from data by using generative models. For instance, [11, 12, 28, 34] use generative models to
generate novel in-domain images for data augmentation, adversarial training or evaluating network generalisation; [34]
additionally derives formal conditions for a latent space set
to necessarily contain sufficient perturbations for it to be
trusted for adversarial training and robustness checks. All
these approaches either provide statistical robustness measures, or generate attacks based on gradient-search, which
is not guaranteed to find an attack if one exists.
Popular for network robustification and empirical evaluation, latent space sets are seldom used as inputs for verification due to the valid concern over the lack of mathematical guarantees on the completeness of the specifications
they encode. Therefore, we reiterate that this work is most
useful for changes that are difficult to mathematically define. We additionally argue that formal verification of latent
space-based specifications can be more valuable than their
empirical evaluation. This is because the latent space is a
continuous domain and countably infinite number of inputs
can be mapped to and reconstructed from a latent space set.
Therefore, no amount of testing, or search in the latent space
can provide guarantees against all the variations encoded in
it. To the best of our knowledge, only [20,27] encode specifications in a latent space and propose architectures to verify
them.
There are, however, two difficulties with verification in
the latent space. The first concerns the scalability of verification methods; the second relates to the quality of reconstructions affecting the verification outcomes. In this paper,
we focus on alleviating these two concerns. Specifically,
we propose a novel, invertible encoder-based pipeline for
verifying latent space sets, that lends two key benefits of:
• Computational efficiency and relative independence to input dimensionality,
• Verification outcomes’ independence to reconstructions,
and precise counterexamples with high recall.
We focus our analysis on pose and attribute variations in vision inference tasks, but the approach is likely extendable

3894

