This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial-Frequency Mutual Learning for Face Super-Resolution
Chenyang Wang, Junjun Jiang*, Zhiwei Zhong, Xianming Liu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{wangchy02,jiangjunjun,zhwzhong,csxm}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Face super-resolution (FSR) aims to reconstruct highresolution (HR) face images from the low-resolution (LR)
ones. With the advent of deep learning, the FSR technique
has achieved significant breakthroughs. However, existing
FSR methods either have a fixed receptive field or fail to
maintain facial structure, limiting the FSR performance. To
circumvent this problem, Fourier transform is introduced,
which can capture global facial structure information and
achieve image-size receptive field. Relying on the Fourier
transform, we devise a spatial-frequency mutual network
(SFMNet) for FSR, which is the first FSR method to explore the correlations between spatial and frequency domains as far as we know. To be specific, our SFMNet is
a two-branch network equipped with a spatial branch and
a frequency branch. Benefiting from the property of Fourier
transform, the frequency branch can achieve image-size receptive field and capture global dependency while the spatial branch can extract local dependency. Considering that
these dependencies are complementary and both favorable
for FSR, we further develop a frequency-spatial interaction block (FSIB) which mutually amalgamates the complementary spatial and frequency information to enhance
the capability of the model. Quantitative and qualitative
experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art FSR methods in recovering face
images. The implementation and model will be released at
https://github.com/wcy-cs/SFMNet.

1. Introduction
Face super-resolution (FSR), also known as face hallucination, is a technology which can transform low-resolution
(LR) face images into the corresponding high-resolution
(HR) ones. Limited by low-cost cameras and imaging conditions, the obtained face images are always low-quality,
resulting in a poor visual effect and deteriorating the downstream tasks, such as face recognition, face attribute analy* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Decomposition and reconstruction of face image in the
frequency domain. (a) denote face images; (b) are their amplitude
spectrum; (c) show their phase spectrum; (d) present the reconstructed images with amplitude information only; (e) are the reconstructed images with phase information only.

sis, face editing, etc. Therefore, FSR has become an emerging scientific tool and has gained more of the spotlight in the
computer vision and image processing communities [20].
FSR is an ill-posed challenging problem. In contrast to
general image super-resolution, FSR only focuses on the
face images and is tasked with recovering pivotal facial
structures. The first FSR method proposed by Baker and
Kanade [1] sets off the upsurge of traditional FSR methods.
These traditional methods mainly resort to PCA [6], convex
optimization [23], Bayesian approach [42] and manifold
learning [19] to improve the quality of face images. Nevertheless, they are still incompetent in recovering plausible
face images due to their limited representation abilities. In
recent years, FSR has made a dramatic leap, benefiting from
the advent of deep learning [20]. Researchers develop various network frameworks to learn the transformation from
LR face images to the corresponding HR ones, including
single-task learning frameworks [5, 8, 17], multi-task learning frameworks [4, 9, 32, 51], etc., which has greatly pushed
forward the frontier of FSR research.
Although existing FSR methods improve FSR performance, they still have limitations to be tackled. Face image has global facial structure which plays an important
role in transforming LR face images into the corresponding HR ones. However, the actual receptive field of the
convolutional neural network is limited due to the vanishing gradient problem, failing to model global dependency.
To achieve large receptive field, transformer has been ap-

22356

