This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GM-NeRF: Learning Generalizable Model-based Neural Radiance Fields
from Multi-view Images
Jianchuan Chen1 * Wentao Yi1 * Liqian Ma2†
1

Dalian University of Technology, China

Xu Jia1
2

Huchuan Lu1†

ZMO AI Inc.

Abstract
In this work, we focus on synthesizing high-fidelity novel
view images for arbitrary human performers, given a set
of sparse multi-view images. It is a challenging task due to
the large variation among articulated body poses and heavy
self-occlusions. To alleviate this, we introduce an effective generalizable framework Generalizable Model-based
Neural Radiance Fields (GM-NeRF) to synthesize freeviewpoint images. Specifically, we propose a geometryguided attention mechanism to register the appearance
code from multi-view 2D images to a geometry proxy which
can alleviate the misalignment between inaccurate geometry prior and pixel space. On top of that, we further conduct
neural rendering and partial gradient backpropagation for
efficient perceptual supervision and improvement of the perceptual quality of synthesis. To evaluate our method, we
conduct experiments on synthesized datasets THuman2.0
and Multi-garment, and real-world datasets Genebody and
ZJUMocap. The results demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of novel view
synthesis and geometric reconstruction.

1. Introduction
3D digital human reconstruction has a wide range of applications in movie production, telepresence, 3D immersive
communication, and AR/VR games. Traditional digital human production relies on dense camera arrays [10, 14] or
depth sensors [12, 20] followed by complex graphics rendering pipelines for high-quality 3D reconstruction, which
limits the availability to the general public.
Reconstructing 3D humans from 2D images captured
by sparse RGB cameras is very attractive due to its low
cost and convenience. This field has been studied for
decades [21, 46, 50]. However, reconstruction from sparse
RGB cameras is still quite challenging because of: 1) heavy
self-occlusions of the articulated human body; 2) inconsistent lighting and sensor parameters between different cam* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors. Codes are available at
https://github.com/JanaldoChen/GM-NeRF

Figure 1. The effect of inaccurately estimated SMPL. Compared with GNR [8] and KeypointNeRF [26], our method still
yields a reasonable result.

eras; 3) highly non-rigid and diverse clothes.
In recent years, with the rise of learning-based methods,
we can reconstruct high-quality digital humans from sparse
cameras. Learning-based methods [32, 36, 43, 49, 52] have
made great processes, however, they lack multi-view geometric consistency due to the mere usage of a 2D neural
rendering network. To address this problem, many recent
works [5, 47, 54] adopt neural radiance fields as 3D representations, which achieves outstanding performance on
novel view synthesis. However, these methods are not robust to unseen poses without the guidance of human geometric prior.
To better generalize to unseen poses, NeuralBody [31]
introduces a statistical body model SMPL [23] into neural
radiance fields which can reconstruct vivid digital humans
from a sparse multi-view video. However, NeuralBody is
designed for identity-specific scenarios, which means it requires laborious data collection and long training to obtain
the model for one person. Such a limitation restricts its application in general real-world scenarios.
In this work, we focus on synthesizing high-fidelity
novel view images for arbitrary human performers from a
set of sparse multi-view images. Towards this goal, some
very recent works [7, 8, 19, 26] propose to aggregate multiview pixel-aligned features using SMPL as a geometric
prior. However, these methods usually assume perfect geometry (e.g. accurate SMPL [23] estimation from 2D images) which is not applicable in practical applications. In

20648

