This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TAPS3D: Text-Guided 3D Textured Shape Generation from Pseudo Supervision
Jiacheng Wei1*

Hao Wang1*
Jiashi Feng2
Guosheng Lin1†
Kim-Hui Yap1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 ByteDance

{jiacheng002@e., hao005@e., gslin@, ekhyap@}ntu.edu.sg, jshfeng@bytedance.com

“a red hatchback car”

“a gray armless chair”

“a wooden office table”

“a black motorbike”

Figure 1. Our proposed model is capable of generating detailed textured shapes based on given text prompts. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by showcasing generated results for four distinct object classes: Car, Chair, Table, and Motorbike. Both the textured
meshes and geometries are presented, with visualizations rendered using ChimeraX [10].

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate an open research task
of generating controllable 3D textured shapes from the
given textual descriptions. Previous works either require
ground truth caption labeling or extensive optimization
time. To resolve these issues, we present a novel framework, TAPS3D, to train a text-guided 3D shape generator
with pseudo captions. Specifically, based on rendered 2D
images, we retrieve relevant words from the CLIP vocabulary and construct pseudo captions using templates. Our
constructed captions provide high-level semantic supervision for generated 3D shapes. Further, in order to produce fine-grained textures and increase geometry diversity,
we propose to adopt low-level image regularization to enable fake-rendered images to align with the real ones. During the inference phase, our proposed model can generate
3D textured shapes from the given text without any additional optimization. We conduct extensive experiments to
analyze each of our proposed components and show the
efficacy of our framework in generating high-fidelity 3D
textured and text-relevant shapes. Code is available at
https://github.com/plusmultiply/TAPS3D

1. Introduction
3D objects are essential in various applications [21–24],
such as video games, film special effects, and virtual real∗ Equal contribution. Work done during an internship at Bytedance.
† Corresponding author.

ity. However, realistic and detailed 3D object models are
usually hand-crafted by well-trained artists and engineers
slowly and tediously. To expedite this process, many research works [3,9,13,34,48,49] use deep generative models
to achieve automatic 3D object generation. However, these
models are primarily unconditioned, which can hardly generate objects as humans will.
In order to control the generated 3D objects from text,
prior text-to-3D generation works [43, 44] leverage the pretrained vision-language alignment model CLIP [37], such
that they can only use 3D shape data to achieve zero-shot
learning. For example, Dream Fields [13] combines the advantages of CLIP and NeRF [27], which can produce both
3D representations and renderings. However, Dream Fields
costs about 70 minutes on 8 TPU cores to produce a single result. This means the optimization time during the
inference phase is too slow to use in practice. Later on,
GET3D [9] is proposed with faster inference time, which
incorporates StyleGAN [15] and Deep Marching Tetrahedral (DMTet) [46] as the texture and geometry generators
respectively. Since GET3D adopts a pretrained model to do
text-guided synthesis, they can finish optimization in less
time than Dream Fields. But the requirement of test-time
optimization still limits its application scenarios. CLIPNeRF [50] utilizes conditional radiance fields [45] to avoid
test-time optimization, but it requires ground truth text data
for the training purpose. Therefore, CLIP-NeRF is only applicable to a few object classes that have labeled text data
for training, and its generation quality is restricted by the
NeRF capacity.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose

16805

