This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRISE: Demystifying Deep Lucas-Kanade with Strongly Star-Convex Constraints
for Multimodel Image Alignment
Yiqing Zhang
Xinming Huang
Ziming Zhang
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
100 Institute Rd, Worcester, MA, USA
{yzhang37, xhuang, zzhang15}@wpi.edu

Abstract
The Lucas-Kanade (LK) method is a classic iterative homography estimation algorithm for image alignment, but
often suffers from poor local optimality especially when image pairs have large distortions. To address this challenge,
in this paper we propose a novel Deep Star-Convexified
Lucas-Kanade (PRISE) method for multimodel image alignment by introducing strongly star-convex constraints into
the optimization problem. Our basic idea is to enforce the
neural network to approximately learn a star-convex loss
landscape around the ground truth give any data to facilitate the convergence of the LK method to the ground truth
through the high dimensional space defined by the network.
This leads to a minimax learning problem, with contrastive
(hinge) losses due to the definition of strong star-convexity
that are appended to the original loss for training. We also
provide an efficient sampling based algorithm to leverage the
training cost, as well as some analysis on the quality of the
solutions from PRISE. We further evaluate our approach on
benchmark datasets such as MSCOCO, GoogleEarth, and
GoogleMap, and demonstrate state-of-the-art results, especially for small pixel errors. Code can be downloaded from
https://github.com/Zhang-VISLab.

1. Introduction
Deep learning networks have achieved great success in
homography estimation by directly predicting the transformation matrix in various scenarios. However, the existing
classic algorithms still take the place for showing more explainability compared with the deep learning architectures.
Such algorithms are often rooted from well-studied theoretical and empirical grounding. Current works often focus
on combining the robustness of deep learning with explainability of classical algorithms to handle multimodel image
alignment such as image modality and satellite modality.
However, due to the high nonconvexity in homography esti-

mation, such methods often suffer from poor local optimality.
Recently Zhao et al. [77] proposed DeepLK for multimodel image alignment, i.e., estimating the homography between two planar projections of the same view but across different modalities such as map and satellite images (see Sec.
3.1.1 for formal definition), based on the LK method [46].
This method consists of two novel components:
• A new deep neural network was proposed to map images from different modalities into the same feature space
where the LK method can align them.
• A new training algorithm was proposed as well by enforcing the local change on the loss landscape should be no
less than a quadratic shape centered at the ground truth for
any image pair, with no specific reason.
Surprisingly, when we evaluate DeepLK based on the public
code1 , the proposed network cannot work well without the
proposed training algorithm. This strongly motivate us to
discover the mysteries in the DeepLK training algorithm.
Deep Reparametrization. Our first insight from DeepLK
is that the deep neural network essentially maps the alignment problem into a much higher dimensional space by
introducing a large amount of parameters. The high dimensional space provides the feasibility to reshape the loss landscape of the LK method. Such deep reparametrization has
been used as a means of reformulating some problems such
as shape analysis [11], super-resolution and denoising [8],
while preserving the properties and constraints in the original
problems. This insight at test time can be interpreted as
reparametrization

min ℓ(ω; x) =========⇒ min ℓf (ω; x, θ∗ ),
ω∈Ω

via deep learning

ω∈Ω

(1)

where x ∈ X denotes the input data, ℓ denotes a nonconvex
differentiable function (e.g., the LK loss) parametrized by
ω ∈ Ω, f : X × Θ → X denotes an auxiliary function
presented by a neural network with learned weights θ∗ ∈ Θ
(e.g., the proposed network in DeepLK), and ℓf denotes the
1 https://github.com/placeforyiming/CVPR21-DeepLucas-Kanade-Homography

13187

