This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-fidelity Facial Avatar Reconstruction from Monocular Video with
Generative Priors
Yunpeng Bai1 *, Yanbo Fan2†, Xuan Wang3 , Yong Zhang2 , Jingxiang Sun4 , Chun Yuan1,5† , Ying Shan2
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tencent AI Lab, 3 Ant Group,4 Tsinghua University, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory

3DMM-driven

2

Novel View

Novel View
Ground Truth

Audio-driven

NerFACE[11]

Ours

Novel View

Novel View
Ground Truth

DFRF[41]

Ours

Figure 1. Visualizations of 3DMM and audio-driven face reenactment of our proposed method and NerFACE [11] and DFRF [41]. The
leftmost column is the ground truth image. For each method, the left plot is the rendered image with the same view of the ground truth
image, and the two right plots are novel view syntheses. By utilizing the high-quality 3D-aware generative prior, our method significantly
boosts the performance of face reenactment and novel view synthesis. We highlight some areas with red rectangles for better comparisons.

Abstract
High-fidelity facial avatar reconstruction from a monocular video is a significant research problem in computer
graphics and computer vision. Recently, Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) has shown impressive novel view rendering
results and has been considered for facial avatar reconstruction. However, the complex facial dynamics and missing 3D information in monocular videos raise significant
challenges for faithful facial reconstruction. In this work,
we propose a new method for NeRF-based facial avatar reconstruction that utilizes 3D-aware generative prior. Dif* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding Authors.

ferent from existing works that depend on a conditional deformation field for dynamic modeling, we propose to learn
a personalized generative prior, which is formulated as a
local and low dimensional subspace in the latent space of
3D-GAN. We propose an efficient method to construct the
personalized generative prior based on a small set of facial images of a given individual. After learning, it allows
for photo-realistic rendering with novel views, and the face
reenactment can be realized by performing navigation in
the latent space. Our proposed method is applicable for
different driven signals, including RGB images, 3DMM coefficients, and audio. Compared with existing works, we
obtain superior novel view synthesis results and faithfully
face reenactment performance. The code is available here

4541

