This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Scalable Neural Representation for Diverse Videos
Bo He1 Xitong Yang2 Hanyu Wang1 Zuxuan Wu3 Hao Chen1
Shuaiyi Huang1 Yixuan Ren1 Ser-Nam Lim2 Abhinav Shrivastava1
1

2

University of Maryland, College Park

Meta AI

3

Fudan University

https://boheumd.github.io/D-NeRV/

Abstract
Implicit neural representations (INR) have gained increasing attention in representing 3D scenes and images, and
have been recently applied to encode videos (e.g., NeRV [1],
E-NeRV [2]). While achieving promising results, existing
INR-based methods are limited to encoding a handful of
short videos (e.g., seven 5-second videos in the UVG dataset)
with redundant visual content, leading to a model design
that fits individual video frames independently and is not
efficiently scalable to a large number of diverse videos. This
paper focuses on developing neural representations for a
more practical setup – encoding long and/or a large number
of videos with diverse visual content. We first show that
instead of dividing videos into small subsets and encoding
them with separate models, encoding long and diverse videos
jointly with a unified model achieves better compression results. Based on this observation, we propose D-NeRV, a
novel neural representation framework designed to encode
diverse videos by (i) decoupling clip-specific visual content
from motion information, (ii) introducing temporal reasoning into the implicit neural network, and (iii) employing the
task-oriented flow as intermediate output to reduce spatial
redundancies. Our new model largely surpasses NeRV and
traditional video compression techniques on UCF101 and
UVG datasets on the video compression task. Moreover,
when used as an efficient data-loader, D-NeRV achieves 3%10% higher accuracy than NeRV on action recognition tasks
on the UCF101 dataset under the same compression ratios.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations (INR) have achieved great
success in parameterizing various signals, such as 3D
scenes [3–5], images [6, 7], audio [6], and videos [1, 2, 8–10].
The key idea is to represent signals as a function approximated by a neural network, mapping a reference coordinate to its corresponding signal value. Recently, INR has
received increasing attention in image and video compres-

NeRV

NeRV

D-NeRV
Figure 1. Comparison of D-NeRV and NeRV when representing
diverse videos. NeRV optimizes representation to every video
independently while D-NeRV encodes all videos by a shared model.

sion tasks [1, 2, 8, 11–15]. Compared with learning-based
video compression techniques [16–18], INR-based methods
(e.g., NeRV [1]) are more favorable due to simpler training
pipelines and much faster video decoding speed.
While impressive progress has been made, existing INRbased methods are limited to encoding a single short video at
a time. This prohibits the potential applications in most realworld scenarios, where we need to represent and compress a
large number of diverse videos. A straightforward strategy
for encoding diverse videos is to divide them into multiple
subsets and model each of them by a separate neural network,
as shown in Figure 1 (top). However, since this strategy is
unable to leverage long-term redundancies across videos, it
achieves inferior results compared to fitting all diverse videos
with a single shared model. As shown in Figure 2, under the
same compression ratio (bits per pixel), the performance of
NeRV is consistently better when fitting a larger number of

6132

