This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniSim: A Neural Closed-Loop Sensor Simulator
Ze Yang1,2 * Yun Chen1,2∗
Wei-Chiu Ma1,3
1

Waabi

2

Jingkang Wang1,2∗ Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2∗
Anqi Joyce Yang1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2

University of Toronto

3

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

{zyang, ychen, jwang, siva, weichiu, jyang, urtasun}@waabi.ai

Original

Actor Removal

Original

Actor Modification

Original

SDV Sensor Lift

Original

SDV Lane Change

Scene manipulation with actor removal, modification, sensor configuration changes, and modified ego-trajectories

Original Scenario

Original Scenario

Modify Sedan Route

Insert New Truck

Closed-loop simulation for vehicle cut-in

Closed-loop simulation for safety-critical scenarios

Figure 1. Top: UniSim takes recorded sensor data from a data collection platform and creates manipulable digital twins. Bottom: UniSim
generates realistic, temporally consistent sensor simulations for new scenarios, enabling closed-loop autonomy evaluation. The autonomy
system reactively interacts with the scenario, receives new sensor data, and changes lanes (see planned trajectory inset). All images and
LiDAR in figure simulated by UniSim. Please refer to our project page https://waabi.ai/research/unisim/ for more results.

Abstract
Rigorously testing autonomy systems is essential for
making safe self-driving vehicles (SDV) a reality. It requires
one to generate safety critical scenarios beyond what can
be collected safely in the world, as many scenarios happen
rarely on our roads. To accurately evaluate performance,
we need to test the SDV on these scenarios in closed-loop,
where the SDV and other actors interact with each other
at each timestep. Previously recorded driving logs provide
* Indicates equal contribution.

a rich resource to build these new scenarios from, but for
closed loop evaluation, we need to modify the sensor data
based on the new scene configuration and the SDV’s decisions, as actors might be added or removed and the trajectories of existing actors and the SDV will differ from the
original log. In this paper, we present UniSim, a neural
sensor simulator that takes a single recorded log captured
by a sensor-equipped vehicle and converts it into a realistic
closed-loop multi-sensor simulation. UniSim builds neural
feature grids to reconstruct both the static background and
dynamic actors in the scene, and composites them together

1389

