This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clover

: Towards A Unified Video-Language Alignment and Fusion Model

Jingjia Huang♢ *

Yinan Li♡∗†

Jiashi Feng♢

Xinglong Wu♢

Xiaoshuai Sun♡‡

Rongrong Ji♡
♡

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, China
♢
ByteDance Inc, 100043, China
yinanlee@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {xssun, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn
{huangjingjia, jshfeng, wuxinglong}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Building a universal Video-Language model for solving
various video understanding tasks (e.g., text-video retrieval,
video question answering) is an open challenge to the machine learning field. Towards this goal, most recent works
build the model by stacking uni-modal and cross-modal feature encoders and train it with pair-wise contrastive pre-text
tasks. Though offering attractive generality, the resulted
models have to compromise between efficiency and performance. They mostly adopt different architectures to deal
with different downstream tasks. We find this is because the
pair-wise training cannot well align and fuse features from
different modalities. We then introduce Clover—a Correlated Video-Language pre-training method—towards a universal Video-Language model for solving multiple video understanding tasks with neither performance nor efficiency
compromise. It improves cross-modal feature alignment
and fusion via a novel tri-modal alignment pre-training
task. Additionally, we propose to enhance the tri-modal
alignment via incorporating learning from semantic masked
samples and a new pair-wise ranking loss. Clover establishes new state-of-the-arts on multiple downstream tasks,
including three retrieval tasks for both zero-shot and finetuning settings, and eight video question answering tasks.
Codes and pre-trained models will be released at https:
//github.com/LeeYN-43/Clover.

1. Introduction
Video-Language pre-training (VidL) aims to learn generalizable multi-modal models from large-scale video-text
* Equal Contribution in alphabetical order.
† Work done when interning at ByteDance Inc.
‡ Corresponding Author.

samples so as to better solve various challenging VideoLanguage understanding tasks, such as text-video retrieval
[1, 4, 38, 55] and video question answering [16, 47, 52]. Recent studies [9,11,23,24,49,56,58,61] have shown that VidL
leads to significant performance improvement and achieves
state-of-the-art results on various downstream text-video retrieval and video question answering (VQA) benchmarks.
Though achieving encouraging performance, existing
VidL models mostly adopt different architectures to deal
with different downstream tasks. For the text-video retrieval
tasks, they [2, 10, 11, 13, 31, 39] typically use two individual uni-modal encoders for processing video and text data
separately, for the sake of retrieval efficiency. While for
video question answering tasks, the models usually adopt
the multi-modal joint encoder design to learn the association and interaction of different modalities.
Building a unified model capable of solving various
Video-Language tasks is a long-standing challenge for machine learning research. A few recent works [9, 24] attempt
to learn a unified VidL model for both tasks, which uses the
multi-modal encoder to conduct text-video retrieval. However, the model requires an exhaustive pair-wise comparison between the query texts and gallery videos. Given
N text queries and M category videos, the computation
complexity of the multi-modal encoder model would be
O(N M ), which makes it infeasible for large-scale videotext retrieval applications. Another straightforward solution is to simply combine the uni-modal and multi-modal
encoders (Fig. 1 (a)), and perform the retrieval and VQA
tasks through the uni-modal and multi-modal encoders respectively. Its computation complexity for retrieval tasks
is only O(N + M ). However, the experiment results in
Fig.1 (c) show that, without a carefully designed correlating mechanism between these two types of encoders, the
simple combination i.e., COMB yields a compromised per-

14856

