This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Video Distillation: Rethinking Masked Feature Modeling for
Self-supervised Video Representation Learning
Rui Wang1,2
1

Dongdong Chen3 Zuxuan Wu1,2† Yinpeng Chen3
Mengchen Liu3 Lu Yuan3 Yu-Gang Jiang1,2†

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Cloud + AI

Abstract

77

SSv2 Top-1 Acc %

Benefiting from masked visual modeling, self-supervised
video representation learning has achieved remarkable
progress. However, existing methods focus on learning representations from scratch through reconstructing low-level
features like raw pixel values. In this paper, we propose
masked video distillation (MVD), a simple yet effective twostage masked feature modeling framework for video representation learning: firstly we pretrain an image (or video)
model by recovering low-level features of masked patches,
then we use the resulting features as targets for masked feature modeling. For the choice of teacher models, we observe that students taught by video teachers perform better on temporally-heavy video tasks, while image teachers
transfer stronger spatial representations for spatially-heavy
video tasks. Visualization analysis also indicates different
teachers produce different learned patterns for students. To
leverage the advantage of different teachers, we design a
spatial-temporal co-teaching method for MVD. Specifically,
we distill student models from both video teachers and image teachers by masked feature modeling. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that video transformers pretrained with spatial-temporal co-teaching outperform models distilled with a single teacher on a multitude of video
datasets. Our MVD with vanilla ViT achieves state-of-theart performance compared with previous methods on several challenging video downstream tasks. For example, with
the ViT-Large model, our MVD achieves 86.4% and 76.7%
Top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-400 and Something-Somethingv2, outperforming VideoMAE by 1.2% and 2.4% respectively. When a larger ViT-Huge model is adopted, MVD
achieves the state-of-the-art performance with 77.3% Top-1
accuracy on Something-Something-v2. Code will be available at https://github.com/ruiwang2021/mvd.

† Corresponding authors

Xiyang Dai3

75
73
71
MVD(ours)
VideoMAE
ST-MAE
OmniMAE
BEVT

69
67
0

2000

4000

6000

MaskFeat
MViTv1
MViTv2
VideoSwin
Mformer

8000

GFLOPs/Video

Figure 1. Comparisons of MVD with previous supervised or
self-supervised methods on Something-Something v2. Each
line represents the corresponding model of different sizes.

1. Introduction
For self-supervised visual representation learning, recent
masked image modeling (MIM) methods like MAE [31]
and BEiT [2] achieve promising results with vision transformers [17] on various vision downstream tasks. Such a
pretraining paradigm has also been adapted to the video
domain and boosts video transformers by clear margins
compared with supervised pretraining on several video
downstream tasks. Representative masked video modeling
(MVM) works include BEVT [63], VideoMAE [57] and
ST-MAE [21].
Following MAE [31] and BEiT [2], existing masked
video modeling methods [21, 57, 63] pretrain video transformers through reconstructing low-level features, e.g., raw
pixel values or low-level VQVAE tokens. However, using low-level features as reconstruction targets often incur
much noise. And due to the high redundancy in video data,
it is easy for masked video modeling to learn shortcuts, thus
resulting in limited transfer performance on downstream

6312

