This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting the P3P Problem
Yaqing Ding1
1

Jian Yang2

Lund University

2

Viktor Larsson1

Carl Olsson1

Kalle Åström1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
One of the classical multi-view geometry problems is the
so called P3P problem, where the absolute pose of a calibrated camera is determined from three 2D-to-3D correspondences. Since these solvers form a critical component
of many vision systems (e.g. in localization and Structurefrom-Motion), there have been significant effort in developing faster and more stable algorithms. While the current
state-of-the-art solvers are both extremely fast and stable,
there still exist configurations where they break down.
In this paper we algebraically formulate the problem as
finding the intersection of two conics. With this formulation
we are able to analytically characterize the real roots of the
polynomial system and employ a tailored solution strategy
for each problem instance. The result is a fast and stable
solver, that is able to correctly solve cases where competing
methods might fail. Our experimental evaluation shows that
we outperform the current state-of-the-art methods both in
terms of speed and success rate.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Registering a new image to a given 3D model is a critical step in many computer vision pipelines, e.g. visual positioning and localization [22], augmented reality [23] or
autonomous mapping and navigation [18]. In addition, it
has been combined with deep learning to perform learning
and geometric optimization end-to-end [4]. The problem
is generally solved by establishing a sparse set of 2D-3D
point correspondences between the image and the model
using feature-based matching [17]. To deal with the potential mismatches, robust estimators based on hypothesisand-test frameworks such as RANSAC [7] are employed.
These methods work by generating multiple candidate models from randomly selected minimal subsets of the data (to
reduce the risk of outlier contamination). In the context of
the absolute pose problem, i.e. estimating the position and
orientation of a camera given a set of 2D-3D point correspondences, the minimal is called Perspective-Three-Point
(P3P). As the name suggests, the problem is minimal with
three point correspondences in the calibrated setting, and

Figure 1. The perspective-three-point problem

has up to four real solutions.
The P3P problem has a long history, predating the field
of computer vision by a large margin. The geometric problem itself (though not in the context of cameras) was considered as early as 1773 by Lagrange [16] (see [24] for details). In his work Lagrange showed that it had at most
four solutions and could be reduced to a quartic polynomial. Almost a century later, in 1841, Grunert [10] revisited the problem and provided a direct solution method. In
the early 20th century the problem was also studied in the
photogrammetry community, though the main focus was on
refinement-based methods instead of solving the problem
from scratch (see Haralick [12] for details). Finstenvalder
and Scheufele [6] first show that the P3P problem only required to find a root of a cubic polynomial and the roots of
two quadratic polynomials. The problem later resurfaced
in the computer vision community in the seminal RANSAC
paper from Fischler and Bolles [7]. Due to the success of
RANSAC-based estimators the problem has since received
significant attention.
Based on the degree of the final univariate polynomial,
the P3P solutions can be mainly divided into two categories:
solving a quartic equation and solving a cubic equation.
Most of the modern papers focus on converting the P3P
problem into solving a quartic equation. Gao et al. [8] used
Wu-Ritt’s zero decomposition algorithm [27] to give a first

4872

