This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Image Training for Generalizable Deep Image Denoising
Haoyu Chen1∗ , Jinjin Gu2,3 *, Yihao Liu2,4,5 , Salma Abdel Magid7 ,
Chao Dong2,4 , Qiong Wang6 , Hanspeter Pfister7 , Lei Zhu1,8†
1 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

2 Shanghai AI Lab

3 The University of Sydney

4 ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

6 Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
7 Harvard University

Project page:

8 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

https://github.com/haoyuc/MaskedDenoising

Abstract
When capturing and storing images, devices inevitably
introduce noise. Reducing this noise is a critical task called
image denoising. Deep learning has become the de facto
method for image denoising, especially with the emergence
of Transformer-based models that have achieved notable
state-of-the-art results on various image tasks. However,
deep learning-based methods often suffer from a lack of
generalization ability. For example, deep models trained on
Gaussian noise may perform poorly when tested on other
noise distributions. To address this issue, we present a
novel approach to enhance the generalization performance
of denoising networks, known as masked training. Our
method involves masking random pixels of the input image
and reconstructing the missing information during training.
We also mask out the features in the self-attention layers
to avoid the impact of training-testing inconsistency. Our
approach exhibits better generalization ability than other
deep learning models and is directly applicable to realworld scenarios. Additionally, our interpretability analysis
demonstrates the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a crucial research area that aims to
recover clean images from noisy observations. Due to the
rapid advancements in deep learning, many promising image denoising networks have been developed. These networks are typically trained using images synthesized from
a pre-defined noise distribution and can achieve remarkable
performance in removing the corresponding noise. However, a significant challenge in applying these deep models
to real-world scenarios is their generalization ability. Since
* Haoyu Chen and Jinjin Gu contribute equally to this work.
† Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.

Gaussian 15

SwinIR

a. In-distribution

Mixture noise

SwinIR

b. Out-of-distribution

Ours

Figure 1. We illustrate the generalization problem of denoising networks. We train a SwinIR model on Gaussian noise with
σ = 15. When tested on the same noise, SwinIR demonstrates outstanding performance. However, when applied to outof-distribution noise, e.g., the mixture of various noise. SwinIR
suffers from a huge performance drop. The model trained by the
proposed masked training method maintains a reasonable denoising effect, despite aldo being trained on Gaussian noise.

the real-world noise distribution can differ from that observed during training, these models often struggle to generalize to such scenarios.
More specifically, most existing denoising works train
and evaluate models on images corrupted with Gaussian
noise, limiting their performance to a single noise distribution. When these models are applied to remove noise
drawn from other distributions, their performance drastically drops. Figure 1 shows an example. The research
community has become increasingly aware of this generalization issue of deep models in recent years. As a countermeasure, some methods [80] assume that the noise level
of a particular noise type is unknown, while others [5, 68]
attempt to improve the performance in real-world scenarios
by synthesizing or collecting training data closer to the target noise or directly performing unsupervised training on
the target noise [11, 71]. However, none of these methods substantially improve the generalization performance of
denoising networks, and they still struggle when the noise
distribution is mismatched [1]. The generalization issue of

1692

