This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ALSO: Automotive Lidar Self-supervision by Occupancy estimation
Alexandre Boulch1
1

Valeo.ai, Paris, France

Corentin Sautier1,2
2

Björn Michele1,3

Gilles Puy1

Renaud Marlet1,2

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
3
CNRS, IRISA, Univ. Bretagne Sud, Vannes, France

Abstract
We propose a new self-supervised method for pre-training
the backbone of deep perception models operating on point
clouds. The core idea is to train the model on a pretext
task which is the reconstruction of the surface on which
the 3D points are sampled, and to use the underlying latent
vectors as input to the perception head. The intuition is
that if the network is able to reconstruct the scene surface,
given only sparse input points, then it probably also captures
some fragments of semantic information, that can be used to
boost an actual perception task. This principle has a very
simple formulation, which makes it both easy to implement
and widely applicable to a large range of 3D sensors and
deep networks performing semantic segmentation or object
detection. In fact, it supports a single-stream pipeline, as
opposed to most contrastive learning approaches, allowing
training on limited resources. We conducted extensive experiments on various autonomous driving datasets, involving
very different kinds of lidars, for both semantic segmentation and object detection. The results show the effectiveness
of our method to learn useful representations without any
annotation, compared to existing approaches.
The code is available at github.com/valeoai/ALSO

1. Introduction
As a complement to 2D cameras, lidars directly capture
the 3D environment of a vehicle with high accuracy and
low sensitivity to adverse conditions, such as low illumination, bright sunlight or oncoming headlights. They are thus
essential sensors for safe autonomous driving.
Most state-of-the-art lidar-based perception methods,
whether they regard semantic segmentation [21, 76, 94] or
object detection [44, 73, 87, 90], assume they can be trained
on large annotated datasets. However, annotating 3D data for
such tasks is notoriously costly and time consuming. As data
acquisition is much cheaper than data annotation, being able
to leverage unannotated data to increase the performance or
reduce the annotation effort is a significant asset.

(a) nuScenes.

(b) SemanticKITTI.
Figure 1. Aggregation of the self-supervised training on lidar
datasets. Input point cloud (first column) and occupancy prediction
colored by the learned downstream labels.

A promising direction to address this question is to pretrain a neural network using only unannotated data, e.g., on
a pretext task which does not require manual labelling, and
then to fine-tune the resulting self-supervised pre-trained
network for the targeted downstream task(s). With adequate
pre-training, the learned network weights are a good starting
point for further supervised optimization; training a specific
downstream task then typically requires fewer annotations to
reach the same performance level as if trained from scratch.
A number of self-supervised approaches have been very

13455

