This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

spconv
spconv

spconv

1

Indices
Distribution

FPS &
Retrieval

spconv

Aggregate

2

MSMDFusion: Fusing LiDAR and Camera at Multiple Scales with
Multi-Depth Seeds for 3D Object Detection
Chen1,2† Lin Ma3† Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
Yang Jiao1,2∗ Zequn Jie3 * Shaoxiang Chen3 Jingjing
z
y
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
x
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Meituan

Abstract
Fusing LiDAR and camera information is essential for
accurate and reliable 3D object detection in autonomous
driving systems. This is challenging due to the difficulty of
combining multi-granularity geometric and semantic features from two drastically different modalities. Recent approaches aim at exploring the semantic densities of camera features through lifting points in 2D camera images (referred to as “seeds”) into 3D space, and then incorporate
2D semantics via cross-modal interaction or fusion techniques. However, depth information is under-investigated
in these approaches when lifting points into 3D space, thus
2D semantics can not be reliably fused with 3D points.
Moreover, their multi-modal fusion strategy, which is implemented as concatenation or attention, either can not
effectively fuse 2D and 3D information or is unable to
perform fine-grained interactions in the voxel space. To
this end, we propose a novel framework with better utilization of the depth information and fine-grained crossmodal interaction between LiDAR and camera, which consists of two important components. First, a Multi-Depth
Unprojection (MDU) method is used to enhance the depth
quality of the lifted points at each interaction level. Second, a Gated Modality-Aware Convolution (GMA-Conv)
block is applied to modulate voxels involved with the camera modality in a fine-grained manner and then aggregate multi-modal features into a unified space. Together
they provide the detection head with more comprehensive
features from LiDAR and camera. On the nuScenes test
benchmark, our proposed method, abbreviated as MSMDFusion, achieves state-of-the-art results on both 3D object detection and tracking tasks without using test-timeaugmentation and ensemble techniques. The code is available at https://github.com/SxJyJay/MSMDFusion.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Virtual points
with semantics

LiDAR points

project
to 2D
Depth
map

Image
features

unproject
to 3D

GMA-Conv

MDU
Detection Head

multiple depth
depth-aware
features
Detection result

Figure 1. Illustration of our MSMDFusion pipeline. The yellow
arrows indicate information passing or interaction between the LiDAR and camera modalities.

1. Introduction
Detecting 3D objects [1, 22, 29] is regarded as a fundamental task for autonomous driving. Aiming at the robust environmental perception, LiDARs and cameras are
widely equipped on autonomous driving vehicles since they
can provide complementary information. Characterized by
point clouds, LiDARs can capture accurate spatial information, while cameras contain rich semantics and context
with images. Therefore, developing multi-modal detectors that enjoy the benefits of the two worlds is promising.
Such an idea has catalyzed the emergence of a set of recent researches [1, 3, 12, 13, 15, 17, 19, 20, 25, 26]. Early
works [1, 3, 11, 12, 18–20, 26] perform LiDAR-camera fusion by projecting 3D LiDAR points (or region proposals
generated from them) onto 2D image planes to collect useful 2D semantics. However, such a paradigm suffers from
the signal density mismatching of multi-modality sensors.
Since LiDAR points are much sparser than camera pixels,
this projection manner will inevitably waste semantically
rich 2D features [1, 13].
Recently, another paradigm [9,10,13,15,25] for LiDARcamera fusion has emerged. Instead of collecting 2D semantic features with 3D queries, these methods first estimate depths of pixels, and then directly lift 2D pixels with

21643

