This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOICLIP: Efficient Knowledge Transfer for HOI Detection with
Vision-Language Models
Shan Ning1 * Longtian Qiu1 * Yongfei Liu2 Xuming He1,3
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China1 ByteDance Inc.2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging3
{ningshan2022, qiult, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

liuyongfei314@gmail.com

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to localize human-object pairs and recognize their interactions.
Recently, Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)
has shown great potential in providing interaction prior for
HOI detectors via knowledge distillation. However, such
approaches often rely on large-scale training data and suffer from inferior performance under few/zero-shot scenarios. In this paper, we propose a novel HOI detection framework that efficiently extracts prior knowledge from CLIP
and achieves better generalization. In detail, we first introduce a novel interaction decoder to extract informative regions in the visual feature map of CLIP via a cross-attention
mechanism, which is then fused with the detection backbone
by a knowledge integration block for more accurate humanobject pair detection. In addition, prior knowledge in CLIP
text encoder is leveraged to generate a classifier by embedding HOI descriptions. To distinguish fine-grained interactions, we build a verb classifier from training data via visual
semantic arithmetic and a lightweight verb representation
adapter. Furthermore, we propose a training-free enhancement to exploit global HOI predictions from CLIP. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms
the state of the art by a large margin on various settings, e.g.
+4.04 mAP on HICO-Det. The source code is available in
https://github.com/Artanic30/HOICLIP.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, which aims
to localize human-object pairs and identify their interactions, is a core task towards a comprehensive understanding
of visual scenes. It has attracted increasing interest in recent
years for its key role in a wide range of applications, such
* These authors contributed equally to this work, which was supported
by Shanghai Science and Technology Program 21010502700 and Shanghai
Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence.

(a) Data Efficiency Comparison

(b) Verb Long-tail Problem

Figure 1. Data efficiency comparison and verb distribution
analysis. In panel (a), we increase training data from 5% to 100%
and show the result of HOICLIP and GEN-VLKT. In panel (b),
the dots indicate the mean mAP and length of vertical line indicate
the variance of mAP for verbs grouped by sample number.

as assistive robots, visual surveillance and video analysis
[3,4,9,11]. Thanks to the development of end-to-end object
detectors [5], recent research [23,28,29,37,49] has made remarkable progress in localizing human-object instances in
interaction. Nonetheless, the problem of identifying interaction classes between human-object pairs remains particularly challenging. Conventional strategies [7, 23, 37, 49]
simply learn a multi-label classifier and typically require
large-scale annotated data for training. As such, they often suffer from long-tailed class distributions and a lack of
generalization ability to unseen interactions.
Recently, Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training [33]
has been explored to address such open-vocabulary and
zero-shot learning problems as its learned visual and linguistic representations demonstrate strong transfer ability
in various downstream tasks. In particular, recent work
on open-vocabulary detection utilizes knowledge distillation to transfer CLIP’s object representation to object detectors [10,12,14,31,45,52]. Such a strategy has been adopted
in the work of HOI detection, including GEN-VLKT [28]
and EoID [43], which leverage CLIP’s knowledge to tackle
the long-tail and zero-shot learning in the HOI tasks.
Despite their promising results, it remains an open ques-

23507

