This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Guided Diffusion Models
Vincent Tao Hu1† David W. Zhang1†
Yuki M. Asano1 Gertjan J. Burghouts2 Cees G. M. Snoek1
1
2
University of Amsterdam
TNO

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable progress
in image generation quality, especially when guidance is
used to control the generative process. However, guidance
requires a large amount of image-annotation pairs for training and is thus dependent on their availability and correctness. In this paper, we eliminate the need for such annotation by instead exploiting the flexibility of self-supervision
signals to design a framework for self-guided diffusion models. By leveraging a feature extraction function and a selfannotation function, our method provides guidance signals
at various image granularities: from the level of holistic
images to object boxes and even segmentation masks. Our
experiments on single-label and multi-label image datasets
demonstrate that self-labeled guidance always outperforms
diffusion models without guidance and may even surpass
guidance based on ground-truth labels. When equipped with
self-supervised box or mask proposals, our method further
generates visually diverse yet semantically consistent images,
without the need for any class, box, or segment label annotation. Self-guided diffusion is simple, flexible and expected to
profit from deployment at scale.

Images
without annotations

Self-annotation

cluster-ID 890

k-means

Self-guidance

Example
conditioning

Self-labeled

cluster-ID 23

Self-boxed

Self-segmented

, cluster-ID 2

Generated
samples

Figure 1. Self-guided diffusion framework. Our method can
leverage large and diverse image datasets without any annotations
for training guided diffusion models. Starting from a dataset without ground-truth annotations, we apply a self-supervised feature
extractor to create self-annotations. Using these, we train diffusion
models with either self-labeled, self-boxed, or self-segmented guidance that enable controlled generation and improved image fidelity.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have recently enabled tremendous advancements in many computer vision fields related to image
synthesis, but counterintuitively this often comes with the
cost of requiring large annotated datasets [49, 55]. For example, the image fidelity of samples from diffusion models
can be spectacularly enhanced by conditioning on class labels [17]. Classifier guidance goes a step further and offers
control over the alignment with the class label, by using
the classifier gradient to guide the image generation [17].
Classifier-free guidance [28] replaces the dedicated classifier
with a diffusion model trained by randomly dropping the
condition during training. This has proven a fruitful line
† Equal contribution

Source code at: https://taohu.me/sgdm/.

of research for several other condition modalities, such as
text [50, 55], image layout [53], visual neighbors [3], and
image features [20]. However, all these conditioning and
guidance methods require ground-truth annotations. In many
domains, this is an unrealistic and too costly assumption. For
example, medical images require domain experts to annotate
very high-resolution data, which is infeasible to do exhaustively [45]. In this paper, we propose to remove the necessity
of ground-truth annotation for guided diffusion models.
We are inspired by progress in self-supervised learning
[11,13], which encodes images into semantically meaningful
latent vectors without using any label information. It usually
does so by solving a pretext task [2, 21, 24, 69] on imagelevel to remove the necessity of labels. This annotation-free
paradigm enables the representation learning to upscale to

18413

