This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local-to-Global Registration for Bundle-Adjusting Neural Radiance Fields
Yue Chen1,2 *

Xingyu Chen1,2 *
Xuan Wang3†
Qi Zhang4
Yu Guo1,2†
Ying Shan4
Fei Wang1,2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
2
IAIR, Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Ant Group 4 Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have achieved photorealistic novel views synthesis; however, the requirement
of accurate camera poses limits its application. Despite
analysis-by-synthesis extensions for jointly learning neural 3D representations and registering camera frames exist,
they are susceptible to suboptimal solutions if poorly initialized. We propose L2G-NeRF, a Local-to-Global registration method for bundle-adjusting Neural Radiance Fields:
first, a pixel-wise flexible alignment, followed by a framewise constrained parametric alignment. Pixel-wise local
alignment is learned in an unsupervised way via a deep
network which optimizes photometric reconstruction errors.
Frame-wise global alignment is performed using differentiable parameter estimation solvers on the pixel-wise correspondences to find a global transformation. Experiments on
synthetic and real-world data show that our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art in terms of high-fidelity
reconstruction and resolving large camera pose misalignment. Our module is an easy-to-use plugin that can be
applied to NeRF variants and other neural field applications. The Code and supplementary materials are available
at https://rover-xingyu.github.io/L2G-NeRF/.

1. Introduction
Recent success with neural fields [47] has caused a
resurgence of interest in visual computing problems, where
coordinate-based neural networks that represent a field gain
traction as a useful parameterization of 2D images [4,7,40],
and 3D scenes [27, 29, 34]. Commonly, these coordinates
are warped to a global coordinate system by camera parameters obtained via computing homography, structure from
motion (Sf M), or simultaneous localization and mapping
* Authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author. This work is partly supported by the Na-

tional Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2022YFB3303800 and National Key Projects of China, 2021XJTU0040.

BARF

L2G-NeRF (ours)

perturbed/optimized
ground-truth
translational error

Suboptimal registration Initialization Accurate registration

Ghosting artifacts

Photorealistic reconstruction

Figure 1. We present L2G-NeRF, a new bundle-adjusting neural
radiance fields — employing local-to-global registration — that is
much more robust than the current state-of-the-art BARF [24].

(SLAM) [17] with off-the-shelf tools like COLMAP [39],
before being fed to the neural fields.
This paper considers the generic problem of simultaneously reconstructing the neural fields from RGB images
and registering the given camera frames, which is known
as a long-standing chicken-and-egg problem — registration
is needed to reconstruct the fields, and reconstruction is
needed to register the cameras.
One straightforward way to solve this problem is to
jointly optimize the camera parameters with the neural
fields via backpropagation. Recent work can be broadly
placed into two camps: parametric and non-parametric.
Parametric methods [10, 20, 24, 44] directly optimize global
geometric transformations (e.g. rigid, homography). Nonparametric methods [22, 31] do not make any assumptions

8264

