This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SplineCam: Exact Visualization and Characterization of Deep
Network Geometry and Decision Boundaries
Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun
Rice University

Randall Balestriero
Meta AI, FAIR

Guha Balakrishnan
Rice University

Richard Baraniuk
Rice University

imtiaz@rice.edu

rbalestriero@fb.com

guha@rice.edu

richb@rice.edu

Abstract
Current Deep Network (DN) visualization and interpretability methods rely heavily on data space visualizations such as scoring which dimensions of the data are responsible for their associated prediction or generating new
data features or samples that best match a given DN unit or
representation. In this paper, we go one step further by developing the first provably exact method for computing the
geometry of a DN’s mapping – including its decision boundary – over a specified region of the data space. By leveraging the theory of Continuous Piece-Wise Linear (CPWL)
spline DNs, SplineCam exactly computes a DN’s geometry without resorting to approximations such as sampling
or architecture simplification. SplineCam applies to any
DN architecture based on CPWL activation nonlinearities,
including (leaky) ReLU, absolute value, maxout, and maxpooling and can also be applied to regression DNs such
as implicit neural representations. Beyond decision boundary visualization and characterization, SplineCam enables
one to compare architectures, measure generalizability, and
sample from the decision boundary on or off the data manifold. Project website: bit.ly/splinecam.

1. Introduction
Deep learning and in particular Deep Networks (DNs) have
redefined the landscape of machine learning and pattern
recognition [22]. Although current DNs employ a variety
of techniques that improve their performance, their core operation remains unchanged, primarily consisting of sequentially mapping an input vector x to a sequence of L feature maps z ℓ , ℓ = 1, . . . , L by successively applying simple
nonlinear transformations, as in

z ℓ = σ W ℓ z ℓ−1 + bℓ , ℓ = 1, . . . , L
(1)
starting with z 0 = x. Here W ℓ and bℓ denotes the weight
matrix and the bias vector for layer ℓ, and σ is an activation
operator that applies an element-wise nonlinear activation

Figure 1. Exact visualization of the decision boundary and partition geometry of a 3D neural signed distance field (SDF). (Top
left) Surface normals obtained from the learned signed distance
field with annotations indicating slices used for visualization. For
each of the slices, we can see the spline partition geometry of the
learned SDF- each contiguous line represents a neuron, on either
side of which it gets activated/deactivated. Neurons from different depths of the network create a partitioning of the input space
into ’linear regions’. Here the colored lines represent the decision
boundary learned by the SDF. Note that while the final neuron obtains the decision boundary, many neurons place their boundaries
close to the ground truth surface to obtain the final SDF representation.

function. One popular choice for σ is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [12] that takes the elementwise maximum
between its entry and 0. The parametrization of W ℓ , bℓ
controls the type of layer, e.g., circulant matrix for convolutional layer.
Interpreting the geometry of a DN is a nontrivial task since
many different sets of parameters can lead to the same
13789

