This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CaPriDe Learning: Confidential and Private Decentralized Learning based on
Encryption-friendly Distillation Loss
Nurbek Tastan Karthik Nandakumar
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
{nurbek.tastan,karthik.nandakumar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Large volumes of data required to train accurate deep
neural networks (DNNs) are seldom available with any single entity. Often, privacy concerns prevent entities from
sharing data with each other or with a third-party learning
service provider. While cross-silo federated learning (FL)
allows collaborative learning of large DNNs without sharing the data itself, most existing cross-silo FL algorithms
have an unacceptable utility-privacy trade-off. In this work,
we propose a framework called Confidential and Private
Decentralized (CaPriDe) learning, which optimally leverages the power of fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) to
enable collaborative learning without compromising on the
confidentiality and privacy of data. In CaPridDe learning, participating entities release their private data in an
encrypted form allowing other participants to perform inference in the encrypted domain. The crux of CaPriDe
learning is mutual knowledge distillation between multiple local models through a novel distillation loss, which is
an approximation of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between the local predictions and encrypted inferences of
other participants on the same data that can be computed
in the encrypted domain. Extensive experiments on three
datasets show that CaPriDe learning can improve the accuracy of local models without any central coordination,
provide strong guarantees of data confidentiality and privacy, and has the ability to handle statistical heterogeneity. Constraints on the model architecture (arising from the
need to be FHE-friendly), limited scalability, and computational complexity of encrypted domain inference are the
main limitations of the proposed approach. The code can
be found at https://github.com/tnurbek/capride-learning.

1. Introduction
Rapid strides have been made in machine learning (ML)
(in particular, deep learning) over the past decade. However, in many important application domains such as health-

care and finance, the absence of large, centralized datasets
is a significant obstacle to realizing the full benefits of deep
learning algorithms. Data in these applications often resides
in silos and is governed by strict regulations (e.g., HIPAA,
GDPR, etc.) because of its privacy sensitive nature [22].
Competing business interests of data owners and the lack
of appropriate incentives for data sharing further accentuate
the problem. To overcome these issues, there is a need for
collaborative learning algorithms that ideally satisfy the following requirements [15]: (i) confidentiality - no sharing of
raw data, (ii) privacy - minimal leakage of information via
the knowledge exchange mechanism (e.g., gradients or predictions), (iii) utility - gain in accuracy (over the individual
models) resulting from the collaboration, even in the presence of statistical heterogeneity, (iv) efficiency - minimize
computational complexity and communication burden, (v)
robustness - handle unintentional failures and attacks emanating from malicious entities, and (vi) fairness - utility
should be proportional to the individual contributions.
Federated learning (FL) [15] is a special case of collaborative learning, which works under the orchestration of a
central server. FL allows multiple entities to collaboratively
solve a ML problem by sharing of focused updates (e.g.,
gradients), instead of raw data. Specifically, cross-silo FL
(typically between 2-100 participants) has been touted as a
promising solution to address the data fragmentation problem in finance [8] and healthcare [16, 23]. Most prior crosssilo FL algorithms assume that all the parties are collectively training a single model with a common architecture,
which is too restrictive in practice. Furthermore, knowledge exchange usually happens through sharing of gradients or model parameters. Recent gradient inversion attacks [9, 14] demonstrate that it is indeed possible to recover high fidelity information from individual gradient updates, thus violating the privacy requirement. While differential privacy (DP) [24], secure multi-party computation
(MPC) [26], and trusted execution environment (TEE) [21]
have been proposed as potential remedies to safeguard privacy in FL, none of the existing solutions offer an acceptable privacy-utility trade-off with reasonable efficiency. As

8084

