This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Name Classes for Vision and Language Models
Sarah Parisot

Yongxin Yang
Steven McDonagh
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{sarah.parisot, yongxin.yang, steven.mcdonagh}@huawei.com

Both named “bow”

Both named “bat”

Abstract
Large scale vision and language models can achieve impressive zero-shot recognition performance by mapping class
specific text queries to image content. Two distinct challenges
that remain however, are high sensitivity to the choice of handcrafted class names that define queries, and the difficulty of
adaptation to new, smaller datasets. Towards addressing these
problems, we propose to leverage available data to learn, for
each class, an optimal word embedding as a function of the
visual content. By learning new word embeddings on an otherwise frozen model, we are able to retain zero-shot capabilities
for new classes, easily adapt models to new datasets, and adjust potentially erroneous, non-descriptive or ambiguous class
names. We show that our solution can easily be integrated in
image classification and object detection pipelines, yields significant performance gains in multiple scenarios and provides
insights into model biases and labelling errors.

1. Introduction
The introduction of large-scale vision and language pretraining techniques has led to significant breakthroughs in object
recognition, notably for tasks where data efficiency forms a
crucial component (e.g. zero-shot scenarios). The key idea is to
learn a mapping between image and text spaces such that a latent
image representation will be close to sentences that describe the
image content, in representation space [33, 36]. Learning from
image-specific descriptions, rather than a fixed and common
class label, with limited semantic meaning, yields models with
very strong representational power [36]. Such multi-modal
approaches address one key shortcoming of visual-only recognition methods; they provide an ability to seamlessly expand
the model’s output space without the requirement of additional
training (i.e. open-set recognition). In contrast, visual-only
classification and object detection methods have historically
relied on training a linear classification layer in order to identify
objects of interest, resulting in the undesirable consequence that
any introduction of new classes (with or without available data)
is very challenging. A plethora of complex mechanisms have
been proposed, towards addressing this problem [12,19]. Vision

(a) Ambiguous class names
Class name:
“2007 Cadillac Escalade EXT Crew Cab”

Class name:
“A3400-200”

(b) Technical class names

Figure 1. Vision and language recognition models are highly sensitive
to class prompts. Ambiguous or highly technical class names can lead
to poor classification performance. Rather than adjusting class names
directly, current solutions rely on prompt context to reduce ambiguity,
e.g.: ‘a photo of a bow, a type of weapon’.

and language multi-modal approaches alternatively perform
classification by computing a similarity between image features
and a set of textual features, corresponding to text descriptions
from the classes of interest. As the text component constitutes
an input, such models naturally enable a route to identify new
categories, simply by modifying the queried text, yielding very
strong zero-shot and open-set performance [22, 36].
We draw attention to the fact that such performant
multi-modal models suffer from two remaining key limitations.
Firstly, performance is highly sensitive to class-prompt textual
content; both in terms of (i) the selected class name and (ii)
the surrounding sentence context. Class name sensitivity can
be illustrated by considering class homonyms; words that have
the same spelling but different meanings and origins (Figure
1a). These lead to ambiguous queries that negatively effect performance and mitigation necessitates time consuming prompt

23477

