This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Knowledge Distillation Framework for Deep Directed Graphical Models
Yizhuo Chen *
William and Mary & UIUC

Kaizhao Liang
UIUC

Zhe Zeng
UCLA

yizhuoc@illinois.edu

kl2@illinois.edu

zhezeng@cs.ucla.edu

Shuochao Yao
George Mason University

Huajie Shao †
William and Mary

shuochao@gmu.edu

hshao@wm.edu

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) is a technique that transfers
the knowledge from a large teacher network to a small student network. It has been widely applied to many different
tasks, such as model compression and federated learning.
However, existing KD methods fail to generalize to general deep directed graphical models (DGMs) with arbitrary
layers of random variables. We refer by deep DGMs to
DGMs whose conditional distributions are parameterized
by deep neural networks. In this work, we propose a novel
unified knowledge distillation framework for deep DGMs
on various applications. Specifically, we leverage the reparameterization trick to hide the intermediate latent variables,
resulting in a compact DGM. Then we develop a surrogate
distillation loss to reduce error accumulation through multiple layers of random variables. Moreover, we present the
connections between our method and some existing knowledge distillation approaches. The proposed framework is
evaluated on four applications: data-free hierarchical variational autoencoder (VAE) compression, data-free variational
recurrent neural networks (VRNN) compression, data-free
Helmholtz Machine (HM) compression, and VAE continual
learning. The results show that our distillation method outperforms the baselines in data-free model compression tasks.
We further demonstrate that our method significantly improves the performance of KD-based continual learning for
data generation. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/YizhuoChen99/KD4DGM-CVPR.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) aims at transferring the
knowledge of a large teacher model to a small student model,
which tries to mimic the behavior of the teacher model to
* Work is completed during internship at William and Mary
† Corresponding author

attain a competitive or superior performance [13, 20]. The
goal of this work is to develop a unified knowledge distillation (KD) framework for deep directed graphical models
(DGMs). Applications of the proposed framework include:
(i) data-free hierarchical variational autoencoder (VAE) compression [50], (ii) data-free variational recurrent neural networks (VRNN) compression [8], (iii) data-free Helmholtz
Machine (HM) compression [49], and (iv) KD based continual learning.
Deep directed graphical models (DGMs) refer to DGMs
whose conditional distributions are parameterized by deep
neural networks (DNNs), which is in contrast to the regular
DGMs with tabular conditional probability. One good example is variational autoencoders (VAEs), whose posterior
probability of latent variables is parameterized by DNNs. A
general deep DGM may have a complex structure, consisting
of an arbitrary number of input variables, target variables,
and latent variables. Deep DGMs have been widely used
in various applications, such as image generation [53], text
generation [5], and video prediction [55].
This work is motivated by the growing popularity of recent over-parameterized deep DGMs with millions of parameters to improve their accuracy in various tasks. However, the
large models are very computationally expensive. As a result,
it is not practical to deploy them on resource-constrained
edge devices, such as mobile phones and IoT systems [33].
One possible solution to this problem is KD, which enables
a smaller student model to approximate the performance
of a large teacher. Recently, KD has been widely applied
to many different tasks, such as model compression [20],
continual learning [34, 59], and federated learning [30, 36].
To our knowledge, the existing KD methods, however, are
only applicable to some specific DGMs, including generative adversarial networks (GANs) [2, 33], auto-regressive
models in natural language processing (NLP) [35], and VQVAE [48]. They fail to generalize to the general deep DGMs,
especially to those with multiple latent variables or complex

7795

