This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backdoor Attacks Against Deep Image Compression
via Adaptive Frequency Trigger
Yap-Peng Tan1
Alex C. Kot1
Yi Yu1,3
Yufei Wang1
Wenhan Yang2 * Shijian Lu1
1
2
3
Nanyang Technological University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
IGP-ROSE, NTU
{yuyi0010, yufei001, shijian.Lu, eyptan, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

yangwh@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent deep-learning-based compression methods have
achieved superior performance compared with traditional
approaches. However, deep learning models have proven to
be vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where some specific trigger patterns added to the input can lead to malicious behavior of the models. In this paper, we present a novel backdoor
attack with multiple triggers against learned image compression models. Motivated by the widely used discrete cosine transform (DCT) in existing compression systems and
standards, we propose a frequency-based trigger injection
model that adds triggers in the DCT domain. In particular, we design several attack objectives for various attacking scenarios, including: 1) attacking compression quality
in terms of bit-rate and reconstruction quality; 2) attacking
task-driven measures, such as down-stream face recognition and semantic segmentation. Moreover, a novel simple
dynamic loss is designed to balance the influence of different loss terms adaptively, which helps achieve more efficient
training. Extensive experiments show that with our trained
trigger injection models and simple modification of encoder
parameters (of the compression model), the proposed attack
can successfully inject several backdoors with corresponding triggers in a single image compression model.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a fundamental task in the area
of signal processing, and has been used in many applications to store image data efficiently without much degrading
the quality. Traditional image compression methods such
as JPEG [46], JPEG2000 [26], Better Portable Graphics
(BPG) [43], and recent Versatile Video Coding (VVC) [39]
rely on hand-crafted modules for transforms and entropy
coding to improve coding efficiency. With the rapid development of deep-learning techniques, various learning-based
approaches [2, 7, 20, 36] adopt end-to-end trainable models
* Corresponding author.

$
Original Image

!"

0.392bpp, 28.63dB

$
Poisoned Image (BPP attack)

!#

9.354bpp, 28.39dB

$
Poisoned Image (PSNR attack)
Compression Model

0.334bpp, 4.24dB
Trigger Injection Model

Figure 1. Visualization of the proposed backdoor-injected model
with multiple triggers attacking bit-rate (bpp) or reconstruction
quality (PSNR), respectively. The second sample shows the result
of the BPP attack with a huge increase in bit-rate, and the third one
presents a PSNR attack with severely corrupted output.

that integrate the pipeline of prediction, transform, and entropy coding jointly to achieve improved performance.
Together with the impressive performance of the deep
neural networks, many concerns have been raised about
their related AI security issues [23,54]. Primarily due to the
lack of transparency in deep neural networks, it is observed
that a variety of attacks can compromise the deployment
and reliability of AI systems [24, 25, 53] in computer vision, natural language processing, speech recognition, etc.
Among all these attacks, backdoor attacks have recently attracted lots of attention. As most SOTA models require extensive computation resources and a lengthy training process, it is more practical and economical to download and
directly adopt a third-party model with pretrained weights,
which might face the threat from a malicious backdoor.
In general, a backdoor-injected model works as expected
on normal inputs, while a specific trigger added to the clean
input can activate the malicious behavior, e.g., incorrect prediction. Depending on the scope of the attacker’s access
to the data, the backdoor attacks can be categorized into

12250

