This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sampling is Matter: Point-guided 3D Human Mesh Reconstruction
Jeonghwan Kim1 * Mi-Gyeong Gwon1 * Hyunwoo Park1
Hyukmin Kwon2 Gi-Mun Um2 Wonjun Kim1†
1
Konkuk University 2 Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
{jhkim0759,kmk3942,pzls,wonjkim}@konkuk.ac.kr

{hmkwon,gmum}@etri.re.kr

Abstract
This paper presents a simple yet powerful method for
3D human mesh reconstruction from a single RGB image.
Most recently, the non-local interactions of the whole mesh
vertices have been effectively estimated in the transformer
while the relationship between body parts also has begun
to be handled via the graph model. Even though those approaches have shown the remarkable progress in 3D human mesh reconstruction, it is still difficult to directly infer
the relationship between features, which are encoded from
the 2D input image, and 3D coordinates of each vertex. To
resolve this problem, we propose to design a simple feature sampling scheme. The key idea is to sample features
in the embedded space by following the guide of points,
which are estimated as projection results of 3D mesh vertices (i.e., ground truth). This helps the model to concentrate more on vertex-relevant features in the 2D space, thus
leading to the reconstruction of the natural human pose.
Furthermore, we apply progressive attention masking to
precisely estimate local interactions between vertices even
under severe occlusions. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that the proposed method efficiently improves the performance of 3D human mesh reconstruction.
The code and model are publicly available at: https:
//github.com/DCVL-3D/PointHMR_release.

1. Introduction
The goal of 3D human mesh reconstruction is to estimate 3D coordinates of points, which make up the human
body surface. Since the high-quality 3D human model has
been consistently required for various immersive applications, many studies have devoted considerable efforts to
accurately reconstruct the 3D human mesh. In the early
stage of this field, complex optimization techniques were
* equal contribution
† corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) Traditional process of feature extraction for estimating 3D coordinates. (b) Vertex-relevant feature extraction process
based on the proposed point-guided sampling method for estimating 3D coordinates.

adopted to generate the 3D human model based on the relationship between multiple scenes, which are acquired by
using stereo or multiple-view camera systems. Recently,
owing to the great success of deep learning, the problem of
3D human mesh reconstruction now can be resolved only
with a single RGB image, thus the majority has begun to
develop compact network architectures and efficient training strategies. Even though such deep learning-based approaches have shown the significant progress in 3D human
mesh reconstruction, this task is still challenging due to severe occlusions by diverse human poses and depth ambiguities by the monocular setting.
Deep learning-based approaches can be divided into
two main groups: model-based and model-free methods.
In the former, most methods aim to estimate shape and
pose parameters of the skinned multi-person linear (SMPL)
model [24], which is capable of yielding the whole vertices
via these two simple factors, thus most widely employed in
this field. Traditional encoder-decoder architectures, which
are mostly composed of stacked convolutional layers, are
sufficient to conduct the regression for estimating those parameters. Despite their great performance, model-based

12880

