This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Proposal-based Multiple Instance Learning for Weakly-supervised
Temporal Action Localization
Huan Ren1 , Wenfei Yang1 , Tianzhu Zhang1, 2, *, Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Deep Space Exploration Lab
rh hr 666@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {yangwf, tzzhang, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Segment Features

Abstract

Temporal Action Localization (TAL) is one of the essential tasks in video understanding, which aims to simultaneously discover action instances and identify their categories in untrimmed videos [9, 18]. TAL has recently
received increasing attention from the research community due to its broad application potentials, such as intelligent surveillance [44], video summarization [22], highlight detection [49], and visual question answering [23].
Most existing methods handle this task in a fully-supervised
* Corresponding Author

S-MIL Model

1. Introduction

...

Weakly-supervised temporal action localization aims to
localize and recognize actions in untrimmed videos with
only video-level category labels during training. Without
instance-level annotations, most existing methods follow the
Segment-based Multiple Instance Learning (S-MIL) framework, where the predictions of segments are supervised by
the labels of videos. However, the objective for acquiring
segment-level scores during training is not consistent with
the target for acquiring proposal-level scores during testing, leading to suboptimal results. To deal with this problem, we propose a novel Proposal-based Multiple Instance
Learning (P-MIL) framework that directly classifies the
candidate proposals in both the training and testing stages,
which includes three key designs: 1) a surrounding contrastive feature extraction module to suppress the discriminative short proposals by considering the surrounding contrastive information, 2) a proposal completeness evaluation
module to inhibit the low-quality proposals with the guidance of the completeness pseudo labels, and 3) an instancelevel rank consistency loss to achieve robust detection by
leveraging the complementarity of RGB and FLOW modalities. Extensive experimental results on two challenging
benchmarks including THUMOS14 and ActivityNet demonstrate the superior performance of our method. Our code is
available at github.com/RenHuan1999/CVPR2023 P-MIL.

Training stage
Classification
scores of segments

CAS

Inconsistent

Testing stage
What's the score of
the proposal?

Proposal

(a)
High Jump

Long Jump

Which class?
Triple Jump

(b)

Figure 1. Drawbacks of the Segment-based Multiple Instance
Learning framework. (a) The objectives of the training and testing
stages are inconsistent. (b) By watching a single running segment
in the red box, it is difficult to tell which category it belongs to.

setting [7, 25, 42, 51, 63], which requires instance-level
annotations. Despite their success, the requirements for
such massive instance-level annotations limit their application in real-world scenarios. To overcome this limitation,
Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization (WTAL)
has been widely studied because it only requires video-level
labels [13, 26, 36, 45, 55], which are much easier to collect.
Most existing WTAL methods follow the Segment-based
Multiple Instance Learning (S-MIL) framework [16,32,45],
where the predictions of segments are supervised by the
labels of videos. In particular, a class-agnostic attention
branch is used to calculate the attention sequence, which indicates the foreground probability of each segment. Meanwhile, a classification branch is used to calculate the Class
Activation Sequence (CAS), which indicates the category
probability of each segment. In the training stage, the videolevel classification scores can be derived by aggregating
CAS with the attention sequence, which are then supervised
by the video-level category labels. In the testing stage, the
candidate proposals are generated by thresholding the attention sequence, and the segment-level CAS corresponding to
each proposal is aggregated to score each proposal.

2394

