This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointAvatar: Deformable Point-based Head Avatars from Videos
Yufeng Zheng1,2 Wang Yifan3 Gordon Wetzstein3 Michael J. Black2 Otmar Hilliges1
1
ETH Zurich, 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 3 Stanford University

Figure 1. PointAvatar learns lighting-disentangled point-based head avatars from a monocular RGB video captured by a smartphone.

Abstract
The ability to create realistic animatable and relightable
head avatars from casual video sequences would open up
wide ranging applications in communication and entertainment. Current methods either build on explicit 3D morphable meshes (3DMM) or exploit neural implicit representations. The former are limited by fixed topology, while
the latter are non-trivial to deform and inefficient to render.
Furthermore, existing approaches entangle lighting and
albedo, limiting the ability to re-render the avatar in new
environments. In contrast, we propose PointAvatar, a deformable point-based representation that disentangles the
source color into intrinsic albedo and normal-dependent
shading. We demonstrate that PointAvatar bridges the gap
between existing mesh- and implicit representations, combining high-quality geometry and appearance with topological flexibility, ease of deformation and rendering efficiency. We show that our method is able to generate animatable 3D avatars using monocular videos from multiple sources including hand-held smartphones, laptop webcams and internet videos, achieving state-of-the-art quality in challenging cases where previous methods fail, e.g.,
thin hair strands, while being significantly more efficient in
training than competing methods.

contact: yufeng.zheng@inf.ethz.ch
project page: https://zhengyuf.github.io/PointAvatar/

1. Introduction
Personalized 3D avatars will enable new forms of communication and entertainment. Successful tools for creating avatars should enable easy data capture, efficient computation, and create a photo-realistic, animatable, and relightable 3D representation of the user. Unfortunately, existing approaches fall short of meeting these requirements.
Recent methods that create 3D avatars from videos either build on 3D morphable models (3DMMs) [26, 36] or
leverage neural implicit representations [32, 33, 35]. The
former methods [8, 13, 22, 23] allow efficient rasterization
and inherently generalize to unseen deformations, but they
cannot easily model individuals with eyeglasses or complex hairstyles, as 3D meshes are limited by a-priori fixed
topologies and surface-like geometries. Recently, neural implicit representations have also been used to model
3D heads [5, 11, 16, 54]. While they outperform 3DMMbased methods in capturing hair strands and eyeglasses,
they are significantly less efficient to train and render, since
rendering a single pixel requires querying many points
along the camera ray. Moreover, deforming implicit representations in a generalizable manner is non-trivial and
existing approaches have to revert to an inefficient rootfinding loop, which impacts training and testing time negatively [10, 18, 25, 45, 54].
To address these issues, we propose PointAvatar, a novel
avatar representation that uses point clouds to represent the
canonical geometry and learns a continuous deformation

21057

