This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent View Synthesis with Pose-Guided Diffusion Models
Hung-Yu Tseng1

Qinbo Li1 Changil Kim1 Suhib Alsisan1 Jia-Bin Huang1,2
2
1
Meta
University of Maryland, College Park

Input

Johannes Kopf1

Outputs

Figure 1. Consistent view synthesis via pose-guided diffusion model. (top) Given an input image and a sequence of camera poses, we
present a pose-guided diffusion model to generate a sequence of frames that are photorealistic and 3D consistent. (bottom) Our proposed
method can synthesize diverse sequences from the same set of inputs.

Abstract
Novel view synthesis from a single image has been a
cornerstone problem for many Virtual Reality applications
that provide immersive experiences. However, most existing techniques can only synthesize novel views within a
limited range of camera motion or fail to generate consistent and high-quality novel views under signiﬁcant camera movement. In this work, we propose a pose-guided
diffusion model to generate a consistent long-term video
of novel views from a single image. We design an attention layer that uses epipolar lines as constraints to facilitate the association between different viewpoints. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed diffusion model

against state-of-the-art transformer-based and GAN-based
approaches. More qualitative results are available at
https://poseguided-diffusion.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Offering immersive 3D experiences from daily photos
has attracted considerable attention. It is a cornerstone
technique for a wide range of applications such as 3D
photo [18, 49], 3D asset generation [35], and 3D scene navigation [4]. Notably, rapid progress has been made in addressing the single-image view synthesis [40, 50, 61, 69] issue. Given an arbitrarily narrow ﬁeld-of-view image, these
frameworks can produce high-quality images from novel
viewpoints. However, these methods are limited to view-

16773

