This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Neural Head Synthesis via Controllable Local Deformation Fields
Chuhan Chen1 *

Matthew O’Toole1
1

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
High-quality reconstruction of controllable 3D head
avatars from 2D videos is highly desirable for virtual human
applications in movies, games, and telepresence. Neural
implicit fields provide a powerful representation to model
3D head avatars with personalized shape, expressions, and
facial parts, e.g., hair and mouth interior, that go beyond
the linear 3D morphable model (3DMM). However, existing
methods do not model faces with fine-scale facial features,
or local control of facial parts that extrapolate asymmetric
expressions from monocular videos. Further, most condition
only on 3DMM parameters with poor(er) locality, and resolve local features with a global neural field. We build on
part-based implicit shape models that decompose a global
deformation field into local ones. Our novel formulation
models multiple implicit deformation fields with local semantic rig-like control via 3DMM-based parameters, and representative facial landmarks. Further, we propose a local control loss and attention mask mechanism that promote sparsity
of each learned deformation field. Our formulation renders
sharper locally controllable nonlinear deformations than
previous implicit monocular approaches, especially mouth
interior, asymmetric expressions, and facial details. Project
page: https://imaging.cs.cmu.edu/local deformation fields/

1. Introduction
Monocular human head avatar reconstruction is a long
standing challenge that has drawn a lot of attention in the
last few decades due to its wide application in movie making [11, 17, 43], and virtual reality [2, 3, 29], among others.
Traditional reconstruction methods in production pipelines
create animatable and detailed avatars, often represented as
3D rigs, from high-quality face scans with predefined expressions and poses [56, 58]. However, such data is often
expensive to acquire and process, and over the years has
created the need for an easier capture pipeline, e.g., based on
high-definition images, or videos of human subjects. With
the advancements in deep learning, much effort has gone
* Work was done while interning at Flawless AI.

Gaurav Bharaj2
2

Pablo Garrido2

Flawless AI

into learning neural 3D face representations from 2D images and the research community has achieved impressive
results [22, 27, 39, 45]. However, modeling 3D structures
from 2D information alone is an ill-posed problem, which
results in models that lack view consistency and details.
Both traditional and neural reconstruction pipelines based
on the parametric mesh representation, 3DMM [9], are efficient, controllable, and well integrated into the graphics
pipeline, though at the expense of lacking important facial
features such as hair, eyes, and mouth interior. In the last
couple of years, there has been a surge of research on generalized implicit face representations, e.g., sign distance
functions (SDFs) [34], neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [16]
or hybrid volumetric representations [4], that allow accurate modeling of fine-grained facial, and non-facial features
not possible with mesh-based representations alone, while
preserving view-consistency.
Recently, several implicit models for human head avatars
from monocular videos have demonstrated great progress
[1, 3, 12, 15, 18, 35, 36, 41, 47, 57, 67, 68]. Several employ
facial parameters from an existing face tracker to condition a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to model expression changes
[3,12,18,47], use deformation fields to learn a mapping from
an observed point deformed by expression to a point on the
template face [1, 35, 67], or learn forward mapping functions
that estimate implicit 3DMM functions, represented as facial
deformation bases [15, 42, 68]. These approaches have done
a good job in allowing control of expressions and poses,
even for out-of-distribution training parameters. However,
none of these approaches reconstruct animatable heads with
high-fidelity details such as deep creases. Besides, since they
heavily rely on creating implicit fields derived from linear
3DMMs, which are de-facto limited by global or large-scale
expression decompositions, it is relatively difficult to control
localized deformations at a finer level, e.g., wrinkles that
form around eyes when winking.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach that allows
implicit 3D rig modeling, and local control of detailed facial
deformations. We use expression parameters obtained from
a 3DMM face tracker, e.g., DECA [10], but learn to model
more local deformations beyond linear 3DMM. To this end,
instead of learning a single global deformation field, we

416

