This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Alias-Free Convnets: Fractional Shift Invariance via Polynomial Activations
Hagay Michaeli Tomer Michaeli Daniel Soudry
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
Haifa, Israel
{hagaymichaeli, daniel.soudry}@gmail.com, tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Although CNNs are believed to be invariant to translations, recent works have shown this is not the case due to
aliasing effects that stem from down-sampling layers. The
existing architectural solutions to prevent the aliasing effects are partial since they do not solve those effects that
originate in non-linearities. We propose an extended antialiasing method that tackles both down-sampling and nonlinear layers, thus creating truly alias-free, shift-invariant
CNNs1 . We show that the presented model is invariant to
integer as well as fractional (i.e., sub-pixel) translations,
thus outperforming other shift-invariant methods in terms
of robustness to adversarial translations.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are the most
common model in the image classification field. They were
originally intended to have two properties:
1. Shift-invariant output: when we spatially translate the
input image, their output does not change.
2. Shift-equivariant representation: when we spatially
translate the input image, their internal representation
translates in the same way.
Both these properties are thought to be beneficial for generalization (i.e., they are useful inductive biases), as we expect
the image class not to change by an image translation, and
its features to shift together with the image. Moreover, without the first property, the CNN might become vulnerable to
adversarial attacks using image translations. Such attacks
are real threats since they are very simple to execute in a
“black-box” setting (where we do not know anything about
the CNN). For example, consider a person trying to fool a
CNN-based face scanner, by simply moving continuously
until a face match is achieved.
It was commonly assumed that these useful properties
were maintained since CNNs use only shift-equivariant operations: the convolution operation and component-wise
1 Our code is available at github.com/hmichaeli/alias free convnets/.

non-linearities. However, CNN models typically also include downsampling operations such as pooling and strided
convolution. Unfortunately, these operations violate equivariance, and this also leads to CNNs not being shiftinvariant. Specifically, Azulay and Weiss [2] have shown
that shifting an input image by even one pixel can cause the
output probability of a trained classifier to change significantly. This vulnerability can be further exploited in adversarial attacks, lowering classifiers’ accuracy by more than
20% [8]. Later, Zhang [33] has shown that this problematic behavior stems from an aliasing effect, taking place in
downsampling operations such as pooling and strided convolutions, and non-linear operations on the downsampled
signals.
Previous works have shown an improvement in CNN
invariance to translations using partial solutions that reduced aliasing. For example, Zhang [33] has suggested
adding a low-pass filter before the downsampling operations. This approach has been shown to reduce aliasing
caused by downsampling, thus improving shift-invariance,
as well as accuracy and noise robustness. Karras et al. [17]
have addressed aliasing in the generator within generative
adversarial networks (GANs). They have shown that without proper treatment, aliasing in GANs leads to a decoupling of the high-frequency features (texture) from the lowfrequency content (structure) in the generated images, thus
limiting their applicability in smooth video generation. To
alleviate this issue, Karras et al. [17] extended the lowpass filter approach and suggested a solution for the implicit
aliasing caused by non-linearities. Their method wraps the
component-wise non-linear operations by upsampling and
downsampling layers in an attempt to mimic the effect of
applying the non-linear operations in the continuous domain, where they theoretically do not cause aliasing.
Yet, none of the previous solutions completely eliminates aliasing, thus their suggested CNN architectures are
not guaranteed to be shift-invariant. A different approach to
shift-invariant CNNs was suggested by Chaman and Dokmanić [4]. They have proposed to use downsampling operations that dynamically choose the subsampling grid using

16333

