This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF-RPN: A general framework for object detection in NeRFs
Benran Hu1 * Junkai Huang1 * Yichen Liu1 * Yu-Wing Tai1,2 Chi-Keung Tang1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Kuaishou Technology

Abstract
This paper presents the first significant object detection
framework, NeRF-RPN, which directly operates on NeRF.
Given a pre-trained NeRF model, NeRF-RPN aims to detect
all bounding boxes of objects in a scene. By exploiting a
novel voxel representation that incorporates multi-scale 3D
neural volumetric features, we demonstrate it is possible to
regress the 3D bounding boxes of objects in NeRF directly
without rendering the NeRF at any viewpoint. NeRF-RPN
is a general framework and can be applied to detect objects
without class labels. We experimented NeRF-RPN with
various backbone architectures, RPN head designs and
loss functions. All of them can be trained in an end-toend manner to estimate high quality 3D bounding boxes.
To facilitate future research in object detection for NeRF,
we built a new benchmark dataset which consists of both
synthetic and real-world data with careful labeling and
clean up. Code and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/lyclyc52/NeRF_RPN .

1. Introduction
3D object detection is fundamental to important applications such as robotics and autonomous driving, which
require scene understanding in 3D. Most existing relevant
methods require 3D point clouds input or at least RGBD images acquired from 3D sensors. Nevertheless, recent
advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [34] provide
an effective alternative approach to extract highly semantic
features of the underlying 3D scenes from 2D multi-view
images. Inspired by Region Proposal Network (RPN)
for 2D object detection, in this paper, we present the
first 3D NeRF-RPN, which directly operates on the NeRF
representation of a given 3D scene learned entirely from
RGB images and camera poses. Specifically, given the
radiance field and the density extracted from a NeRF model,
our method produces bounding box proposals, which can be
deployed in downstream tasks.
Recently, NeRF has provided very impressive results
* Equal contribution.
The order of authorship was determined
alphabetically.
† This research is supported in part by the Research Grant Council of
the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

Figure 1. Region proposal results on a NeRF. Top 12 proposals
in eight orientations with highest confidence are visualized. The
NeRF is trained from the Living Room scene from INRIA [38].

in novel view synthesis, while 3D object detection
has become increasingly important in many real-world
applications such as autonomous driving and augmented
reality. Compared to 2D object detection, detection in
3D is more challenging due to the increased difficulty in
data collection where various noises in 3D can be captured
as well. Despite some good works, there is a lot of
room for exploration in the field of 3D object detection.
Image-based 3D object detectors either use a single image
(e.g., [1, 4, 62]) or utilize multi-view consensus of multiple
images (e.g., [29, 51, 63]). Although the latter use multiview projective geometry to combine information in the 3D
space, they still use 2D features to guide the pertinent 3D
prediction. Some other 3D detectors based on point cloud
representation (e.g., [31,33,41,73]) heavily rely on accurate
data captured by sensors. To our knowledge, there is still no
representative work on direct 3D object detection in NeRF.
Thus, we propose NeRF-RPN to propose 3D ROIs in
a given NeRF representation. Specifically, the network
takes as input the 3D volumetric information extracted
from NeRF, and directly outputs 3D bounding boxes
of ROIs. NeRF-RPN will thus be a powerful tool for
3D object detection in NeRF by adopting the “3D-to3D learning” paradigm, taking full advantages of 3D
information inherent in NeRF and predicting 3D region
proposals directly in 3D space.
As the first significant attempt to perform 3D object
detection directly in NeRFs trained from multi-view
images, this paper’s focus contributions consist of:
• First significant attempt on introducing RPN to NeRF

23528

