This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Therbligs in Action: Video Understanding through Motion Primitives
Eadom Dessalene, Michael Maynord, Cornelia Fermüller, Yiannis Aloimonos
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD 20742, USA
{edessale,maynord,fermulcm,jyaloimo@umd.edu}

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a rule-based, compositional,
and hierarchical modeling of action using Therbligs as our
atoms. Introducing these atoms provides us with a consistent, expressive, contact-centered representation of action. Over the atoms we introduce a differentiable method of
rule-based reasoning to regularize for logical consistency.
Our approach is complementary to other approaches in that
the Therblig-based representations produced by our architecture augment rather than replace existing architectures’
representations. We release the first Therblig-centered annotations over two popular video datasets - EPIC Kitchens
100 and 50-Salads. We also broadly demonstrate benefits to adopting Therblig representations through evaluation on the following tasks: action segmentation, action
anticipation, and action recognition - observing an average 10.5%/7.53%/6.5% relative improvement, respectively,
over EPIC Kitchens and an average 8.9%/6.63%/4.8% relative improvement, respectively, over 50 Salads. Code and
data will be made publicly available.

ing Therbligs a consistency which methods relying on annotators’ intuited demarcations lack 1 . Between points of contact exist contact states represented by a binary class (contact, no contact) for each object present, which are wholly
captured by Therbligs. As objects in contact are the primary objects of interaction and define the space of possible
actions, they provide meaningful information for the modeling of action.
Therblig atoms are then composable into higher entities,
including full actions. These actions are in turn composable into sequences constituting activities. We then have
the hierarchy of representation illustrated in Figure 2. At
the lowest, and instantaneous, level are points of contact,
1 See [1] for a case study on how annotators have difficulties coming to
a consensus on when actions begin and end.

1. Introduction
We propose the use of Therbligs - a low-level mutually exclusive contact demarcated set of sub-actions. These
Therbligs are consistent in that a given action segment has
only a single Therblig representation, and Therbligs are expressive in that they capture the meaningful physical aspects of action relevant to action modeling. Therbligs were
introduced in the early 20th century as a set of 18 elemental
motions used to analyze complex movement - see the Supplementary Materials for a brief historical background. We
adopt 7 Therbligs pertaining to those involving the manipulation of objects. See Figure 1 for our Therblig set.
The benefits of our Therblig-centered framework include: compositionality & hierarchy; rule-based reasoning;
resolution of semantic ambiguity; contact-centered precision of temporal boundaries of action.
Contact transitions demarcate Therblig boundaries, giv-

Figure 1. Listed above are the Therbligs we select, their symbolic
illustrations as introduced by Gilbreths, and brief descriptions of
their usage.

10618

