This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDGE: Editable Dance Generation From Music
Jonathan Tseng, Rodrigo Castellon, C. Karen Liu
Stanford University
{jtseng20,rjcaste,karenliu}@cs.stanford.edu

Figure 1. EDGE generates diverse, physically plausible dance choreographies conditioned on music.

Abstract
Dance is an important human art form, but creating
new dances can be difficult and time-consuming. In this
work, we introduce Editable Dance GEneration (EDGE), a
state-of-the-art method for editable dance generation that
is capable of creating realistic, physically-plausible dances
while remaining faithful to the input music. EDGE uses a
transformer-based diffusion model paired with Jukebox, a
strong music feature extractor, and confers powerful editing
capabilities well-suited to dance, including joint-wise conditioning, and in-betweening. We introduce a new metric
for physical plausibility, and evaluate dance quality generated by our method extensively through (1) multiple quantitative metrics on physical plausibility, beat alignment, and
diversity benchmarks, and more importantly, (2) a largescale user study, demonstrating a significant improvement
over previous state-of-the-art methods. Qualitative samples
from our model can be found at our website.

1. Introduction
Dance is an important part of many cultures around the
world: it is a form of expression, communication, and social
interaction [29]. However, creating new dances or dance animations is uniquely difficult because dance movements are
expressive and freeform, yet precisely structured by music.
In practice, this requires tedious hand animation or motion
capture solutions, which can be expensive and impractical.

On the other hand, using computational methods to generate dances automatically can alleviate the burden of the creation process, leading to many applications: such methods
can help animators create new dances or provide interactive characters in video games or virtual reality with realistic and varied movements based on user-provided music.
In addition, dance generation can provide insights into the
relationship between music and movement, which is an important area of research in neuroscience [2].
Previous work has made significant progress using machine learning-based methods, but has achieved limited success in generating dances from music that satisfy user constraints. Furthermore, the evaluation of generated dances is
subjective and complex, and existing papers often use quantitative metrics that we show to be flawed.
In this work, we propose Editable Dance GEneration
(EDGE), a state-of-the-art method for dance generation that
creates realistic, physically-plausible dance motions based
on input music. Our method uses a transformer-based diffusion model paired with Jukebox, a strong music feature
extractor. This unique diffusion-based approach confers
powerful editing capabilities well-suited to dance, including joint-wise conditioning and in-betweening. In addition
to the advantages immediately conferred by the modeling
choices, we observe flaws with previous metrics and propose a new metric that captures the physical accuracy of
ground contact behaviors without explicit physical modeling. In summary, our contributions are the following:

448

