This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Egocentric Auditory Attention Localization in Conversations
Fiona Ryan1,2∗ , Hao Jiang2 , Abhinav Shukla2 , James M. Rehg1,2 , Vamsi Krishna Ithapu2
Georgia Institute of Technology1 , Meta Reality Labs Research2
{fkryan, rehg}@gatech.edu, {haojiang, ithapu}@meta.com, abhinav.shukla.research@gmail.com

Abstract
In a noisy conversation environment such as a dinner
party, people often exhibit selective auditory attention, or
the ability to focus on a particular speaker while tuning out
others. Recognizing who somebody is listening to in a conversation is essential for developing technologies that can
understand social behavior and devices that can augment
human hearing by amplifying particular sound sources.
The computer vision and audio research communities have
made great strides towards recognizing sound sources and
speakers in scenes. In this work, we take a step further
by focusing on the problem of localizing auditory attention
targets in egocentric video, or detecting who in a camera
wearer’s field of view they are listening to. To tackle the
new and challenging Selective Auditory Attention Localization problem, we propose an end-to-end deep learning approach that uses egocentric video and multichannel audio
to predict the heatmap of the camera wearer’s auditory attention. Our approach leverages spatiotemporal audiovisual features and holistic reasoning about the scene to make
predictions, and outperforms a set of baselines on a challenging multi-speaker conversation dataset. Project page:
https://fkryan.github.io/saal

1. Introduction
One of the primary goals of wearable computing devices
like augmented reality (AR) glasses is to enhance human
perceptual and cognitive capabilities. This includes helping people have natural conversations in settings with high
noise level (e.g. coffee shops, restaurants, etc.) by selectively amplifying certain speakers while suppressing noise
and the voices of background speakers. This desired effect mirrors selective auditory attention (SAA), or humans’
ability to intentionally focus on certain sounds while tuning
out others. People exercise SAA in everyday conversational
settings; at restaurants people tune out the voices at adjacent tables, and in group social settings, such as dining at
*Work done during internship at Meta.

Figure 1. We address the novel task of Selective Auditory Attention Localization in multi-speaker environments: given egocentric
video and multichannel audio, we predict which people, if any,
the camera wearer is listening to. We show our model’s predicted
heatmaps, with red bounding boxes denoting ground truth auditory
attention targets and white boxes denoting non-attended speakers.

a large table or socializing at a party, people often engage
in conversations with smaller subsets of people while others converse in close proximity. Being able to determine
which speaker(s) a person is selectively listening to is important for developing systems that can aid communication
in noisy environments and assist people with hearing loss.
While the computer vision community has made strides
towards understanding conversational dynamics with largescale datasets like Ego4D [37], AVA-ActiveSpeaker [78],
VoxConverse [24], and AMI [57], the problem of modeling selective listening behavior has not yet been addressed.
In fact, determining auditory attention among competing
sound signals has traditionally been approached using neurophysiological sensing [11, 50]. These approaches involve
a controlled listening task, where competing audio signals

14663

