This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Bottleneck Concepts in Image Classiﬁcation
Bowen Wang1 , Liangzhi Li2 ,* Yuta Nakashima2 , Hajime Nagahara2
Osaka University, Japan
1
2

bowen.wang@is.ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

{li, n-yuta, nagahara}@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Interpreting and explaining the behavior of deep neural
networks is critical for many tasks. Explainable AI provides a way to address this challenge, mostly by providing per-pixel relevance to the decision. Yet, interpreting
such explanations may require expert knowledge. Some recent attempts toward interpretability adopt a concept-based
framework, giving a higher-level relationship between some
concepts and model decisions. This paper proposes Bottleneck Concept Learner (BotCL), which represents an image solely by the presence/absence of concepts learned
through training over the target task without explicit supervision over the concepts. It uses self-supervision and tailored regularizers so that learned concepts can be humanunderstandable. Using some image classiﬁcation tasks as
our testbed, we demonstrate BotCL’s potential to rebuild
neural networks for better interpretability 1 .

1. Introduction
Understanding the behavior of deep neural networks
(DNNs) is a major challenge in the explainable AI (XAI)
community, especially for medical applications [19,38], for
identifying biases in DNNs [2, 18, 42], etc. Tremendous research efforts have been devoted to the post-hoc paradigm
for a posteriori explanation [29, 33]. This paradigm produces a relevance map to spot regions in the input image that
interact with the model’s decision. Yet the relevance map
only tells low-level (or per-pixel) relationships and does not
explicitly convey any semantics behind the decision. Interpretation of relevance maps may require expert knowledge.
The concept-based framework [22, 37, 50] is inspired by
the human capacity to learn a new concept by (subconsciously) ﬁnding ﬁner-grained concepts and reuse them in
different ways for better recognition [24]. Instead of giving per-pixel relevance, this framework offers higher-level
* Corresponding author.
1 Code is avaliable at https://github.com/wbw520/BotCL and a simple

demo is available at https://botcl.liangzhili.com/.

Input image

Concept bottleneck representation

Cpt.1

Cpt.2

Cpt.3

Cpt.4

Cpt.5

Cpt.6

Dataset
Discovered concepts

Figure 1. Examples of concepts discovered by BotCL in ImageNet [10] and concepts in the input image. BotCL automatically
discovers a set of concepts optimized for the target task and represents an image solely with the presence/absence of concepts.

relationships between the image and decision mediated by
a limited number of concepts. That is, the decision is explained by giving a set of concepts found in the image. The
interpretation of the decision is thus straightforward once
the interpretation of each concept is established.
Some works use concepts for the post-hoc paradigm for
better interpretation of the decision [14, 50], while the link
between the decision and concepts in the image is not obvious. The concept bottleneck structure [23] uses the presence/absence of concepts as image representation (referred
to as concept activation). The classiﬁer has access only to
the concept activation, so the decision is strongly tied to the
concepts. This bottleneck structure has become the mainstream of the concept-based framework [5, 20, 28, 31].
A major difﬁculty in this framework is designing a set of
concepts that suits the target task. A promising approach is
handcrafting them [4, 21, 48], which inherently offers better interpretability at the cost of extra annotations on the
concepts. Recent attempts automatically discover concepts
[1, 13, 14, 46]. Such concepts may not always be consistent with how humans (or models) see the world [25, 47]
and may require some effort to interpret them, but concept
discovery without supervision is a signiﬁcant advantage.

10962

