This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing the Self-Universality for Transferable Targeted Attacks
Zhipeng Wei1,2 , Jingjing Chen1,2†, Zuxuan Wu1,2 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
zpwei21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {chenjingjing, zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel transfer-based targeted attack method that optimizes the adversarial perturbations without any extra training efforts for auxiliary networks on training data. Our new attack method is proposed based on the observation that highly universal adversarial perturbations tend to be more transferable for
targeted attacks. Therefore, we propose to make the perturbation to be agnostic to different local regions within
one image, which we called as self-universality. Instead
of optimizing the perturbations on different images, optimizing on different regions to achieve self-universality can
get rid of using extra data. Specifically, we introduce a
feature similarity loss that encourages the learned perturbations to be universal by maximizing the feature similarity between adversarial perturbed global images and randomly cropped local regions. With the feature similarity
loss, our method makes the features from adversarial perturbations to be more dominant than that of benign images, hence improving targeted transferability. We name the
proposed attack method as Self-Universality (SU) attack.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that SU can achieve
high success rates for transfer-based targeted attacks. On
ImageNet-compatible dataset, SU yields an improvement of
12% compared with existing state-of-the-art methods. Code
is available at https://github.com/zhipengwei/Self-Universality.

1. Introduction
It has been demonstrated in recent works that adversarial examples have the properties of transferability, which
means an adversarial example generated on one whitebox model can be used to fool other black-box models
[3, 15, 27, 30, 33]. The existence of transferability brings
convenience to performing black-box attacks, hence raising
security concerns for deploying deep models in real-world
† Corresponding author.

applications [14, 22, 28, 35]. Consequently, considerable research attention has been spent on improving the transferability of adversarial examples for both non-targeted and
targeted attacks [4, 29, 36].
Compared to non-targeted attacks, transfer-based targeted attacks are inherently much more challenging since
the goal is to fool deep models into predicting the specific
target class. The major difficulty of transfer-based targeted
attacks is caused by the fact that the gradient directions
from a source image to a target class are usually different
among different DNNs [16]. Hence, transfer-based attack
methods designed for non-targeted attacks typically work
poorly for targeted attacks. To increase the transferability, previous studies make efforts in aligning the feature of
the generated adversarial example with the feature distributions of the targeted class, which are learned from classspecific auxiliary networks [7, 8] or generative adversarial
networks [18]. However, these works assume that the training dataset is available and require extra training efforts for
auxiliary networks, making it hard to apply in real-world
scenarios.
This paper investigates the problem of transfer-based targeted attacks. Specifically, we propose a new method that
improves the transferability of adversarial examples in a
more efficient way, i.e., without any training efforts for
auxiliary networks to learn the feature distributions of the
targeted class. Our method is proposed based on the observation that more universal perturbations yield better attack success rates in targeted attacks. To this end, our
goal is to enhance the universality of the generated adversarial perturbations, in order to improve its targeted transferability. Note that existing universal adversarial perturbation (UAP) attacks [17] require optimizing the perturbations on an abundant of images to achieve universality,
which is not applicable in our setting. To get rid of using extra data and make transfer-based targeted attacks as
convenient as non-targeted attacks, we propose to make the
perturbation to be agnostic to different local regions within
one image, which we called as self-universality. Then our
method optimizes the self-universality of adversarial pertur-

12281

