This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Audio-Visual Source Localization via
False Negative Aware Contrastive Learning
Weixuan Sun1,5 * , Jiayi Zhang2 ∗ , Jianyuan Wang3 , Zheyuan Liu1 , Yiran Zhong4 ,
Tianpeng Feng5 , Yandong Guo5 , Yanhao Zhang5 , Nick Barnes1
1
Australian National University, 2 Beihang University, 3 The University of Oxford,
4
Shanghai AI Lab, 5 OPPO Research Institute.
Abstract
Self-supervised audio-visual source localization aims to
locate sound-source objects in video frames without extra
annotations. Recent methods often approach this goal with
the help of contrastive learning, which assumes only the audio and visual contents from the same video are positive
samples for each other. However, this assumption would
suffer from false negative samples in real-world training.
For example, for an audio sample, treating the frames from
the same audio class as negative samples may mislead the
model and therefore harm the learned representations (e.g.,
the audio of a siren wailing may reasonably correspond to
the ambulances in multiple images). Based on this observation, we propose a new learning strategy named False
Negative Aware Contrastive (FNAC) to mitigate the problem of misleading the training with such false negative samples. Specifically, we utilize the intra-modal similarities
to identify potentially similar samples and construct corresponding adjacency matrices to guide contrastive learning.
Further, we propose to strengthen the role of true negative
samples by explicitly leveraging the visual features of sound
sources to facilitate the differentiation of authentic sounding source regions. FNAC achieves state-of-the-art performances on Flickr-SoundNet, VGG-Sound, and AVSBench,
which demonstrates the effectiveness of our method in mitigating the false negative issue. The code is available at
https://github.com/OpenNLPLab/FNAC_AVL.

1. Introduction
When hearing a sound, humans can naturally imagine
the visual appearance of the source objects and locate them
in the scene. This demonstrates that audio-visual correspondence is an important ability for scene understanding. Given that unlimited paired audio-visual data exists in nature, there is an emerging interest in developing
multi-modal systems with audio-visual understanding abil* Indicates equal contribution

Pull

Push

Pull

'Playing drums'

Figure 1. False negative in audio-visual contrastive learning.
Audio-visual pairs with similar contents are falsely considered as
negative samples to each other and pushed apart in the shared latent space, which we find would affect the model performance.

ity. Various audio-visual tasks have been studied, including
sound source localization [8, 19–21, 26–28], audio-visual
event localization [32, 33, 35, 39], audio-visual video parsing [11, 18, 31] and audio-visual segmentation [37, 38]. In
this work, we focus on unsupervised visual sound source localization, with the aim of localizing the sound-source objects in an image using its paired audio clip, but without
relying on any manual annotations.
The essence of unsupervised visual sound source localization is to leverage the co-occurrences between an audio
clip and its corresponding image to extract representations.
A major part of existing methods [8, 19–21, 28] formulates
this task as contrastive learning. For each image sample,
its paired audio clip is viewed as the positive sample, while
all other audio clips are considered as negative. Likewise,
each audio clip considers its paired image as positive and
all others as negative. As such, the Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) loss [24, 30] is used to perform instance
discrimination by pushing closer the distance between a
positive audio-image pair, while pulling away any negative pairs. However, the contrastive learning scheme above
suffers from the issue of false negatives during training,
i.e., audio/image samples that belong to the semanticallymatched class but are not regarded as a positive pair (due to
the lack of manual labeling). A typical example is shown

6420

