This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Pyramid Recurrent Network for Video Frame Interpolation
Xin Jin1 Longhai Wu1 Jie Chen1 Youxin Chen1 Jayoon Koo2 Cheul-hee Hahm2
1
2
Samsung Electronics (China) R&D Center
Samsung Electronics, South Korea
{xin.jin,longhai.wu,ada.chen,yx113.chen,j.goo,chhahm}@samsung.com

31.00

Abstract

UPR-Net LARGE
UPR-Net large
UPR-Net

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is a classic low-level
vision task. It aims to increase the frame rate of videos,
by synthesizing non-existent intermediate frames between
consecutive frames. VFI technique supports many practical applications including novel view synthesis [10], video
compression [21], cartoon creation [32], etc.
Despite great potential in applications, video frame interpolation remains an unsolved problem, due to challenges
like complex and large motions, occlusions, and illumination changes in real-world videos. Depending on whether
or not optical flow is incorporated to compensate for interframe motion, existing methods can be roughly classified
into two categories: flow-agnostic methods [5,6,25,28], and
flow-guided synthesis [2, 14, 19, 26, 27, 29, 30]. With recent
advances in optical flow [12,13,34,35], flow-guided synthesis has developed into a popular framework with compelling
performance for video frame interpolation.

PSNR on SNU-FILM hard subset

30.80

Flow-guided synthesis provides a common framework
for frame interpolation, where optical flow is estimated to
guide the synthesis of intermediate frames between consecutive inputs. In this paper, we present UPR-Net, a novel
Unified Pyramid Recurrent Network for frame interpolation. Cast in a flexible pyramid framework, UPR-Net exploits lightweight recurrent modules for both bi-directional
flow estimation and intermediate frame synthesis. At each
pyramid level, it leverages estimated bi-directional flow to
generate forward-warped representations for frame synthesis; across pyramid levels, it enables iterative refinement for
both optical flow and intermediate frame. In particular, we
show that our iterative synthesis strategy can significantly
improve the robustness of frame interpolation on large motion cases. Despite being extremely lightweight (1.7M parameters), our base version of UPR-Net achieves excellent performance on a large range of benchmarks. Code
and trained models of our UPR-Net series are available at:
https://github.com/srcn-ivl/UPR-Net.

30.60

ABME
(ICCV’21)

30.40

IFRNet
(CVPR’22)

30.20

RIFE
(ECCV’22)
XVFI
(ICCV’21)

30.00
29.80

CDFI
(CVPR’21)

29.60
29.40

BMBC
(ECCV’20)

29.20
0

10

VFIformer
(CVPR’22)
IFRNet large
(CVPR’22)
DAIN
(CVPR’19)

CAIN
(AAAI’20)
AdaCoF
(CVPR’20)

20
30
40
Number of parameters (millions)

50

Figure 1. Comparison of performance and model size on the hard
subset of SNU-FILM benchmark [6]. Our UPR-Net series achieve
state-of-the-art accuracy with extremely small parameters.

Most of existing flow-guided methods follow a similar procedure: estimating optical flow for desired time
step, warping input frames and their context features based
on optical flow, and synthesizing intermediate frame from
warped representations. Where technical choices may diverge in this procedure, is the warping operation and the
optical flow it requires. Backward-warping is traditionally
used for frame interpolation [2, 14, 19, 29, 30], but acquiring
high-quality bilateral intermediate flow for it is often challenging. Forward-warping can directly use linearly-scaled
bi-directional flow between input frames (which is easier to
obtain), and thus has recently emerged as a promising direction for frame interpolation [26, 27].
In common flow-guided synthesis pipeline [1,18,27,30],
optical flow is typically estimated from coarse to fine by
a pyramid network, but intermediate frame is synthesized
just once by a synthesis network. Despite promising performance on low-resolution videos, this practice misses the
opportunity of iteratively refining the interpolation for highresolution inputs. Second, for large motion cases, an important issue has been overlooked by previous works: even

1578

