This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Transductive Few-Shot Fine-tuning with Margin-based Uncertainty
Weighting and Probability Regularization
Ran Tao
Carnegie Mellon University

Hao Chen
Carnegie Mellon University

Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University

taoran1@cmu.edu

haoc3@andrew.cmu.edu

marioss@andrew.cmu.edu

Few-Shot Learning (FSL) has been rapidly developed
in recent years, potentially eliminating the requirement for
signiﬁcant data acquisition. Few-shot ﬁne-tuning has been
demonstrated to be practically efﬁcient and helpful, especially for out-of-distribution datum [7, 13, 17, 29]. In this
work, we ﬁrst observe that the few-shot ﬁne-tuned methods are learned with the imbalanced class marginal distribution, leading to imbalanced per-class testing accuracy.
This observation further motivates us to propose the Transductive Fine-tuning with Margin-based uncertainty weighting and Probability regularization (TF-MP), which learns
a more balanced class marginal distribution as shown in
Fig. 1. We ﬁrst conduct sample weighting on unlabeled
testing data with margin-based uncertainty scores and further regularize each test sample’s categorical probability.
TF-MP achieves state-of-the-art performance on in- / outof-distribution evaluations of Meta-Dataset [31] and surpasses previous transductive methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has gained vital progress in various architecture designs, optimization techniques, data augmentation, and learning strategies, demonstrating its great potential to be applied to real-world scenarios. However, applications with deep learning generally require a large amount of
labeled data, which is time-consuming to collect and costly
on manual labeling force. Few-Shot Learning (FSL), learning with only a few training samples, becomes increasingly
essential [5, 9, 10, 27, 31, 33] to alleviate the dependence on
data acquisition signiﬁcantly.
The recent attention on FSL over out-of-distribution datum [31] poses a challenge in obtaining efﬁcient algorithms
that can perform well on cross-domain situations. Finetuning a pre-trained feature extractor with a few samples
[5, 7, 13, 17, 29] recently demonstrates its prominent potential to solve this challenge. However, as illustrated in [29],

Largest Diﬀ. between Per-class Pred.

Abstract
20

DCMSS

TF
URL

TSA

15

TF-MP

10

5

73

74
75
Per-class Accuracy

76

Figure 1. We observe that ﬁne-tuned models with current state-ofthe-art methods [7,17,18,29] learned an imbalanced class marginal
distribution. In the empirical experiments, a uniform testing set is
utilized, and the Largest Difference LD between per-class predictions is used to quantify whether the learned class marginal probability is balanced. Data are from sub-datasets in Meta-Dataset [31]
with 100 episodes for each dataset and 10 per-class testing samples. With current methods, LD is over 10. TF-MP successfully
reduces LD by around 5 points and achieves the best per-class accuracy.

a few training samples would lead to a biased estimation of
the true data distribution. The biased learning during fewshot ﬁne-tuning could further mislead the model to learn
an imbalanced class marginal distribution. To verify this,
we quantify the largest difference (LD) between the number of per-class predictions with a uniform testing set. If
the ﬁne-tuned model learns a balanced class marginal distribution, with a uniform testing set LD should approach
zero. However, the empirical results show the opposite answer. As shown in Fig. 1, even with state-of-the-art methods [7, 17, 18, 29], LD could be largely over 10 in practice.

15752

