This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Efficient Use of Multi-Scale Features in Transformer-Based
Object Detectors
Gongjie Zhang†1,2
1

Zhipeng Luo†1,3

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
gjz@ieee.org

Zichen Tian1
2

Jingyi Zhang1

Black Sesame Technologies

zhipeng001@e.ntu.edu.sg

3

SenseTime Research

Detecting objects of vastly different scales has always
been a major challenge in object detection [28]. Fortunately, strong evidence [11, 22, 25, 48, 69, 72] shows that
object detectors can significantly benefit from multi-scale
features while dealing with large scale variation. For
ConvNet-based object detectors like Faster R-CNN [42] and
FCOS [49], Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) [25] and its
variants [12, 18, 19, 30, 48, 69, 70] have become the go-to
components for exploiting multi-scale features.
Other than ConvNet-based object detectors, the recently
proposed DEtection TRansformer (DETR) [4] has established a fully end-to-end object detection paradigm with
† marks equal technical contribution.
* marks corresponding author.
Project Page: https://github.com/ZhangGongjie/IMFA .

Wenzhou University

DAB-DETR + IMFA (Ours)

COCO val2017 AP (%)

45

1. Introduction

4

Shijian Lu*1

shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Multi-scale features have been proven highly effective
for object detection but often come with huge and even
prohibitive extra computation costs, especially for the recent Transformer-based detectors. In this paper, we propose Iterative Multi-scale Feature Aggregation (IMFA) – a
generic paradigm that enables efficient use of multi-scale
features in Transformer-based object detectors. The core
idea is to exploit sparse multi-scale features from just a
few crucial locations, and it is achieved with two novel designs. First, IMFA rearranges the Transformer encoderdecoder pipeline so that the encoded features can be iteratively updated based on the detection predictions. Second,
IMFA sparsely samples scale-adaptive features for refined
detection from just a few keypoint locations under the guidance of prior detection predictions. As a result, the sampled multi-scale features are sparse yet still highly beneficial for object detection. Extensive experiments show
that the proposed IMFA boosts the performance of multiple
Transformer-based object detectors significantly yet with
only slight computational overhead.

Xiaoqin Zhang4

44

DAB-DETR(DC)
Anchor-DETR + IMFA (Ours)
Anchor-DETR(DC)
Cond-DETR + IMFA (Ours)
Deform-DETR(MS)
SMCA-DETR(MS)
Cond-DETR(DC)

43
42
41

DAB-DETR(SS)
Anchor-DETR(SS)

Cond-DETR(SS)

80

100

120

Single-Scale (SS)
Dilated-Conv (DC)
Multi-Scale (MS)
Multi-Scale w/ our IMFA

140 160
GFLOPs

180

200

Figure 1. The proposed Iterative Multi-scale Feature Aggregation
(IMFA) is a generic approach for efficient use of multi-scale features in Transformer-based object detectors. It boosts detection
accuracy on multiple object detectors at minimal costs of additional computational overhead. Results are obtained with ResNet50. Best viewed in color.

promising performance. However, naively incorporating
multi-scale features using FPN in these Transformer-based
detectors [4, 11, 20, 29, 35, 55, 66, 72] often brings enormous
and even unfeasible computation costs, primarily due to the
poor efficiency of the attention mechanism in processing
high-resolution features. Concretely, to handle a feature
map with a spatial size of H × W , ConvNet requires a computational cost of O(HW ), while the complexity of the attention mechanism in Transformer-based object detectors is
O(H 2 W 2 ). To mitigate this issue, Deformable DETR [72]
and Sparse DETR [43] replace the original global dense
attention with sparse attention. SMCA-DETR [11] restricts most Transformer encoder layers to be scale-specific,
with only one encoder layer to integrate multi-scale features. However, as the number of tokens increases quadratically w.r.t. feature map size (typically 20x∼80x compared to
single-scale), these methods are still costly in computation
and memory consumption, and rely on special operators like

6206

