This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Robustness via Random Projection Filters
Minjing Dong, Chang Xu*
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
{mdon0736@uni, c.xu@}.sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks show superior performance in
various tasks but are vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
Most defense techniques are devoted to the adversarial
training strategies, however, it is difficult to achieve satisfactory robust performance only with traditional adversarial training. We mainly attribute it to that aggressive perturbations which lead to the loss increment can always be
found via gradient ascent in white-box setting. Although
some noises can be involved to prevent attacks from deriving precise gradients on inputs, there exist trade-offs between the defense capability and natural generalization.
Taking advantage of the properties of random projection,
we propose to replace part of convolutional filters with random projection filters, and theoretically explore the geometric representation preservation of proposed synthesized filters via Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma. We conduct sufficient evaluation on multiple networks and datasets. The
experimental results showcase the superiority of proposed
random projection filters to state-of-the-art baselines. The
code is available on GitHub.

1. Introduction
Although Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become a
popular technique in various scientific fields [16,46,47,50],
the vulnerability of DNNs reveals the high risk of deployment in real scenarios, especially under the attack of adversarial examples [11, 28]. Some tiny and imperceptible
perturbations to network inputs could result in the major
changes of outputs, which can be easily crafted through
various adversarial attack strategies [1, 6, 11]. Adversarial attacks could be generally categorized into two streams,
the white-box and black-box attacks. In black-box setting, the attackers have no knowledge of victim models but
can estimate the strong perturbation via surrogate models
or huge number of queries [15, 19]. In white-box setting,
the attackers have full knowledge of victim model, includ* Corresponding author.

ing the model parameters, network architecture, and inference strategy [28, 39]. Since the gradients of victim models
can be directly fetched, the crafted adversarial examples are
more aggressive and the performance under white-box attacks is one of the key criteria of robustness evaluation.
Seeking adversarial robust networks becomes a key challenge when it comes to the deployment of DNNs. One of the
most popular and effective techniques is adversarial training [28], which arguments the training data with adversarial
examples within a fixed perturbation size. With the involvement of adversarial examples, DNNs are optimized to preserve their outputs for perturbed samples within the ℓp ball
of all training input data. However, due to the increasingly
advanced attack techniques, it is difficult for existing adversarially trained networks to achieve satisfactory robustness
against all potential attacks. Furthermore, the training on
stronger adversarial examples could hurt the natural generalization of models [52], and there exists a trade-off between robustness and accuracy [51].
Besides the traditional adversarial training, the utilization of randomization in adversarial robustness has been
proven effective. For example, Liu et al. [25] propose to
inject noise which is sampled from Gaussian distribution to
the inputs of convolution layers. Some theoretical analyses have shown that randomized classifiers can easily outperform deterministic ones in defending against adversarial attacks [32, 33]. We mainly attribute the improvement
of randomization in adversarial robustness evaluation to the
fusion of features with noises, which prevents white-box attackers from obtaining the precise gradients of loss with respect to the inputs. Although the involvement of noise in the
networks can be an effective defense mechanism, the design
of noises, such as the way of injection, the magnitude of
noise, etc., can also significantly influence the natural generalization of networks in practice. The trade-offs between
the adversarial robustness and optimization difficulty are always ignored in the randomized techniques, which limits
their superiority to deterministic models.
In this paper, we introduce randomness into deep neural networks with the help of random projection filters.
Random projection is a simple yet effective technique

4077

