This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SlowLiDAR: Increasing the Latency of LiDAR-Based Detection Using
Adversarial Examples
Han Liu, Yuhao Wu, Zhiyuan Yu, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, Ning Zhang
Washington University in St. Louis
{h.liu1,yuhao.wu,yu.zhiyuan,yvorobeychik,zhang.ning}@wustl.edu

Abstract
LiDAR-based perception is a central component of autonomous driving, playing a key role in tasks such as vehicle localization and obstacle detection. Since the safety
of LiDAR-based perceptual pipelines is critical to safe autonomous driving, a number of past efforts have investigated its vulnerability under adversarial perturbations of
raw point cloud inputs. However, most such efforts have focused on investigating the impact of such perturbations on
predictions (integrity), and little has been done to understand the impact on latency (availability), a critical concern for real-time cyber-physical systems. We present the
first systematic investigation of the availability of LiDAR
detection pipelines, and SlowLiDAR, an adversarial perturbation attack that maximizes LiDAR detection runtime.
The attack overcomes the technical challenges posed by the
non-differentiable parts of the LiDAR detection pipelines by
using differentiable proxies and uses a novel loss function
that effectively captures the impact of adversarial perturbations on the execution time of the pipeline. Extensive experimental results show that SlowLiDAR can significantly
increase the latency of the six most popular LiDAR detection pipelines while maintaining imperceptibility 1 .

1. Introduction
The promise of autonomous transit has stimulated extensive efforts towards the development of self-driving platforms [1–3, 5]. A central feature of most such platforms is
a LiDAR-based perceptual pipeline (usually integrated with
other sensors, such as camera and radar) for critical control
tasks, such as localization and object detection [1, 3, 51].
Since errors in localization or obstacle detection can cause
the vehicle to crash, these tasks are crucial in ensuring the
safety of an autonomous vehicle. As a result, extensive
prior research has been devoted to understanding and assuring the robustness of the LiDAR-based perceptual pipelines
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/WUSTL-CSPL/SlowLiDAR

Add

Perturb

Figure 1. SlowLiDAR attack. The attack goal is to maximize
the runtime latency of the state-of-the-art LiDAR detection models
with either an adding-based attack or a perturbation-based attack.

against adversarial perturbations on its raw point cloud inputs [22, 51, 53, 54]. A key focus in prior work has been on
perceptual prediction accuracy, for example, the ability of
the adversary to hide real obstacles or create phantom obstacles [15,32,43,44]. Another significant aspect of the robustness analysis of LiDAR-based perception that has received
little attention is its real-time performance (availability). In
particular, a delay in perceptual processing caused solely by
computational quirks of the LiDAR processing pipeline can
be just as damaging as a mistaken prediction. For example,
a delay in obstacle recognition can cause the vehicle to react
to an obstacle too late, failing to avoid a crash.
We present the first systematic analysis of the impact
of adversarial point cloud perturbations on the runtime latency of common LiDAR perceptual pipelines. To this
end, we propose SlowLiDAR, an algorithmic framework for
adding adversarial perturbations to point cloud data aiming to increase the execution time of LiDAR-based object detection. Specifically, we consider two attack mechanisms (see Figure 1): 1) perturbation of the 3D coordinates of existing points in the raw point cloud (point
perturbation attacks), and 2) adding points to the raw
point cloud (point addition attacks). Due to the unique
representation and processing procedure of LiDAR detec-

5146

