This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Spatial Multimodal Knowledge Accumulation for Scene Graph
Prediction in Point Cloud

1

Mingtao Feng1 * Haoran Hou1∗ Liang Zhang1† Zijie Wu2† Yulan Guo3 Ajmal Mian4
Xidian University, 2 Hunan University, 3 Sun Yat-Sen University, 4 The University of Western Australia

Abstract
In-depth understanding of a 3D scene not only involves
locating/recognizing individual objects, but also requires to
infer the relationships and interactions among them. However, since 3D scenes contain partially scanned objects
with physical connections, dense placement, changing sizes,
and a wide variety of challenging relationships, existing
methods perform quite poorly with limited training samples. In this work, we find that the inherently hierarchical
structures of physical space in 3D scenes aid in the automatic association of semantic and spatial arrangements,
specifying clear patterns and leading to less ambiguous
predictions. Thus, they well meet the challenges due to
the rich variations within scene categories. To achieve
this, we explicitly unify these structural cues of 3D physical spaces into deep neural networks to facilitate scene
graph prediction. Specifically, we exploit an external knowledge base as a baseline to accumulate both contextualized visual content and textual facts to form a 3D spatial multimodal knowledge graph. Moreover, we propose
a knowledge-enabled scene graph prediction module benefiting from the 3D spatial knowledge to effectively regularize semantic space of relationships. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over
current state-of-the-art competitors. Our code is available
at https://github.com/HHrEtvP/SMKA.

1. Introduction
In recent years, much success has been achieved on
3D point cloud scene understanding such as semantic segmentation [9, 11, 15, 16, 21, 28, 29, 49] and object detection [10, 22, 25, 27, 43]. However, the 3D world is not only
defined by objects but also by the relationships between objects. A 3D scene graph can abstract the environment as a
graph where nodes represent objects and edges characterize the relationships between object pairs, which has already
been recognized in recent seminal works [1,30,37,38,41,46].
However, relationship graphs predicted by current methods
are far from satisfactory due to the noisy, cluttered and par* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. A brief overview of our method.

tial nature of real 3D scans. Moreover, these data-driven
methods treat sophisticated relationships in 3D space independently for classification using the geometric features
proximity or fit, and are ignorant of commonsense or other
useful 3D spatial cues beyond visual information. 3D objects
in real scenes commonly have strongly structured regularities [33,39], whose semantic and spatial arrangements follow
clear patterns, but still exhibit rich structural variations even
within the scene category.
The key observation is that 3D scene structures are inherently hierarchical [20]. By definition, an instance can
have multiple supports, lamps are standing on a table, chairs
are supported by the floor and only the floor does not have
any support, and it is unlikely that a pillow is supporting a
couch. Although relationships themselves cast no light on
the human eyes, a growing body of works [14, 31] suggest
that even very complex relationship information is reasoned
hierarchically and systemically according to the role of the
prefrontal cortex. Relationships, such as support, can be
extracted rapidly, are hard to ignore, and influence other
relationships in the perceptual process. For example, a TV
and a sofa are related since they together serve the function
of ‘watching TV’, but these two objects can be far apart in a
scene. Relationships of this kind are much more difficult, if
not possible, to infer based on geometric analysis alone. The
model can relate the table easily which supports the TV and
use the table as a bridge to predict the ‘front’ relationship
with sofa, where table and sofa are all supported by the floor
and relationships within them is intuitive.

9182

