This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Neural Network for Multi-Task Learning
Searching across Diverse Network Topologies
Wonhyeok Choi, Sunghoon Im*
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, DGIST, Daegu, Korea
{smu06117, sunghoonim}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new MTL framework that
searches for structures optimized for multiple tasks with diverse graph topologies and shares features among tasks.
We design a restricted DAG-based central network with
read-in/read-out layers to build topologically diverse taskadaptive structures while limiting search space and time.
We search for a single optimized network that serves as
multiple task adaptive sub-networks using our three-stage
training process. To make the network compact and discretized, we propose a flow-based reduction algorithm and
a squeeze loss used in the training process. We evaluate
our optimized network on various public MTL datasets and
show ours achieves state-of-the-art performance. An extensive ablation study experimentally validates the effectiveness of the sub-module and schemes in our framework.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL), which learns multiple tasks
simultaneously with a single model has gained increasing
attention [3, 13, 14]. MTL improves the generalization performance of tasks while limiting the total number of network parameters to a lower level by sharing representations across tasks. However, as the number of tasks increases, it becomes more difficult for the model to learn the
shared representations, and improper sharing between less
related tasks causes negative transfers that sacrifice the performance of multiple tasks [15,36]. To mitigate the negative
transfer in MTL, some works [6, 25, 32] separate the shared
and task-specific parameters on the network.
More recent works [21,29,38] have been proposed to dynamically control the ratio of shared parameters across tasks
using a Dynamic Neural Network (DNN) to construct a task
adaptive network. These works mainly apply the cell-based
architecture search [19, 27, 41] for fast search times, so that
the optimized sub-networks of each task consist of fixed
or simple structures whose layers are simply branched, as
shown in Fig. 1a. They primarily focus on finding branching
* Corresponding author

patterns in specific aspects of the architecture, and featuresharing ratios across tasks. However, exploring optimized
structures in restricted network topologies has the potential
to cause performance degradation in heterogeneous MTL
scenarios due to unbalanced task complexity.
We present a new MTL framework searching for subnetwork structures, optimized for each task across diverse
network topologies in a single network. To search the graph
topologies from richer search space, we apply Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG) for the homo/heterogeneous MTL
frameworks, inspired by the work in NAS [19, 27, 40]. The
MTL in the DAG search space causes a scalability issue,
where the number of parameters and search time increase
quadratically as the number of hidden states increases.
To solve this problem, we design a restricted DAG-based
central network with read-in/read-out layers that allow our
MTL framework to search across diverse graph topologies
while limiting the search space and search time. Our flowrestriction eliminates the low-importance long skip connection among network structures for each task, and creates the
required number of parameters from O(N 2 ) to O(N ). The
read-in layer is the layer that directly connects all the hidden
states from the input state, and the read-out layer is the layer
that connects all the hidden states to the last feature layer.
These are key to having various network topological representations, such as polytree structures, with early-exiting
and multi-embedding.
Then, we optimize the central network to have compact
task-adaptive sub-networks using a three-stage training procedure. To accomplish this, we propose a squeeze loss and a
flow-based reduction algorithm. The squeeze loss limits the
upper bound on the number of parameters. The reduction
algorithm prunes the network based on the weighted adjacency matrix measured by the amount of information flow
in each layer. In the end, our MTL framework constructs a
compact single network that serves as multiple task-specific
networks with unique structures, such as chain, polytree,
and parallel diverse topologies, as presented in Fig. 1b. It
also dynamically controls the amount of sharing representation among tasks.

3779

