This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Computational Flash Photography through Intrinsics
Sepideh Sarajian Maralan

Chris Careaga

Yağız Aksoy

Simon Fraser University

Figure 1. We develop a system to computationally control the flash light in photographs originally taken with or without flash. We formulate the flash photograph formation through image intrinsics, and estimate the flash shading through generation for no-flash photographs
(top) or decomposition where we separate the flash from the ambient illumination for flash photographs (bottom).

Abstract
Flash is an essential tool as it often serves as the sole
controllable light source in everyday photography. However, the use of flash is a binary decision at the time a
photograph is captured with limited control over its characteristics such as strength or color. In this work, we study
the computational control of the flash light in photographs
taken with or without flash. We present a physically motivated intrinsic formulation for flash photograph formation
and develop flash decomposition and generation methods
for flash and no-flash photographs, respectively. We demonstrate that our intrinsic formulation outperforms alternatives in the literature and allows us to computationally control flash in in-the-wild images.

1. Introduction
Flash is an essential tool as it often serves as the sole controllable light source in everyday photography available on
a wide range of cameras. Although most cameras measure
the environment light to adjust the flash strength, whether to
use flash or not is a binary decision for the casual photographer without any control over flash characteristics such
as strength or color temperature. In addition to hardware
constraints, this limitation also stems from the typical use
case of flash in situations that do not allow lengthy experi-

mentation with illumination. This makes the computational
control of the flash a desirable application in photography.
Using the superposition of illumination principle, a flash
photograph can be modeled as the summation of flash and
ambient illuminations in linear RGB:
  P = A + F, \label {eq:superposition} 

(1)

where P , A, and F represent the flash photograph, the ambient illumination, and the flash illumination respectively.
To computationally control the flash post-capture, the ambient and flash illuminations need to be decomposed. Similarly, to add flash light to a no-flash photograph, the flash
illumination needs to be generated. In this work, we tackle
both flash illumination decomposition and generation problems and show that regardless of the original photograph
being captured with or without flash, we can generate and
control the flash photograph computationally.
We start by modeling the flash photograph formation
through image intrinsics. Intrinsic image decomposition
models the image in terms of reflectance and shading:
  I = R \cdot S, \label {eq:intrinsicmodel} 

(2)

where I, R, and S represent the input image, the reflectance map, and the shading respectively. This representation separates the effects of lighting in the scene from
the illumination-invariant surface properties. With lighting

16654

