This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ensemble-based Blackbox Attacks on Dense Prediction
Zikui Cai∗ , Yaoteng Tan∗ , and M. Salman Asif
University of California Riverside
{zcai032,ytan073,sasif}@ucr.edu

Abstract
We propose an approach for adversarial attacks on dense
prediction models (such as object detectors and segmentation). It is well known that the attacks generated by a single
surrogate model do not transfer to arbitrary (blackbox) victim models. Furthermore, targeted attacks are often more
challenging than the untargeted attacks. In this paper, we
show that a carefully designed ensemble can create effective attacks for a number of victim models. In particular, we
show that normalization of the weights for individual models plays a critical role in the success of the attacks. We then
demonstrate that by adjusting the weights of the ensemble
according to the victim model can further improve the performance of the attacks. We performed a number of experiments for object detectors and segmentation to highlight the
significance of the our proposed methods. Our proposed
ensemble-based method outperforms existing blackbox attack methods for object detection and segmentation. Finally
we show that our proposed method can also generate a single perturbation that can fool multiple blackbox detection
and segmentation models simultaneously. Code is available
at https://github.com/CSIPlab/EBAD.

1. Introduction
Computer vision models (e.g., classification, object detection, segmentation, and depth estimation) are known
to be vulnerable to carefully crafted adversarial examples [4, 11, 16, 17, 46]. Creating such adversarial attacks is
easy for whitebox models, where the victim model is completely known [14,16,24,37,55]. In contrast, creating adversarial attacks for blackbox models, where the victim model
is unknown, remains a challenging task [1, 33, 54]. Most
of the existing blackbox attack methods have been developed for classification models [10, 21, 35, 47]. Blackbox
attacks for dense prediction models such as object detection and segmentation are relatively less studied [4, 17, 27],
and most of the existing ones mainly focus on untargeted
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Illustration of the targeted ensemble-based blackbox attack.
(Top) Attack generated by a single surrogate model does not transfer on
the victim blackbox model (person does not map to car). (Bottom) Attack
generated by weight balancing and optimization can transfer on a variety
of victim models (person is mapped to car).

attacks [17]. Furthermore, a vast majority of these methods
are based on transfer attacks, in which a surrogate (whitebox) model is used to generate the adversarial example that
is tested on the victim model. However, the success rate of
such transfer-based attacks is often low, especially for targeted attacks [10, 21, 47].
In this paper, we propose and evaluate an ensemblebased blackbox attack method for objection detection and
segmentation. Our method is inspired by three key observations: 1) targeted attacks generated by a single surrogate
model are rarely successful; 2) attacks generated by an ensemble of surrogate models are highly successful if the contribution from all the models is properly normalized; and
3) attacks generated by an ensemble for a specific victim
model can be further improved by adjusting the contributions of different surrogate models. The overall idea of
the proposed work is illustrated in Fig. 1. Our proposed
method can be viewed as a combination of transfer- and
query-based attacks, where we can adjust the contribution
based on the feedback from the victim model using a small
number of queries (5–20 in our experiments). In contrast,
conventional query-based attacks require hundreds or thousands of queries from the victim model [9, 19, 22, 49].
We conduct comprehensive experiments to validate our
proposed method and achieve state-of-the-art performance
for both targeted and untargeted blackbox attacks on ob14045

