This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAP: Multimodal Uncertainty-Aware Vision-Language Pre-training Model
Yatai Ji1 *
Junjie Wang2 *
Yuan Gong1
Lin Zhang3
Yanru Zhu1
Hongfa Wang4
Jiaxing Zhang3
Tetsuya Sakai2²
Yujiu Yang1²
1

Tsinghua University

2

Waseda University

{jyt21, gong-y21, zhuyr20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
wjj1020181822@toki.waseda.jp
{zhanglin, zhangjiaxing}@idea.edu.cn

3

4

IDEA

Tencent TEG

yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

tetsuyasakai@acm.org
hongfawang@tencent.com

Abstract

Multimodal uncertainties
Intra-modal uncertainty

Multimodal semantic understanding often has to deal
with uncertainty, which means the obtained messages tend
to refer to multiple targets. Such uncertainty is problematic
for our interpretation, including inter- and intra-modal uncertainty. Little effort has studied the modeling of this uncertainty, particularly in pre-training on unlabeled datasets
and fine-tuning in task-specific downstream datasets. In
this paper, we project the representations of all modalities as probabilistic distributions via a Probability Distribution Encoder (PDE) by utilizing sequence-level interactions. Compared to the existing deterministic methods, such
uncertainty modeling can convey richer multimodal semantic information and more complex relationships. Furthermore, we integrate uncertainty modeling with popular pretraining frameworks and propose suitable pre-training tasks:
Distribution-based Vision-Language Contrastive learning
(D-VLC), Distribution-based Masked Language Modeling
(D-MLM), and Distribution-based Image-Text Matching (DITM). The fine-tuned models are applied to challenging
downstream tasks, including image-text retrieval, visual
question answering, visual reasoning, and visual entailment,
and achieve state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Precise understanding is a fundamental ability of human intelligence, whether it involves localizing objects from
similar semantics or finding corresponding across multiple
modalities. Our artificial models suppose to do the same,
pinpointing exact concepts from rich multimodal semantic scenarios. However, this kind of precise understanding
is challenging. Information from different modalities can
present rich semantics from each other, but the resulting ambiguity and noise are also greater than the case with a single
* Equal contribution.
² Corresponding Author.

(a) Vision uncertainty

(b) Language uncertainty

(a.1) A billboard

(a.0) An image region / grid
(b.1) A woman poses with avocado sandwich
lunch at an outdoor restaurant
(b.2) Young girl having a meal in outdoor setting.
(a.2) Zebras
(b.3) A woman sitting at a restaurant getting
ready to eat her food.

(a.3) Snowy Mountains

Inter-modal uncertainty
(c) Vision-to-Language uncertainty

(d) Language-to-Vision uncertainty
(d.1) People along a narrow street and a guy riding a scooter.
(d.2) The motorcyclist is traveling down the busy street.
(d.3) Man on moped traveling through busy street.

(c.1) There are people
with umbrellas in the
street.

(e) An example for (b) Language uncertainty (Point Rep. V.S. Distribution Rep.)
avocado sandwich

avocado sandwich
meal
food
meal

(e.1) Point Representations

food

(e.2) Distribution Representations

Figure 1. Multimodal uncertainties and an example for language uncertainty (b) by modeling as point representations and distribution
representations. The images and text are from MSCOCO [30].

modality.
Multimodal representation learning methods hold the
promise of promoting the desired precise understanding
across different modalities [13]. While these methods have
shown promising results, current methods face the challenge
of uncertainty [7, 51], including within a modality and between modalities. Considering image (a.0) in Fig. 1 as an
example, one vision region includes multiple objects, such
as a billboard, several zebras and others. Therefore, it is
unclear which objects when mentioning this region. In the
language domain, the complex relationships of words lead
to uncertainty, such as synonymy and hyponymy. In Fig. 1
(c)&(d), the same object often has different descriptions

23262

