This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometry and Uncertainty-Aware 3D Point Cloud Class-Incremental Semantic
Segmentation
Yuwei Yang1

Munawar Hayat2 Zhao Jin1 Chao Ren1
1
Sichuan University 2 Monash University

yuwei@stu.scu.edu.cn

munawar.hayat@monash.edu

chaoren@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the signiﬁcant recent progress made on 3D
point cloud semantic segmentation, the current methods require training data for all classes at once, and are not suitable for real-life scenarios where new categories are being continuously discovered. Substantial memory storage
and expensive re-training is required to update the model
to sequentially arriving data for new concepts. In this
paper, to continually learn new categories using previous
knowledge, we introduce class-incremental semantic segmentation of 3D point cloud. Unlike 2D images, 3D point
clouds are disordered and unstructured, making it difﬁcult
to store and transfer knowledge especially when the previous data is not available. We further face the challenge
of semantic shift, where previous/future classes are indiscriminately collapsed and treated as the background in the
current step, causing a dramatic performance drop on past
classes. We exploit the structure of point cloud and propose two strategies to address these challenges. First, we
design a geometry-aware distillation module that transfers
point-wise feature associations in terms of their geometric characteristics. To counter forgetting caused by the
semantic shift, we further develop an uncertainty-aware
pseudo-labelling scheme that eliminates noise in uncertain
pseudo-labels by label propagation within a local neighborhood. Our extensive experiments on S3DIS and ScanNet in
a class-incremental setting show impressive results comparable to the joint training strategy (upper bound). Code is
available at: https://github.com/leolyj/3DPC-CISS

1. Introduction
The semantic segmentation of 3D point cloud plays a
crucial role in applications such as virtual reality, robotics
and autonomous vehicles. In recent years, a number of point
cloud segmentation methods [16, 28, 29, 38, 39, 45] have
Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn)

Yinjie Lei1,

jinzhao@stu.scu.edu.cn

yinjie@scu.edu.cn

Training on Base Classes {ceiling, floor, wall, table}
Input Base Point Cloud

Base Model

Labels

$ base

Training on Novel
Classes {chair, clutter}

Geometry-aware Featurerelation Transfer (GFT)
Sec. 3.2

Uncertainty-aware Pseudolabel Generation (UPG)
Sec. 3.3

Input Novel Point Cloud

Mixed Labels

$ novel

Novel Model
Pesudo Labels Prediction Branch

=

Pesudo Labels
ˇ

Novel Labels

Novel model for Inference on
both Base and Novel classes

Figure 1. To continually learn new categories without forgetting
the previous ones, we leverage Geometry-aware Feature-relation
Transfer (Sec. 3.2) to distill point-wise relationships from the base
model and further employ Uncertainty-aware Pseudo-label Generation (Sec. 3.3) to synthesize pseudo labels of old classes with low
uncertainty as guidance for novel model training.

achieved remarkable performance in the traditional setting
where all classes are learned at once. Nevertheless, new
categories are gradually discovered in real-life scenarios,
and updating the model to cater for these new categories requires large memory storage and expensive re-training. In
such situations, as illustrated in Fig. 1, class-incremental
learning provides a promising paradigm, since it enables
progressively learning novel knowledge in an efﬁcient manner while preserving the previous capabilities.
The existing research on class-incremental learning is
mostly on 2D image classiﬁcation [17,19,21,32] with some
efforts extended to RGB semantic segmentation [3, 4, 10,
41]. These methods employ a strategy based upon regularization [11, 19, 44], rehearsal/replay [2, 17, 24, 32, 35]
or knowledge distillation [8, 20, 21] to preserve previous
knowledge. At present, only a few works have investigated

21759

