This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physically Adversarial Infrared Patches with Learnable Shapes and Locations
Xingxing Wei,* Jie Yu, Yao Huang
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
xxwei@buaa.edu.cn, sy2106137@buaa.edu.cn, y huang@buaa.edu.cn

Patch in digital world

Abstract

attack

Owing to the extensive application of infrared object detectors in the safety-critical tasks, it is necessary to evaluate
their robustness against adversarial examples in the real
world. However, current few physical infrared attacks are
complicated to implement in practical application because
of their complex transformation from digital world to physical world. To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a
physically feasible infrared attack method called ”adversarial infrared patches”. Considering the imaging mechanism
of infrared cameras by capturing objects’ thermal radiation,
adversarial infrared patches conduct attacks by attaching a
patch of thermal insulation materials on the target object to
manipulate its thermal distribution. To enhance adversarial
attacks, we present a novel aggregation regularization to
guide the simultaneous learning for the patch’ shape and
location on the target object. Thus, a simple gradient-based
optimization can be adapted to solve for them. We verify
adversarial infrared patches in different object detection
tasks with various object detectors. Experimental results
show that our method achieves more than 90% Attack Success Rate (ASR) versus the pedestrian detector and vehicle
detector in the physical environment, where the objects are
captured in different angles, distances, postures, and scenes.
More importantly, adversarial infrared patch is easy to implement, and it only needs 0.5 hours to be constructed in the
physical world, which verifies its effectiveness and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown promising
performance in various vision tasks, including object detection [14], classification [8], face recognition [16], and
autonomous driving [15]. However, it is typically known
that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples [2, 5, 26],
i.e., the human-imperceptible perturbed inputs can fool the
DNNs-based system to give wrong predictions. Moreover,
* Corresponding author

stick

Original Object

Patch in physical world

Perturbed Object

Figure 1. The generation process of adversarial infrared patches.
We see the pedestrian cannot be detected after the infrared patches
are pasted on the pedestrian in the physical world.

these adversarial examples can be exploited in the physical
world. In such cases, a widely used technique is called adversarial patches [1, 4, 24, 28], which have been successfully
applied to traffic sign detection by generating a carefully
designed sticker [4, 23], or face recognition by adding specific textures on eyeglass frames [17, 22]. The success of
adversarial patches raises the concerns because of their great
threat to the deployed DNN-based systems in the real world.
Nowadays, famous for its strong anti-interference ability
in the severe environment, object detection in the thermal
infrared images has been widely used in many safety-critical
tasks such as security surveillance [19], remote sensing [25],
etc. Consequently, it is necessary to evaluate the physical
adversarial robustness of infrared object detectors. However,
the aforementioned adversarial patches cannot work well in
the infrared images because they depend on the adversarial
perturbations generated from the view of RGB appearance.
These perturbations cannot be captured by infrared cameras,
which perform the imaging by encoding the objects’ thermal radiation [20]. Although few recent works have been
proposed to address this issue, they have their own limitations. For example, adversarial bulbs based on a cardboard
of alight small bulbs [30] are complicated to implement in
the real world, and are also not stealthy because they produce
heat source. Adversarial clothing [29] based on a large-scale
QR code improves the stealthiness by utilizing the thermal
insulation material to cover the object’s thermal radiation,
but still has complex transformations from digital to physical
world, making it not easy to implement in the real world.

12334

