This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-Free Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Abhra Chaudhuri
University of Exeter, UK

Ayan Kumar Bhunia, Yi-Zhe Song, Anjan Dutta
Institute for People-Centred AI, University of Surrey, UK

ac1151@exeter.ac.uk

{a.bhunia, y.song, anjan.dutta}@surrey.ac.uk

Data-Dependent (Conventional)

Abstract
Rising concerns about privacy and anonymity preservation of deep learning models have facilitated research
in data-free learning (DFL). For the first time, we identify that for data-scarce tasks like Sketch-Based Image Retrieval (SBIR), where the difficulty in acquiring paired photos and hand-drawn sketches limits data-dependent crossmodal learning algorithms, DFL can prove to be a much
more practical paradigm. We thus propose Data-Free (DF)SBIR, where, unlike existing DFL problems, pre-trained,
single-modality classification models have to be leveraged
to learn a cross-modal metric-space for retrieval without
access to any training data. The widespread availability of
pre-trained classification models, along with the difficulty
in acquiring paired photo-sketch datasets for SBIR justify
the practicality of this setting. We present a methodology
for DF-SBIR, which can leverage knowledge from models
independently trained to perform classification on photos
and sketches. We evaluate our model on the Sketchy, TUBerlin, and QuickDraw benchmarks, designing a variety
of baselines based on state-of-the-art DFL literature, and
observe that our method surpasses all of them by significant margins. Our method also achieves mAPs competitive
with data-dependent approaches, all the while requiring
no training data. Implementation is available at https:
//github.com/abhrac/data-free-sbir.

Photo
Encoder

Real Data

Sketch
Encoder

Cross-Modal
Representation Space

Data-Free (Proposed)
Inverted
Photo
Classifier
Independently
Trained
Inverted
Sketch
Classifier

Photo
Encoder
Class-Aligned
Estimated Distributions

Sketch
Encoder

Figure 1. Our proposed Data-Free setting for SBIR does not need
a real-world dataset of paired sketches and photos. Using only
independently trained, modality-specific classifiers, it can estimate
their train set distributions, as well as pair them at class-level for
training the sketch and photo encoders.

1. Introduction

cal constraint, the problem has been studied under a variety
of data-scarce settings like semi-supervised [3], few-shot
class incremental [5], zero-shot [14], and any-shot [15].
However, all such settings assume the availability of some
amount of instance/class-aligned data for training the encoders. With the tremendous effort involved in acquiring such labelled photo-sketch pairs [3, 13, 14], as well as
the rising concerns about privacy, security and anonymity
preservation abilities of deep learning models [8,31,46,51],
such assumptions may no longer be practical.

Motivated by the high degree of expressiveness and flexibility provided by sketches, sketch-based image retrieval
(SBIR) has emerged as a popular area of computer vision
research [3,6,7,13,15]. SBIR is generally achieved by training photo and sketch encoders to respectively map photo
and sketch inputs to a class or instance aligned common
space. Training deep neural photo-sketch encoders for this
task, however, requires datasets with matching photo-sketch
pairs [45, 58]. Unlike photos, sketches are fundamentally
difficult to acquire as drawing them involve long time periods of laborious human participation. Driven by this practi-

With this view, we propose Data-Free Sketch-Based Image Retrieval (DF-SBIR), a novel setting that requires training photo and sketch encoders for retrieval, but with no
training data. Specifically, we only assume access to pretrained photo and sketch classification models. In contrast
to unsupervised cross-domain image retrieval [22] which
only requires access to training data, but with no in-domain
or cross-domain labels, our setting goes a step further and
assumes access to no training data at all. Since classification
does not require cross-modal pairings as in SBIR, and owing to the recent advances in domain generalization [29,52],

12084

