This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taming Diffusion Models for Audio-Driven Co-Speech Gesture Generation
Lingting Zhu1 * Xian Liu2 * Xuanyu Liu1 Rui Qian2 Ziwei Liu3 Lequan Yu1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{ltzhu99, u3008631}@connect.hku.hk, lqyu@hku.hk,
{alvinliu, qr021}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Animating virtual avatars to make co-speech gestures
facilitates various applications in human-machine interaction. The existing methods mainly rely on generative adversarial networks (GANs), which typically suffer from notorious mode collapse and unstable training, thus making it
difficult to learn accurate audio-gesture joint distributions.
In this work, we propose a novel diffusion-based framework,
named Diffusion Co-Speech Gesture (DiffGesture), to
effectively capture the cross-modal audio-to-gesture associations and preserve temporal coherence for high-fidelity
audio-driven co-speech gesture generation. Specifically, we
first establish the diffusion-conditional generation process
on clips of skeleton sequences and audio to enable the
whole framework. Then, a novel Diffusion Audio-Gesture
Transformer is devised to better attend to the information
from multiple modalities and model the long-term temporal
dependency. Moreover, to eliminate temporal inconsistency,
we propose an effective Diffusion Gesture Stabilizer with
an annealed noise sampling strategy. Benefiting from the
architectural advantages of diffusion models, we further
incorporate implicit classifier-free guidance to trade off
between diversity and gesture quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiffGesture achieves state-of-theart performance, which renders coherent gestures with better mode coverage and stronger audio correlations. Code is
available at https://github.com/Advocate99/DiffGesture.

1. Introduction
Making co-speech gestures is an innate human behavior
in daily conversations, which helps the speakers to express
their thoughts and the listeners to comprehend the meanings [10, 32, 38]. Previous linguistic studies verify that
such non-verbal behaviors could liven up the atmosphere
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

𝑇

⋯

𝑝𝜃 (

𝑡−1 | 𝑡 , 𝑐)

𝑞(

𝑡 | 𝑡−1 )

𝑡-1

𝑡

⋯

0

Figure 1. Illustration of Conditional Generation Process in CoSpeech Gesture Generation. The diffusion process q gradually
adds Gaussian noise to the gesture sequence (i.e., x0 sampled
from the real data distribution). The generation process pθ learns
to denoise the white noise (i.e., xT sampled from the normal
distribution) conditioned on context information c. Note that xt
denotes the corrupted gesture sequence at the t-th diffusion step.

and improve mutual intimacy [7, 8, 21]. Therefore, animating virtual avatars to gesticulate co-speech movements
is crucial in embodied AI. To this end, recent researches
focus on the problem of audio-driven co-speech gesture
generation [16, 25, 30, 41], which synthesizes human upper
body gesture sequences that are aligned to the speech audio.
Early attempts downgrade this task as a searching-andconnecting problem, where they predefine the corresponding gestures of each speech unit and stitch them together by
optimizing the transitions between consecutive motions for
coherent results [11,21,31]. In recent years, the compelling
performance of deep neural networks has prompted datadriven approaches. Previous studies establish large-scale
speech-gesture corpus to learn the mapping from speech
audio to human skeletons in an end-to-end manner [4, 5, 25,
27, 30, 34, 39]. To attain more expressive results, Ginosar et
al. [16] and Yoon et al. [41] propose GAN-based methods
to guarantee realism by adversarial mechanism, where the
discriminator is trained to distinguish real gestures from
the synthetic ones while the generator’s objective is to fool
the discriminator. However, such pipelines suffer from
the inherent mode collapse and unstable training, making
them difficult to capture the high-fidelity audio-conditioned
gesture distribution, resulting in dull or unreasonable poses.
The recent paradigm of diffusion probabilistic models

10544

