This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hubs and Hyperspheres: Reducing Hubness and Improving Transductive
Few-shot Learning with Hyperspherical Embeddings
Daniel J. Trosten* †, Rwiddhi Chakraborty* †, Sigurd Løkse†, Kristoffer Knutsen Wickstrøm†,
Robert Jenssen† ‡ § ¶, Michael C. Kampffmeyer† ‡
Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway
firstname[.middle initial].lastname@uit.no

Abstract

noHub-S (Ours)
noHub (Ours)

Distance-based classification is frequently used in transductive few-shot learning (FSL). However, due to the highdimensionality of image representations, FSL classifiers are
prone to suffer from the hubness problem, where a few points
(hubs) occur frequently in multiple nearest neighbour lists
of other points. Hubness negatively impacts distance-based
classification when hubs from one class appear often among
the nearest neighbors of points from another class, degrading
the classifier’s performance. To address the hubness problem in FSL, we first prove that hubness can be eliminated by
distributing representations uniformly on the hypersphere.
We then propose two new approaches to embed representations on the hypersphere, which we prove optimize a tradeoff
between uniformity and local similarity preservation – reducing hubness while retaining class structure. Our experiments
show that the proposed methods reduce hubness, and significantly improves transductive FSL accuracy for a wide range
of classifiers1 .

1. Introduction
While supervised deep learning has made a significant
impact in areas where large amounts of labeled data are
available [6, 11], few-shot learning (FSL) has emerged as
a promising alternative when labeled data is limited [3, 12,
14, 16, 21, 26, 28, 31, 33, 39, 40]. FSL aims to design
classifiers that can discriminate between novel classes based
on a few labeled instances, significantly reducing the cost of
the labeling procedure.
In transductive FSL, one assumes access to the entire
* Equal contributions.
† UiT Machine Learning group (machine-learning.uit.no) and

Visual Intelligence Centre (visual-intelligence.no).
‡ Norwegian Computing Center.
§ Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen.
¶ Pioneer Centre for AI (aicentre.dk).
1 Code available at https://github.com/uitml/noHub.

Accuracy

70
65

EASE (CVPR'22)
ZN (ICCV'21)
TCPR (NeurIPS'22)
L2 (ArXiv'19)

60

None
55
0.25

0.50

0.75
1.00
Hubness

1.25

1.50

Figure 1. Few-shot accuracy increases when hubness decreases.
The figure shows the 1-shot accuracy when classifying different
embeddings with SimpleShot [33] on mini-ImageNet [29].

query set during evaluation. This allows transductive FSL
classifiers to learn representations from a larger number of
samples, resulting in better performing classifiers. However,
many of these methods base their predictions on distances
to prototypes for the novel classes [3, 16, 21, 28, 39, 40].
This makes these methods susceptible to the hubness problem [10, 22, 24, 25], where certain exemplar points (hubs)
appear among the nearest neighbours of many other points.
If a support sample is a hub, many query samples will be
assigned to it regardless of their true label, resulting in low
accuracy. If more training data is available, this effect can
be reduced by increasing the number of labeled samples in
the classification rule – but this is impossible in FSL.
Several approaches have recently been proposed to embed
samples in a space where the FSL classifier’s performance
is improved [4, 5, 7, 17, 33, 35, 39]. However, only one of
these directly addresses the hubness problem. Fei et al. [7]
show that embedding representations on a hypersphere with
zero mean reduces hubness. They advocate the use of Zscore normalization (ZN) along the feature axis of each
representation, and show empirically that ZN can reduce
hubness in FSL. However, ZN does not guarantee a data
mean of zero, meaning that hubness can still occur after ZN.

7527

