This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Semantic-Visual Mutual Adaption for Generalized Zero-Shot
Learning
Man Liu1,2 , Feng Li3 , Chunjie Zhang1,2 , Yunchao Wei1,2 , Huihui Bai1,2 *, Yao Zhao1,2
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China
3
Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
{manliu, cjzhang, yunchao.wei, hhbai, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

fengli@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) identifies unseen categories by knowledge transferred from the seen
domain, relying on the intrinsic interactions between visual and semantic information. Prior works mainly localize regions corresponding to the sharing attributes.
When various visual appearances correspond to the same
attribute, the sharing attributes inevitably introduce semantic ambiguity, hampering the exploration of accurate
semantic-visual interactions. In this paper, we deploy
the dual semantic-visual transformer module (DSVTM)
to progressively model the correspondences between attribute prototypes and visual features, constituting a progressive semantic-visual mutual adaption (PSVMA) network for semantic disambiguation and knowledge transferability improvement. Specifically, DSVTM devises an
instance-motivated semantic encoder that learns instancecentric prototypes to adapt to different images, enabling
the recast of the unmatched semantic-visual pair into the
matched one. Then, a semantic-motivated instance decoder
strengthens accurate cross-domain interactions between the
matched pair for semantic-related instance adaption, encouraging the generation of unambiguous visual representations. Moreover, to mitigate the bias towards seen classes
in GZSL, a debiasing loss is proposed to pursue response
consistency between seen and unseen predictions. The
PSVMA consistently yields superior performances against
other state-of-the-art methods. Code will be available at:
https://github.com/ManLiuCoder/PSVMA.

1. Introduction
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) [35] aims to
recognize images belonging to both seen and unseen categories, solely relying on the seen domain data. Freed
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. The embedding-based models for GZSL. (a) The early
embedding-based method. (b) Part-based methods via attention
mechanisms. (c) Semantic-guided methods. (d) Our PSVMA. A,
S, F denote the category attribute prototypes, sharing attributes,
and visual features, respectively. The PSVMA progressively performs semantic-visual mutual adaption for semantic disambiguation and knowledge transferability improvement.

from the requirement of enormous manually-labeled data,
GZSL has extensively attracted increasing attention as a
challenging recognition task that mimics human cognitive
abilities [25]. As unseen images are not available during
training, knowledge transfer from the seen to unseen domains is achieved via auxiliary semantic information (i.e.,
category attributes [15, 25], text descriptions [26, 38], and
word embedding [31, 32, 40]).
Early embedding-based methods [2,3,45,51] embed category attributes and visual images and learn to align global
visual representations with corresponding category prototypes, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Nevertheless, the global
information is insufficient to mine fine-grained discriminative features which are beneficial to capture the subtle discrepancies between seen and unseen classes. To
solve this issue, part-based learning strategies have been
leveraged to explore distinct local features. Some works
[27, 29, 33, 47, 48, 52] apply attention mechanisms to high-

15337

