This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Domain Adaption with Pixel-level Discriminator
for Image-aware Layout Generation
Tiezheng Ge2
Weiwei Xu1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Chenchen Xu1,2 *

Min Zhou2

Yuning Jiang2
2

Alibaba Group

xuchenchen@zju.edu.cn, {yunqi.zm, tiezheng.gtz, mengzhu.jyn}@alibaba-inc.com, xww@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Logo

Text

Underlay

Layout is essential for graphic design and poster generation. Recently, applying deep learning models to generate layouts has attracted increasing attention. This paper focuses on using the GAN-based model conditioned on
image contents to generate advertising poster graphic layouts, which requires an advertising poster layout dataset
with paired product images and graphic layouts. However, the paired images and layouts in the existing dataset
are collected by inpainting and annotating posters, respectively. There exists a domain gap between inpainted posters
(source domain data) and clean product images (target domain data). Therefore, this paper combines unsupervised
domain adaption techniques to design a GAN with a novel
pixel-level discriminator (PD), called PDA-GAN, to generate graphic layouts according to image contents. The
PD is connected to the shallow level feature map and computes the GAN loss for each input-image pixel. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate that PDAGAN can achieve state-of-the-art performances and generate high-quality image-aware graphic layouts for advertising posters.

1. Introduction
Graphic layout is essential to the design of posters, magazines, comics, and webpages. Recently, generative adversarial network (GAN) has been applied to synthesize
graphic layouts through modeling the geometric relationships of different types of 2D elements, for instance, text
and logo bounding boxes [10, 19]. Fine-grained controls
over the layout generation process can be realized using
Conditional GANs, and the conditions might include image
contents and the attributes of graphic elements, e.g. category, area, and aspect ratio [20, 35]. Especially, image
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Examples of image-conditioned advertising posters
graphic layouts generation. Our model generates graphic layouts (middle) with multiple elements conditioned on product images (left). The designer or even automatic rendering programs
can utilize graphic layouts to render advertising posters (right).

contents play an important role in generating image-aware
graphic layouts of posters and magazines [34, 35].

10114

