This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Cinemagraphy from a Single Image
Xingyi Li1,3 Zhiguo Cao1 Huiqiang Sun1 Jianming Zhang2 Ke Xian3 * Guosheng Lin3
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Adobe Research 3 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{xingyi li,zgcao,shq1031}@hust.edu.cn, jianmzha@adobe.com, {ke.xian,gslin}@ntu.edu.sg
https://xingyi-li.github.io/3d-cinemagraphy

Figure 1. Given a single still image, our method can synthesize videos with plausible animation of the scene while allowing camera
movements. Here, we showcase four 3D cinemagraphs with various camera trajectories. Besides real-world photos (the left two examples),
our method can also generalize to paintings (the third one) and synthetic images generated by Stable Diffusion [47] (the rightmost one).
To see the effect of 3D cinemagraphy, readers are encouraged to view with Adobe Acrobat or KDE Okular.

Abstract
We present 3D Cinemagraphy, a new technique that marries 2D image animation with 3D photography. Given a
single still image as input, our goal is to generate a video
that contains both visual content animation and camera motion. We empirically find that naively combining existing 2D
image animation and 3D photography methods leads to obvious artifacts or inconsistent animation. Our key insight
is that representing and animating the scene in 3D space
offers a natural solution to this task. To this end, we first
convert the input image into feature-based layered depth
images using predicted depth values, followed by unprojecting them to a feature point cloud. To animate the scene, we
perform motion estimation and lift the 2D motion into the
3D scene flow. Finally, to resolve the problem of hole emergence as points move forward, we propose to bidirectionally
displace the point cloud as per the scene flow and synthesize novel views by separately projecting them into target
image planes and blending the results. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. A user
study is also conducted to validate the compelling rendering
results of our method.
* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, since people can easily take images using
smartphone cameras, the number of online photos has increased drastically. However, with the rise of online videosharing platforms such as YouTube and TikTok, people are
no longer content with static images as they have grown accustomed to watching videos. It would be great if we could
animate those still images and synthesize videos for a better experience. These living images, termed cinemagraphs,
have already been created and gained rapid popularity online [1, 71]. Although cinemagraphs may engage people
with the content for longer than a regular photo, they usually fail to deliver an immersive sense of 3D to audiences.
This is because cinemagraphs are usually based on a static
camera and fail to produce parallax effects. We are therefore motivated to explore ways of animating the photos and
moving around the cameras at the same time. As shown in
Fig. 1, this will bring many still images to life and provide
a drastically vivid experience.
In this paper, we are interested in making the first step
towards 3D cinemagraphy that allows both realistic animation of the scene and camera motions with compelling parallax effects from a single image. There are plenty of attempts to tackle either of the two problems. Single-image
animation methods [12, 19, 35] manage to produce a real-

4595

