This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Regularized Vector Quantization for Tokenized Image Synthesis
Jiahui Zhang1 Fangneng Zhan2
1
Nanyang Technological University

Christian Theobalt2 Shijian Lu*1
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

VQ-GAN

Abstract
Quantizing images into discrete representations has been
a fundamental problem in unified generative modeling.
Predominant approaches learn the discrete representation
either in a deterministic manner by selecting the bestmatching token or in a stochastic manner by sampling from
a predicted distribution. However, deterministic quantization suffers from severe codebook collapse and misalignment with inference stage while stochastic quantization suffers from low codebook utilization and perturbed reconstruction objective. This paper presents a regularized vector quantization framework that allows to mitigate above
issues effectively by applying regularization from two perspectives. The first is a prior distribution regularization
which measures the discrepancy between a prior token distribution and the predicted token distribution to avoid codebook collapse and low codebook utilization. The second is
a stochastic mask regularization that introduces stochasticity during quantization to strike a good balance between inference stage misalignment and unperturbed reconstruction
objective. In addition, we design a probabilistic contrastive
loss which serves as a calibrated metric to further mitigate the perturbed reconstruction objective. Extensive experiments show that the proposed quantization framework
outperforms prevailing vector quantization methods consistently across different generative models including autoregressive models and diffusion models.

1. Introduction
With the prevalence of multi-modal image synthesis
[3, 23, 37, 39] and Transformers [31], unifying data modeling regardless of data modalities has attracted increasing interest from the research communities. Aiming for a
generic data representation across different data modalities,
discrete representation learning [21, 25] plays a significant
role in the unified modeling. In particular, vector quantization models (e.g., VQ-VAE [21] and VQ-GAN [8]) emerge
as a promising family for learning generic image representations by discretizing images into discrete tokens. With the
* Corresponding author, E-mail: shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Gumbel-VQ

Regularized Quantization

Figure 1. Visualization of codebook (first row) and illustration of
codebook utilization (second row) on ADE20K dataset [42]. VQGAN [8] severely suffers from codebook collapse as most codebook embeddings are invalid values. Gumbel-VQ [2] learns valid
values for all codebook embeddings, while only a small number
of embeddings are actually used for quantization as illustrated in
codebook utilization. As a comparison, the proposed regularized
quantization prevents codebook collapse and achieves full codebook utilization. The codebook visualization method is provided
in the supplementary file.

tokenized representation, generative models such as autoregressive model [8, 9] and diffusion model [6, 12] can be
applied to accommodate the dependency of the sequential
tokens for image generation, which is referred as tokenized
image synthesis under this context.
Vector quantization models can be broadly grouped into
deterministic quantization and stochastic quantization according to the selection of discrete tokens. Specifically,
typical deterministic methods like VQ-GAN [8] directly select the best-matching token via Argmin or Argmax, while
stochastic methods like Gumbel-VQ [2] select a token by
stochastically sampling from a predicted token distribution.
On the other hand, deterministic quantization suffers from
codebook collapse [26], a well-known problem where large
portion of codebook embeddings are invalid with near-zero
values as shown in Fig. 1 (first row). In addition, deterministic quantization is misaligned with the inference stage of
generative modeling, where the tokens are usually randomly

18467

