This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlearnable Clusters: Towards Label-agnostic Unlearnable Examples
Jiaming Zhang1 * Xingjun Ma2† Qi Yi1 Jitao Sang1,4† Yu-Gang Jiang2
Yaowei Wang4
Changsheng Xu3,4
1
2
3
Beijing Jiaotong University Fudan University Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Peng Cheng Lab

Abstract
There is a growing interest in developing unlearnable
examples (UEs) against visual privacy leaks on the Internet.
UEs are training samples added with invisible but unlearnable noise, which have been found can prevent unauthorized
training of machine learning models. UEs typically are generated via a bilevel optimization framework with a surrogate
model to remove (minimize) errors from the original samples, and then applied to protect the data against unknown
target models. However, existing UE generation methods
all rely on an ideal assumption called label-consistency,
where the hackers and protectors are assumed to hold the
same label for a given sample. In this work, we propose
and promote a more practical label-agnostic setting, where
the hackers may exploit the protected data quite differently
from the protectors. E.g., a m-class unlearnable dataset
held by the protector may be exploited by the hacker as a
n-class dataset. Existing UE generation methods are rendered ineffective in this challenging setting. To tackle this
challenge, we present a novel technique called Unlearnable Clusters (UCs) to generate label-agnostic unlearnable examples with cluster-wise perturbations. Furthermore,
we propose to leverage Vision-and-Language Pre-trained
Models (VLPMs) like CLIP as the surrogate model to improve the transferability of the crafted UCs to diverse domains. We empirically verify the effectiveness of our proposed approach under a variety of settings with different
datasets, target models, and even commercial platforms Microsoft Azure and Baidu PaddlePaddle. Code is available at https://github.com/jiamingzhang94/
Unlearnable-Clusters.

1. Introduction
While the huge amount of “free” data available on the
Internet has been key to the success of deep learning and
computer vision, this has also raised public concerns on the
unauthorized exploitation of personal data uploaded to the
* This work is done when the author interned at Peng Cheng Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

=

...
Original images 𝒙𝒙

Protector

car, dog, cat,
airplane, etc.

𝒎𝒎-class surrogate
model 𝒇𝒇𝒔𝒔𝒎𝒎

...
Unlearnable image 𝒙𝒙′

Unconscious and unauthorized collection for training

=

Hacker

=

car, dog, cat,
airplane, etc.

𝒎𝒎-class target
model 𝒇𝒇𝒕𝒕𝒎𝒎

𝒏𝒏-class target
model 𝒇𝒇𝒕𝒕𝒏𝒏

Label-consistency

Label-agnostic

animal,
vehicle, etc.

Hacker

Figure 1. An illustration of two different data protection assumptions: label-consistency vs. label-agnostic, where the hacker exploits the protected data in different manners.

Internet to train commercial or even malicious models [16].
For example, a company named Clearview AI has been
found to have scraped billions of personal images from Facebook, YouTube, Venmo and millions of other websites to
construct a commercial facial recognition application [44].
This has motivated the proposal of Unlearnable Examples
(UEs) [17] to make data unlearnable (or unusable) to machine learning models/services. Similar techniques are also
known as availability attacks [2, 41] or indiscriminate poisoning attacks [14] in the literature. These techniques allow
users to actively adding protective noise into their private
data to avoid unauthorized exploitation, rather than putting
our trust into the hands of large corporations.
The original UE generation method generates errorminimizing noise via a bilevel min-min optimization framework with a surrogate model [17]. The noise can then be
added to samples in a training set in either a sample-wise
or class-wise manner to make the entire dataset unlearnable
to different DNNs. It has been found that this method cannot survive adversarial training, which has been addressed
by a recent method [11]. In this work, we identify one
common assumption made by existing UE methods: labelconsistency, where the hackers will exploit the protected
dataset in the same way as the protector including the labels.

3984

