This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object Discovery from Motion-Guided Tokens
Zhipeng Bao*,1
Pavel Tokmakov2
Yu-Xiong Wang3
Adrien Gaidon2
Martial Hebert1
1
2
3
CMU
Toyota Research Institute
UIUC
{zbao, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

{pavel.tokmakov, adrien.gaidon}@tri.global

yxw@illinois.edu

Abstract
Object discovery – separating objects from the background without manual labels – is a fundamental open challenge in computer vision. Previous methods struggle to go beyond clustering of low-level cues, whether handcrafted (e.g.,
color, texture) or learned (e.g., from auto-encoders). In this
work, we augment the auto-encoder representation learning
framework with two key components: motion-guidance and
mid-level feature tokenization. Although both have been
separately investigated, we introduce a new transformer decoder showing that their benefits can compound thanks to
motion-guided vector quantization. We show that our architecture effectively leverages the synergy between motion
and tokenization, improving upon the state of the art on
both synthetic and real datasets. Our approach enables the
emergence of interpretable object-specific mid-level features,
demonstrating the benefits of motion-guidance (no labeling)
and quantization (interpretability, memory efficiency).

1. Introduction
Objects are central in human and computer vision. In the
former, they are a fundamental primitive used to decompose
the complexity of the visual world into an actionable representation. This abstraction in turn enables higher-level cognitive abilities, such as casual reasoning and planning [32, 54].
In computer vision, object detection has achieved remarkable
progress [7, 45] and is now an essential component in many
applications (e.g., driving, robotics). However, these models
require a large amount of manual labels from a fixed vocabulary of categories. Consequently, learning unsupervised,
object-centric representations is an important step towards
scaling up computer vision to the real world.
This topic has received renewed attention recently thanks
to structured generative networks with iterative inference
over a fixed set of variables [6,16,22,38,39]. These methods
cluster pixels in the feature space of an auto-encoder, exhibiting behavior similar to grouping based on low-level cues,
* Work done during an internship at TRI

Slot Representation

Token Representation

Figure 1. TRI-PD dataset results: (left) top-10 foreground slot
segments produced by our approach; (right) corresponding token
representations. Compared to raw images, tokens in our framework
present a more structured and compact space for reconstruction.

such as color or texture. Hence, they are restricted to toy images with colored geometric shapes on a plain background,
and fail on more complex realistic scenes [4].
Two main types of works attempt to address this shortcoming. The first family of methods sets out to simplify the
grouping problem by introducing more structure into the output space, e.g., reconstructing optical flow [36] or depth [15].
They, however, require supervision, either in the form of
known poses [36] or ground truth bounding boxes [15], veering away from the unsupervised goal of object discovery.
In contrast, Bao et al. [4] resolve the object-background
ambiguity by explicitly integrating an unsupervised motion
segmentation algorithm [11] into the pipeline, showing substantial progress on realistic scenes. The second main direction to improve object discovery focuses on improving the
decoder part of auto-encoding architectures [52, 53], replacing convolutional decoders with transformers [43, 60] combined with discrete variational auto-encoders (DVAE) [47] to
reduce memory footprint. These more sophisticated architectures improve performance without additional supervision,
including on real-world sequences. However, these methods
are evaluated with different protocols (metrics, datasets) and
therefore no clear architectural principles have emerged yet
for unsupervised object discovery.
In this work, we introduce a novel architecture, Motionguided Tokens (MoTok), based on the combination of two
fundamental structural principles: motion and discretization.
We define objects as discrete entities that might have an independent motion. As prior works have shown encouraging
results thanks to unsupervised motion guidance and better

22972

