This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MM-Diffusion: Learning Multi-Modal Diffusion Models for
Joint Audio and Video Generation
Ludan Ruan1 *, Yiyang Ma2 , Huan Yang3† , Huiguo He3 ,
Bei Liu3 , Jianlong Fu3 , Nicholas Jing Yuan3 , Qin Jin1 , Baining Guo3
1
Renmin University of China, 2 Peking University, 3 Microsoft Research
1
3

{ruanld,qinj}@ruc.edu.cn, 2 myy12769@pku.edu.cn,

{huayan,v-huiguohe,bei.liu,nicholas.yuan,jianf,bainguo}@microsoft.com

Figure 1. Examples of generated video frames (256 × 256) and audio spectrograms from Landscape [21] and AIST++ datasets [22]. We
can see vivid bonfires burning, beautiful sea wave moving, and elegant dancing. Matched audio is generated with video appearances (e.g.,
the periodical rhythm for dancers). The complete high-fidelity videos and audio can be found in supplementary materials.

Abstract
We propose the first joint audio-video generation framework
that brings engaging watching and listening experiences
simultaneously, towards high-quality realistic videos. To
generate joint audio-video pairs, we propose a novel
Multi-Modal Diffusion model (i.e., MM-Diffusion), with
two-coupled denoising autoencoders. In contrast to existing
single-modal diffusion models, MM-Diffusion consists of a
sequential multi-modal U-Net for a joint denoising process
by design. Two subnets for audio and video learn to gradually generate aligned audio-video pairs from Gaussian
noises. To ensure semantic consistency across modalities,
we propose a novel random-shift based attention block
bridging over the two subnets, which enables efficient
cross-modal alignment, and thus reinforces the audio-video
fidelity for each other. Extensive experiments show superior
*This work was performed when Ludan Ruan was visiting Microsoft
Research Asia as research interns.
† Corressponding author.

results in unconditional audio-video generation, and zeroshot conditional tasks (e.g., video-to-audio). In particular,
we achieve the best FVD and FAD on Landscape and
AIST++ dancing datasets. Turing tests of 10k votes further
demonstrate dominant preferences for our model. The code
and pre-trained models can be downloaded at https:
//github.com/researchmm/MM-Diffusion.

1. Introduction
AI-powered content generation in image, video, and
audio domains has attracted extensive attention in recent
years. For example, DALL·E 2 [33] and DiffWave [19] can
create vivid art images and produce high-fidelity audio, respectively. However, such generated content can only provide single-modality experiences either in vision or audition. There are still large gaps with plentiful human-created
contents on the Web which often involve multi-modal contents, and can provide engaging experiences for humans to
perceive from both sight and hearing. In this paper, we take

10219

