This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SQUID: Deep Feature In-Painting for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Tiange Xiang1 Yixiao Zhang2 Yongyi Lu2 Alan L. Yuille2
Chaoyi Zhang1 Weidong Cai1 Zongwei Zhou2, *
1

University of Sydney

2

Johns Hopkins University

GitHub: https://github.com/tiangexiang/SQUID

Abstract
Radiography imaging protocols focus on particular body
regions, therefore producing images of great similarity
and yielding recurrent anatomical structures across patients. To exploit this structured information, we propose
the use of Space-aware Memory Queues for In-painting and
Detecting anomalies from radiography images (abbreviated
as SQUID). We show that SQUID can taxonomize the ingrained anatomical structures into recurrent patterns; and
in the inference, it can identify anomalies (unseen/modified
patterns) in the image. SQUID surpasses 13 state-of-theart methods in unsupervised anomaly detection by at least 5
points on two chest X-ray benchmark datasets measured by
the Area Under the Curve (AUC). Additionally, we have created a new dataset (DigitAnatomy), which synthesizes the
spatial correlation and consistent shape in chest anatomy.
We hope DigitAnatomy can prompt the development, evaluation, and interpretability of anomaly detection methods.

1. Introduction
Vision tasks in photographic imaging and radiography imaging are different. For example, when identifying objects in photographic images, we assume translation
invariance—a cat is a cat no matter if it appears on the left
or right of the image. In radiography imaging, on the other
hand, the relative location and orientation of a structure are
important characteristics that allow the identification of normal anatomy and pathological conditions [20,83]. Since radiography imaging protocols assess patients in a fairly consistent orientation, the generated images have great similarity across various patients, equipment manufacturers, and
facility locations (see examples in Figure 1d). The consistent and recurrent anatomy facilitates the analysis of numerous critical problems and should be considered a significant
advantage for radiography imaging [85]. Several investiga* Corresponding author: Zongwei Zhou (zzhou82@jh.edu)

Figure 1. Anomaly detection in radiography images can be both
easier and harder than in photographic images. It is easier because radiography images are spatially structured due to consistent
imaging protocols. It is harder because anomalies in radiography
images are subtle and require medical expertise to annotate.

tions have demonstrated the value of this prior knowledge in
enhancing Deep Nets’ performance by adding location features, modifying objective functions, and constraining coordinates relative to landmarks in images [3, 47, 49, 69, 86].
Our work seeks to answer this critical question: Can we
exploit consistent anatomical patterns and their spatial information to strengthen Deep Nets’ detection of anomalies
from radiography images without manual annotation?
Unsupervised anomaly detection only uses healthy images for model training and requires no other annotations
such as disease diagnosis or localization [5]. As many as
80% of clinical errors occur when the radiologist misses the
abnormality in the first place [7]. The impact of anomaly
detection is to reduce that 80% by clearly pointing out to radiologists that there exists a suspicious lesion and then having them look at the scan in depth. Unlike previous anomaly
detection methods, we formulate the task as an in-painting
task to exploit the anatomical consistency in appearance,
position, and layout across radiography images. Specif-

23890

