This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive Segmentation as Gaussian Process Classification
Minghao Zhou1,2 , Hong Wang2, ,* Qian Zhao1 , Yuexiang Li2 , Yawen Huang2 , Deyu Meng1,3,4 , Yefeng Zheng2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 2 Tencent Jarvis Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 4 Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
woshizhouminghao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

{hazelhwang, vicyxli, yawenhuang, yefengzheng}@tencent.com

{timmy.zhaoqian, dymeng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Click-based interactive segmentation (IS) aims to extract
the target objects under user interaction. For this task, most
of the current deep learning (DL)-based methods mainly
follow the general pipelines of semantic segmentation. Albeit achieving promising performance, they do not fully and
explicitly utilize and propagate the click information, inevitably leading to unsatisfactory segmentation results, even
at clicked points. Against this issue, in this paper, we propose
to formulate the IS task as a Gaussian process (GP)-based
pixel-wise binary classification model on each image. To
solve this model, we utilize amortized variational inference
to approximate the intractable GP posterior in a data-driven
manner and then decouple the approximated GP posterior
into double space forms for efficient sampling with linear
complexity. Then, we correspondingly construct a GP classification framework, named GPCIS, which is integrated with
the deep kernel learning mechanism for more flexibility. The
main specificities of the proposed GPCIS lie in: 1) Under the
explicit guidance of the derived GP posterior, the information contained in clicks can be finely propagated to the entire
image and then boost the segmentation; 2) The accuracy of
predictions at clicks has good theoretical support. These
merits of GPCIS as well as its good generality and high
efficiency are substantiated by comprehensive experiments
on several benchmarks, as compared with representative
methods both quantitatively and qualitatively. Codes will be
released at https://github.com/zmhhmz/GPCIS CVPR2023.

1. Introduction
Driven by the huge potential in reducing the pixelwise annotation cost, interactive segmentation (IS) has
sparked much research interest [14], which aims to segment the target objects under user interaction with less
interaction cost. Among various types of user interac* Corresponding author

(a)

Pixel-Wise Classifier
DNN

Input

𝐱

Feature
𝐱

Feature

Label
𝑦

Prediction

Deep Features
Foreground

(b)
DNN

𝐱

𝑦

Feature
Space

Background

𝑦

GP Posterior
Input

Deep Features

Prediction

Figure 1. Classification procedure for an exemplar unclicked pixel
(blue box) in the IS task. (a) Most current deep learning-based IS
methods individually perform pixel-wise classification on the deep
feature x; (b) We formulate the IS task as a Gaussian process (GP)
classification model on each image, where red (green) clicks are
viewed as training data with foreground (background) labels, and
the unclicked pixel as the to-be-classified testing data. Based on the
derived GP posterior inference framework, the relations between
the deep feature x of the testing pixel (blue solid line) and that
of other pixels (dashed lines) can be finely modeled and then the
information at clicks can be propagated to the entire image for
improved prediction.

tion [1–3, 27, 30, 49, 52, 54], in this paper, we focus on the
popular click-based mode, where positive annotations are
clicked on the target object while negative ones are clicked
in the background regions [7, 18, 25, 40, 41].
Recent years have witnessed the promising success of
deep learning (DL)-based methods in the IS task. The most
commonly adopted research line is that the user interaction
is encoded as click maps and fed into a deep neural network
(DNN) together with input images to extract deep features
for the subsequent segmentation [41, 51]. However, these
methods generally suffer from two limitations: 1) As shown
in Fig. 1 (a), after extracting the deep features, they generally
perform pixel-wise classification without specific designs for
the IS task. As a result, during the last-layer classification,
the deep features of different pixels are not fully interactive
and the information contained in clicked pixels cannot be

19488

