This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tell Me What Happened: Unifying Text-guided Video Completion
via Multimodal Masked Video Generation
Tsu-Jui Fu1 , Licheng Yu2 , Ning Zhang2 , Cheng-Yang Fu2 ,
Jong-Chyi Su3 , William Yang Wang1 , Sean Bell2
1
UC Santa Barbara 2 Meta 3 NEC Laboratories America
{tsu-juifu, william}@cs.ucsb.edu

jcsu@nec-labs.com

{lichengyu, ningzhang, chengyangfu, seanbell}@meta.com

Abstract
Generating a video given the first several static frames is
challenging as it anticipates reasonable future frames with
temporal coherence. Besides video prediction, the ability
to rewind from the last frame or infilling between the head
and tail is also crucial, but they have rarely been explored
for video completion. Since there could be different outcomes from the hints of just a few frames, a system that can
follow natural language to perform video completion may
significantly improve controllability. Inspired by this, we
introduce a novel task, text-guided video completion (TVC),
which requests the model to generate a video from partial
frames guided by an instruction. We then propose Multimodal Masked Video Generation (MMVG) to address this
TVC task. During training, MMVG discretizes the video
frames into visual tokens and masks most of them to perform
video completion from any time point. At inference time, a
single MMVG model can address all 3 cases of TVC, including video prediction, rewind, and infilling, by applying
corresponding masking conditions. We evaluate MMVG in
various video scenarios, including egocentric, animation,
and gaming. Extensive experimental results indicate that
MMVG is effective in generating high-quality visual appearances with text guidance for TVC.

1. Introduction
Generative video modeling [15, 70, 84] has made great
progress, which first succeeds in unconditional video generation [40,64]. More recently, video prediction [28,36,47]
has been trying the controllable setting, which anticipates
the future by completing a video from the past frames or
a static starting image [37, 97]. However, video prediction
may produce various outcomes, which makes it difficult to
meet human expectations. For the example in Fig. 1(a), the
game agent can keep jumping to the right or move back and
turn left. The limited guidance from only the first frame is

Figure 1. The introduced text-guided video completion (TVC)
task. (a) Video prediction may have different outcomes without
text guidance. (b) TVC performs video completion from the first
frame (prediction), the last frame (rewind), or both (infilling),
guided by the textual description.

insufficient to tell the intention. For humans, language is the
most straightforward way of communication. If a system
can follow an instruction to accomplish video completion, it
will significantly improve its controllability and make a vast
application impact. On the other hand, compared with video
prediction, video rewind and infilling have been rarely studied [39, 79], but they are also crucial. Breaking the limitation of chronological guidance should make the visual guidance more flexible, leading to a general video completion.
We thus introduce a novel task, text-guided video completion (TVC), where the partial frames and a given instruction jointly guide the video generation. As illustrated in

10681

