This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IFSeg: Image-free Semantic Segmentation via Vision-Language Model
Paul Hongsuck Seo2
Jinwoo Shin1
Sukmin Yun13 *†
Seong Hyeon Park1 *
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) 2 Google Research
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)
sukmin.yun@mbzuai.ac.ae, seonghyp@kaist.ac.kr, phseo@google.com, jinwoos@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Vision-language (VL) pre-training has recently gained
much attention for its transferability and flexibility in novel
concepts (e.g., cross-modality transfer) across various visual
tasks. However, VL-driven segmentation has been underexplored, and the existing approaches still have the burden of acquiring additional training images or even segmentation annotations to adapt a VL model to downstream
segmentation tasks. In this paper, we introduce a novel
image-free segmentation task where the goal is to perform
semantic segmentation given only a set of the target semantic categories, but without any task-specific images and annotations. To tackle this challenging task, our proposed
method, coined IFSeg, generates VL-driven artificial imagesegmentation pairs and updates a pre-trained VL model
to a segmentation task. We construct this artificial training data by creating a 2D map of random semantic categories and another map of their corresponding word tokens. Given that a pre-trained VL model projects visual and
text tokens into a common space where tokens that share
the semantics are located closely, this artificially generated
word map can replace the real image inputs for such a VL
model. Through an extensive set of experiments, our model
not only establishes an effective baseline for this novel task
but also demonstrates strong performances compared to existing methods that rely on stronger supervision, such as
task-specific images and segmentation masks. Code is available at https://github.com/alinlab/ifseg.

1. Introduction
Understanding a new concept with less cost (e.g., collecting data, annotations, or training) is a challenging yet
essential problem in machine learning [41]. The most common practice is fine-tuning a foundation model, pre-trained
on a large amount of data [3, 6, 12, 18], for downstream tasks.
* Equal contribution
† Work was done while at KAIST

“grass” word

“cat” word

“dog” word

“other” word

Figure 1. Visualization of image-free segmentation results via
IFSeg on a web image. Here, we present a web image (Top) and
its segmentation results (Middle and Bottom) of our image-free
segmentation approach. Note that our model is not trained with any
task-specific images and annotations, but only the text words (e.g.,
“grass”, “cat”, “dog” and “other”) as semantic categories.

In particular, such large-scale models have shown successful adaptation to downstream tasks with only little supervision across vision [6] and language [3] domains. Recently,
pre-training approaches in the vision-language (VL) domain
have also achieved remarkable results in transferring to novel
tasks (e.g., few-shot or zero-shot transfer [37]) with various
elaborate designs, including modality interaction between
the dual encoders [20, 32], the multi-modal encoder [22, 43],
and the encoder-decoder [1, 8, 39, 42, 44, 49].
Semantic segmentation is one of the crucial tasks in com-

2967

