This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring and Exploiting Uncertainty for Incomplete Multi-View Classification
Mengyao Xie‡ , Zongbo Han‡ , Changqing Zhang∗ , Yichen Bai, Qinghua Hu
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Classifying incomplete multi-view data is inevitable since
arbitrary view missing widely exists in real-world applications. Although great progress has been achieved, existing
incomplete multi-view methods are still difficult to obtain a
trustworthy prediction due to the relatively high uncertainty
nature of missing views. First, the missing view is of high
uncertainty, and thus it is not reasonable to provide a single
deterministic imputation. Second, the quality of the imputed
data itself is of high uncertainty. To explore and exploit the
uncertainty, we propose an Uncertainty-induced Incomplete
Multi-View Data Classification (UIMC) model to classify
the incomplete multi-view data under a stable and reliable
framework. We construct a distribution and sample multiple
times to characterize the uncertainty of missing views, and
adaptively utilize them according to the sampling quality.
Accordingly, the proposed method realizes more perceivable
imputation and controllable fusion. Specifically, we model
each missing data with a distribution conditioning on the
available views and thus introducing uncertainty. Then an
evidence-based fusion strategy is employed to guarantee the
trustworthy integration of the imputed views. Extensive experiments are conducted on multiple benchmark data sets
and our method establishes a state-of-the-art performance
in terms of both performance and trustworthiness.

1. Introduction
Learning from multiple complementary views has the
potential to yield more generalizable models. Benefiting
from the power of deep learning, multi-view learning has
further exhibited remarkable benefits against the single-view
paradigm in clustering [1–3], classification [4, 5] and representation learning [6, 7]. However, real-world data are
usually incomplete. For instance, in the medical field, patients with same condition may choose different medical
examinations producing incomplete/unaligned multi-view
‡ Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

data; similarly, sensors in cars at times may be out of order
and thus only part of information can be collected. Flexible
and trustworthy utilization of incomplete multi-view data is
still very challenging due to the high uncertainty of missing
issues.
For the task of incomplete multi-view classification
(IMVC), there have been plenty of studies which could be
roughly categorized into two main lines. The methods [8, 9]
only use available views without imputation to conduct classification. While the other line [10–13] reconstructs missing data based on deep learning methods such as autoencoder [14, 15] or generative adversarial network (GAN) [16],
and then utilizes the imputed complete data for classification.
Although significant progress has been achieved by existing IMVC methods, there are still limitations: (1) Methods
that simply neglect missing views are usually ineffective
especially under high missing rate due to the limitation in
exploring the correlation among views; (2) Methods that
impute missing data based on deep learning methods are
short in interpretability and the deterministic imputation way
fails to characterize the uncertainty of missing resulting in
unstable classification; (3) Few IMVC methods can handle
multi-view data with complex missing patterns especially
for the data with more than two views, which makes these
methods inflexible.
In view of above limitations, we propose a simple yet
effective, stable and flexible incomplete multi-view classification model. First, the proposed model characterizes the
uncertainty of each missing view by imputing a distribution
instead of a deterministic value. The necessity of characterizing the uncertainty for missing data on single view has
been well recognized in recent works [17, 18]. Second, we
conduct sampling multiple times from the above distribution
and each one is combined with the observed views to form
multiple completed multi-view samples. The quality of the
sampled data is of high uncertainty, and thus we adaptively
integrate them according to their quality on the single view
and multi-view fusion. For single view, the uncertainty of
the low-quality sampled data tends to be large and should
not affect the learning of other views. Therefore, we construct an evidence-based classifier for each view to obtain the

19873

