This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatio-Temporal Pixel-Level Contrastive Learning-based Source-Free
Domain Adaptation for Video Semantic Segmentation
Shao-Yuan Lo1 * Poojan Oza2 Sumanth Chennupati2 Alejandro Galindo2 Vishal M. Patel1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Amazon
{sylo, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

{poojanku, sumchenn, pagh}@amazon.com

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) of semantic
segmentation transfers labeled source knowledge to an unlabeled target domain by relying on accessing both the
source and target data. However, the access to source
data is often restricted or infeasible in real-world scenarios. Under the source data restrictive circumstances, UDA
is less practical. To address this, recent works have explored solutions under the Source-Free Domain Adaptation
(SFDA) setup, which aims to adapt a source-trained model
to the target domain without accessing source data. Still,
existing SFDA approaches use only image-level information for adaptation, making them sub-optimal in video applications. This paper studies SFDA for Video Semantic
Segmentation (VSS), where temporal information is leveraged to address video adaptation. Specifically, we propose Spatio-Temporal Pixel-Level (STPL) contrastive learning, a novel method that takes full advantage of spatiotemporal information to tackle the absence of source data
better. STPL explicitly learns semantic correlations among
pixels in the spatio-temporal space, providing strong selfsupervision for adaptation to the unlabeled target domain.
Extensive experiments show that STPL achieves state-ofthe-art performance on VSS benchmarks compared to current UDA and SFDA approaches. Code is available at:
https://github.com/shaoyuanlo/STPL

1. Introduction
The availability of large amounts of labeled data has
made it possible for various deep networks to achieve remarkable performance on Image Semantic Segmentation
(ISS) [2, 4, 30]. However, these deep networks often generalize poorly on target data from a new unlabeled domain that is
visually distinct from the source training data. Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) attempts to mitigate this domain
shift problem by using both the labeled source data and un* This work was mostly done when S.-Y. Lo was an intern at Amazon.

Figure 1. Comparison of VSS accuracy. Video-based UDA methods [12, 38, 49] outperform image-based UDA methods [33, 51],
showing the importance of video-based strategies for the VSS task.
Image-based SFDA methods [16, 39] perform lower than the UDA
methods, which shows the difficulty of the more restricted SFDA
setting. The proposed STPL, even with SFDA, achieves the best
accuracy and locates at the top-right corner of the chart (i.e., more
restriction, but higher accuracy).

labeled target data to train a model transferring the source
knowledge to the target domain [11, 12, 31, 32, 38, 41]. UDA
is effective but relies on the assumption that both source and
target data are available during adaptation. In real-world
scenarios, the access to source data is often restricted (e.g.,
data privacy, commercial proprietary) or infeasible (e.g.,
data transmission efficiency, portability). Hence, under these
source data restrictive circumstances, UDA approaches are
less practical.
To deal with these issues, the Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) setup, also referred to as Unsupervised Model
Adaptation (UMA), has been recently introduced in the literature [6, 26, 27, 52]. SFDA aims to use a source-trained

10534

