This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A New Benchmark: On the Utility of Synthetic Data with Blender for
Bare Supervised Learning and Downstream Domain Adaptation

1

Hui Tang1,2 and Kui Jia1, *
South China University of Technology 2 DexForce Co. Ltd.
eehuitang@mail.scut.edu.cn, kuijia@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning in computer vision has achieved great
success with the price of large-scale labeled training data.
However, exhaustive data annotation is impracticable for
each task of all domains of interest, due to high labor costs
and unguaranteed labeling accuracy. Besides, the uncontrollable data collection process produces non-IID training
and test data, where undesired duplication may exist. All
these nuisances may hinder the verification of typical theories and exposure to new findings. To circumvent them, an
alternative is to generate synthetic data via 3D rendering
with domain randomization. We in this work push forward
along this line by doing profound and extensive research on
bare supervised learning and downstream domain adaptation. Specifically, under the well-controlled, IID data setting enabled by 3D rendering, we systematically verify the
typical, important learning insights, e.g., shortcut learning,
and discover the new laws of various data regimes and network architectures in generalization. We further investigate
the effect of image formation factors on generalization, e.g.,
object scale, material texture, illumination, camera viewpoint, and background in a 3D scene. Moreover, we use
the simulation-to-reality adaptation as a downstream task
for comparing the transferability between synthetic and real
data when used for pre-training, which demonstrates that
synthetic data pre-training is also promising to improve real
test results. Lastly, to promote future research, we develop
a new large-scale synthetic-to-real benchmark for image
classification, termed S2RDA, which provides more significant challenges for transfer from simulation to reality.

1. Introduction
Recently, we have witnessed considerable advances in
various computer vision applications [16, 29, 38]. However,
such a success is vulnerable and expensive in that it has been
limited to supervised learning methods with abundant la* Corresponding author.

beled data. Some publicly available datasets exist certainly,
which include a great mass of real-world images and acquire their labels via crowdsourcing generally. For example,
ImageNet-1K [9] is of 1.28M images; MetaShift [26] has
2.56M natural images. Nevertheless, data collection and
annotation for all tasks of domains of interest are impractical since many of them require exhaustive manual efforts
and valuable domain expertise, e.g., self-driving and medical diagnosis. What’s worse, the label given by humans has
no guarantee to be correct, resulting in unpredictable label
noise. Besides, the poor-controlled data collection process
produces a lot of nuisances, e.g., training and test data aren’t
independent identically distributed (IID) and even have duplicate images. All of these shortcomings could prevent the
validation of typical insights and exposure to new findings.
To remedy them, one can resort to synthetic data generation via 3D rendering [10], where an arbitrary number
of images can be produced with diverse values of imaging
factors randomly chosen in a reasonable range, i.e., domain
randomization [48]; such a dataset creation pipeline is thus
very lucrative, where data with labels come for free. For
image classification, Peng et al. [32] propose the first largescale synthetic-to-real benchmark for visual domain adaptation [30], VisDA-2017; it includes 152K synthetic images
and 55K natural ones. Ros et al. [37] produce 9K synthetic
cityscape images for cross-domain semantic segmentation.
Hinterstoisser et al. [19] densely render a set of 64 retail objects for retail detection. All these datasets are customized
for specific tasks in cross-domain transfer. In this work, we
push forward along this line extensively and profoundly.
The deep models tend to find simple, unintended solutions and learn shortcut features less related to the semantics of particular object classes, due to systematic biases, as
revealed in [14]. For example, a model basing its prediction
on context would misclassify an airplane floating on water
as a boat. The seminal work [14] emphasizes that shortcut opportunities are present in most data and rarely disappear by simply adding more data. Modifying the training
data to block specific shortcuts may be a promising solution,
e.g., making image variation factors consistently distributed

15954

