This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Retain while Acquiring: Combating Distribution-Shift in
Adversarial Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
Gaurav Patel†
†
Purdue University

Konda Reddy Mopuri‡ Qiang Qiu†
‡
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad

{gpatel10, qqiu}@purdue.edu, krmopuri@ai.iith.ac.in

1. Introduction
The primary goal of Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
(DFKD) is to acquire a trustworthy alternative dataset for
knowledge distillation. The quality of knowledge transfer depends on the caliber of these alternative samples. Noise optimization [11,22,30] and generative reconstruction [4,10,20]
are the two primary ways to replace the original training data
used in the distillation process with synthetic or pseudo samples. Adversarial DFKD methods [10, 19, 20] investigate an
adversarial exploration framework to seek pseudo-samples.
In such a paradigm, the Generator (G) is used to create
pseudo-samples as surrogates to perform knowledge distillation/transfer, and the Teacher-Student (T -S) setup acts as a
joint discriminator to penalize and update generator parameters (θG ) (Figure 1). In the adversarial framework, the generator explores the input space to find suitable pseudo-samples
as the distillation progresses. Consequently, the distribution

Student Update

Generator Update

Accuracy

Data-free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) has gained
popularity recently, with the fundamental idea of carrying
out knowledge transfer from a Teacher neural network to
a Student neural network in the absence of training data.
However, in the Adversarial DFKD framework, the student
network’s accuracy, suffers due to the non-stationary distribution of the pseudo-samples under multiple generator updates. To this end, at every generator update, we aim to maintain the student’s performance on previously encountered
examples while acquiring knowledge from samples of the current distribution. Thus, we propose a meta-learning inspired
framework by treating the task of Knowledge-Acquisition
(learning from newly generated samples) and KnowledgeRetention (retaining knowledge on previously met samples)
as meta-train and meta-test, respectively. Hence, we dub our
method as Learning to Retain while Acquiring. Moreover, we
identify an implicit aligning factor between the KnowledgeRetention and Knowledge-Acquisition tasks indicating that
the proposed student update strategy enforces a common
gradient direction for both tasks, alleviating interference between the two objectives. Finally, we support our hypothesis
by exhibiting extensive evaluation and comparison of our
method with prior arts on multiple datasets.

Pseudo-Data
Pre-Trained
Student Model
Generator
Teacher Model

Abstract

11

Epoch

Figure 1. The top-section represents the learning evolution of a
generic Adversarial Data-Free Knowledge Distillation framework;
the color-intensity variation signifies the change in the distribution
of the pseudo-samples, the student network, and the generator network over the learning epochs. Under the variation in the distribution of the pseudo-samples, the bottom-section shows the learning
curves for cases when the student accuracy degrades (shown in
Red), which is undesirable, and when the student accuracy is maintained, if not improved, as proposed (shown in Green).

of the generated samples consistently keeps changing during the process due to the generator updates [25]. From the
student network’s perspective, at each iteration, the pseudo
samples seem to be generated from different generator parameters (θG ). Hence, the convergence of the student network
gets hampered due to successive distributional alterations
over time [29], as depicted by the red curve in Figure 1.
This observation hints that updating the student network,
solely using the samples generated from the current generator parameters is not adequate to generalize the student.
Moreover, the student forgets the knowledge acquired previously and decelerates the knowledge distillation. Therefore,
the generator, apart from exploring the input space, seeks
to compensate for the loss of knowledge in future iterations.
Additionally, in a practical setting, during the distillation
process, high variation in the student network’s classification
accuracy is undesirable, especially when the validation data
is not available, since that prevents the user from tracking

7786

