This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An In-depth Exploration of Person Re-identification and Gait Recognition in
Cloth-Changing Conditions
Weijia Li1,4∗ , Saihui Hou2,3∗ , Chunjie Zhang1,4† , Chunshui Cao3 , Xu Liu3 ,
Yongzhen Huang2,3† , Yao Zhao1,4
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, 3 WATRIX.AI
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network, Beijing, 100044, China
21125203@bjtu.edu.cn, housaihui@bnu.edu.cn, cjzhang@bjtu.edu.cn,
{chunshui.cao, xu.liu}@watrix.ai, huangyongzhen@bnu.edu.cn, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The target of person re-identification (ReID) and gait
recognition is consistent, that is to match the target pedestrian under surveillance cameras. For the cloth-changing
problem, video-based ReID is rarely studied due to the
lack of a suitable cloth-changing benchmark, and gait
recognition is often researched under controlled conditions. To tackle this problem, we propose a Cloth-Changing
benchmark for Person re-identification and Gait recognition (CCPG). It is a cloth-changing dataset, and there are
several highlights in CCPG, (1) it provides 200 identities
and over 16K sequences are captured indoors and outdoors, (2) each identity has seven different cloth-changing
statuses, which is hardly seen in previous datasets, (3)
RGB and silhouettes version data are both available for
research purposes. Moreover, aiming to investigate the
cloth-changing problem systematically, comprehensive experiments are conducted on video-based ReID and gait
recognition methods. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of ReID and gait recognition separately in different cloth-changing conditions and suggest
that gait recognition is a potential solution for addressing
the cloth-changing problem. Our dataset will be available
at https://github.com/BNU-IVC/CCPG.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of video devices, more and
more surveillance systems are taken into real applications
and play an essential role in protecting the security of our
society. However, along with the significantly growing
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Gallery

Query

Gallery

Query

Person Re-identification

Query

Gait Recognition

Person Retrieval Method

Gallery

Figure 1. The targets of person re-identification and gait recognition are consistent, to search the target person from the gallery.
The main difference is that gait recognition normally requires
pedestrian segmentation.

amount of data, traditional social security is facing two
dilemmas: data storage and inefficient monitoring. Due to
artificial intelligence progress and diverse demand in social security, many security technologies have come into
our sights, such as face recognition, person re-identification
(ReID), and gait recognition. These technologies reduce
data size vastly and improve efficiency in social security.
Video-based ReID plays a vital role in surveillance video
analysis, and it intends to match the probe sequence of the
specific person from gallery sequences in surveillance systems by learning features of multiple frames [5, 27, 43].
Compared with image-based ReID [10,21,36], video-based
ReID provides both appearance and rich temporal information. Previous video-based ReID methods [9, 12, 19, 20, 33,
36, 38] focus on the cloth-consistent setting, where people
do not change their clothes in the short term. However, in
the real world, clothes-changing situations are everywhere.
Due to its practical application in social security, cloth-

13824

