This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SLOPER4D: A Scene-Aware Dataset for Global 4D Human Pose Estimation in
Urban Environments
Lan Xu3
Yudi Dai1,2
Yitai Lin1,2
Xiping Lin1,2
Chenglu Wen1,2 *
4
1,2
3
1,2
Hongwei Yi
Siqi Shen
Yuexin Ma
Cheng Wang
1

2

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education
of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
3
4
ShanghaiTech University, China
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany
LiDAR Camera IMUs

Capturing System

Global Human Motion and Scene

Figure 1. Using the head-mounted LiDAR and camera to scan the IMUs wearer, we construct SLOPER4D, a large
scene-aware dataset for global 4D human pose estimation in urban environments.

Abstract
We present SLOPER4D, a novel scene-aware dataset
collected in large urban environments to facilitate the research of global human pose estimation (GHPE) with
human-scene interaction in the wild. Employing a headmounted device integrated with a LiDAR and camera, we
record 12 human subjects’ activities over 10 diverse urban
scenes from an egocentric view. Frame-wise annotations
for 2D key points, 3D pose parameters, and global translations are provided, together with reconstructed scene point
clouds. To obtain accurate 3D ground truth in such large
dynamic scenes, we propose a joint optimization method to
fit local SMPL meshes to the scene and fine-tune the camera
calibration during dynamic motions frame by frame, resulting in plausible and scene-natural 3D human poses. Even* Corresponding author.

tually, SLOPER4D consists of 15 sequences of human motions, each of which has a trajectory length of more than
200 meters (up to 1,300 meters) and covers an area of more
than 200 m2 (up to 30,000 m2 ), including more than 100k
LiDAR frames, 300k video frames, and 500k IMU-based
motion frames. With SLOPER4D, we provide a detailed and
thorough analysis of two critical tasks, including camerabased 3D HPE and LiDAR-based 3D HPE in urban environments, and benchmark a new task, GHPE. The in-depth
analysis demonstrates SLOPER4D poses significant challenges to existing methods and produces great research opportunities. The dataset and code are released at http:
//www.lidarhumanmotion.net/sloper4d/.

1. Introduction
Urban-level human motion capture is attracting more and
more attention, which targets acquiring consecutive finegrained human pose representations, such as 3D skeletons

682

