This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Segment Every Referring Object Point by Point
Mengxue Qu1,2 * Yu Wu 3

Yunchao Wei1,2

Wu Liu 4

Xiaodan Liang 5,6

Yao Zhao1,2†

1

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
Wuhan University 4 JD Explore Academy 5 Sun Yat-sen University 6 MBZUAI
2

qumengxue@bjtu.edu.cn, wuyucs@whu.edu.cn, yunchao.wei@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) can facilitate pixel-level semantic alignment between vision and language. Most of the existing RES approaches require massive pixel-level annotations, which are expensive and exhaustive. In this paper, we propose a new partially supervised training paradigm for RES, i.e., training using abundant referring bounding boxes and only a few (e.g., 1%)
pixel-level referring masks. To maximize the transferability from the REC model, we construct our model based on
the point-based sequence prediction model. We propose
the co-content teacher-forcing to make the model explicitly
associate the point coordinates (scale values) with the referred spatial features, which alleviates the exposure bias
caused by the limited segmentation masks. To make the
most of referring bounding box annotations, we further propose the resampling pseudo points strategy to select more
accurate pseudo-points as supervision. Extensive experiments show that our model achieves 52.06% in terms of accuracy (versus 58.93% in fully supervised setting) on RefCOCO+@testA, when only using 1% of the mask annotations. Code is available at https://github.com/
qumengxue/Partial-RES.git.

1. Introduction
Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) aims to generate a segmentation mask for the object referred to by the
language expression in the image. It allows pixel-level semantic alignment between language and vision, which is
meaningful to many multi-modal tasks and can be applied
to various practical applications, e.g., video/image editing
with sentences. Benefiting from the development of deep
learning techniques, significant progress [31, 9, 12, 2, 19,
* Work done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.
† Yao Zhao is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of MDETR and SeqTR. On the left is the
streamlined framework of the two, and on the right is their IoU
performance on RefCOCOg@val. Best viewed in color.

20, 27, 54, 9] has been made in this field and achieved remarkable performance.
The success of current methods partially attributes to the
large-scale training dataset with accurate pixel-level masks.
However, labeling masks for a huge amount of images is
often costly in terms of both human effort and finance, and
thus hardly be scaled up. Therefore, it is meaningful to
explore a new training paradigm for RES where extensive
pixel-level annotations are not necessary. It is well known
that bounding box annotations are much cheaper and easier
to be collected compared with pixel-level masks. Thus, we
try to study this question: is it possible to learn an accurate
RES model using abundant box annotations and only a few
mask annotations?
To answer this question, for the first time, we explore a new partially supervised training paradigm for RES
(Partial-RES). Intuitively, a naive pipeline for this partially
supervised setting is to first train a Referring Expression
Comprehension (REC) model and then transfer it to the
RES task by fine-tuning on a limited number of data with
mask annotations. However, due to the difference between

3021

