This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Occlusion-Free Scene Recovery via Neural Radiance Fields
Chengxuan Zhu1,2
1
2

Renjie Wan3

Yunkai Tang1,2

Boxin Shi1,2 *

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University

{peterzhu, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, renjiewan@hkbu.edu.hk, tangyunkai@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Our everyday lives are filled with occlusions that we
strive to see through. By aggregating desired background
information from different viewpoints, we can easily eliminate such occlusions without any external occlusion-free
supervision. Though several occlusion removal methods
have been proposed to empower machine vision systems
with such ability, their performances are still unsatisfactory
due to reliance on external supervision. We propose a
novel method for occlusion removal by directly building
a mapping between position and viewing angles and the
corresponding occlusion-free scene details leveraging Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF). We also develop an effective
scheme to jointly optimize camera parameters and scene
reconstruction when occlusions are present. An additional
depth constraint is applied to supervise the entire optimization without labeled external data for training. The experimental results on existing and newly collected datasets
validate the effectiveness of our method. Our project page:
https://freebutuselesssoul.github.io/occnerf.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) are capable of learning
the scene representation implicitly from a set of 2D images,
yet not every scene is favored by observers. Many undesirable occlusions in our world obscure details that are essential to our understanding of the world. In general, such
obstructions range from water droplets and scribbles on a
piece of glass, to fences or any objects occluding the desired scenes (e.g., a statue closer to the camera in a landmark scene). How to apply computational methods to exclude them from the scene representation is of great interest.
Occlusion removal (e.g., [29]) is the direct solution to
achieve this goal. However, explicit occlusion removal may
* Corresponding author.

oversmooth essential details necessary for clearly observing the desired background scenes. In addition, current
methods mainly depend on external occlusion-free supervision (e.g., fence removal [4], raindrop removal [22]) to
develop the reliable capability in removing certain types of
occlusions. Once encountering a new scenario with unseen
occlusion types beyond their training data, these methods
might show degraded performances. To handle more diverse types of occlusions, generic constraints from multiple
viewpoints are widely adopted [4, 10, 12, 14, 19, 27, 29] via
mimicking our human vision systems, who can easily piece
together the desired background scenes by looking at them
from different viewpoints. But the majority of these methods just consider viewpoints as a prior in relation to spatial
correlations. Their backbones still rely on external training data with corresponding ground truth for optimization,
which still does not fundamentally alleviate the difficulty of
handling diverse occlusions in the real world.
An occlusion-free world can be progressively aggregated
by seeing its occluded part from different viewing directions
to reveal occlusions previously unobservable in each single perspective, as illustrated in the left part of Fig. 1 (the
fan is occluded in the target view). Since NeRF [18] employs an implicit representation to map viewpoints to pixels, one may come to the naive solution of directly constructing a NeRF which is optimized across multiple viewpoints. However, the vanilla NeRF [18] representing the
scene as a whole is not able to treat occlusion and background scenes distinctively, and as long as the occlusion
remains static, NeRF is designed to faithfully reconstruct
its presence. Meanwhile, many NeRF variants can decompose the whole scene into different components (e.g.,
NeRF-W [17], Ha-NeRF [3], NeRFReN [7]), but they cannot handle the real-world static occlusions. This is because
NeRF-W [17] and Ha-NeRF [3] rely on the inconsistency
of undesired components across different views to achieve
such separation, which is difficult to be observed in a continuous 3D world. On the other hand, NeRFReN [7] only
works in separating the transmission and reflection compo-

20722

