This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G LIGEN: Open-Set Grounded Text-to-Image Generation
Yuheng Li1§ , Haotian Liu1§ , Qingyang Wu2 , Fangzhou Mu1 , Jianwei Yang3 , Jianfeng Gao3 ,
Chunyuan Li3¶ , Yong Jae Lee1¶
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison

2

3

Columbia University

Microsoft

https://gligen.github.io/

Caption: “A woman sitting in a restaurant with a pizza in front of her ”

(b)

Caption: “A dog / bird / helmet / backpack is on the grass”

Caption: “Elon Musk and Emma Watson on a movie poster”

(d)

Caption: “a baby girl / monkey / Hormer Simpson / is scratching her/its head”

(e)

Caption: “A vibrant colorful bird sitting on tree branch”

(f)

Caption: “A young boy with white powder on his face looks away”

(g)

Caption: “Cars park on the snowy street”

(a)

(c)

Grounded text: table, pizza, person, wall, car, paper, chair, window, bottle, cup

Grounded text: Elon Musk, Emma Watson; Grounded style image: blue inset

Grounded depth map: the left image

Grounded normal map: the left image

Grounded image: red inset

Grounded keypoints: plotted dots on the left image

Grounded HED map: the left image

(h)

Caption: “A living room filled with lots of furniture and plants”
Grounded semantic map: the left image

Figure 1. G LIGEN enables versatile grounding capabilities for a frozen text-to-image generation model, by feeding different grounding
conditions. G LIGEN supports (a) text entity + box, (b) image entity + box, (c) image style and text + box, (d) keypoints, (e) depth map, (f)
edge map, (g) normal map, and (h) semantic map.

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image diffusion models have made
amazing advances. However, the status quo is to use
text input alone, which can impede controllability. In this
work, we propose G LIGEN, Grounded-Language-to-Image
Generation, a novel approach that builds upon and extends
the functionality of existing pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models by enabling them to also be conditioned on
grounding inputs. To preserve the vast concept knowledge of

the pre-trained model, we freeze all of its weights and inject
the grounding information into new trainable layers via a
gated mechanism. Our model achieves open-world grounded
text2img generation with caption and bounding box condition inputs, and the grounding ability generalizes well to
novel spatial configurations and concepts. G LIGEN’s zeroshot performance on COCO and LVIS outperforms existing
supervised layout-to-image baselines by a large margin.
§ Part of the work performed at Microsoft; ¶ Co-senior authors

22511

