This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

System-status-aware Adaptive Network for Online Streaming Video
Understanding

1

Lin Geng Foo1† Jia Gong1† Zhipeng Fan2§ Jun Liu1‡
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 New York University

{lingeng foo,jia gong}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, zf606@nyu.edu, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed great progress in deep neural networks for real-time applications. However, most
existing works do not explicitly consider the general case
where the device’s state and the available resources fluctuate over time, and none of them investigate or address
the impact of varying computational resources for online
video understanding tasks. This paper proposes a Systemstatus-aware Adaptive Network (SAN) that considers the
device’s real-time state to provide high-quality predictions
with low delay. Usage of our agent’s policy improves efficiency and robustness to fluctuations of the system status.
On two widely used video understanding tasks, SAN obtains
state-of-the-art performance while constantly keeping processing delays low. Moreover, training such an agent on
various types of hardware configurations is not easy as the
labeled training data might not be available, or can be computationally prohibitive. To address this challenging problem, we propose a Meta Self-supervised Adaptation (MSA)
method that adapts the agent’s policy to new hardware configurations at test-time, allowing for easy deployment of the
model onto other unseen hardware platforms.

1. Introduction
Online video understanding, where certain predictions
are immediately made for each video frame by using information in the current frame and potentially past frames,
is an important task right at the intersection of video-based
research and practical vision applications (e.g., self-driving
vehicles [11], security surveillance [4], streaming services
[32], and human-computer interactions [20]). In particular,
in many of these real-world video-based applications, a fast
and timely response is often crucial to ensure high usability
and reduce potential security risk. Therefore, in many practical online applications, it is essential to ensure that the
model is working with low delay while maintaining a good
† Equal contribution; § Currently at Meta; ‡ Corresponding author

performance, which can be challenging for many existing
deep neural networks.
Recently, much effort has been made to reduce the delay of deep neural networks, including research into efficient network design [16, 36, 44], input-aware dynamic networks [5,6,12,24], and latency-constrained neural architectures [1, 2, 21]. However, all these works do not explicitly
consider the dynamic conditions of the hardware platform,
and assume stable computation resources are readily available. In practical scenarios, the accessible computing resources of the host devices can be fluctuating and dynamic
due to the fact that multiple computationally expensive yet
important threads are running concurrently. For example,
in addition to performing vision-related tasks such as object
detection, human activity recognition, and pose estimation,
state-of-the-art robotic systems usually need to simultaneously perform additional tasks like simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) to successfully interact with humans and the environment. Those tasks are also often computationally heavy and could compete with vision tasks for
computing resources. As a result, at times when the host
device is busy with other processes, conducting inference
for each model might require significantly more time than
usual, leading to extremely long delays, which could cause
safety issues and lagging responses in many real-world applications. Therefore, the study and development of models
providing reliable yet timely responses under various hardware devices and fluctuating computing resources is crucially important. Unfortunately, such studies are lacking in
the field.
To achieve and maintain low delay for online video
understanding tasks under a dynamic computing resource
budget, we propose a novel System-status-aware Adaptive
Network (SAN). Different from previous works, SAN explicitly considers the system status of its host device to make
on-the-fly adjustments to its computational complexity, and
is thus capable of processing video streams effectively and
efficiently in a dynamic system environment. SAN comprises of two components: a) a simple yet effective dynamic
main module that offers reliable predictions under various

10514

