This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language in a Bottle: Language Model Guided Concept Bottlenecks
for Interpretable Image Classification
Yue Yang, Artemis Panagopoulou, Shenghao Zhou, Daniel Jin,
Chris Callison-Burch, Mark Yatskar
University of Pennsylvania
{yueyang1, artemisp, shzhou2, jindan, ccb, myatskar}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract

Ours: LLM Generated Concepts
black throat with a white boarder
brown head with white stripes
GPT-3

...

1 Code and data are available at https://github.com/YueYANG1996/LaBo

...

As deep learning systems improve, their applicability
to critical domains is hampered because of a lack of transparency. Efforts to address this have largely focused on
post-hoc explanations [47, 54, 72]. Such explanations can
be problematic because they may be incomplete or unfaithful with respect to the model’s computations [49]. Models

"
!

has head pattern :: eyebow

...

1. Introduction

Human Designed Concepts
has nape color :: grey
has bill shape :: cone
...

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBM) are inherently interpretable models that factor model decisions into humanreadable concepts. They allow people to easily understand
why a model is failing, a critical feature for high-stakes applications. CBMs require manually specified concepts and
often under-perform their black box counterparts, preventing
their broad adoption. We address these shortcomings and
are first to show how to construct high-performance CBMs
without manual specification of similar accuracy to black
box models. Our approach, Language Guided Bottlenecks
(LaBo), leverages a language model, GPT-3, to define a
large space of possible bottlenecks. Given a problem domain,
LaBo uses GPT-3 to produce factual sentences about categories to form candidate concepts. LaBo efficiently searches
possible bottlenecks through a novel submodular utility that
promotes the selection of discriminative and diverse information. Ultimately, GPT-3’s sentential concepts can be aligned
to images using CLIP, to form a bottleneck layer. Experiments demonstrate that LaBo is a highly effective prior for
concepts important to visual recognition. In the evaluation
with 11 diverse datasets, LaBo bottlenecks excel at few-shot
classification: they are 11.7% more accurate than black
box linear probes at 1 shot and comparable with more data.
Overall, LaBo demonstrates that inherently interpretable
models can be widely applied at similar, or better, performance than black box approaches.1

Input Image x

"
!

grayish brown back and wings

prompt: describe what the black-throated sparrow looks like:

Figure 1. Our proposed high-performance Concept Bottleneck
Model alleviates the need for human-designed concepts by prompting large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-3 [4].

can also be designed to be inherently interpretable, but it is
believed that such models will perform more poorly than
their black box alternatives [16]. In this work, we provide
evidence to the contrary. We show how to construct highperformance interpretable-by-design classifiers by combining a language model, GPT-3 [4], and a language-vision
model, CLIP [44].
Our method builds on Concept Bottleneck Models
(CBM) [25], which construct predictors through a linear
combination of human-designed concepts. For example, as
seen in Figure 1, a qualified person can design concepts,
such as “nape color,” as intermediate targets for a black box
model before classifying a bird. CBMs provide abstractions
that people can use to understand errors or intervene on,
contributing to increased trust.
Application of CBMs is limited because they require
costly attribute annotations by domain experts and often
under-perform their black box counterparts. In contexts
where CBM performance is competitive with black box alternatives, interpretability properties are sacrificed [34, 70].
To address both of these challenges, we propose to build
systems that automatically construct CBMs.
Our Language Model Guided Concept Bottleneck Model
(LaBo), Figure 2, allows for the automatic construction of
high-performance CBMs for arbitrary classification problems without concept annotations. Large language models

19187

