This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local Implicit Normalizing Flow for Arbitrary-Scale Image Super-Resolution
Jie-En Yao⇤1 , Li-Yuan Tsao⇤1 , Yi-Chen Lo†2 , Roy Tseng†2 , Chia-Che Chang†2 , and Chun-Yi Lee1
1
ElsaLab, National Tsing Hua University, 2 MediaTek Inc.
{matt1129yao, lytsao}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, {yichen.lo, roy.tseng, chia-che.chang}@mediatek.com
cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Flow-based methods have demonstrated promising results in addressing the ill-posed nature of super-resolution
(SR) by learning the distribution of high-resolution (HR)
images with the normalizing flow. However, these methods
can only perform a predefined fixed-scale SR, limiting their
potential in real-world applications. Meanwhile, arbitraryscale SR has gained more attention and achieved great
progress. Nonetheless, previous arbitrary-scale SR methods ignore the ill-posed problem and train the model with
per-pixel L1 loss, leading to blurry SR outputs. In this work,
we propose “Local Implicit Normalizing Flow” (LINF) as
a unified solution to the above problems. LINF models the
distribution of texture details under different scaling factors with normalizing flow. Thus, LINF can generate photorealistic HR images with rich texture details in arbitrary
scale factors. We evaluate LINF with extensive experiments
and show that LINF achieves the state-of-the-art perceptual
quality compared with prior arbitrary-scale SR methods.

1. Introduction
Arbitrary-scale image super-resolution (SR) has gained
increasing attention recently due to its tremendous application potential. However, this field of study suffers from
two major challenges. First, SR aims to reconstruct highresolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) counterpart by recovering the missing high-frequency information.
This process is inherently ill-posed since the same LR image can yield many plausible HR solutions. Second, prior
deep learning based SR approaches typically apply upsampling with a pre-defined scale in their network architectures,
such as squeeze layer [1], transposed convolution [2], and
sub-pixel convolution [3]. Once the upsampling scale is determined, they are unable to further adjust the output resolutions without modifying their model architecture. This
causes inflexibility in real-world applications. As a result,
* and † indicate equal contribution. This work was developed during
the internship of Jie-En Yao and Li-Yuan Tsao at MediaTek Inc.

Figure 1. A comparison of the previous arbitrary-scale SR approaches and LINF. LINF models the distribution of texture details
in HR images at arbitrary scales. Therefore, unlike the prior methods that tend to produce blurry images, LINF is able to generate
arbitrary-scale HR images with rich and photo-realistic textures.

discovering a way to perform arbitrary-scale SR and produce photo-realistic HR images from an LR image with a
single model has become a crucial research direction.
A natural approach to addressing the one-to-many inverse problem in SR is to consider the solution as a distribution. Consequently, a number of generative-based SR
methods [1, 4–8] have been proposed to tackle this illposed problem. Among them, flow-based SR methods
show promise, as normalizing flow [9–12] offers several
advantages over other generative models. For instance,
flow does not suffer from the training instability and mode
collapse issues present in generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [13]. Moreover, flow-based methods are computationally efficient compared to diffusion [14] and autoregressive (AR) [15, 16] models. Representative flow-based
models, such as SRFlow [1] and HCFlow [7], are able to
generate high-quality SR images and achieve state-of-theart results on the benchmarks. However, these methods are
restricted to fixed-scale SR, limiting their applicability.
Another line of research focuses on arbitrary-scale SR.
LIIF [17] employs local implicit neural representation to
represent images in a continuous domain. It achieves
arbitrary-scale SR by replacing fixed-scale upsample mod-

1776

