This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dealing with Cross-Task Class Discrimination in Online Continual Learning
Yiduo Guo1 , Bing Liu4 , Dongyan Zhao1,2,3
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University. 2 BIGAI, Beijing, China. 3 National Key Laboratory of
General Artificial Intelligence. 4 Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago
yiduo@stu.pku.edu.cn, liub@uic.edu, zhaodongyan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing continual learning (CL) research regards catastrophic forgetting (CF) as almost the only challenge. This
paper argues for another challenge in class-incremental
learning (CIL), which we call cross-task class discrimination (CTCD), i.e., how to establish decision boundaries
between the classes of the new task and old tasks with no
(or limited) access to the old task data. CTCD is implicitly
and partially dealt with by replay-based methods. A replay
method saves a small amount of data (replay data) from
previous tasks. When a batch of current task data arrives,
the system jointly trains the new data and some sampled replay data. The replay data enables the system to partially
learn the decision boundaries between the new classes and
the old classes as the amount of the saved data is small.
However, this paper argues that the replay approach also
has a dynamic training bias issue which reduces the effectiveness of the replay data in solving the CTCD problem. A
novel optimization objective with a gradient-based adaptive
method is proposed to dynamically deal with the problem in
the online CL process. Experimental results show that the
new method achieves much better results in online CL.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) learns a sequence of tasks incrementally. This work focuses on the class incremental
learning (CIL) setting [32] in online CL. In CIL, each task
consists of a set of unique classes, the sets of classes of any
two different tasks are disjoint and the system has no access
to the task information in testing. In online CL, the data
comes gradually from a data stream. Whenever the small
batch of data arrives, it is trained in one iteration. Thus, the
data for each task is effectively trained in one epoch.
Existing CL papers almost regard catastrophic forgetting
(CF) as the only issue for CL. In fact, CIL also has another
major challenge. When the system learns a new task, if no
data from previous tasks is available, it has no way to establish decision boundaries between new classes and old

classes in previous tasks. Even if there is no CF, the classification results will still be poor. We call this problem, crosstask class discrimination (CTCD). Those approaches that
do not save any previous data, e.g., regularization-based
or orthogonal projection-based, do not deal with CTCD.
Replay-based methods implicitly deal with CTCD to some
extent because such a method uses a memory buffer M to
save a small amount of data (replay data) from old tasks.
When a small batch of current task data X new arrives, the
system jointly trains X new and some sampled replay data
X buf from M. X buf enables the system to partially learn the
decision boundaries between the new classes and the old
classes because the amount of the saved data is very small.
Due to the limited replay data, the training is biased,
which reduces its ability to solve the CTCD problem. To
make matters worse, the training bias also changes as more
tasks are learned. This paper first shows that the problem is
reflected as gradient imbalance (GI) on logits, i.e., higher
positive gradients than negative gradients on the logits and
vice versa. It further shows that GI is caused by two main issues. The first is data imbalance. Since the memory buffer
size, the batch size of the new data X new , and the sampled
data X buf from the memory buffer are all fixed, if the system
has learned many tasks, the average number of samples in
each previous class in X buf will be much smaller than that of
each class in X new . This results in higher positive gradients
than negative gradients on the logits of the previous classes
leading to training bias and poor decision boundaries (or
weak CTCD capability) between the classes of the new and
old tasks. The second is CL imbalance, i.e., CL training focuses more on the new samples (which are harder to train as
they are new) than the replayed samples (which have been
seen and trained many times before). This causes further
GI. This imbalance is involved (see Sec. 4.2 for details).
Some existing works [2, 42] have tried to deal with data
imbalance in offline CL. For example, SSIL [2] separately
calculates the cross-entropy loss of the new data and the
replay data to mitigate data imbalance. But they are not
from the gradient angle. The second issue of GI is more
complex and has not been attempted before.

11878

