This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Heat Diffusion based Multi-scale and Geometric Structure-aware Transformer
for Mesh Segmentation
Chi-Chong Wong
University of Macau
amilton.wong@connect.um.edu.mo

Abstract
Triangle mesh segmentation is an important task in 3D
shape analysis, especially in applications such as digital humans and AR/VR. Transformer model is inherently
permutation-invariant to input, which makes it a suitable
candidate model for 3D mesh processing. However, two
main challenges involved in adapting Transformer from natural languages to 3D mesh are yet to be solved, such as
i) extracting the multi-scale information of mesh data in
an adaptive manner; ii) capturing geometric structures of
mesh data as the discriminative characteristics of the shape.
Current point based Transformer models fail to tackle such
challenges and thus provide inferior performance for discretized surface segmentation. In this work, heat diffusion
based method is exploited to tackle these problems. A novel
Transformer model called MeshFormer is proposed, which
i) integrates Heat Diffusion method into Multi-head SelfAttention operation (HDMSA) to adaptively capture the features from local neighborhood to global contexts; ii) applies a novel Heat Kernel Signature based Structure Encoding (HKSSE) to embed the intrinsic geometric structures
of mesh instances into Transformer for structure-aware
processing. Extensive experiments on triangle mesh segmentation validate the effectiveness of the proposed MeshFormer model and show significant improvements over current state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Discretized surface semantic segmentation is a task to
semantically classify the labeling of each discrete element
in 3D discretized surface. Such discrete element can be triangle face in mesh input [22, 24, 37] or 3D point in point
cloud input [11, 20, 26, 28, 34, 48–50, 52]. It is an essential task in many applications for 3D vision and computer
graphics, such as 3D human body analysis, digital humans
and AR/VR, etc. In this work, we mainly focus on mesh
representation as input, as point cloud representation can

be regarded as the special case of mesh which discards the
surface connectivity.
The challenges in learning mesh representation involves
its inherent characteristics such as irregularity and unorderedness. Following the success in NLP [7, 15, 44] and
2D computer vision domain [16, 29, 43, 46], Transformer
model such as [20, 32, 50, 52] has been adopted as an effective model for processing 3D point cloud input due to its inherent capability in processing unordered point sets. Along
such direction, it is natural to adapt the Transformer model
to the mesh input, which is also one of the most common
representation for 3D input modality. However, adapting
Transformer model from natural languages to mesh input,
with respect to the specific characteristics of mesh structures, involves many challenges, such as i) extracting the
multi-scale information of mesh data in an adaptive manner; ii) capturing geometric structures of mesh representation as the discriminative characteristics. Sufficiently capturing such two essential information is the prerequisite for
accurate mesh based semantic segmentation task. In retrospect to the recent point cloud based Transformer models [20, 32, 52], it is found that all these methods did not
provide effective approaches to tackle the challenges mentioned above, and thus provided a limited increment in segmentation accuracy for mesh input.
Recent work Swin Transformer [29] applies multiple
fixed-size windows for limiting the attention computation
along scale-varying regions, and hence provides a hierarchical Transformer model to extract multi-scale information for dense prediction task. However, such approach
which uses fixed-size windows is only applicable to regular 2D images input, while it is infeasible for irregular input
such as 3D meshes with diverse shapes. In order to adapt
the Transformer model for adaptively extracting multi-scale
information for irregular mesh input, it is essential to extend its core operation, self-attention, to have capability in
progressively comparing the feature similarity from local
neighborhood to global range of the mesh input, in the form
of intrinsic geometry of surface [9]. In fact, several seminal
works [12,13] had studied on using heat diffusion method to

4413

