This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fresnel Microfacet BRDF:
Unification of Polari-Radiometric Surface-Body Reflection
Tomoki Ichikawa
Yoshiki Fukao
Shohei Nobuhara
Ko Nishino
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

Lambertian [17] + T-S [29]

Ours

cos−1 (N · L) [◦ ]

cos−1 (N · L) [◦ ]

cos−1 (N · L) [◦ ]

Observation

Baek et al. [2]

Ours

cos−1 (N · V ) [◦ ]

cos−1 (N · V ) [◦ ]

cos−1 (N · V ) [◦ ]

DoLP

Intensity

Observation

Figure 1. We derive Fresnel Microfacet BRDF, a novel physically-based BRDF model which consolidates radiometric (left) and polarimetric (right) reflection as well as body and surface reflections of surface microgeometry in a single model. The model outperforms past
physically-based models (e.g., Lambertian [17] plus Torrance-Sparrow [29] and pBRDF [2]) in accuracy and generality.

Abstract
Computer vision applications have heavily relied on the
linear combination of Lambertian diffuse and microfacet
specular reflection models for representing reflected radiance, which turns out to be physically incompatible and
limited in applicability. In this paper, we derive a novel
analytical reflectance model, which we refer to as Fresnel
Microfacet BRDF model, that is physically accurate and
generalizes to various real-world surfaces. Our key idea
is to model the Fresnel reflection and transmission of the
surface microgeometry with a collection of oriented mirror
facets, both for body and surface reflections. We carefully
derive the Fresnel reflection and transmission for each microfacet as well as the light transport between them in the
subsurface. This physically-grounded modeling also allows
us to express the polarimetric behavior of reflected light in
addition to its radiometric behavior. That is, FMBRDF unifies not only body and surface reflections but also light reflection in radiometry and polarization and represents them
in a single model. Experimental results demonstrate its effectiveness in accuracy, expressive power, image-based estimation, and geometry recovery.

1. Introduction
Reflection is a fundamental physical phenomenon of
light that serves as a key creator of our rich visual world.
Models of light reflection lie at the heart of visual infor-

mation processing both for synthesis and analysis. In computer vision, reflectance models play an essential role in 3D
reconstruction, inverse rendering, and material estimation.
The goal is to invert light reflection to deduce its physical ingredients, such as the surface geometry, from images. Naturally, devising simple yet accurate models that are faithful
to the underlying physics becomes vital. Analytical models provide a sound basis for solving these inverse problems
as parameter estimation and physically-based models lend
semantic interpretations of the results.
Physically-based analytical reflectance models have
been studied extensively. Parametric representations of the
Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) are
of particular importance, as they enable pixel-wise estimation of its parameters. Most models widely adopted
in computer vision are built on two representative models corresponding to the two distinct reflection components,
namely body reflection and surface reflection. Body reflection refers to the light that transmits into the subsurface and
is eventually emitted from the surface. It is also called diffuse reflection as it is comparatively scattered in directions.
The Lambertian reflectance model [17] which models it as
uniform distribution in the angular domain dominates computer vision applications due to its simple linear form.
Surface reflection is the light that immediately reflects
off the surface. It is also referred to as specular reflection
as it primarily concentrates around the perfect mirror reflection direction of incident light. Torrance and Sparrow [29]
introduced the idea of modeling the microgeometry within a
single pixel that causes this angular spread of surface reflec-

16489

