This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Scene Completion with Cleaner Self
Fengyun Wang1 Dong Zhang2 Hanwang Zhang3 Jinhui Tang1 * Qianru Sun4
1
2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science & Technology

The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology 3 Nanyang Technological University 4 Singapore Management University
E-mail: {fereenwong, jinhuitang}@njust.edu.cn; dongz@ust.hk; hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg; qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) transforms an image
of single-view depth and/or RGB 2D pixels into 3D voxels, each of whose semantic labels are predicted. SSC is a
well-known ill-posed problem as the prediction model has
to “imagine” what is behind the visible surface, which is
usually represented by Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF). Due to the sensory imperfection of the depth
camera, most existing methods based on the noisy TSDF
estimated from depth values suffer from 1) incomplete volumetric predictions and 2) confused semantic labels. To
this end, we use the ground-truth 3D voxels to generate a
perfect visible surface, called TSDF-CAD, and then train
a “cleaner” SSC model. As the model is noise-free, it
is expected to focus more on the “imagination” of unseen voxels. Then, we propose to distill the intermediate
“cleaner” knowledge into another model with noisy TSDF
input. In particular, we use the 3D occupancy feature and
the semantic relations of the “cleaner self” to supervise
the counterparts of the “noisy self” to respectively address
the above two incorrect predictions. Experimental results
validate that our method improves the noisy counterparts
with 3.1% IoU and 2.2% mIoU for measuring scene completion and SSC, and also achieves new state-of-the-art accuracy on the popular NYU dataset. The code is available
at https://github.com/fereenwong/CleanerS.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is an important visual task for
many practical applications, e.g., robotic navigation [16]
and augmented reality [55], where the scene geometry and
semantics are two key factors to the agent interaction with
the real world [24, 64]. However, visual sensors can only
perceive a partial world given their limited field of view
with sensory noises [49]. Therefore, an agent is expected to
leverage prior knowledge to estimate the complete geome* Corresponding author.

try and semantics from the imperfect perception. Semantic
Scene Completion (SSC) is designed for such an ability to
infer complete volumetric occupancy and semantic labels
for a scene from a single depth and/or RGB image [49, 52].
Based on an input 2D image, the 2D→3D projection is
a vital bond for mapping 2D perception to the corresponding 3D spatial positions, which is determined by the depth
value [6]. After this, the model recovers the visible surface
in 3D space, which sheds light on completing and labeling
the occluded regions [31, 52], because the geometry of the
visible and occluded areas is tightly intertwined. For example, you can easily infer the shapes and the semantic labels
when you see a part of a “chair” or “bed”. Thus, a highquality visible surface is crucial for the SSC task.
However, due to the inherent imperfection of the depth
camera, the depth information is quite noisy, what follows
is an imperfect visible surface that is usually represented by
Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF) [52]. In general, the existing depth noises can be roughly categorized
into the following two basic types:
1) Zero Noise. This type of noise happens when a depth
sensor cannot confirm the depth value of some local regions,
it will fill these regions with zeroes [14,43]. Zero noise generally occurs on object surfaces with reflection or unevenness [41]. Based on zero noise, the visible surface will be
incomplete after the 2D-3D projection via TSDF [49], so
the incomplete volumetric prediction problem may occur in
the final 3D voxels. For example, as shown in the upper-half
of Figure 1, for the input RGB “kitchen” image, the depth
value of some parts of the “cupboard” surface (marked with
the red dotted frames) (in (b)) is set to zero due to reflections. Based on this, both the visible surface (in (d)) and the
predicted 3D voxels (in (f)) appear incomplete in reflective
regions of this “cupboard”. Our method uses the perfect visible surface (in (e)) generated by the noise-free ground-truth
depth value (in (c)) as intermediate supervision in training ,
which helps the model to estimate “cupboard” 3D voxels in
inference even with the noisy depth value as input.
2) Delta Noise. This type of noise refers to the inevitable
deviation of the obtained depth value due to the inherent

867

