This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncovering the Disentanglement Capability in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Qiucheng Wu1 , Yujian Liu1 , Handong Zhao2 , Ajinkya Kale2 , Trung Bui2 , Tong Yu2 ,
Zhe Lin2 , Yang Zhang3 , Shiyu Chang1
1
UC, Santa Barbara, 2 Adobe Research, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{qiucheng, yujianliu}@ucsb.edu

Original + Attribute

Original Image

Original + Attribute

Original Image

Original + Attribute

Transfer

Training

Original Image

Attribute: Cherry Blossom

Attribute: Red Brick

Attribute: Renaissance

Figure 1. Example attributes disentangled from the stable diffusion model. Based on a fixed stable diffusion model, we disentangle
the target attribute from a single training image. The learned parameters can then be applied to an unseen image and achieve the same edit.

Abstract
Generative models have been widely studied in computer
vision. Recently, diffusion models have drawn substantial
attention due to the high quality of their generated images. A key desired property of image generative models is
the ability to disentangle different attributes, which should
enable modification towards a style without changing the
semantic content, and the modification parameters should
generalize to different images. Previous studies have found
that generative adversarial networks (GANs) are inherently
endowed with such disentanglement capability, so they can
perform disentangled image editing without re-training or
fine-tuning the network. In this work, we explore whether
diffusion models are also inherently equipped with such a
capability. Our finding is that for stable diffusion models,
by partially changing the input text embedding from a neutral description (e.g., “a photo of person”) to one with style
(e.g., “a photo of person with smile”) while fixing all the
Gaussian random noises introduced during the denoising
process, the generated images can be modified towards the
target style without changing the semantic content. Based

on this finding, we further propose a simple, light-weight
image editing algorithm where the mixing weights of the two
text embeddings are optimized for style matching and content preservation. This entire process only involves optimizing over around 50 parameters and does not fine-tune the
diffusion model itself. Experiments show that the proposed
method can modify a wide range of attributes, with the
performance outperforming diffusion-model-based imageediting algorithms that require fine-tuning. The optimized
weights generalize well to different images. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/UCSBNLP-Chang/DiffusionDisentanglement.

1. Introduction
Image generation has been a widely-studied research
problem in computer vision, with many competitive generative models proposed over the last decade, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [5, 10, 18, 30, 32] and
variational autoencoders (VAE) [39, 57, 59, 60]. Recently,
diffusion models [23, 71–73], with their ability to generate high-quality and high-resolution images in different do-

1900

