This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Artistic Image Aesthetics Assessment:
a Large-scale Dataset and a New Method
Ran Yi1 *, Haoyuan Tian1 , Zhihao Gu1 , Yu-Kun Lai2 , Paul L. Rosin2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Cardiff University
{ranyi,thy0210,ellery-holmes}@sjtu.edu.cn, {LaiY4,RosinPL}@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
Image aesthetics assessment (IAA) is a challenging task
due to its highly subjective nature. Most of the current studies rely on large-scale datasets (e.g., AVA and AADB) to
learn a general model for all kinds of photography images.
However, little light has been shed on measuring the aesthetic quality of artistic images, and the existing datasets
only contain relatively few artworks. Such a defect is a great
obstacle to the aesthetic assessment of artistic images. To
fill the gap in the field of artistic image aesthetics assessment (AIAA), we first introduce a large-scale AIAA dataset:
Boldbrush Artistic Image Dataset (BAID), which consists
of 60,337 artistic images covering various art forms, with
more than 360,000 votes from online users. We then propose a new method, SAAN (Style-specific Art Assessment
Network), which can effectively extract and utilize stylespecific and generic aesthetic information to evaluate artistic images. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed
approach outperforms existing IAA methods on the proposed BAID dataset according to quantitative comparisons.
We believe the proposed dataset and method can serve as
a foundation for future AIAA works and inspire more research in this field. Dataset and code are available at:
https://github.com/Dreemurr-T/BAID.git

1. Introduction
With the ever-growing scale of online visual data, image
aesthetic assessment (IAA) shows great potential in a variety of applications such as photo recommendation, image
ranking and image search [6]. In recent years, image style
transfer [9, 14, 19, 20, 26] and AI painting [15, 39] have become high-profile research areas. Users can easily generate
artworks of numerous styles from websites and online applications, which has led to the explosion of artistic images
online and the drastic increase in demand for automatically
evaluating artwork aesthetics. We refer to this problem as
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Samples from the proposed BAID dataset. BAID covers
a wide range of artistic styles and painting themes.

artistic image aesthetic assessment (AIAA).
The artistic image aesthetic assessment task is similar
to IAA for being extremely challenging due to its highly
subjective nature, as different individuals may have distinct
visual and art preferences. Existing datasets related to this
task can be summarized into three categories, but none of
them meets the requirements of the AIAA task: (1) IAA
datasets: modern IAA methods [13, 21, 23, 30, 32, 34] are
data-driven, usually trained and evaluated on large-scale
IAA datasets, e.g., AVA [25], AADB [17] and CUHKPQ [22]. However, these datasets only contain real-world

22388

