This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Diffusion for Multi-Modal Face Generation and Editing

Teaser
Multi-Modal
Conditions

Ziqi Huang Kelvin C.K. Chan Yuming Jiang Ziwei LiuB
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{ziqi002, chan0899, yuming002, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Generated Image (512×512)

Multi-Modal Conditions

This man has
beard of medium
length. He is in
his thirties.

This female is in
the middle age.

Generated Image

Input Image

Target Mask

Target Text

He is a young
adult. This man has
a rough growth of
stubble.

He is a teen. The
face is covered with
short pointed
beard.

She is a teenager.

This man has
beard of medium
length. He is in his
thirties.

This female is in
the middle age.

This woman is a
teen. There is no
beard on her face.

This man has
beard of medium
length. He is in his
thirties.

This man has
beard of medium
length. He is in his
thirties.

(a) Face Generation

Edited Image

(b) Face Editing

Figure 1. We propose Collaborative Diffusion, where users can use multiple modalities to control face generation and editing. (a) Face
Generation. Given multi-modal controls, our framework synthesizes high-quality images consistent with the input conditions. (b) Face
Editing. Collaborative Diffusion also supports multi-modal editing of real images with promising identity preservation capability.

Abstract
Diffusion models arise as a powerful generative tool recently. Despite the great progress, existing diffusion models
mainly focus on uni-modal control, i.e., the diffusion process
is driven by only one modality of condition. To further unleash the users’ creativity, it is desirable for the model to be
controllable by multiple modalities simultaneously, e.g. generating and editing faces by describing the age (text-driven)
while drawing the face shape (mask-driven).
In this work, we present Collaborative Diffusion, where
pre-trained uni-modal diffusion models collaborate to
achieve multi-modal face generation and editing without
re-training. Our key insight is that diffusion models driven
by different modalities are inherently complementary regarding the latent denoising steps, where bilateral connections
can be established upon. Specifically, we propose dynamic
diffuser, a meta-network that adaptively hallucinates multimodal denoising steps by predicting the spatial-temporal
B

Corresponding author.
Project page: https://ziqihuangg.github.io/projects/collaborative-diffusion.html
Code: https://github.com/ziqihuangg/Collaborative-Diffusion

influence functions for each pre-trained uni-modal model.
Collaborative Diffusion not only collaborates generation
capabilities from uni-modal diffusion models, but also integrates multiple uni-modal manipulations to perform multimodal editing. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate the superiority of our framework in both
image quality and condition consistency.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed substantial progress in image
synthesis and editing with the surge of diffusion models [9,
20, 56, 58]. In addition to the remarkable synthesis quality,
one appealing property of diffusion models is the flexibility
of conditioning on various modalities, such as texts [3, 16,
29, 30, 39, 48, 51], segmentation masks [48, 65, 66], and
sketches [7, 65]. However, existing explorations are largely
confined to the use of a single modality at a time. The
exploitation of multiple conditions remains under-explored.
As a generative tool, its controllability is still limited.
To unleash users’ creativity, it is desirable that the model

6080

