This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ActMAD: Activation Matching to Align Distributions for Test-Time-Training
M. Jehanzeb Mirza‡1,2
Pol Jané Soneira3
Horst Possegger1

Wei Lin1,4
Horst Bischof1,2

Mateusz Kozinski1

1

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, TU Graz, Austria.
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning.
3
Institute of Control Systems, KIT, Germany.
4
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Semantic 3D Computer Vision.
2

Abstract

1. Introduction
When evaluated in laboratory conditions, deep networks
outperform humans in numerous visual recognition tasks [6,
8, 9]. But this impressive performance is predicated on
the assumption that the test and training data come from the
same distribution. In many practical scenarios, satisfying
this requirement is either impossible or impractical. For
example, a perception system of an autonomous vehicle
can be exposed not only to fog, snow, and rain, but also to
rare conditions including smoke, sand storms, or substances
distributed on the road in consequence of a traffic accident.
Unfortunately, distribution shifts between the training and
test data can incur a significant performance penalty [1, 20,
‡ Correspondence: muhammad.mirza@icg.tugraz.at

Mean Average Precision (%)

Test-Time-Training (TTT) is an approach to cope with
out-of-distribution (OOD) data by adapting a trained model
to distribution shifts occurring at test-time. We propose to
perform this adaptation via Activation Matching (ActMAD):
We analyze activations of the model and align activation
statistics of the OOD test data to those of the training data.
In contrast to existing methods, which model the distribution
of entire channels in the ultimate layer of the feature extractor, we model the distribution of each feature in multiple
layers across the network. This results in a more fine-grained
supervision and makes ActMAD attain state of the art performance on CIFAR-100C and Imagenet-C. ActMAD is also
architecture- and task-agnostic, which lets us go beyond
image classification, and score 15.4% improvement over
previous approaches when evaluating a KITTI-trained object detector on KITTI-Fog. Our experiments highlight that
ActMAD can be applied to online adaptation in realistic
scenarios, requiring little data to attain its full performance.

Fog

Snow

Rain

Clear

80

60

40

20

0

0

60

Baseline Clear (90.7%)
NORM
TTT

Condition Change
DUA
Our ActMAD

120

240

180

300

Time (seconds)

Figure 1. ActMAD is well suited for online test-time adaptation
irrespective of network architecture and task. Our intended application is object detection on board of a vehicle driving in dynamically
changing and unpredictable weather conditions. Here, we report the
class-averaged Mean Average Precision (mAP@50) over adaptation time1 , attained by continuously adapting a KITTI [12]-trained
YOLOv3 [29] detector. Clear refers to the weather condition of the
original dataset, mostly acquired in sunny weather, while Fog, Rain,
and Snow are generated by perturbing the original images [15, 18].
Gray vertical lines mark transitions between weather conditions.

25,27,34,36]. To address this shortcoming, test-time-training
(TTT) methods attempt to adapt a deep network to the actual
distribution of the test data, at test-time.
Existing TTT techniques limit the performance drop provoked by the shift in test distribution, but the goal of online, data-efficient, source-free, and task-agnostic adaptation remains elusive: the methods that update network parameters by self-supervision on test data [10, 25, 32] can
only be used if the network was first trained in a multi1 Time (seconds) for adaptation is hardware specific. For reference, we
run these experiments on an RTX-3090 NVIDIA graphics card and it takes
∼75s to adapt to 3741 images (one weather condition) in the KITTI test set.

24152

