This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Fine-Grained Image Forgery Detection and Localization
Xiao Guo1 , Xiaohong Liu2 , Zhiyuan Ren1 , Steven Grosz1 , Iacopo Masi3 , Xiaoming Liu1
1
Michigan State University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Sapienza University of Rome
{guoxia11, renzhiy1, groszst}@msu.edu, xiaohongliu@sjtu.edu.cn,
masi@di.uniroma1.it, liuxm@msu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Chaotic and pervasive multimedia information sharing
offers better means for spreading misinformation [1], and
the forged image content could, in principle, sustain recent “infodemics” [3]. Firstly, CNN-synthesized images
made extraordinary leaps culminating in recent synthesis
methods—Dall·E [52] or Google ImageN [57]—based on
diffusion models (DDPM) [24], which even generates realistic videos from text [23, 60]. Secondly, the availability
of image editing toolkits produced a substantially low-cost
access to image forgery or tampering (e.g., splicing and inpainting). In response to such an issue of image forgery,
the computer vision community has made considerable ef-

Real v.s. Forgery

Image Editing
Localization
CNN-synthesized

(a)
Mean/Variance of forgery area

Differences in forgery attributes of images generated in
CNN-synthesized and image-editing domains are large, and
such differences make a unified image forgery detection and
localization (IFDL) challenging. To this end, we present
a hierarchical fine-grained formulation for IFDL representation learning. Specifically, we first represent forgery attributes of a manipulated image with multiple labels at
different levels. Then we perform fine-grained classification at these levels using the hierarchical dependency between them. As a result, the algorithm is encouraged to
learn both comprehensive features and inherent hierarchical nature of different forgery attributes, thereby improving
the IFDL representation. Our proposed IFDL framework
contains three components: multi-branch feature extractor, localization and classification modules. Each branch
of the feature extractor learns to classify forgery attributes
at one level, while localization and classification modules
segment the pixel-level forgery region and detect imagelevel forgery, respectively. Lastly, we construct a hierarchical fine-grained dataset to facilitate our study. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on 7 different
benchmarks, for both tasks of IFDL and forgery attribute
classification. Our source code and dataset can be found:
github.com/CHELSEA234/HiFi-IFDL.

Detection

HiFi-IFDL
HiFi-IFDL

.5
.4

Columbia
HiFi-IFDL

.3
.2

HiFi CASIA HiFi USCISI
-IFDL
NIST16 -IFDL

.1

Inpainting

Copy-move

(b)

Splicing Faceshifter STGAN

Figure 1. (a) In this work, we study image forgery detection and
localization (IFDL), regardless of forgery method domains. (b)
The distribution of forgery region depends on individual forgery
methods. Each color represents one forgery category (x-axis).
Each bubble represents one image forgery dataset. The y-axis denotes the average of forgery area. The bubble’s area is proportional
to the variance of the forgery area.

forts, which however branch separately into two directions:
detecting either CNN synthesis [62, 64, 73], or conventional
image editing [17, 26, 43, 63, 68]. As a result, these methods
may be ineffective when deploying to real-life scenarios,
where forged images can possibly be generated from either
CNN-sythensized or image-editing domains.
To push the frontier of image forensics [59], we study the
image forgery detection and localization problem (IFDL)—
Fig. 1a—regardless of the forgery method domains, i.e.,
CNN-synthesized or image editing. It is challenging to develop a unified algorithm for two domains, as images, generated by different forgery methods, differ largely from each
other in terms of various forgery attributes. For example,
a forgery attribute can indicate whether a forged image is
fully synthesized or partially manipulated, or whether the
forgery method used is the diffusion model generating im-

3155

