This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly supervised segmentation with point annotations for histopathology
images via contrast-based variational model
Hongrun Zhang1,4† , Liam Burrows2† , Yanda Meng1 , Declan Sculthorpe3 , Abhik Mukherjee3 ,
Sarah E Coupland4 , Ke Chen2 , Yalin Zheng1∗
1
Department of Eye and Vision Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK 2 Department of Mathematical
Sciences and Centre for Mathematical Imaging Techniques, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
3
Biodiscovery Institute, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
4
Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
{hongrun.zhang,liam.burrows,yanda.meng,s.e.coupland,k.chen,yalin.zheng}@liverpool.ac.uk
{declan.sculthorpe,abhik.mukherjee1}@nottingham.ac.uk, zhang.hr.jlu@gmail.com

Abstract
Image segmentation is a fundamental task in the field of
imaging and vision. Supervised deep learning for segmentation has achieved unparalleled success when sufficient
training data with annotated labels are available. However,
annotation is known to be expensive to obtain, especially
for histopathology images where the target regions are usually with high morphology variations and irregular shapes.
Thus, weakly supervised learning with sparse annotations
of points is promising to reduce the annotation workload. In
this work, we propose a contrast-based variational model
to generate segmentation results, which serve as reliable
complementary supervision to train a deep segmentation
model for histopathology images. The proposed method
considers the common characteristics of target regions in
histopathology images and can be trained in an end-to-end
manner. It can generate more regionally consistent and
smoother boundary segmentation, and is more robust to unlabeled ‘novel’ regions. Experiments on two different histology datasets demonstrate its effectiveness and efficiency
in comparison to previous models. Code is available at:
https://github.com/hrzhang1123/CVM_WS_
Segmentation.

1. Introduction
Histopathology images are of great importance for clinical diagnosis and prognosis of diseases. With the thriving of
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques over the past decade,
especially deep learning, automatic analysis of histopathology images in some tasks has achieved comparable or even
†: Equal contribution; ∗: Corresponding author

Figure 1. Two examples of histopathology images with target regions (e.g. tumor (top row) and stroma (bottom row)) annotated
by contours (b) or in-target and out-of-target points (c).

surpassing performance in comparison with human pathologists’ reviewing [2, 13, 28, 50]. However, most competent
methods are based on supervised learning, and their performances critically rely on a large number of training samples
with detailed annotations. Yet such annotations usually require experienced pathologists and are expensive (in terms
of cost and time consumption) to obtain, and also subject
to human errors. The annotation problem for histopathology images is particularly demanding, not only due to the
large size of such an image but also resulting from irregular
shapes of target tissues to be annotated (See Figure.1).
Weakly supervised learning is a promising solution to
alleviate the issues of obtaining annotations. The annotations for the “weakly supervised” can specifically refer to image-level labelling (multiple instance learning)
[23, 25, 27, 41, 48, 51], partial annotations within an image
(point or scribble annotation) [26], or full annotation in par-

15630

