This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hard Patches Mining for Masked Image Modeling
Haochen Wang1,3 Kaiyou Song2 Junsong Fan1,4 Yuxi Wang1,4 Jin Xie2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing,
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Megvii Technology 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics,
Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Science
{wanghaochen2022, junsong.fan, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
{songkaiyou, xiejin}@megvii.com

Abstract
Masked image modeling (MIM) has attracted much
research attention due to its promising potential for learning
scalable visual representations. In typical approaches,
models usually focus on predicting specific contents of
masked patches, and their performances are highly related
to pre-defined mask strategies. Intuitively, this procedure can
be considered as training a student (the model) on solving
given problems (predict masked patches). However, we
argue that the model should not only focus on solving given
problems, but also stand in the shoes of a teacher to produce
a more challenging problem by itself. To this end, we propose
Hard Patches Mining (HPM), a brand-new framework for
MIM pre-training. We observe that the reconstruction loss
can naturally be the metric of the difficulty of the pretraining task. Therefore, we introduce an auxiliary loss
predictor, predicting patch-wise losses first and deciding
where to mask next. It adopts a relative relationship learning
strategy to prevent overfitting to exact reconstruction loss
values. Experiments under various settings demonstrate
the effectiveness of HPM in constructing masked images.
Furthermore, we empirically find that solely introducing the
loss prediction objective leads to powerful representations,
verifying the efficacy of the ability to be aware of where is
hard to reconstruct.1

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning [6, 8, 9, 18, 20], with the goal
of learning scalable feature representations from largescale datasets without any annotations, has been a research
hotspot in computer vision (CV). Inspired by masked
1 Code: https://github.com/Haochen-Wang409/HPM

yuxiwang93@gmail.com

model

input

image

image

Pre-defined
mask strategy

(a) Conventional MIM pre-training paradigm.
input

image

model (as a student)

image

Where is hard to
reconstruct?
model (as a teacher)

(b) Our proposed MIM pre-training paradigm.

Figure 1. Comparison between conventional MIM pre-training
paradigm and our proposed HPM. (a) Conventional approaches
can be interpreted as training a student, where the model is only
equipped with the ability to solve a given problem under some
pre-defined mask strategies. (b) Our proposed HPM pre-training
paradigm makes the model to be both a teacher and a student, with
the extra ability to produce a challenging pretext task.

language modeling (MLM) [4,11,44,45] in natural language
processing (NLP), where the model is urged to predict
masked words within a sentence, masked image modeling
(MIM), the counterpart in CV, has attracted numerous
interests of researchers [3, 13, 19, 26, 42, 61, 66, 69].
Fig. 1a illustrates the paradigm of conventional approaches for MIM pre-training [3, 19, 67]. In these typical
solutions, models usually focus on predicting specific
contents of masked patches. Intuitively, this procedure
can be considered as training a student (i.e., the model)
on solving given problems (i.e., predict masked patches).
To alleviate the spatial redundancy in CV [19] and produce

10375

