This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TOPLight: Lightweight Neural Networks with Task-Oriented Pretraining for
Visible-Infrared Recognition

1

Hao Yu1 , Xu Cheng1 *, Wei Peng2
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University
{yuhao,xcheng}@nuist.edu.cn, wepeng@stanford.edu

Visible-infrared recognition (VI recognition) is a challenging task due to the enormous visual difference across
heterogeneous images. Most existing works achieve promising results by transfer learning, such as pretraining on
the ImageNet, based on advanced neural architectures like
ResNet and ViT. However, such methods ignore the negative influence of the pretrained colour prior knowledge,
as well as their heavy computational burden makes them
hard to deploy in actual scenarios with limited resources.
In this paper, we propose a novel task-oriented pretrained
lightweight neural network (TOPLight) for VI recognition.
Specifically, the TOPLight method simulates the domain
conflict and sample variations with the proposed fake domain loss in the pretraining stage, which guides the network
to learn how to handle those difficulties, such that a more
general modality-shared feature representation is learned
for the heterogeneous images. Moreover, an effective finegrained dependency reconstruction module (FDR) is developed to discover substantial pattern dependencies shared
in two modalities. Extensive experiments on VI person reidentification and VI face recognition datasets demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed TOPLight, which significantly outperforms the current state of the arts while demanding fewer computational resources.

1. Introduction
Identity recognition technologies have provided numerous reliable solutions for monitoring systems, which strive
to match the face (face recognition [6, 7]) or pedestrian
(person re-identification [42]) images of the same identity.
However, the majority of previous efforts only consider visible images. In real-life practice, many surveillance cameras can switch to infrared imaging mode at night. Thus,
the essential cross-modality visible-infrared recognition (VI
* Corresponding Author (Email: xcheng@nuist.edu.cn)

Learn to represent
''heterogenous'' features

+
va Co
ria lou
tio r
n

Abstract

Domain
Conflict

ImageNet + Generic
variation
-mini

Dual-path
training

+
va Tex
ria tur
tio e
n

Learn to embed
''heterogenous'' features

(a)
: Rank-1
: mAP

ImageNet-1k
pretrained networks

62.4

61.8

60.1

59.0

57.6
55.1
50.9

47.8 47.1

SP

47.3 47.8

TOP

MobileNetV3-L

SP

47.9

TOP

ShuffleNetV2-1.5

SP

TOP

GhostNet-1.3

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The task-oriented pretraining strategy; (b) Performance comparison of the standard ImageNet-1k pretraining
scheme (SP) and the proposed task-oriented pretraining scheme
(TOP) on the SYSU-MM01 dataset [35] (All-Search mode).

recognition) technology has been developed to match the
visible and infrared photographs of the same people.
Recently, visible-infrared person re-identification (VIReID) [26, 38] and visible-infrared face recognition [8, 13,
44] have been widely studied. The key issue is identifying the modality-shared patterns. To this end, several
works [29, 30] use generative adversarial networks (GANs)
to implement cross-modality alignment at the pixel and feature levels. Others [4, 26, 38] design the dual-path feature
extraction network, coupled with inter-feature constraints,
to close the embedding space of two modalities. However,
these methods utilize at least one pretrained ResNet-50 [12]
backbone to extract solid features, which makes them unsuitable for edge monitoring devices. Recent works [4, 38]
employ auxiliary models (e.g., pose estimation, graph reasoning) to relieve the modality discrepancy, which enhances
the performance on academic benchmarks but reduces the
real-time inference speed. Compared with conventional
deep networks (e.g., ResNet, ViT), lightweight networks
[11,15,24] can extract basal features rapidly. In VI recogni-

3541

