This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-set Fine-grained Retrieval via Prompting Vision-Language Evaluator
Shijie Wang1 , Jianlong Chang2 , Haojie Li1,3 *, Zhihui Wang1 , Wanli Ouyang4 , Qi Tian2
1
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Huawei Cloud & AI, China
3
College of Computer and Engineering, Shandong University of Science and Technology, China
4
Sense Time Computer Vision Research Group, The University of Sydney, Australia

Abstract
ℱ𝐶𝑁𝑁

Open-set fine-grained retrieval is an emerging challenge
that requires an extra capability to retrieve unknown subcategories during evaluation. However, current works focus
on close-set visual concepts, where all the subcategories
are pre-defined, and make it hard to capture discriminative knowledge from unknown subcategories, consequently
failing to handle unknown subcategories in open-world scenarios. In this work, we propose a novel Prompting visionLanguage Evaluator (PLEor) framework based on the recently introduced contrastive language-image pretraining
(CLIP) model, for open-set fine-grained retrieval. PLEor
could leverage pre-trained CLIP model to infer the discrepancies encompassing both pre-defined and unknown subcategories, called category-specific discrepancies, and transfer them to the backbone network trained in the close-set
scenarios. To make pre-trained CLIP model sensitive to
category-specific discrepancies, we design a dual prompt
scheme to learn a vision prompt specifying the categoryspecific discrepancies, and turn random vectors with category names in a text prompt into category-specific discrepancy descriptions. Moreover, a vision-language evaluator
is proposed to semantically align the vision and text prompts
based on CLIP model, and reinforce each other. In addition, we propose an open-set knowledge transfer to transfer
the category-specific discrepancies into the backbone network using knowledge distillation mechanism. Quantitative
and qualitative experiments show that our PLEor achieves
promising performance on open-set fine-grained datasets.

1. Introduction
Open-set fine-grained retrieval (OSFR) attempts to build
a well-generalized embedding space where the visual discrepancies among unknown subcategories are clearly reflected. It plays a vital role in numerous vision applica* Corresponding author: hjli@dlut.edu.cn

𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺𝑨

0
0.15
0
0.02
0.94 𝐶𝐸 1
ℒ
⋮
⋮
0
0.23

(a) a classification-based evaluator
(e.g., [34, 43, 52, 64])

ℒ 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒

(b) a metric-based evaluator
(e.g., [3, 20, 39, 46, 51, 63])

ℒ 𝐾𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑒𝑟

𝑫𝒐𝒈

𝑪𝒂𝒕

⋯
⋯

𝑭𝒐𝒙

𝑷𝒊𝒈

Open-world Knowledge

ℱ𝐶𝑁𝑁
𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺
𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨

ℱ𝐶𝑁𝑁

𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺𝑨𝑨
𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺
𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺𝑩

Vison Prompt
(Visual discrepancies )

𝐶𝐿𝐼𝑃

𝑪𝒂𝒓

+ 𝑪𝑳𝑨𝑺𝑺𝑨

Tuned
Frozen

A brown dog is sitting on the grass.
Two striped
cats are lying
on bed.
Open-world
Knowledge
Tibetan fox walks on the grassland

Text Prompt (Category-specific descriptions)

𝑻𝒐𝒚

𝑷𝒐𝒕

𝑨𝒊𝒓

(c) a vision-language evaluator with open-world knowledge

Figure 1. Comparison on existing evaluators in open-set finegrained retrieval. Although our PLEor (c) is trained in a closeset scenarios, similar with previous works (a) (b), it could mine
the category-specific discrepancies using pre-trained CLIP model
aided by vision and text prompts, and transfer the discrepancies
encompassing both pre-defined and unknown subcategories to our
model. This enables our model to procure in-depth understanding
for unknown subcategories owing to distilling the knowledge with
open-world visual concepts from CLIP model, improving retrieval
performance eventually in open-set scenarios.

tions from fashion industry, e.g., retrieval of diverse types of
clothes [1, 31], to environmental conservation, e.g., retrieving endangered species [7,49,50]. As shown in Fig. 1(a)(b),
existing works follow a close-set learning setting, where all
the subcategories are pre-defined, and evaluate embeddings
identifying the visually similar objects of pre-defined subcategories. However, such evaluation focuses on closed-set
visual concepts, limiting the model to a pre-defined list of
subcategories, and is not generalizable when it comes to unknown subcategories unseen during training.
Fortunately, recent works [66, 67] using large-scale contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP) model [37] have
shown great potentials in alleviating this limitation. As
shown in Fig. 1(c), CLIP model is pretrained from scratch
on a dataset of 400 moillion image-text pairs, which are automatically collected from the publicly available sources on

19381

