This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PartManip: Learning Cross-Category Generalizable Part Manipulation Policy
from Point Cloud Observations
Haoran Geng 1,2*
1

Ziming Li 1,2* Yiran Geng 1,2 Jiayi Chen 1,3 Hao Dong 1,2
CFCS, Peking University 2 School of EECS, Peking University
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

He Wang1,2†

Figure 1. Overview. We introduce a large-scale cross-category part manipulation benchmark PartManip with diverse object datasets,
realistic settings, and rich annotations. We propose a generalizable vision-based policy learning strategy and boost the performance of
part-based object manipulation by a large margin, which can generalize to unseen object categories and novel objects in the real world.

Abstract
Learning a generalizable object manipulation policy is
vital for an embodied agent to work in complex real-world
scenes. Parts, as the shared components in different object
categories, have the potential to increase the generalization ability of the manipulation policy and achieve crosscategory object manipulation. In this work, we build the
first large-scale, part-based cross-category object manipulation benchmark, PartManip, which is composed of 11
object categories, 494 objects, and 1432 tasks in 6 task
classes. Compared to previous work, our benchmark is
also more diverse and realistic, i.e., having more objects
and using sparse-view point cloud as input without oracle
information like part segmentation. To tackle the difficulties of vision-based policy learning, we first train a state* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: hewang@pku.edu.cn.

based expert with our proposed part-based canonicalization and part-aware rewards, and then distill the knowledge
to a vision-based student. We also find an expressive backbone is essential to overcome the large diversity of different
objects. For cross-category generalization, we introduce
domain adversarial learning for domain-invariant feature
extraction. Extensive experiments in simulation show that
our learned policy can outperform other methods by a large
margin, especially on unseen object categories. We also
demonstrate our method can successfully manipulate novel
objects in the real world. Our benchmark has been released
in https://pku-epic.github.io/PartManip.

1. Introduction
We as humans are capable of manipulating objects in
a wide range of scenarios with ease and adaptability. For
building general-purpose intelligent robots that can work in

2978

