This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RelightableHands: Efficient Neural Relighting of Articulated Hand Models
Shun Iwase1,2⇤
Shunsuke Saito2
Tomas Simon2
Stephen Lombardi2
Timur Bagautdinov2
Rohan Joshi2
2
2
2
Fabian Prada
Takaaki Shiratori
Yaser Sheikh
Jason Saragih2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Reality Labs Research

Directional Light

Near-field Light

Environment Map

Student Model Rendering (21ms)

Two Hand Rendering (32ms)

Figure 1. Neural Relighting of Animatable Hands. Our model-based neural rendering approach enables high-fidelity rendering of hands
with various poses, views, and illuminations. Our student model is highly efficient enough to render in real-time.

Abstract
We present the first neural relighting approach for rendering high-fidelity personalized hands that can be animated in real-time under novel illumination. Our approach
adopts a teacher-student framework, where the teacher
learns appearance under a single point light from images
captured in a light-stage, allowing us to synthesize hands
in arbitrary illuminations but with heavy compute. Using
images rendered by the teacher model as training data, an
efficient student model directly predicts appearance under
natural illuminations in real-time. To achieve generalization, we condition the student model with physics-inspired
illumination features such as visibility, diffuse shading, and
specular reflections computed on a coarse proxy geometry,
maintaining a small computational overhead. Our key insight is that these features have strong correlation with subsequent global light transport effects, which proves sufficient as conditioning data for the neural relighting network.
Moreover, in contrast to bottleneck illumination conditioning, these features are spatially aligned based on underlying
geometry, leading to better generalization to unseen illuminations and poses. In our experiments, we demonstrate the
efficacy of our illumination feature representations, outperforming baseline approaches. We also show that our approach can photorealistically relight two interacting hands
⇤ This work was done during an internship at Meta

at real-time speeds. https://sh8.io/#/relightable hands

1. Introduction
Neural rendering approaches have significantly advanced photorealistic face rendering [42, 55, 66] in recent
years. These methods use deep neural networks to model
the light transport on human skin [11, 14, 31, 63], directly
reproducing physical effects such as subsurface scattering
by reconstructing real images. However, despite the success of neural relighting, extending this approach to animatable hand models poses a unique challenge: generalization
across articulations.
Unlike faces, hands have many joints, and the state of
a single joint affects all child joints. This leads to extremely diverse shape variations even within a single subject. Changes in pose drastically affect the appearance
of hands, creating wrinkles, casting shadows, and interreflecting across topologically distant regions. Rendering
these effects is challenging because sufficiently accurate geometry and material properties required for photorealism
are difficult to obtain, and even then, path tracing to sufficient accuracy is computationally expensive. The use of
simplified geometric and appearance models (such as linear
blend skinning and reduced material models) allow faster
computation but come at a noticeable degradation in rendering fidelity. So far, photorealistic rendering of animatable

16663

