This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RefCLIP: A Universal Teacher for Weakly Supervised
Referring Expression Comprehension
Lei Jin 12 *, Gen Luo 1∗ , Yiyi Zhou12 , Xiaoshuai Sun12†, Guannan Jiang3 , Annan Shu3 , Rongrong Ji12
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
3
Intelligent Manufacturing Department, Contemporary Amperex Technology Co. Limited (CATL).
{kingts,luogen}@stu.xmu.edu.cn,{zhouyiyi,xssun,rrji}@xmu.edu.cn,{jianggn, shuan01}@catl.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC), also
known as visual grounding [5, 16], aims to locate the
target instance in an image based on a referring expres* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Prediction
(Pseudo Label)

Text Encoder
Anchor-text
matching
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9

Visual
Encoder

2

Best Anchor
1 2 3

Candidates

Anchor Points

(a) RefCLIP

“Person on middle”

REC Models

supervise

Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) is a task of
grounding the referent based on an expression, and its development is greatly limited by expensive instance-level annotations. Most existing weakly supervised methods are
built based on two-stage detection networks, which are
computationally expensive. In this paper, we resort to the
efficient one-stage detector and propose a novel weakly supervised model called RefCLIP. Specifically, RefCLIP redefines weakly supervised REC as an anchor-text matching
problem, which can avoid the complex post-processing in
existing methods. To achieve weakly supervised learning,
we introduce anchor-based contrastive loss to optimize RefCLIP via numerous anchor-text pairs. Based on RefCLIP,
we further propose the first model-agnostic weakly supervised training scheme for existing REC models, where RefCLIP acts as a mature teacher to generate pseudo-labels for
teaching common REC models. With our careful designs,
this scheme can even help existing REC models achieve
better weakly supervised performance than RefCLIP, e.g.,
TransVG and SimREC. To validate our approaches, we conduct extensive experiments on four REC benchmarks, i.e.,
RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, RefCOCOg and ReferItGame. Experimental results not only report our significant performance gains over existing weakly supervised models, e.g.,
+24.87% on RefCOCO, but also show the 5x faster inference speed. Project: https://refclip.github.io.

“Person on middle”

One-stage Loss

RealGIN

SimREC

Regression
Loss

TransVG

…

Confidence
Loss

(b) Weakly-supervised Training Scheme

Pseudo-label
learning

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed RefCLIP and weaklysupervised training scheme. RefCLIP selects the target bounding
box from YOLOv3 via anchor-text matching, which is optimized
by anchor-based contrastive learning. Our training scheme uses
RefCLIP as a mature teacher to supervise common REC models ,
which requires no network modifications.

sion [25–27, 42, 48]. As a cross-modal recognition task,
REC is not limited to a fixed set of object categories and
is theoretically capable of any open-ended detection [45].
These appealing properties give REC increasing attention
from the community of computer vision [25, 28, 45–48].
However, the expensive instance-level annotation has long
plagued its development.
To this end, recent progress has been devoted to the research of weakly supervised REC models, which aim to
learn detection based merely on language information [7,
38, 43]. Specifically, existing methods extend the two-stage
object detector like Faster-RCNN [37] to a weakly supervised REC model. In terms of methodology, they regard the
REC as a region-text ranking problem, where the salient regions of an image are first extracted by Faster-RCNN and
then ranked via cross-modal matching. To achieve weakly
supervised training, they only use expressions as supervi-

2681

