This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Light Source Separation and Intrinsic Image Decomposition
under AC Illumination
Yusaku Yoshida, Ryo Kawahara, and Takahiro Okabe
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Kyushu Institute of Technology
680-4 Kawazu, Iizuka, Fukuoka 820-8502, Japan
{rkawahara, okabe}@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

Abstract
Artificial light sources are often powered by an electric grid, and then their intensities rapidly oscillate in response to the grid’s alternating current (AC). Interestingly,
the flickers of scene radiance values due to AC illumination are useful for extracting rich information on a scene
of interest. In this paper, we show that the flickers due to
AC illumination is useful for intrinsic image decomposition
(IID). Our proposed method conducts the light source separation (LSS) followed by the IID under AC illumination. In
particular, we reveal the ambiguity in the blind LSS via matrix factorization and the ambiguity in the IID assuming the
diffuse reflection model, and then show why and how those
ambiguities can be resolved via a physics-based approach.
We experimentally confirmed that our method can recover
the colors of the light sources, the diffuse reflectance values,
and the diffuse and specular intensities (shadings) under
each of the light sources, and that the IID under AC illumination is effective for application to auto white balancing.

1. Introduction
Artificial light sources in our surroundings are often
powered by an electric grid, and therefore their intensities
rapidly oscillate in response to the grid’s alternating current
(AC). Such intensity oscillations cause flickers in the radiance values of a scene illuminated by artificial light sources.
The flickers are usually too fast to notice with our naked
eyes, but can be captured by using cameras with short exposure time settings [32]. It is known that the flickers could
make auto white balance unnatural [15].
Interestingly, the flickers are useful for extracting rich information on a scene of interest. Sheinin et al. [28] propose
a method for light source separation (LSS) under AC illumination. Their method decomposes an image sequence of
a scene illuminated by multiple AC light sources into the

basis images of the scene, each of which is illuminated by
only one of the light sources, and the temporal intensity profiles of the light sources. They make use of their self-built
coded-exposure camera synchronized to AC and the dataset
of temporal intensity profiles of various light sources, and
then achieve LSS even for dark scenes such as a city-scale
scene at night.
In this paper, we show that the flickers due to AC illumination is useful also for intrinsic image decomposition
(IID). Originally, IID recovers the shading and reflectance
images of a scene of interest from a single input image on
the basis of the Retinex theory [2,19]. Those intrinsic properties of a scene is useful for computer vision applications
such as image segmentation [6], object recognition [25],
and shape from shading [14].
Our proposed method assumes a scene illuminated by
multiple AC light sources, and recovers the intrinsic properties of the scene and the light sources from an image sequence captured by using a consumer high speed camera.
In contrast to the conventional methods for IID, our method
assumes the dichromatic reflection model [27], and then recovers the intrinsic properties more than the reflectance and
shading images: the colors of the light sources, the diffuse
reflectance values, and the diffuse and specular intensities
(shadings) under each of the light sources.
Specifically, our proposed method conducts the blind
LSS via matrix factorization followed by the IID assuming
the dichromatic reflection model. In particular, we reveal
the ambiguity in the blind LSS under AC illumination via
matrix factorization [26], and then resolve the ambiguity by
integrating the LSS and the IID assuming the diffuse reflection model. Furthermore, we reveal the ambiguity in the
IID assuming the diffuse reflection model under AC illumination, and then resolve the ambiguity on the basis of the
dichromatic reflection model by taking specular highlights
into consideration 1 .
1 It is analogous to uncalibrated photometric stereo; the GBR ambiguity [3] can be resolved from specularity [8]

5735

