This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SegLoc: Learning Segmentation-based Representations for Privacy-Preserving
Visual Localization
Maxime Pietrantoni1,2

Martin Humenberger3
Torsten Sattler2
3
Gabriela Csurka
1
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
NAVER LABS Europe
{firstname.lastname}@cvut.cz,{firstname.lastname}@naverlabs.com
Query image

Abstract
Inspired by properties of semantic segmentation, in this
paper we investigate how to leverage robust image segmentation in the context of privacy-preserving visual localization. We propose a new localization framework, SegLoc,
that leverages image segmentation to create robust, compact, and privacy-preserving scene representations, i.e., 3D
maps. We build upon the correspondence-supervised, finegrained segmentation approach from [42], making it more
robust by learning a set of cluster labels with discriminative
clustering, additional consistency regularization terms and
we jointly learn a global image representation along with
a dense local representation. In our localization pipeline,
the former will be used for retrieving the most similar images, the latter to refine the retrieved poses by minimizing
the label inconsistency between the 3D points of the map
and their projection onto the query image. In various experiments, we show that our proposed representation allows to achieve (close-to) state-of-the-art pose estimation
results while only using a compact 3D map that does not
contain enough information about the original images for
an attacker to reconstruct personal information.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the precise camera pose – position and orientation – from which
the image was taken in a known scene. It is a core component of systems such as self-driving cars [31], autonomous
robots [49], and mixed-reality applications [4, 53].
Traditionally, visual localization algorithms rely on a 3D
scene representation of the target area, which can be a 3D
point cloud map [29, 34, 35, 45, 46, 66, 68, 69, 73, 79], e.g. ,
from Structure-from-Motion (SfM), or a learned 3D representation [9,10,14,37,38,71,76]. The representation is typically derived from reference images with known camera
poses. Depending on the application scenario, these maps

Labelled 3D map

SegLoc
Segmentation
Global
descriptor

(𝑅!, 𝑇!)
(𝑅, 𝑇)

Image retrieval

+

Pose refinement through label alignment

Figure 1. The SegLoc localization pipeline: Our model jointly
creates a robust global descriptor used to retrieve an initial pose
(R0 , T0 ) and dense local representations used to obtain the refined pose (R, T) by maximizing the label consistency between
the reprojected 3D points and the query image.

need to be stored in the cloud, which raises important questions about memory consumption and privacy preservation. It is possible to reconstruct images from maps that
contain local image features [62], amongst the most widely
used for scene representation.
To tackle the above challenges that feature-based approaches may face, inspired by semantic-based [48, 82] and
segmentation-based [42] approaches, we propose a visual
localization pipeline where robust segmentations are used
as the sole cue for localization, yielding reduced storage
requirements (compared to using local features) while increasing privacy-preservation. Our proposed localization
pipeline, called SegLoc, follows standard structure basedlocalization pipelines [34, 66] that represent the scene via
a 3D model: first, image retrieval based on a compact image representation is used to coarsely localize a query image. Given such an initial pose estimate, the camera pose
is refined by aligning the query image to the 3D map. Contrary to prior work that is based on extracting features directly from images, we derive a more abstract representation in the form of a robust dense segmentation based on a

15380

