This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Semi-supervised Learning for Underwater Image Restoration via
Reliable Bank

1

Shirui Huang1* , Keyan Wang1*† , Huan Liu2 , Jun Chen2 , Yunsong Li1
Xidian University, 2 McMaster University, * Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author

srhuang@stu.xidian.edu.cn,{kywang, ysli}@mail.xidian.edu.cn,{liuh127, chenjun}@mcmaster.ca

Abstract
Despite the remarkable achievement of recent underwater image restoration techniques, the lack of labeled data
has become a major hurdle for further progress. In this
work, we propose a mean-teacher based Semi-supervised
Underwater Image Restoration (Semi-UIR) framework to
incorporate the unlabeled data into network training. However, the naive mean-teacher method suffers from two main
problems: (1) The consistency loss used in training might
become ineffective when the teacher’s prediction is wrong.
(2) Using L1 distance may cause the network to overfit wrong labels, resulting in confirmation bias. To address the above problems, we first introduce a reliable
bank to store the “best-ever” outputs as pseudo ground
truth. To assess the quality of outputs, we conduct an
empirical analysis based on the monotonicity property to
select the most trustworthy NR-IQA method. Besides, in
view of the confirmation bias problem, we incorporate contrastive regularization to prevent the overfitting on wrong
labels. Experimental results on both full-reference and nonreference underwater benchmarks demonstrate that our
algorithm has obvious improvement over SOTA methods
quantitatively and qualitatively. Code has been released at
https://github.com/Huang-ShiRui/Semi-UIR.

1. Introduction
Due to light refraction, absorption and scattering in underwater scenes, images taken in the water usually suffer
severely from color distortion, low contrast and blur. Images with these defects tend to be less visually appealing
and can potentially hinder the well-functioning of underwater robotic systems. Recently, many deep learning based
methods [5–7, 24, 51] have been proposed to address image restoration problems. Numerous efforts have also been
devoted to the specific domain of underwater image restora1 This work is supported by the Nature Science Foundation of Shaanxi
Province of China (2021JM-125).

(a) UIEBD

(b) UWCNN

(c) EUVP

Figure 1. Examples from different benchmarks. (a) shows realworld underwater images from UIEB [22] with degraded images
(first and second row). (b) shows the UWCNN training set [21]
(synthesized based on the image formation model) and (c) shows
the EUVP dataset [17] (synthesized by GAN). The ambient light
and color cast of (b) and (c) are quite different from that of (a).

tion [11, 17, 20, 22, 49]. Compared with traditional methods
that mostly rely on hand-crafted priors, deep learning based
solutions are able to deliver superior restoration results due
to their data-driven nature.
Despite their success, most of deep learning based methods are designed to learn the restoration mapping on paired
datasets in a supervised manner. As is known, it is extremely hard, if not impossible, to acquire paired underwater images in real scenes. The existing datasets for underwater image restoration have several non-negligible issues:
(1) Lack of real data. A popular way to construct paired
datasets is to synthesize underwater images using some
physical model [21] or GAN [17, 48]. However, there is a
significant discrepancy between synthesized and real data.
As is shown in Fig. 1, the ambient light and color cast of
synthetic data are quite different from the real counterparts.
Due to domain shift, models trained on synthetic datasets
often exhibit poor generalization in real scenes. Another
way [22] is to manually construct pseudo labels by selecting the best results among those produced by traditional al-

18145

