This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fusing Pre-trained Language Models with Multimodal Prompts
through Reinforcement Learning
Jack Hessel
Youngjae Yu * Jiwan Chung * Heeseung Yun
Jae Sung Park
Ximing Lu
Rowan Zellers
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu
Ronan Le Bras
Gunhee Kim
Yejin Choi
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
OpenAI
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington

Abstract
Generate

Language models are capable of commonsense reasoning: while domain-specific models can learn from explicit knowledge (e.g. commonsense graphs [6], ethical
norms [25]), and larger models like GPT-3 [7] manifest broad commonsense reasoning capacity. Can their
knowledge be extended to multimodal inputs such as images and audio without paired domain data? In this
work, we propose ESPER (Extending Sensory PErception
with Reinforcement learning) which enables text-only pretrained models to address multimodal tasks such as visual
commonsense reasoning. Our key novelty is to use reinforcement learning to align multimodal inputs to language
model generations without direct supervision: for example,
our reward optimization relies only on cosine similarity derived from CLIP [52] and requires no additional paired
(image, text) data. Experiments demonstrate that ESPER
outperforms baselines and prior work on a variety of multimodal text generation tasks ranging from captioning to
commonsense reasoning; these include a new benchmark
we collect and release, the ESP dataset, which tasks models with generating the text of several different domains for
each image. Our code and data are publicly released at
https://github.com/JiwanChung/esper.

1. Introduction
Collecting multimodal training data for new domains can
be a Herculean task. Not only is it costly to assemble multimodal data, but also curated datasets cannot completely
cover a broad range of skills, knowledge, and form (e.g.
free text, triplets, graphs, etc.). Ideally, we want to endow
*

denotes equal contribution

News :
Dialog :
Story :

CLIP

Prompt

Dogs with vegan diets are
healthier, study suggests

0.77

ESPER

A: Is the cat sleeping? B: Yes

PLM

I was walking to the veterinarian.
My dog was having a bad day.

0.41
CLIP
Reward 0.69

Figure 1. The intuition of ESPER, Extending Sensory PErception
with Reinforcement learning. To better align knowledge in CLIP
and pretrained language models (PLM), we use CLIP as a reward
for the pairs of images and self-generated text.

multimodal models with diverse reasoning capacity (e.g.
ethics [25], commonsense [57], etc.) without undertaking
a separate multimodal annotation effort each time.
In this work, we propose Extending Sensory PErception
with Reinforcement learning(ESPER), a new framework that
enables a pre-trained language model to accept multimodal
inputs like images and audio. ESPER extends diverse skills
embodied by the pre-trained language model to similarly
diverse multimodal capabilities, all without requiring additional visually paired data. In a zero-shot fashion, our
model generates text conditioned on an image: using this
interface, we show that ESPER is capable of a diverse range
of skills, including visual commonsense [50], news [39], dialogues [60], blog-style posts [28], and stories [22].
ESPER combines insights from two previously disjoint
lines of work: multimodal prompt tuning and reinforcement learning. Like prior multimodal prompt tuning work,
ESPER starts from a base language-only model (e.g., GPT2 [53], COMET [6]), keeps most of its parameters frozen,

10845

