This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BITE: Beyond Priors for Improved Three-D Dog Pose Estimation
Nadine Rüegg1,2 , Shashank Tripathi2 , Konrad Schindler1 , Michael J. Black2 , and Silvia Zuffi3
1

2

ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
IMATI-CNR, Milan, Italy

Figure 1. BITE enables 3D shape and pose estimation of dogs from a single input image. The model handles a wide range of shapes and
breeds, as well as challenging postures far from the available training poses, like sitting or lying on the ground.

Abstract
We address the problem of inferring the 3D shape and
pose of dogs from images. Given the lack of 3D training data, this problem is challenging, and the best methods lag behind those designed to estimate human shape and
pose. To make progress, we attack the problem from multiple sides at once. First, we need a good 3D shape prior,
like those available for humans. To that end, we learn a
dog-specific 3D parametric model, called D-SMAL. Second,
existing methods focus on dogs in standing poses because
when they sit or lie down, their legs are self occluded and
their bodies deform. Without access to a good pose prior
or 3D data, we need an alternative approach. To that end,
we exploit contact with the ground as a form of side information. We consider an existing large dataset of dog images
and label any 3D contact of the dog with the ground. We exploit body-ground contact in estimating dog pose and find
that it significantly improves results. Third, we develop a
novel neural network architecture to infer and exploit this
contact information. Fourth, to make progress, we have to
be able to measure it. Current evaluation metrics are based
on 2D features like keypoints and silhouettes, which do not
directly correlate with 3D errors. To address this, we create
a synthetic dataset containing rendered images of scanned
3D dogs. With these advances, our method recovers significantly better dog shape and pose than the state of the

art, and we evaluate this improvement in 3D. Our code,
model and test dataset are publicly available for research
purposes at https://bite.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
Capturing and modeling 3D animal shape and pose has
many applications, ranging from biology and conservation
to entertainment and virtual content creation. Cameras are
a natural sensor to observe animals because they do not require the animal to stand still, hold specific postures, be in
physical contact, or otherwise cooperate. The study of animals using images has a long tradition, e.g. Muybridge’s
famous “Horse in Motion” chronophotographs [30]. Still,
expressive 3D models that can adapt to the individual
shape and pose of an animal have only recently been created [44], following earlier work on 3D human shape and
pose [1, 23, 38]. Here, we address the task of reconstructing dogs in 3D from a single image. We focus on dogs as a
representative animal species that features both large shape
variability across different breeds and strong articulated deformations typical of quadrupeds. Dogs are frequently photographed, so images showing a wide range of poses, shapes
and environments are readily available.
While, at first glance, modeling humans and modeling
dogs may seem like similar problems, they present very different technical challenges. For humans there is an enor-

8867

