This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobileNeRF: Exploiting the Polygon Rasterization Pipeline
for Efficient Neural Field Rendering on Mobile Architectures
Zhiqin Chen1,2

Thomas Funkhouser1

Peter Hedman1

1

2

Google Research

Simon Fraser University

Andrea Tagliasacchi1,2,3

University of Toronto3

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have demonstrated
amazing ability to synthesize images of 3D scenes from
novel views. However, they rely upon specialized volumetric rendering algorithms based on ray marching that are
mismatched to the capabilities of widely deployed graphics hardware. This paper introduces a new NeRF representation based on textured polygons that can synthesize
novel images efficiently with standard rendering pipelines.
The NeRF is represented as a set of polygons with textures
representing binary opacities and feature vectors. Traditional rendering of the polygons with a z-buffer yields an
image with features at every pixel, which are interpreted
by a small, view-dependent MLP running in a fragment
shader to produce a final pixel color. This approach enables
NeRFs to be rendered with the traditional polygon rasterization pipeline, which provides massive pixel-level parallelism, achieving interactive frame rates on a wide range of
compute platforms, including mobile phones.
Project page: https://mobile-nerf.github.io

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [33] have become a popular representation for novel view synthesis of 3D scenes.
They represent a scene using a multilayer perceptron (MLP)
that evaluates a 5D implicit function estimating the density
and radiance emanating from any position in any direction,
which can be used in a volumetric rendering framework to
produce novel images. NeRF representations optimized to
minimize multi-view color consistency losses for a set of
posed photographs have demonstrated remarkable ability to
reproduce fine image details for novel views.
One of the main impediments to wide-spread adoption
of NeRF is that it requires specialized rendering algorithms
that are poor match for commonly available hardware. Traditional NeRF implementations use a volumetric rendering
3 Work done while at Google.

Figure 1. Teaser – We present a NeRF that can run on a variety of
common devices at interactive frame rates.

algorithm that evaluates a large MLP at hundreds of sample
positions along the ray for each pixel in order to estimate
and integrate density and radiance. This rendering process
is far too slow for interactive visualization.
Recent work has addressed this issue by “baking” NeRFs
into a sparse 3D voxel grid [21, 51]. For example, Hedman et al. introduced Sparse Neural Radiance Grids
(SNeRG) [21], where each active voxel contains an opacity, diffuse color, and learned feature vector. Rendering an
image from SNeRG is split into two phases: the first uses
ray marching to accumulate the precomputed diffuse colors and feature vectors along each ray, and the second uses
a light-weight MLP operating on the accumulated feature
vector to produce a view-dependent residual that is added
to the accumulated diffuse color. This precomputation and
deferred rendering approach increase the rendering speed of
NeRF by three orders of magnitude. However, it still relies
upon ray marching through a sparse voxel grid to produce
the features for each pixel, and thus it cannot fully utilize
the parallelism available in commodity graphics processing
units (GPUs). In addition, SNeRG requires a significant
amount of GPU memory to store the volumetric textures,
which prohibits it from running on common mobile devices.
In this paper, we introduce MobileNeRF, a NeRF that

16569

