This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multispectral Video Semantic Segmentation: A Benchmark Dataset and Baseline
Wei Ji1

Jingjing Li1,∗
Cheng Bian2
Zongwei Zhou3
Jiaying Zhao2
Alan Yuille3
Li Cheng1
1
2
3
University of Alberta
ByteDance
Johns Hopkins University
{wji3, jingjin1, lcheng5}@ualberta.ca, zzhou82@jh.edu, ayuille1@jhu.edu
RGBT234_man9
KAIST_set02_V004_1.-3
KAIST_set03_V000_2.-2
https://jiwei0921.github.io/Multispectral-Video-Semantic-Segmentation
I00765l.png

I00795l.png

I00810l.png

I01265l.png

I01280l.png

I01295l.png

00003v.jpg

00033v.jpg

00063v.jpg

Figure 1. Multispectral Video Semantic Segmentation. Examples of three typical real-life video sequences under diverse conditions are
given (daytime (left), nighttime and overexposure (middle), rainy and low-light (right)), where RGB images, thermal infrared images, and
their pixel-level semantic annotations are shown through the first to the third rows, respectively.

Abstract
Robust and reliable semantic segmentation in complex
scenes is crucial for many real-life applications such as autonomous safe driving and nighttime rescue. In most approaches, it is typical to make use of RGB images as input. They however work well only in preferred weather
conditions; when facing adverse conditions such as rainy,
overexposure, or low-light, they often fail to deliver satisfactory results. This has led to the recent investigation
into multispectral semantic segmentation, where RGB and
thermal infrared (RGBT) images are both utilized as input.
This gives rise to significantly more robust segmentation of
image objects in complex scenes and under adverse conditions. Nevertheless, the present focus in single RGBT image input restricts existing methods from well addressing
dynamic real-world scenes.
Motivated by the above observations, in this paper, we
set out to address a relatively new task of semantic segmentation of multispectral video input, which we refer to
as Multispectral Video Semantic Segmentation, or MVSS
in short. An in-house MVSeg dataset is thus curated, consisting of 738 calibrated RGB and thermal videos, accompanied by 3,545 fine-grained pixel-level semantic annota∗ Corresponding author.

tions of 26 categories. Our dataset contains a wide range
of challenging urban scenes in both daytime and nighttime.
Moreover, we propose an effective MVSS baseline, dubbed
MVNet, which is to our knowledge the first model to jointly
learn semantic representations from multispectral and temporal contexts. Comprehensive experiments are conducted
using various semantic segmentation models on the MVSeg
dataset. Empirically, the engagement of multispectral video
input is shown to lead to significant improvement in semantic segmentation; the effectiveness of our MVNet baseline
has also been verified.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental computer vision problem, semantic
segmentation concerns the assignment of category labels to
each pixel in an image. It has received extensive research attention over the past decades [2,5,12,36,45,64,74,80]. Existing semantic segmentation networks are predominantly
designed to work with RGB images, which may fail in the
presence of adverse conditions, such as rainy, low-light,
or overexposure. On the other hand, we have evidenced
a growing demand in using thermal images for semantic
segmentation; a number of RGBT models have been subsequently developed, to engage both RGB and thermal images

1094

