This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decompose, Adjust, Compose: Effective Normalization by Playing with
Frequency for Domain Generalization
Sangrok Lee* 1 , Jongseong Bae* 2 , and Ha Young Kim†1
1

2

Graduate School of Information, Yonsei University
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Yonsei University
{lsrock1, js.bae, hayoung.kim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) is a principal task to evaluate the robustness of computer vision models. Many previous studies have used normalization for DG. In normalization, statistics and normalized features are regarded as style
and content, respectively. However, it has a content variation problem when removing style because the boundary
between content and style is unclear. This study addresses
this problem from the frequency domain perspective, where
amplitude and phase are considered as style and content,
respectively. First, we verify the quantitative phase variation of normalization through the mathematical derivation
of the Fourier transform formula. Then, based on this, we
propose a novel normalization method, P CN orm, which
eliminates style only as the preserving content through spectral decomposition. Furthermore, we propose advanced
P CN orm variants, CCN orm and SCN orm, which adjust the degrees of variations in content and style, respectively. Thus, they can learn domain-agnostic representations for DG. With the normalization methods, we propose
ResNet-variant models, DAC-P and DAC-SC, which are robust to the domain gap. The proposed models outperform
other recent DG methods. The DAC-SC achieves an average state-of-the-art performance of 65.6% on five datasets:
PACS, VLCS, Office-Home, DomainNet, and TerraIncognita.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has performed remarkably well in various
computer vision tasks. However, the performance decreases
when distribution-shifted test data are given [39]. As training and testing datasets are assumed to be identically and
independently distributed, common vision models are not
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Input

Input

Normalization
Decompose (FT)

Content

Style

Normalization

Content

Normalization

Adjusting

Compose (IFT)

Changed Content

Style

Adjusting

Eliminated Style

Content Changed Output

(a) Existing Normalization Method

Eliminated Style

Content Preserved Output

(b) Our Normalization Method

Figure 1. Concepts of (a) the existing normalization and (b) the
proposed methods. Our methods prevent or adjust the content
change caused by existing normalization using spectral decomposition. The solid line marks the feedforward process and the
dashed line conceptually represents the content and style of the
feature. Red-colored star and doughnut in (b) indicate the content
and style adjusting terms, respectively.

as robust as the human vision system, which is not confused
by affordable changes in the image style [14]. Domain generalization (DG) aims to learn models that are robust to the
gap between source domain and unseen target domain to
address this problem [49]. Moreover, DG is challenging because models should learn domain-irrelevant representation
in an unsupervised manner.
The style-based approach is widely studied for DG,
which defines the domain gap as the difference in style
[19, 31, 51, 56, 57]. Typically, normalization methods, such
as batch normalization (BN) [18], layer normalization (LN)
[18], and instance normalization (IN) [45], which are wellknown in style transfer, are used in this approach. Normalization statistics contain style information, and normalization can successfully extract the style from a feature. However, the content is also changed when the style is eliminated [15, 19, 34].

11776

