This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Passive Micron-scale Time-of-Flight with Sunlight Interferometry
Alankar Kotwal1 , Anat Levin2 , and Ioannis Gkioulekas1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Technion
Abstract
We introduce an interferometric technique for passive
time-of-flight imaging and depth sensing at micrometer axial resolutions. Our technique uses a full-field Michelson
interferometer, modified to use sunlight as the only light
source. The large spectral bandwidth of sunlight makes
it possible to acquire micrometer-resolution time-resolved
scene responses, through a simple axial scanning operation. Additionally, the angular bandwidth of sunlight makes
it possible to capture time-of-flight measurements insensitive to indirect illumination effects, such as interreflections
and subsurface scattering. We build an experimental prototype that we operate outdoors, under direct sunlight, and
in adverse environment conditions such as machine vibrations and vehicle traffic. We use this prototype to demonstrate, for the first time, passive imaging capabilities such
as micrometer-scale depth sensing robust to indirect illumination, direct-only imaging, and imaging through diffusers.

sunlight
beam
tracker

scene

splitter
camera

mirror

(a) passive ToF schematic

(b) prototype optical setup
1 mm

1.75 mm

(c) scene

(d) inset

(f) rendered depth

(g) inset

1. Introduction
The recovery of 3D information for an imaged scene is
one of the core problems of optics, imaging, computer vision, and other sciences. In particular, the ability to sense
depth at axial resolutions of a few micrometers is of great
importance for critical applications areas such as medicine,
precision fabrication, material science, and robotics.
Existing contactless imaging techniques for micronscale 3D sensing, such as interferometry and microscopy,
require active illumination, most commonly from a coherent source. This makes these techniques impractical for
use outdoors, in the presence of strong ambient illumination
that overwhelms the active source, or in power-constrained
applications. On the other hand, existing passive 3D sensing
techniques, such as multi-view stereo, shape from shading,
and depth from (de)focus, achieve resolutions of hundreds
of micrometers at best, placing them out of scope for applications requiring micron-scale resolutions.
We change this state of affairs by introducing a completely passive micron-scale 3D sensing technique. Our
technique is interferometric, and uses sunlight as the only
light source, to capture full-frame time-of-flight measurements at axial resolutions of 5 micrometers. Our technique
additionally takes advantage of the spatial incoherence of
sunlight, to enable robust 3D sensing in the presence of severe indirect illumination effects (interreflections, subsur-

(e) estimated depth map

Figure 1. Using sunlight interferometry to passively reconstruct part of a circuit board. (a) and (b) show a schematic
and photograph of the sunlight interferometer we build for passive
time-of-flight imaging. We use this system to reconstruct part of
a Raspberry Pi circuit board that has multiple resistors, soldering
pads, and tracks. (c) and (d) show a picture of the scene as seen
through the imaging camera, along with an inset highlighting fine
geometric features. (e) shows the estimated depth map, and (f)
and (g) the corresponding rendered 3D surface. Our technique reconstructs fine features such as the PCB tracks and through-holes,
despite operating outdoors under adverse environment conditions.

face scattering), and even tasks such as imaging and 3D
sensing through optically-thin scattering layers.
To demonstrate these capabilities, we build an experimental prototype that we operate outdoors, under direct
sunlight and adverse experimental conditions (wind, machine vibrations, vehicle traffic). This is in stark contrast
with previous demonstrations of interferometric sensing,
which were only possible under carefully-controlled lab
conditions (dark room, vibration-isolated optical tables, no
air flow). Even under these adverse conditions, our experi-

4139

