This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pic2Word: Mapping Pictures to Words for Zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval
Kuniaki Saito1,2∗, Kihyuk Sohn3 , Xiang Zhang2 , Chun-Liang Li2 ,
Chen-Yu Lee2 , Kate Saenko1,4 , Tomas Pfister2
{keisaito, saenko}@bu.edu
{kihyuks,fancyzhx,chunliang,chenyulee,tpfister}@google.com
1

Boston University, 2 Google Cloud AI Research, 3 Google Research, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract

Supervised Composed Image Retrieval
query

In Composed Image Retrieval (CIR), a user combines
a query image with text to describe their intended target.
Existing methods rely on supervised learning of CIR models using labeled triplets consisting of the query image, text
specification, and the target image. Labeling such triplets
is expensive and hinders broad applicability of CIR. In this
work, we propose to study an important task, Zero-Shot
Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR), whose goal is to build
a CIR model without requiring labeled triplets for training.
To this end, we propose a novel method, called Pic2Word,
that requires only weakly labeled image-caption pairs and
unlabeled image datasets to train. Unlike existing supervised CIR models, our model trained on weakly labeled
or unlabeled datasets shows strong generalization across
diverse ZS-CIR tasks, e.g., attribute editing, object composition, and domain conversion. Our approach outperforms several supervised CIR methods on the common CIR
benchmark, CIRR and Fashion-IQ. Code will be made publicly available at https://github.com/googleresearch/composed_image_retrieval

1. Introduction
Composed image retrieval (CIR) [2, 4, 16, 18, 35] aims
to retrieve images using a query composed of an image and
text. In contrast to the image-based retrieval systems [7],
CIR is advantageous as it allows retrieval of images with a
higher precision thanks to the text query that incorporates
user’s intent, such as a desired modification to the query
image. With a surge of image-text models [1, 20, 30], CIR
has received attention recently for diverse real-world applications in e-commerce and internet search.
Several approaches [2, 4, 16, 18, 35] have been proposed
to solve CIR problems, including attribute manipulation for
fashion image search, composing objects, and converting
∗ Work done during internship at Google Cloud AI Research.

description

target

Test Input
Trained Model

inside a
hole ,

,

cream with

, blue picture ,

query

description

Model A

on a rock
in the water

Model B

longer
sleeves
and black

Zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval (Ours)
Query :

*

description

Ours

Baseline

Model

Origami of

*
*

in the pool!

Trained on
Image-Caption
Data Only

with blue
*floral
print!

Figure 1. Composed Image Retrieval (CIR) takes a query composed of an image (denoted as ?) plus a text modifier and retrieves
matching images. CIR encompasses diverse tasks, such as domain
conversion (origami of ?), scene or object composition (? in the
pool), or fashion-attribute manipulation (? with blue floral print).
Top: Existing methods [2,35] train a separate model for each task,
and require strong triplet supervision. Bottom: We propose a new
task, Zero-shot CIR, and solve diverse CIR sub-tasks using a single model trained only on image-caption pairs and unlabeled image datasets.

the style of images for content creation, as in Fig. 1. At
the core of CIR is learning how to compose information
from an image and text. We identify two fundamental issues
with existing solutions. First, previous methods require a
large amount of labeled data, which comes in the form of
triplets consisting of a reference image, text, and a target
image, to train their retrieval model. The dataset collection
involves two processes [25] – collecting pairs of a related
reference and the target images as a query-output pair to
the CIR system, then giving a description that modifies the
reference to the target. Examples of labeled triplets are at
19305

