This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Level-S2 fM: Structure from Motion on Neural Level Set of Implicit Surfaces
Tianfu Wu2
Gui-Song Xia1
Yuxi Xiao1
Nan Xue1 *
1
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Department of ECE, NC State University
Project Page: https://henry123-boy.github.io/level-s2fm/

Abstract
This paper presents a neural incremental Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) approach, Level-S2 fM, which estimates
the camera poses and scene geometry from a set of uncalibrated images by learning coordinate MLPs for the implicit
surfaces and the radiance fields from the established keypoint correspondences. Our novel formulation poses some
new challenges due to inevitable two-view and few-view
configurations in the incremental SfM pipeline, which complicates the optimization of coordinate MLPs for volumetric
neural rendering with unknown camera poses. Nevertheless, we demonstrate that the strong inductive basis conveying in the 2D correspondences is promising to tackle those
challenges by exploiting the relationship between the ray
sampling schemes. Based on this, we revisit the pipeline
of incremental SfM and renew the key components, including two-view geometry initialization, the camera poses registration, the 3D points triangulation, and Bundle Adjustment, with a fresh perspective based on neural implicit surfaces. By unifying the scene geometry in small MLP networks through coordinate MLPs, our Level-S2 fM treats the
zero-level set of the implicit surface as an informative topdown regularization to manage the reconstructed 3D points,
reject the outliers in correspondences via querying SDF,
and refine the estimated geometries by NBA (Neural BA).
Not only does our Level-S2 fM lead to promising results on
camera pose estimation and scene geometry reconstruction,
but it also shows a promising way for neural implicit rendering without knowing camera extrinsic beforehand.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) is a fundamental 3D vision problem that aims at reconstructing 3D scenes and
estimating the camera motions from a set of uncalibrated
images. As a long-standing problem, there have been a
tremendous of studies that are mostly established on the
keypoint correspondences across viewpoints and the theoretical findings of Multi-View Geometry (MVG) [11], and
* Corresponding author

Zero-Level Set

Neural Network
Parametric Level Sets

Driving the
Optimization

Discrete Points with
Feature Tracks

𝛷(x, 𝜃)

…
Incremental Reconstruction on Neural Level Sets

Causes

SIFT Matches
+ RANSAC

3D Outliers from
Mismatches

Rejection by SDF
Projection

Figure 1. SfM calculations on neural level sets. We learn to
do geometric calculations including Triangulation, PnP, and Bundle Adjustment above neural level sets, which easily help to reject the outliers in the matches especially in the texture repeated
scenes. Also, due to the continuous surface priors of neural level
sets, we achieve better pose estimation accuracy and our reconstructed points are sticking on the surface which are painted with
color in the figure. While, there are a lot of outlier 3d points reconstructed by COLMAP [32] which are painted by black.

have formed three representative pipelines of Incremental
SfM [32], Global SfM [4, 43], and Hybrid SfM [5].
In this paper, we focus on the incremental pipeline of
SfM and we will use SfM to refer to the incremental SfM.
Given an unordered image set, an SfM system initializes
the computation by a pair of images that are with wellconditioned keypoint correspondences to yield an initial set
of feature tracks, then incrementally adds new views one
by one to estimate the camera pose from the 2D-3D point
correspondences and update the feature tracks with new
matches. Because the feature tracks are generated by grouping the putative 2D correspondences across viewpoints in
bottom-up manners, they would be ineffective or inaccurate
to represent holistic information of scenes. Accordingly,
17205

