This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-based Shape from Polarization
Manasi Muglikar 1

Leonard Bauersfeld 1

Diederik Paul Moeys 2

Davide Scaramuzza 1

1

2

Robotics and Perception Group, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Advanced Sensors and Modelling Group, SONY R&D Center Europe, SL1
Abstract

State-of-the-art solutions for Shape-from-Polarization
(SfP) suffer from a speed-resolution tradeoff: they either
sacrifice the number of polarization angles measured or
necessitate lengthy acquisition times due to framerate constraints, thus compromising either accuracy or latency. We
tackle this tradeoff using event cameras. Event cameras
operate at microseconds resolution with negligible motion
blur, and output a continuous stream of events that precisely
measures how light changes over time asynchronously. We
propose a setup that consists of a linear polarizer rotating
at high speeds in front of an event camera. Our method
uses the continuous event stream caused by the rotation
to reconstruct relative intensities at multiple polarizer angles. Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms physics-based baselines using frames, reducing the
MAE by 25% in synthetic and real-world datasets. In the
real world, we observe, however, that the challenging conditions (i.e., when few events are generated) harm the performance of physics-based solutions. To overcome this,
we propose a learning-based approach that learns to estimate surface normals even at low event-rates, improving the
physics-based approach by 52% on the real world dataset.
The proposed system achieves an acquisition speed equivalent to 50 fps (>twice the framerate of the commercial polarization sensor) while retaining the spatial resolution of
1MP. Our evaluation is based on the first large-scale dataset
for event-based SfP.
Code, dataset and video are available under:
https://rpg.ifi.uzh.ch/esfp.html
https://youtu.be/sF3Ue2Zkpec

1. Introduction
Polarization cues have been used in many applications
across computer vision, including image dehazing [41],
panorama stitching and mosaicing [42], reflection removal
[21], image segmentation [25], optical flow gyroscope, [47]
and material classification [5]. Among these, Shape-fromPolarization (SfP) methods exploit changes in polariza-

a) Setup
Object

rotating po

larizer

event
camera
t=τ

event
stream

ω

unpolarized light
b) Method
Events at t = τ

time

Physics Based

Surface Normals (Ours)
t

Learning Based
encoder
c) Baselines
Images

decoder

Mahmoud (2012)

Ba (2020)

135 deg
90 deg
45 deg
0 deg

Figure 1. Surface normal estimation using event-based SfP. (a)
Rotating a polarizer in front of an event camera creates sinosoidal
changes in intensities, triggering events. (b) The proposed eventbased method uses the continuous event stream to reconstruct relative intensities at multiple polarizer angles which is used to estimate surface normals using physics-based and learning-based
method. (c) Our approach outperforms image-based baselines
[24, 51].

tion information to infer geometric properties of an object
[2, 18, 22, 49,51]. It uses variations in radiance under different polarizer angles to estimate the 3D surface of a given
object. In particular, when unpolarized light is reflected
from a surface, it becomes partially polarized depending on
the geometry and material of the surface. Surface normals,
and thus 3D shape, can then be estimated by orienting a polarizing filter in front of a camera sensor and studying the
relationship between the polarizer angle and the magnitude
of light transmission. SfP has a number of advantages over
both active and passive depth sensing methods. Unlike ac-

1547

