This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuFace: Realistic 3D Neural Face Rendering from Multi-view Images
Mingwu Zheng1,2 , Haiyu Zhang1,2 , Hongyu Yang3 , Di Huang1,2,4 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
4
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{zhengmingwu, zhyzhy, hongyuyang, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Realistic face rendering from multi-view images is beneficial to various computer vision and graphics applications.
Due to complex spatially-varying reflectance properties and
geometry characteristics of faces, however, it remains challenging to recover 3D facial representations both faithfully
and efficiently in the current studies. This paper presents a
novel 3D face rendering model, namely NeuFace, to learn
accurate and physically-meaningful underlying 3D representations by neural rendering techniques. It naturally incorporates the neural BRDFs into physically based rendering, capturing sophisticated facial geometry and appearance clues in a collaborative manner. Specifically, we introduce an approximated BRDF integration and a simple yet
new low-rank prior, which effectively lower the ambiguities
and boost the performance of the facial BRDFs. Extensive
experiments are performed to demonstrate the superiority
of NeuFace in human face rendering, along with a decent
generalization ability to common objects. Code is released
at NeuFace.

1. Introduction
Rendering realistic human faces with controllable viewpoints and lighting is now becoming ever increasingly important with its applications ranging from game production,
movie industry, to immersive experiences in the Metaverse.
Various factors, including the sophisticated geometrical differences among individuals, the person-specific appearance
idiosyncrasies, along with the spatially-varying reflectance
properties of skins, collectively make faithful face rendering
a rather difficult problem.
According to photogrammetry, the pioneering studies on
this issue generally leverage complex active lighting setups,
e.g., LightStage [8], to build 3D face models from multiple
* Corresponding author.

…
Unprocessed Facial Multiview Images

Rendered

Diffuse

Specular

Geometry

Relighting

Figure 1. Demonstration of the face rendering results and recovered underlying 3D representations.

photos of an individual, where accurate shape attributes and
high-quality diffuse and specular reflectance properties are
commonly acknowledged as the premises of its success. An
elaborately designed workflow is required, typically involving a series of stages such as camera calibration, dynamic
data acquisition, multi-view stereo, material estimation, and
texture parameterization [42]. While a compelling and convincing 3D face model can be finally obtained, this output
highly depends on the expertise of the engineers and artists
with significant manual efforts, as the multi-step process inevitably brings diverse optimization goals.
Recently, 3D neural rendering, which offers an end-toend alternative, has demonstrated promising performance in
recovering scene properties from real-world imageries, such
as view-dependent radiance [26, 28, 36, 38, 47] and geometry [33, 48, 49, 54, 55]. It’s mainly credited to the disentanglement of the learnable 3D representations and the differentiable image formation process, free of the tedious photogrammetry pipeline. However, like classical function fitting, inverse rendering is fundamentally under-constrained,
which may incur badly-conditioned fits of the underlying 3D representations, especially for intricate cases, e.g.,
non-Lambertian surfaces with view-dependent highlights.
With the trend in the combination of computer graphics
and learning techniques, several attempts take advantage
of physically motivated inductive biases and present Phys-

16868

