This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Decorrelated Representations Efficiently
Using Fast Fourier Transform
Yutaro Shigeto* Masashi Shimbo∗ Yuya Yoshikawa Akikazu Takeuchi
{shigeto,shimbo,yoshikawa,takeuchi}@stair.center
STAIR Lab, Chiba Institute of Technology, Narashino, Chiba, Japan

Abstract
Barlow Twins and VICReg are self-supervised representation learning models that use regularizers to decorrelate
features. Although these models are as effective as conventional representation learning models, their training can be
computationally demanding if the dimension 𝑑 of the projected embeddings is high. As the regularizers are defined
in terms of individual elements of a cross-correlation or
covariance matrix, computing the loss for 𝑛 samples takes
𝑂 (𝑛𝑑 2 ) time. In this paper, we propose a relaxed decorrelating regularizer that can be computed in 𝑂 (𝑛𝑑 log 𝑑) time
by Fast Fourier Transform. We also propose an inexpensive
technique to mitigate undesirable local minima that develop
with the relaxation. The proposed regularizer exhibits accuracy comparable to that of existing regularizers in downstream tasks, whereas their training requires less memory
and is faster for large 𝑑. The source code is available.1

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) of representations [1, 3–
5, 10, 13, 15, 27–30] has become an integral part of deep
learning applications in computer vision. Most SSL models for visual representations employ a multi-view, Siamese
network architecture. First, an input image is altered by
different transformations that preserve its original semantics. The two augmented examples are then fed to a neural network (or in some cases, two different networks) that
consists of a backbone network cascaded with a small projection network (usually a multi-layer perceptron) to produce “twin” projected embeddings, or views, of the original. Finally, the network weights are trained so that the
twin embeddings (referred to as a “positive pair”) are similar, reflecting the fact that they represent the same original image. After training, the projection network is discarded, while the backbone network is reused for down* Equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/yutaro-s/scalable-decorrelation-ssl.git

stream tasks; the idea is that the pretrained backbone should
produce generic representations of images that also benefit
downstream tasks.
One major issue in SSL is to sidestep collapsed embeddings, or the presence of trivial solutions such that all examples are projected to a single embedding vector. Contrastive
approaches [3, 4, 15, 27, 28] eliminate such solutions by a
loss term that repels embeddings of different original images (known as “negative pairs”) from each other. Considering all possible negative pairs is infeasible, and negative
sampling is usually performed.
Recent studies have explored non-contrastive SSL models. Among these models, Barlow Twins [29] and VICReg
[1] use loss functions to penalize features (components of
embedding vectors) with a small variance, which are characteristic of collapsed embeddings. Also notable in these
loss functions are regularization terms for feature decorrelation. They reduce redundancy in the learned features and
make Barlow Twins and VICReg perform as well as contrastive models. However, since the regularizers are defined
in terms of elements in a sample cross-correlation or covariance matrix, they require 𝑂 (𝑛𝑑 2 ) time to compute, where 𝑛
is the number of examples in a batch, and 𝑑 is the dimensionality of the projected embeddings. This is problematic,
as an increased 𝑑 has been reported to improve the performance of both Barlow Twins and VICReg [1, 29].
Contributions. We propose a relaxed decorrelating regularizer to address the inefficiency of Barlow Twins and VICReg. The proposed regularizer does not require the explicit calculation of cross-correlation or covariance matrices
and can be computed in 𝑂 (𝑛𝑑 log 𝑑) time by means of Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) [7]. Although undesirable local
minima develop as a result of relaxation, they can be mitigated by feature permutation; we give an account of why
this simple technique works. The SSL models using the
proposed regularizer achieve competitive performance with
Barlow Twins and VICReg in downstream tasks, with substantially less computation time for large 𝑑. With 𝑑 = 8192,
training is 1.2 (with a ResNet-50 backbone) or 2.2 (with a

2052

