This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaCLUE: Towards Comprehensive Visual Metaphors Research
Arjun R. Akula∗ , Brendan Driscoll∗ , Pradyumna Narayana, Soravit Changpinyo,
Zhiwei Jia, Suyash Damle, Garima Pruthi, Sugato Basu,
Leonidas Guibas, William T. Freeman, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani∗
Google

Classification
Is this a visual metaphor?

gEneration
- YES
- NO

Localization

Prompt: “An advertisement where
killing trees is as harmful as killing
wildlife.”

Detect image regions that invoke the
concepts:
- Killing trees
- killing wildlife

Metaphor: Killing trees is as harmful
as killing wildlife.

Stable Diffusion

Imagen

Understanding
Retrieval

Captioning

Visual Question Answering

Pick the right one:
(a) Killing the forest is as deadly as

Sample predictions:
1. Deforestation is as damaging as

Sample Questions:

killing the animals too.
(b) Birds is as much a part of our

killing wildlife.
2. Deforestation is as bad as ending the

wildlife?

world as used cans.

death penalty.

Q. What is as harmful as killing

Q. What is compared to killing wildlife?

Figure 1. With MetaCLUE, we introduce several interesting tasks related to visual metaphors. We collect metaphor annotations (objects,
abstract concepts, relationships and object boxes) for evaluating existing models on these tasks. Specifically we perform a comprehensive
evaluation of vision and language models on four different tasks (Classification, Localization, Understanding, and gEneration). Comprehensive experiments in this work show that state-of-the-art techniques mostly focus on literal interpretation and perform poorly in
understanding and generation of metaphor images.

Abstract
Creativity is an indispensable part of human cognition
and also an inherent part of how we make sense of the
world. Metaphorical abstraction is fundamental in communicating creative ideas through nuanced relationships between abstract concepts such as feelings. While computer
vision benchmarks and approaches predominantly focus on
understanding and generating literal interpretations of images, metaphorical comprehension of images remains relatively unexplored. Towards this goal, we introduce MetaCLUE, a set of vision tasks on visual metaphor. We also
collect high-quality and rich metaphor annotations (ab-

stract objects, concepts, relationships along with their corresponding object boxes) as there do not exist any datasets
that facilitate the evaluation of these tasks. We perform
a comprehensive analysis of state-of-the-art models in vision and language based on our annotations, highlighting strengths and weaknesses of current approaches in visual metaphor classification, localization, understanding
(retrieval, question answering, captioning) and generation
(text-to-image synthesis) tasks. We hope this work provides a concrete step towards developing AI systems with
human-like creative capabilities. Project page: https:
//metaclue.github.io

* Equal Contribution

23201

