This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeFII: Inverse Rendering for Reflectance Decomposition with
Near-Field Indirect Illumination
Haoqian Wu1 , Zhipeng Hu1,2 , Lincheng Li1 *, Yongqiang Zhang1 , Changjie Fan1 , Xin Yu3
1
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab 2 Zhejiang University 3 The University of Queensland
{wuhaoqian, zphu, lilincheng, zhangyongqiang02, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com
xin.yu@uq.edu.au

Abstract
Inverse rendering methods aim to estimate geometry,
materials and illumination from multi-view RGB images. In
order to achieve better decomposition, recent approaches
attempt to model indirect illuminations reflected from different materials via Spherical Gaussians (SG), which, however, tends to blur the high-frequency reflection details. In
this paper, we propose an end-to-end inverse rendering
pipeline that decomposes materials and illumination from
multi-view images, while considering near-field indirect illumination. In a nutshell, we introduce the Monte Carlo
sampling based path tracing and cache the indirect illumination as neural radiance, enabling a physics-faithful and
easy-to-optimize inverse rendering method. To enhance efficiency and practicality, we leverage SG to represent the
smooth environment illuminations and apply importance
sampling techniques. To supervise indirect illuminations
from unobserved directions, we develop a novel radiance
consistency constraint between implicit neural radiance
and path tracing results of unobserved rays along with the
joint optimization of materials and illuminations, thus significantly improving the decomposition performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art on multiple synthetic and real
datasets, especially in terms of inter-reflection decomposition.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering, i.e., recovering geometry, material
and lighting from images, is a long-standing problem in
computer vision and graphics. It is important for digitizing our real world and acquiring high quality 3D contents
in many applications such as VR, AR and computer games.
Recent methods [7, 41, 44, 45] represent geometry and
materials as neural implicit fields, and recover them in an

Invrender

Ours

SG
Rendering

Path Tracing
Rendering
direct
illumination
indirect
illumination

direct
illumination

Tracing Path

indirect
illumination
Gradients

Gradients
SGs
Materials

Monte Carlo
Materials

Render Result Specular Reflection

Render Result Specular Reflection

Diffuse Albedo

Diffuse Albedo

Roughness

Roughness

Figure 1. Our method integrates lights through path tracing with
Monte Carlo sampling, while Invrender [45] uses Spherical Gaussians to approximate the overall illumination. In this way, our
method simultaneously optimizes indirect illuminations and materials, and achieves better decomposition of inter-reflections.

analysis-by-synthesis manner. However, how to decompose
the indirect illumination from materials is still challenging.
Most methods [6, 7, 25, 41, 44] model the environment illuminations but ignore indirect illuminations. As a result,
the inter-reflections and shadows between objects are mistakenly treated as materials. Invrender [45] takes the indirect illumination into consideration, and approximates it
with Spherical Gaussian (SG) for computation efficiency.
Since SG approximation cannot model the high frequency
details, the recovered inter-reflections tend to be blurry and
contain artifacts. Besides, indirect illuminations estimated
by an SG network cannot be jointly optimized with materials and environment illuminations.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end inverse render-

* Corresponding author.

4295

