This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting and Grounding Multi-Modal Media Manipulation
Rui Shao1,2 ,* Tianxing Wu2 , Ziwei Liu2†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
shaorui@hit.edu.cn, {tianxing.wu, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
https://github.com/rshaojimmy/MultiModal-DeepFake
Detecting and Grounding Multi-Modal Media Manipulation
Detection

Grounding
Image

Manipulation

DeepFake
Detection:
Real or Fake ?

Manipulated
Bounding Box:

Multi-Modal
Misinformation
Detection:
Real or Fake ?
Text Fake News
Detection:
Real or Fake ?

Text

Gordon Brown is forced to resign EU meeting by
Nicolas Sarkozy the French president in Paris.

[FS, FA, TS, TA]

'is welcomed to'

Manipulated
Tokens:

'is forced to resign'

'forced', 'resign'

Figure 1. Different from existing single-modal forgery detection tasks, DGM4 not only performs real/fake classification on the input
image-text pair, but also attempts to detect more fine-grained manipulation types and ground manipulated image bboxes and text tokens.
They provide more comprehensive interpretation and deeper understanding about manipulation detection besides the binary classification.
(FS: Face Swap Manipulation, FA: Face Attribute Manipulation, TS: Text Swap Manipulation, TA: Text Attribute Manipulation)

Abstract
Misinformation has become a pressing issue. Fake media, in both visual and textual forms, is widespread on the
web. While various deepfake detection and text fake news
detection methods have been proposed, they are only designed for single-modality forgery based on binary classification, let alone analyzing and reasoning subtle forgery
traces across different modalities. In this paper, we highlight a new research problem for multi-modal fake media, namely Detecting and Grounding Multi-Modal Media
Manipulation (DGM4 ). DGM4 aims to not only detect the
authenticity of multi-modal media, but also ground the manipulated content (i.e., image bounding boxes and text tokens), which requires deeper reasoning of multi-modal media manipulation. To support a large-scale investigation,
we construct the first DGM4 dataset, where image-text pairs
are manipulated by various approaches, with rich anno* This work was done at S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
† Corresponding author

tation of diverse manipulations. Moreover, we propose a
novel HierArchical Multi-modal Manipulation rEasoning
tRansformer (HAMMER) to fully capture the fine-grained
interaction between different modalities. HAMMER performs 1) manipulation-aware contrastive learning between
two uni-modal encoders as shallow manipulation reasoning, and 2) modality-aware cross-attention by multi-modal
aggregator as deep manipulation reasoning. Dedicated manipulation detection and grounding heads are integrated
from shallow to deep levels based on the interacted multimodal information. Finally, we build an extensive benchmark and set up rigorous evaluation metrics for this new research problem. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of our model; several valuable observations
are also revealed to facilitate future research in multi-modal
media manipulation.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in deep generative models, increasing hyper-realistic face images or videos can be au-

6904

