This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enlarging Instance-specific and Class-specific Information for
Open-set Action Recognition
Jun Cen1,2 * Shiwei Zhang2 Xiang Wang3 Yixuan Pei4
Zhiwu Qing3 Yingya Zhang2 Qifeng Chen1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Alibaba Group
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 4 Xi’an Jiaotong University
jcenaa@connect.ust.hk, {zhangjin.zsw,yingya.zyy}@alibaba-inc.com,
{wxiang,qzw}@hust.edu.cn, peiyixuan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, cqf@ust.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods for video action recognition have
developed very fast and achieved remarkable performance
in recent years [1–4]. However, these methods operate under the closed-set condition, i.e., to classify all videos into
* Work done as an intern at Alibaba DAMO Academy.

(a)

IS
CS

Information

Open-set action recognition is to reject unknown human
action cases which are out of the distribution of the training
set. Existing methods mainly focus on learning better uncertainty scores but dismiss the importance of feature representations. We find that features with richer semantic diversity can significantly improve the open-set performance
under the same uncertainty scores. In this paper, we begin
with analyzing the feature representation behavior in the
open-set action recognition (OSAR) problem based on the
information bottleneck (IB) theory, and propose to enlarge
the instance-specific (IS) and class-specific (CS) information contained in the feature for better performance. To this
end, a novel Prototypical Similarity Learning (PSL) framework is proposed to keep the instance variance within the
same class to retain more IS information. Besides, we notice that unknown samples sharing similar appearances to
known samples are easily misclassified as known classes.
To alleviate this issue, video shuffling is further introduced
in our PSL to learn distinct temporal information between
original and shuffled samples, which we find enlarges the
CS information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed PSL can significantly boost both the openset and closed-set performance and achieves state-of-theart results on multiple benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/Jun-CEN/PSL.

i: C.E. ii: PSL (ours)

i ii i ii i ii
𝑠! 𝑠" 𝑠#
InD Class 1 Class 2
(b)
TSM
I3D
SlowFast

(c)

i ii i ii
𝑠$ 𝑠%
OoD
PSL (Ours)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Richer semantic features brought by the pretraining
can significantly improve the open-set performance. (b) Information in the feature is divided into IS and CS information. s4 can
be identified as OoD since it has distinct IS information (IS bars
in different colors) with s1 and s2 , while s5 has distinct CS information (CS bars in different colors) with all InD samples so it may
be OoD. Our PSL aims to learn more IS and CS information (bars
in longer lengths) than Cross-Entropy (C.E.). (c) Both enlarged IS
and CS information boosts the open-set performance. (d) Our PSL
achieves the best OSAR performance.

one of the classes encountered during training. This closedset condition is not practical in the real-world scenario, as
videos whose classes are beyond the range of the training set will be misclassified as one of the known classes.
Therefore, open-set action recognition (OSAR) is proposed
to require the network to correctly classify in-distribution
(InD) samples and identify out-of-distribution (OoD) samples. InD and OoD classes refer to classes involved and not
involved in the training set, respectively.

15295

