This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuDA: Neural Deformable Anchor for
High-Fidelity Implicit Surface Reconstruction
Bowen Cai

Jinchi Huang Rongfei Jia Chengfei Lv
Tao Technology Department, Alibaba Group

Huan Fu*

Abstract
This paper studies implicit surface reconstruction leveraging differentiable ray casting. Previous works such as
IDR [34] and NeuS [27] overlook the spatial context in 3D
space when predicting and rendering the surface, thereby
may fail to capture sharp local topologies such as small
holes and structures. To mitigate the limitation, we propose a flexible neural implicit representation leveraging hierarchical voxel grids, namely Neural Deformable Anchor
(NeuDA), for high-fidelity surface reconstruction. NeuDA
maintains the hierarchical anchor grids where each vertex
stores a 3D position (or anchor) instead of the direct embedding (or feature). We optimize the anchor grids such
that different local geometry structures can be adaptively
encoded. Besides, we dig into the frequency encoding
strategies and introduce a simple hierarchical positional
encoding method for the hierarchical anchor structure to
flexibly exploit the properties of high-frequency and lowfrequency geometry and appearance. Experiments on both
the DTU [8] and BlendedMVS [32] datasets demonstrate
that NeuDA can produce promising mesh surfaces.

1. Introduction
3D surface reconstruction from multi-view images is one
of the fundamental problems of the community. Typical
Multi-view Stereo (MVS) approaches perform cross-view
feature matching, depth fusion, and surface reconstruction
(e.g., Poisson Surface Reconstruction) to obtain triangle
meshes [9]. Some methods have exploited the possibility of
training end-to-end deep MVS models or employing deep
networks to improve the accuracy of sub-tasks of the MVS
pipeline. Recent advances show that neural implicit functions are promising to represent scene geometry and appearance [12, 14–16, 18–21, 27, 28, 33, 34, 37]. For example, several works [6, 27, 30, 34] define the implicit surface
as a zero-level set and have captured impressive topologies.
Their neural implicit models are trained in a self-supervised
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. We show the surface reconstruction results produced by
NeuDA and the two baseline methods, including NeuS [27] and
Intsnt-NeuS [17, 27]. Intsnt-NeuS is the reproduced NeuS leveraging the multi-resolution hash encoding technique [17]. We can
see NeuDA can promisingly preserve more surface details. Please
refer to Figure 5 for more qualitative comparisons.

manner by rendering faithful 2D appearance of geometry
leveraging differentiable rendering. However, the surface
prediction and rendering formulations of these approaches
have not explored the spatial context in 3D space. As a result, they may struggle to recover fine-grain geometry in
some local spaces, such as boundaries, holes, and other
small structures (See Fig. 1).
A straightforward solution is to query scene properties
of a sampled 3D point by fusing its nearby features.
For example, we can represent scenes as neural voxel
fields [3, 13, 22, 24, 25] where the embedding (or feature)
at each vertex of the voxel encodes the geometry and
appearance context. Given a target point, we are able to
18476

