This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing Beyond the Brain: Conditional Diffusion Model with
Sparse Masked Modeling for Vision Decoding
Zijiao Chen1*
1

Jiaxin Qing2*

Tiange Xiang3

Wan Lin Yue1

Juan Helen Zhou1†

National University of Singapore, 2The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 3Stanford University
https://mind-vis.github.io

Figure 1. Brain Decoding and Image Reconstruction. For the first time, our proposed MinD-Vis is capable of decoding fMRI-based brain
activities and reconstructing images with not only plausible details but also accurate semantics and image features (texture, shape, etc.), pushing
this domain a considerable step forward. Left: Task overview. Middle: Comparison with benchmarks. Right: More reconstruction examples.

Abstract
Decoding visual stimuli from brain recordings aims to
deepen our understanding of the human visual system and
build a solid foundation for bridging human and computer
vision through the Brain-Computer Interface. However,
reconstructing high-quality images with correct semantics from
brain recordings is a challenging problem due to the complex
underlying representations of brain signals and the scarcity of
data annotations. In this work, we present MinD-Vis: Sparse
Masked Brain Modeling with Double-Conditioned Latent
Diffusion Model for Human Vision Decoding. Firstly, we learn
an effective self-supervised representation of fMRI data using
mask modeling in a large latent space inspired by the sparse
coding of information in the primary visual cortex. Then by
augmenting a latent diffusion model with double-conditioning,
we show that MinD-Vis can reconstruct highly plausible images
with semantically matching details from brain recordings using
very few paired annotations. We benchmarked our model qualitatively and quantitatively; the experimental results indicate
that our method outperformed state-of-the-art in both semantic
mapping (100-way semantic classification) and generation
quality (FID) by 66% and 41% respectively. An exhaustive
ablation study was also conducted to analyze our framework.
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author (helen.zhou@nus.edu.sg)

1. Introduction
“What you think is what you see”. Human perception and
prior knowledge are deeply intertwined in one’s mind [51]. Our
perception of the world is determined not only by objective
stimuli properties but also by our experiences, forming complex
brain activities underlying our perception. Understanding these
brain activities and recovering the encoded information is a
key goal in cognitive neuroscience. Within this broad objective,
decoding visual information is one of the challenging problems
that are the focus of a large body of literature [22, 26, 34, 67].
As a non-invasive and effective method to measure brain
activities indirectly, functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(fMRI) is usually used to recover visual information, such
as the image classes [21, 39]. With the help of recent deep
learning models, it is intriguing if the original visual stimuli
can be directly recovered from corresponding fMRI [2, 46],
especially with the guidance of biological principles [43, 52].
However, due to the lack of fMRI-image pairs and useful
biological guidance when decoding complex neural activity
from fMRI directly, reconstructed images are usually blurry and
semantically meaningless. Thus it is crucial to learn effective
and biological-valid representations for fMRI so that a clear and
generalizable connection between brain activities and visual
stimuli can be established with a few paired annotations.
Moreover, individual variability in brain representations
further complicates this problem. Individuals have unique

22710

