This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H2ONet: Hand-Occlusion-and-Orientation-aware Network for
Real-time 3D Hand Mesh Reconstruction

1

Hao Xu1,2
Tianyu Wang1
Xiao Tang1
Chi-Wing Fu1,2,3
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR
3
Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{xuhao,wangty,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, xtang@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Real-time 3D hand mesh reconstruction is challenging,
especially when the hand is holding some object. Beyond
the previous methods, we design H2ONet to fully exploit
non-occluded information from multiple frames to boost the
reconstruction quality. First, we decouple hand mesh reconstruction into two branches, one to exploit finger-level nonoccluded information and the other to exploit global hand
orientation, with lightweight structures to promote realtime inference. Second, we propose finger-level occlusionaware feature fusion, leveraging predicted finger-level occlusion information as guidance to fuse finger-level information across time frames. Further, we design hand-level
occlusion-aware feature fusion to fetch non-occluded information from nearby time frames. We conduct experiments
on the Dex-YCB and HO3D-v2 datasets with challenging
hand-object occlusion cases, manifesting that H2ONet is
able to run in real-time and achieves state-of-the-art performance on both the hand mesh and pose precision. The
code will be released on GitHub.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D hand meshes from RGB images is a fundamental task useful for many applications, e.g., augmented
reality [17, 52], behavior understanding [26, 44], etc. To
support these applications, user experience is very important, so the reconstruction should be accurate and robust, as
well as fast, i.e., real-time. Despite the promising results
achieved by the recent works, it is still very challenging to
simultaneously meet all the requirements, particularly when
the hand is severely occluded, e.g., holding some object.
Several recent methods are proposed for 3D hand mesh
reconstruction from a single RGB image [13, 15, 31, 38–
42, 45]. To alleviate the negative effect of occlusion, some
try to extract occlusion-robust features by adopting the spa-

Figure 1. Structural comparison between our H2ONet and previous methods. We decouple 3D hand mesh reconstruction into two
branches, one to reconstruct the hand mesh at canonical pose M
and the other to regress the global hand orientation R, such that
we can fuse finger- and hand-level occlusion-aware features from
multiple frames to better exploit the non-occluded information.

tial attention mechanism applied in 3D hand pose estimation [14, 65, 68]. When the amount of occlusion is small,
focusing more on non-occluded regions can help improve
the network performance. However, the performance would
largely drop when the occluded regions dominate, implying
that relying solely on the prior information of hand shape
and pose is insufficient. Besides, the attention mechanism
brings extra computation and memory overhead. Though
recent methods [8, 52] adopt lightweight frameworks for
real-time inference, the influence of occlusion is ignored.
On the other hand, some recent works [18,57] start to explore multi-frame RGB images as input for 3D hand mesh
reconstruction. SeqHAND [57] integrates LSTM as a feature extractor to memorize the hand motion over consecutive frames. Liu et al. [35] constrain the smoothness of hand
shape and pose by designing inter-frame losses. Yet, they

17048

