This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Viewpoint Equivariance for Multi-View 3D Object Detection
Dian Chen

Jie Li Vitor Guizilini Rares, Ambrus, Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute (TRI), Los Altos, CA
{firstname.lastname}@tri.global

Abstract
3D object detection from visual sensors is a cornerstone capability of robotic systems. State-of-the-art methods focus on reasoning and decoding object bounding boxes
from multi-view camera input. In this work we gain intuition from the integral role of multi-view consistency in 3D
scene understanding and geometric learning. To this end,
we introduce VEDet, a novel 3D object detection framework that exploits 3D multi-view geometry to improve localization through viewpoint awareness and equivariance.
VEDet leverages a query-based transformer architecture
and encodes the 3D scene by augmenting image features
with positional encodings from their 3D perspective geometry. We design view-conditioned queries at the output level,
which enables the generation of multiple virtual frames during training to learn viewpoint equivariance by enforcing
multi-view consistency. The multi-view geometry injected
at the input level as positional encodings and regularized
at the loss level provides rich geometric cues for 3D object detection, leading to state-of-the-art performance on
the nuScenes benchmark. The code and model are made
available at https://github.com/TRI-ML/VEDet.

Multi-view Images

Global Predictions

VEDet

View-Conditioned Predictions

Viewpoint
Equivariance

Figure 1. Our proposed VEDet encodes the 3D scene from multiview images, and decodes objects with view-conditioned queries.
The predicted 3D bounding boxes are expressed in the underlying
views of the queries, which enables us to enforce viewpoint equivariance among predictions from multiple views. Virtual query
views are generated during training and together with the viewpoint equivariance regularization bring richer geometric learning
signals to guide the model to better understand the 3D structure
in the scene. During inference, the global predictions can be obtained by simply choosing the global frame as the query view.

1. Introduction
Camera-based 3D object detection is a critical research
topic, with important applications in areas such as autonomous driving and robotics due to the semantic-rich input and low cost compared to range sensors. In the past
few years, monocular 3D detection has seen significant
progress, from relying on predicting pseudo point clouds as
intermediate representation [33, 39, 42] to end-to-end learning [31,34,38]. However, monocular 3D detectors are inherently ambiguous in terms of depth, which motivated some
recent exploration in multi-view and multi-sweep 3D object
detection [22, 25, 26, 40].
In a conventional monocular setting, given multiple cameras on a sensor rig, single-view detections are merged
to the global frame through rule-based processing such as
Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS). Recent advances in

multi-view camera-based 3D algorithms [25, 40] proposed
to jointly aggregate multi-view information at the feature
level, and directly predict a single set of detections in the
global frame. These algorithms demonstrate a giant leap in
3D detection performance on multi-camera datasets (E.g.,
Nuscenes [5]). To aggregate information from different
views, one line of query-based detectors adopt transformers to query image features [25, 26, 40] or bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) features [15, 22] via an attention mechanism. In
contrast, another line of works “lift-splat-shoot” [32] image
features from each view into the shared BEV features to be
processed by convolutional detection heads [21]. To further
mitigate the depth ambiguity, some concurrent works have
started extending multi-view to “multi-sweep” across timestamps and observe a promising performance boost [22, 26].

9213

