This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latency Matters: Real-Time Action Forecasting Transformer
Harshayu Girase1, 2 *

Nakul Agarwal1
∗

1

Chiho Choi1

Karttikeya Mangalam2∗

denotes equal technical contribution

Honda Research Institute USA

2

UC Berkeley

Abstract
We present RAFTformer, a real-time action forecasting
transformer for latency-aware real-world action forecasting. RAFTformer is a two-stage fully transformer based
architecture comprising of a video transformer backbone
that operates on high resolution, short-range clips, and a
head transformer encoder that temporally aggregates information from multiple short-range clips to span a long-term
horizon. Additionally, we propose a novel self-supervised
shuffled causal masking scheme as a model level augmentation to improve forecasting fidelity. Finally, we also propose a novel real-time evaluation setting for action forecasting that directly couples model inference latency to
overall forecasting performance and brings forth a hitherto overlooked trade-off between latency and action forecasting performance. Our parsimonious network design facilitates RAFTformer inference latency to be 9× smaller
than prior works at the same forecasting accuracy. Owing to its two-staged design, RAFTformer uses 94% less
training compute and 90% lesser training parameters to
outperform prior state-of-the-art baselines by 4.9 points
on EGTEA Gaze+ and by 1.4 points on EPIC-Kitchens100 validation set, as measured by Top-5 recall (T5R) in
the offline setting. In the real-time setting, RAFTformer
outperforms prior works by an even greater margin of
upto 4.4 T5R points on the EPIC-Kitchens-100 dataset.
Project Webpage: https://karttikeya.github.
io/publication/RAFTformer/.

1. Introduction
Latency matters. It is a crucial system design consideration for countless applications that operate in real-time
from hardware design [65], network engineering [63], and
satellite communications [30] to capital trading [32], human
vision [59] and COVID transmission patterns [54]. However, it has not been a center stage design consideration in
modern computer vision systems of the past decade [11,45].
Modern vision system design has largely focused on the
* Work done during Harshayu’s internship at HRI with Chiho Choi’s
supervision who is now at Samsung Seminconductor US
Karttikeya Mangalam is the corresponding author

Offline:
dry hand

Target
Future

Present

Time

dry hand

sec

=0

fold cloth take pizza take pizza

Forecasting
Horizon

Observed Past

Real-time:

Action?

≠0
Prior
Methods

Observed Past

Inference Latency

RAFTformer
Observed Past

Latency

Figure 1. Action Forecasting is the task of predicting actions
that will happen after a pre-determined time span, say tf seconds,
into the future. Prior works consider an offline evaluation setting
that ignores the model inference latency. We propose a latencyaware real-time evaluation setting where the model is required to
finish forecasting tf seconds before the target time. We present
RAFTformer, a fast action anticipation transformer that outperforms prior works both in offline & real-time setting while forecasting actions in real-time (≥ 25 FPS).

correctness of systems rather than the latency of the predictions. While vision-based forecasting systems are often
meant for embodied real-time deployment on autonomous
agents like self-driving cars and robots, they are evaluated
in an offline setting where inference latency is neglected
(Figure 1). Interestingly, recent neural network architectures have adopted FLOPs as a proxy for latency as a second axis for model design. While a sufficient fidelity metric for offline after-the-fact applications like automatic content recognition, latency often comes second to correctness,
even for real-time systems such as forecasting models.
Forecasting empowers reactive planning [17]. An autonomous system present in rich human environments inevitably needs to understand human actions around it for
smooth task planning and execution. Autonomous agent
planning critically depends on anticipating the future of the
scene in various forms such as trajectory prediction [22,
23, 57, 58], action forecasting [19, 25, 80] or future scene

18759

