This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Mean Teacher for Domain Adaptive Object Detectors
Shengcao Cao1 Dhiraj Joshi2 Liang-Yan Gui1 Yu-Xiong Wang1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 IBM Research
1

{cao44,lgui,yxw}@illinois.edu

2

djoshi@us.ibm.com

Detection Loss

Abstract

Predictions

Object detectors often suffer from the domain gap between training (source domain) and real-world applications
(target domain). Mean-teacher self-training is a powerful
paradigm in unsupervised domain adaptation for object detection, but it struggles with low-quality pseudo-labels. In
this work, we identify the intriguing alignment and synergy between mean-teacher self-training and contrastive
learning. Motivated by this, we propose Contrastive Mean
Teacher (CMT) – a unified, general-purpose framework
with the two paradigms naturally integrated to maximize
beneficial learning signals. Instead of using pseudo-labels
solely for final predictions, our strategy extracts objectlevel features using pseudo-labels and optimizes them via
contrastive learning, without requiring labels in the target
domain. When combined with recent mean-teacher selftraining methods, CMT leads to new state-of-the-art targetdomain performance: 51.9% mAP on Foggy Cityscapes,
outperforming the previously best by 2.1% mAP. Notably,
CMT can stabilize performance and provide more significant gains as pseudo-label noise increases.

1. Introduction
The domain gap between curated datasets (source domain) and real-world applications (target domain, e.g., on
edge devices or robotic systems) often leads to deteriorated
performance for object detectors. Meanwhile, accurate labels provided by humans are costly or even unavailable in
practice. Aiming at maximizing performance in the target
domain while minimizing human supervision, unsupervised
domain adaptation mitigates the domain gap via adversarial
training [7, 30], domain randomization [23], image translation [4, 20, 21], etc.
In contrast to the aforementioned techniques that explicitly model the domain gap, state-of-the-art domain adaptive
object detectors [5, 27] follow a mean-teacher self-training
paradigm [2, 9], which explores a teacher-student mutual
Code available at https://github.com/Shengcao-Cao/CMT

Student
Detector
Strong
Augmentation

EMA

Contrastive Loss

Pseudo-labels

Query

Key

Teacher
Detector

Online
Encoder

Weak
Augmentation

Augmentation
#1

EMA

Momentum
Encoder
Augmentation
#2

Target-domain
Image

Unlabeled
Image

Mean-teacher Self-training

Momentum Contrast
Attract

Pseudo-labels with Noise

Repel

Object-level Contrastive Learning

Figure 1. Overview of Contrastive Mean Teacher. Top: Meanteacher self-training [2, 5, 9, 27] for unsupervised domain adaptation (left) and Momentum Contrast [16] for unsupervised representation learning (right) share the same underlying structure,
and thus can be naturally integrated into our unified framework,
Contrastive Mean Teacher. Bottom: Contrastive Mean Teacher
benefits unsupervised domain adaptation even when pseudo-labels
are noisy. In this example, the teacher detector incorrectly detects
the truck as a train and the bounding box is slightly off. Reinforcing this wrong pseudo-label in the student harms the performance. Contrarily, our proposed object-level contrastive learning still finds meaningful learning signals from it, by enforcing feature-level similarities between the same objects and dissimilarities between different ones.

learning strategy to gradually adapt the object detector for
cross-domain detection. As illustrated in Figure 1-top, the
teacher generates pseudo-labels from detected objects in the
target domain, and the pseudo-labels are then used to supervise the student’s predictions. In return, the teacher’s
weights are updated as the exponential moving average
(EMA) of the student’s weights.

23839

