This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Fields meet Explicit Geometric Representations
for Inverse Rendering of Urban Scenes
Zian Wang1,2,3 Tianchang Shen1,2,3 Jun Gao1,2,3 Shengyu Huang1,4 Jacob Munkberg1
Jon Hasselgren1 Zan Gojcic1 Wenzheng Chen1,2,3 Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute 4 ETH Zürich

Input Images
Light

𝒌𝒅 , 𝒌𝒔 , 𝒏, 𝐿

Relighting

Relighting in Novel Views

Object Insertion

Figure 1. We present FEGR, an approach for reconstructing scene geometry and recovering intrinsic properties of the scene from posed
camera images. Our approach works both for single and multi-illumination captured data. FEGR enables various downstream applications
such as VR and AR where users may want to control the lighting of the environment and insert desired 3D objects into the scene.

Abstract
Reconstruction and intrinsic decomposition of scenes
from captured imagery would enable many applications
such as relighting and virtual object insertion. Recent NeRF
based methods achieve impressive fidelity of 3D reconstruction, but bake the lighting and shadows into the radiance
field, while mesh-based methods that facilitate intrinsic decomposition through differentiable rendering have not yet
scaled to the complexity and scale of outdoor scenes. We
present a novel inverse rendering framework for large urban
scenes capable of jointly reconstructing the scene geometry,
spatially-varying materials, and HDR lighting from a set
of posed RGB images with optional depth. Specifically, we
use a neural field to account for the primary rays, and use
an explicit mesh (reconstructed from the underlying neural
field) for modeling secondary rays that produce higher-order
lighting effects such as cast shadows. By faithfully disentangling complex geometry and materials from lighting effects,
our method enables photorealistic relighting with specular
and shadow effects on several outdoor datasets. Moreover, it
supports physics-based scene manipulations such as virtual
object insertion with ray-traced shadow casting.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing high fidelity 3D scenes from captured imagery is an important utility of scaleable 3D content creation.
However, for the reconstructed environments to serve as “digital twins” for downstream applications such as augmented
reality and gaming, we require that these environments are
compatible with modern graphics pipeline and can be rendered with user-specified lighting. This means that we not
only need to reconstruct 3D geometry and texture but also
recover the intrinsic properties of the scene such as material
properties and lighting information. This is an ill-posed,
challenging problem oftentimes referred to as inverse rendering [1].
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [34] have recently
emerged as a powerful neural reconstruction approach that
enables photo-realistic novel-view synthesis. NeRFs can
be reconstructed from a set of posed camera images in a
matter of minutes [14, 35, 43] and have been shown to scale
to room-level scenes and beyond [45, 48, 55], making them
an attractive representation for augmented/virtual reality and
generation of digital twins. However, in NeRF, the intrinsic
properties of the scene are not separated from the effect of incident light. As a result, novel views can only be synthesised

8370

