This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Query Tuning: Towards Effective Usage of Intermediate Representations
for Parameter and Memory Efficient Transfer Learning
Cheng-Hao Tu*
Zheda Mai*
Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University, {tu.343, mai.145, chao.209}@osu.edu
Abstract
Intermediate features of a pre-trained model have been
shown informative for making accurate predictions on
downstream tasks, even if the model backbone is kept frozen.
The key challenge is how to utilize these intermediate features given their gigantic amount. We propose visual query
tuning (VQT), a simple yet effective approach to aggregate
intermediate features of Vision Transformers. Through introducing a handful of learnable “query” tokens to each
layer, VQT leverages the inner workings of Transformers
to “summarize” rich intermediate features of each layer,
which can then be used to train the prediction heads of
downstream tasks. As VQT keeps the intermediate features
intact and only learns to combine them, it enjoys memory
efficiency in training, compared to many other parameterefficient fine-tuning approaches that learn to adapt features
and need back-propagation through the entire backbone.
This also suggests the complementary role between VQT
and those approaches in transfer learning. Empirically,
VQT consistently surpasses the state-of-the-art approach
that utilizes intermediate features for transfer learning and
outperforms full fine-tuning in many cases. Compared to
parameter-efficient approaches that adapt features, VQT
achieves much higher accuracy under memory constraints.
Most importantly, VQT is compatible with these approaches
to attain even higher accuracy, making it a simple addon to further boost transfer learning. Code is available at
https://github.com/andytu28/VQT.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning by adapting large pre-trained models to
downstream tasks has been a de facto standard for competitive performance, especially when downstream tasks have
limited data [37, 59]. Generally speaking, there are two
ways to adapt a pre-trained model [15, 27]: updating the
model backbone for new feature embeddings (the output
of the penultimate layer) or recombining the existing fea* Equal contributions.

ture embeddings, which correspond to the two prevalent approaches, fine-tuning and linear probing, respectively. Finetuning, or more specifically, full fine-tuning, updates all the
model parameters end-to-end based on the new dataset. Although fine-tuning consistently outperforms linear probing
on various tasks [54], it requires running gradient descent
for all parameters and storing a separate fine-tuned model
for each task, making it computationally expensive and parameter inefficient. These problems become more salient
with Transformer-based models whose parameters grow exponentially [17, 26, 46]. Alternatively, linear probing only
trains and stores new prediction heads to recombine features
while keeping the backbone frozen. Despite its computational and parameter efficiency, linear probing is often less
attractive due to its inferior performance.
Several recent works have attempted to overcome such a
dilemma in transfer learning. One representative work is by
Evci et al. [15], who attributed the success of fine-tuning to
leveraging the “intermediate” features of pre-trained models
and proposed to directly allow linear probing to access the
intermediate features. Some other works also demonstrated
the effectiveness of such an approach [14,15]. Nevertheless,
given numerous intermediate features in each layer, most of
these methods require pooling to reduce the dimensionality,
which likely would eliminate useful information before the
prediction head can access it.
To better utilize intermediate features, we propose Visual Query Tuning (VQT), a simple yet effective approach
to aggregate the intermediate features of Transformer-based
models like Vision Transformers (ViT) [13]. A Transformer
usually contains multiple Transformer layers, each starting
with a Multi-head self-attention (MSA) module operating
over the intermediate feature tokens (often > 100 tokens)
outputted by the previous layer. The MSA module transforms each feature token by querying all the other tokens,
followed by a weighted combination of their features.
Taking such inner workings into account, VQT introduces a handful of learnable “query” tokens to each layer,
which, through the MSA module, can then “summarize” the
intermediate features of the previous layer to reduce the dimensionality. The output features of these query tokens af-

7725

