This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Probabilistic Attention Model with Occlusion-aware Texture Regression for
3D Hand Reconstruction from a Single RGB Image
Zheheng Jiang1 Hossein Rahmani1 Sue Black2 Bryan M. Williams1
1
Lancaster University 2 St John’s College of the University of Oxford
{z.jiang11,h.rahmani,b.williams6}@lancaster.ac.uk, sue.black@sjc.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently, deep learning based approaches have shown
promising results in 3D hand reconstruction from a single
RGB image. These approaches can be roughly divided into
model-based approaches, which are heavily dependent on
the model’s parameter space, and model-free approaches,
which require large numbers of 3D ground truths to reduce
depth ambiguity and struggle in weakly-supervised scenarios. To overcome these issues, we propose a novel probabilistic model to achieve the robustness of model-based approaches and reduced dependence on the model’s parameter space of model-free approaches. The proposed probabilistic model incorporates a model-based network as a
prior-net to estimate the prior probability distribution of
joints and vertices. An Attention-based Mesh Vertices Uncertainty Regression (AMVUR) model is proposed to capture dependencies among vertices and the correlation between joints and mesh vertices to improve their feature representation. We further propose a learning based occlusionaware Hand Texture Regression model to achieve highfidelity texture reconstruction. We demonstrate the flexibility of the proposed probabilistic model to be trained in both
supervised and weakly-supervised scenarios. The experimental results demonstrate our probabilistic model’s stateof-the-art accuracy in 3D hand and texture reconstruction
from a single image in both training schemes, including in
the presence of severe occlusions.

1. Introduction
3D hand shape and texture reconstruction from a single RGB image is a challenging problem that has numerous
applications such as human-machine interaction [1, 2], virtual and augmented reality [3–6], and sign language translation [7]. In recent years, there has been significant progress
in reconstructing 3D hand pose and shape from a monocular
images [8–16]. These approaches can be generally categorized into model-based and model-free approaches. Model-

based approaches [9,13–15] utilize a parametric model such
as MANO [17] and train a network to regress its parametric representation in terms of shape and pose. Since the
parametric model contains priors of human hands, these approaches are robust to environment variations and weaklysupervised training [12]. However, the shape and pose
regression is constrained by the parametric model that is
learned from the limited hand exemplars [8].
In contrast, model-free approaches [8, 11, 12, 16] regress
the coordinates of 3D hand joints and mesh directly instead
of using parametric models. Despite the remarkable results
they have achieved, there are several limitations. For example, Graph-CNN is used by [8, 11] to model neighborhood
vertex-vertex interactions, but such models cannot capture
long range dependencies among vertices. Although [12]
has addressed this issue by employing self-attention mechanism, it does not distinguish joints and vertices, processing
them together in a same self-attention module. Moreover
none of these works can support weakly supervised training
and often require a large amount of 3D annotations of both
joints and vertices to reduce depth ambiguity in monocular
3D reconstruction [18].
Motivated by the above observations, our first goal is
to combine the benefits of the model-based and modelfree approaches. To this end, we develop a probabilistic
method that incorporates the MANO model into a priornet to estimate the prior probability distribution of joints
and vertices instead of using deterministic settings as previous approaches have done. To relax the solution space of
the MANO model, an Attention-based Mesh Vertices Uncertainty Regression model (AMVUR) is proposed to estimate the conditioned probability distribution of the joints
and vertices. In AMVUR, to improve feature representation
of joints and vertices, a cross-attention model is proposed
to capture the correlation between 3D positional encoded
joints and mesh vertices, followed by a self-attention model
for capturing the short/long range dependencies among
mesh vertices. With the proposed architecture, the AMVUR
model can be jointly trained with the prior-net to achieve
superior performance to using them independently. To the
1758

