This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DNeRV: Modeling Inherent Dynamics via Difference Neural Representation for
Videos
Qi Zhao
Nanjing University

M. Salman Asif
University of California Riverside

Zhan Ma∗
Nanjing University

qizhao@smail.nju.edu.cn

sasif@ucr.edu

mazhan@nju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Results of the proposed DNeRV with 3M parameters for (a) video interpolation on UVG [26] and (b) video inpainting on
Davis [30]. The superior performance shows the effectiveness and generalization capability of DNeRV on neural representation for videos.

Abstract
Existing implicit neural representation (INR) methods
do not fully exploit spatiotemporal redundancies in videos.
Index-based INRs ignore the content-specic spatial features and hybrid INRs ignore the contextual dependency on
adjacent frames, leading to poor modeling capability for
scenes with large motion or dynamics. We analyze this limitation from the perspective of function tting and reveal
the importance of frame difference. To use explicit motion
information, we propose Difference Neural Representation
for Videos (DNeRV), which consists of two streams for content and frame difference. We also introduce a collaborative content unit for effective feature fusion. We test DNeRV
for video compression, inpainting, and interpolation. DNeRV achieves competitive results against the state-of-theart neural compression approaches and outperforms existing implicit methods on downstream inpainting and interpolation for 960 × 1920 videos.
1 Corresponding author: Zhan Ma (mazhan@nju.edu.cn)

1. Introduction
In recent years, implicit neural representations (INR)
have gained signicant attention due to their strong ability in learning a coordinate-wise mapping of different functions. The main principle behind INR is to learn an implicit continuous mapping f using a learnable neural network gθ (·) : Rm → Rn . The idea was rst proposed for
the neural radiance elds (NeRF) [28] and since then has
been applied to various applications [4,8,58]. INR attempts to approximate the continuous f by training gθ with mdimensional discrete coordinates x  Rm and corresponding quantity of interest y  Rn . Once trained, the desired
f can be fully characterized using gθ or the weights θ, and
it would be benet for the tasks which need to model the
intrinsic generalization for given data, such as interpolation
or inpainting tasks shown in Fig. 1.
The success of INR can be attributed to the insight that
a learnable and powerful operator with a nite set of data samples S = {xi , yi }N
i=0 , can t the unknown mapping
f . The accuracy of the mapping depends on the number
2031 of samples (N ) and the complexity of the map f . INR for
1

