This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACR: Attention Collaboration-based Regressor
for Arbitrary Two-Hand Reconstruction
Zhengdi Yu1,2 , Shaoli Huang1 *, Chen Fang1 , Toby P. Breckon 2 , Jue Wang
1
2
Tencent AI Lab
Durham University
{zhengdiyu,shaolihuang,fcfang}@tencent.com

toby.breckon@durham.com

arphid@gmail.com

Abstract
Reconstructing two hands from monocular RGB images
is challenging due to frequent occlusion and mutual confusion. Existing methods mainly learn an entangled representation to encode two interacting hands, which are incredibly fragile to impaired interaction, such as truncated
hands, separate hands, or external occlusion. This paper presents ACR (Attention Collaboration-based Regressor), which makes the first attempt to reconstruct hands in
arbitrary scenarios. To achieve this, ACR explicitly mitigates interdependencies between hands and between parts
by leveraging center and part-based attention for feature
extraction. However, reducing interdependence helps release the input constraint while weakening the mutual reasoning about reconstructing the interacting hands. Thus,
based on center attention, ACR also learns cross-hand
prior that handle the interacting hands better. We evaluate our method on various types of hand reconstruction
datasets. Our method significantly outperforms the best
interacting-hand approaches on the InterHand2.6M dataset
while yielding comparable performance with the state-ofthe-art single-hand methods on the FreiHand dataset. More
qualitative results on in-the-wild and hand-object interaction datasets and web images/videos further demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach for arbitrary hand reconstruction. Our code is available at this link 1 .

1. Introduction
3D hand pose and shape reconstruction based on a single
RGB camera plays an essential role in various emerging applications, such as augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR),
human-computer interaction, 3D character animation for
movies and games, etc. However, this task is highly challenging due to limited labeled data, occlusion, depth ambiguity, etc. Earlier attempts [1, 2, 36, 39] level down the
problem difficulty and focus on single-hand reconstruction.
These methods started from exploring weakly-supervised
* Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/ZhengdiYu/Arbitrary-Hands-3D-Reconstruction

Figure 1. Given a monocular RGB image, our method makes
the first attempt to reconstruct hands under arbitrary scenarios by
representation disentanglement and interaction mutual reasoning
while the previous state-of-the-art method IntagHand [15] failed.

learning paradigms [2] to designing more advanced network
models [31]. Although single-hand approaches can be extended to reconstruct two hands, they generally ignore the
inter-occlusion and confusion issues, thus failing to handle
two interacting hands.
To this end, recent research has shifted toward reconstructing two interacting hands. Wang et al. [33] extract
multi-source complementary information to reconstruct two
interacting hands simultaneously. Rong et al. [27] and
Zhang et al. [35] first obtain initial prediction and stack intermediate results together to refine two-hand reconstruction. The latest work [15] gathers pyramid features and
two-hand features as input for a GCN-based network that
regresses two interacting hands unitedly. These methods
share the same principle: treating two hands as an integral

12955

