This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bias Mimicking: A Simple Sampling Approach for Bias Mitigation
Maan Qraitem1 , Kate Saenko1,2 , Bryan A. Plummer1
1
Boston University 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{mqraitem,saenko,bplum}@bu.edu

Abstract
Prior work has shown that Visual Recognition datasets
frequently underrepresent bias groups B (e.g. Female)
within class labels Y (e.g. Programmers). This dataset bias
can lead to models that learn spurious correlations between
class labels and bias groups such as age, gender, or race.
Most recent methods that address this problem require significant architectural changes or additional loss functions
requiring more hyper-parameter tuning. Alternatively, data
sampling baselines from the class imbalance literature (e.g.
Undersampling, Upweighting), which can often be implemented in a single line of code and often have no hyperparameters, offer a cheaper and more efficient solution.
However, these methods suffer from significant shortcomings. For example, Undersampling drops a significant part
of the input distribution per epoch while Oversampling repeats samples, causing overfitting. To address these shortcomings, we introduce a new class-conditioned sampling
method: Bias Mimicking. The method is based on the observation that if a class c bias distribution, i.e. PD (B|Y = c)
is mimicked across every c′ ̸= c, then Y and B are statistically independent. Using this notion, BM, through a novel
training procedure, ensures that the model is exposed to
the entire distribution per epoch without repeating samples.
Consequently, Bias Mimicking improves underrepresented
groups’ accuracy of sampling methods by 3% over four
benchmarks while maintaining and sometimes improving
performance over nonsampling methods. Code: https:
//github.com/mqraitem/Bias-Mimicking

Figure 1. Comparison of sampling approaches for mitigating bias
of class labels Y (Hair Color) toward sensitive group labels B
(Gender). (a) illustrates Undersampling/Oversampling methods
that drop/repeat samples respectively from a dataset D per epoch
and thus ensure that PD (Y |B) = PD (Y ). However, dropping
samples hurt the model’s predictive performance, and repeating
samples can cause overfitting with over-parameterized models like
neural nets [34]. (b) shows our Bias Mimicking approach which
subsamples D and produces three variants. Each variant, denoted
as dc ⊂ D, preserves class c samples (i.e. mimicked class) and
mimics the bias of class c in each c′ ̸= c. This mimicking process, as we show in our work, ensures that Pdc (Y |B) = Pdc (Y ).
Moreover, by using each dc separately to train the model, we expose it to all the samples in D per epoch, and since we do not
repeat samples in each dc , our method is less prone to overfitting.

1. Introduction
Spurious predictive correlations have been frequently
documented within the Deep Learning literature [33, 37].
These correlations can arise when most samples in class
a c (e.g. blonde hair) belong to a bias group s (e.g. female). Thus, the model might learn to predict classes by using their membership to their bias groups (e.g. more likely
to predict blonde hair if a sample is female). Mitigating
such spurious correlations (Bias) involves decorrelating the

model’s predictions of input samples from their membership to bias groups. Previous research efforts have primarily focused on model-based solutions. These efforts can be
mainly categorized into two directions 1) ensemble-based
methods [34], which introduce separate prediction heads for
samples from different bias groups 2) methods that introduce additional bias regularizing loss functions and require
additional hyper-parameter tuning [12, 15, 25, 26, 32].

20311

