This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tensor4D : Efficient Neural 4D Decomposition for High-fidelity Dynamic
Reconstruction and Rendering
Ruizhi Shao1 , Zerong Zheng1,2 , Hanzhang Tu1 , Boning Liu1 , Hongwen Zhang1 , Yebin Liu1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 NNKosmos Technology

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Given 4 sparse static RGB camera views of a dynamic scene (a), our proposed Tensor4D decomposition enables multiview
reconstruction to achieve fine-grained geometry reconstruction even on human fingers (b) and temporal-consistent novel view synthesis on
a 3D holographic display (c,d,e). The 4 cameras are settled on four conners of the display. The proposed method demonstrates low-cost,
portable and highly immersive telepresence experience.

Abstract
We present Tensor4D, an efficient yet effective approach
to dynamic scene modeling. The key of our solution is an
efficient 4D tensor decomposition method so that the dynamic scene can be directly represented as a 4D spatiotemporal tensor. To tackle the accompanying memory issue, we decompose the 4D tensor hierarchically by projecting it first into three time-aware volumes and then nine
compact feature planes. In this way, spatial information
over time can be simultaneously captured in a compact and
memory-efficient manner. When applying Tensor4D for dynamic scene reconstruction and rendering, we further factorize the 4D fields to different scales in the sense that structural motions and dynamic detailed changes can be learned
from coarse to fine. The effectiveness of our method is validated on both synthetic and real-world scenes. Extensive
experiments show that our method is able to achieve highquality dynamic reconstruction and rendering from sparseview camera rigs or even a monocular camera. The code
and dataset will be released at https://github.com/
DSaurus/Tensor4D.

1. Introduction
High quality reconstruction and Photo-realistic rendering of a dynamic scene from a set of input images is nec-

essary for many applications such as AR/VR, 3D content
production and entertainment. Traditional methods use
classical mesh-based representation to reconstruct the dynamic scenes, which, unfortunately, are prone to produce
reconstruction errors and rendering artifacts when the scene
contains thin structures, specular surfaces and topological
changes [9, 19, 23, 26, 49].
Recent advances in neural rendering approaches, which
learn scene representations in the form of neural radiance
fields (NeRF), have shown impressive novel view synthesis of general static scenes given only multi-view images [32]. They are immediately extended to dynamic
scenes: some methods (e.g., NeRF-T) consider time as an
additional input dimension to NeRF representation [56, 62],
while other methods (e.g., D-NeRF) disentangle a dynamic
scene into a canonical radiance field and a dynamic motion
field [11,28,37,40,55]. Either way, learning a 4D function is
one of the main cornerstones. Unfortunately, directly using
MLP to fit such a function often suffers from high time and
computation cost, i.e., dozens of hours on high-end GPUs.
In fact, the aforementioned limitation also exists in conventional NeRF-based methods for static scenes, and researchers have proposed to use discrete data structures like
voxel grids [65] or triplanes [7] to accelerate NeRF training and rendering. However, these techniques are difficult
to be extended to dynamic domains as introducing an additional time dimension will exponentially increase memory
footprint, hindering them from modeling high-quality ap-

16632

