This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Identity Driven Deepfake Face Swapping Detection
Baojin Huang† , Zhongyuan Wang† ,* Jifan Yang† , Jiaxin Ai† , Qin Zou† , Qian Wang‡ , Dengpan Ye‡
†
NERCMS, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
‡
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the face swapping detection
from the perspective of face identity. Face swapping aims
to replace the target face with the source face and generate the fake face that the human cannot distinguish between
real and fake. We argue that the fake face contains the explicit identity and implicit identity, which respectively corresponds to the identity of the source face and target face
during face swapping. Note that the explicit identities of
faces can be extracted by regular face recognizers. Particularly, the implicit identity of real face is consistent with
the its explicit identity. Thus the difference between explicit
and implicit identity of face facilitates face swapping detection. Following this idea, we propose a novel implicit identity driven framework for face swapping detection. Specifically, we design an explicit identity contrast (EIC) loss and
an implicit identity exploration (IIE) loss, which supervises
a CNN backbone to embed face images into the implicit
identity space. Under the guidance of EIC, real samples
are pulled closer to their explicit identities, while fake samples are pushed away from their explicit identities. Moreover, IIE is derived from the margin-based classification
loss function, which encourages the fake faces with known
target identities to enjoy intra-class compactness and interclass diversity. Extensive experiments and visualizations
on several datasets demonstrate the generalization of our
method against the state-of-the-art counterparts.

1. Introduction
The development of deep learning has promoted the continuous progress of face forgery technology [5, 16, 48]. Especially for face swapping, it can replace the target face
with the source face to generate a fake face that is not distinguishable by the human eyes. With this technology, attackers can easily forge high-quality videos of public celebrities
and political figures to achieve illegal political or commercial purposes. To alleviate the abuse of face swapping, it is
* Corresponding author.

Face
Swapping
Target
Explicit distance

Fake

Source
Implicit distance

General FR model
Our IFR model

Explicit
Embedding
Resemblance?

Given Face

√ Real
× Fake

Implicit
Embedding

Figure 1. Motivation of our approach. The target face is replaced
by the source face through face swapping to generate a fake face.
In appearance, the fake face looks like the source face instead of
the target face. We resort the general face recognition (FR) model
CosFace [51] to obtain the explicit distance of these faces. Particularly, since the fake face is synthesized from the source face and
the target face, we aim to explore a implicit face recognition (IFR)
model that can mine the corresponding target face identity based
on the fake face. With the similarity between explicit and implicit
embeddings of the given face, we can significantly distinguish it
as real and fake, which facilitates forgery detection.

urgent to exploit corresponding detection methods.
Early researches [1, 10, 37, 42] usually treat face swap
detection as a binary image classification task. Specifically,
face images are fed into an existing deep convolutional neural network (CNN) and then classified as real and fake.
Such methods can learn the data distribution of the training
set, resulting in considerable performance in intra-domian
tests. However, the simple classification guidance cannot
incorporate the connotation of face swapping, thus the deep
network lacks the understanding of forgery [50]. Recent
works are devoted to exploring specific forgery patterns,
such as noise analysis [27], local regions [7, 53] and frequency information [19, 41]. In this way, fake traces in fake
faces can be better detected. Albeit gaining the benefits,
they still revolve around certain manipulation methods and

4490

