This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CNVid-3.5M: Build, Filter, and Pre-train
the Large-scale Public Chinese Video-text Dataset
Qing Wang2 *,

Tian Gan1 *,
1

Xingning Dong1 ,

Shandong University,

gantian@sdu.edu.cn,

2

Ant Group,

3

Owing to well-designed large-scale video-text datasets,
recent years have witnessed tremendous progress in videotext pre-training. However, existing large-scale video-text
datasets are mostly English-only. Though there are certain
methods studying the Chinese video-text pre-training, they
pre-train their models on private datasets whose videos
and text are unavailable. This lack of large-scale public
datasets and benchmarks in Chinese hampers the research
and downstream applications of Chinese video-text pretraining. Towards this end, we release and benchmark
CNVid-3.5M, a large-scale public cross-modal dataset containing over 3.5M Chinese video-text pairs. We summarize
our contributions by three verbs, i.e., “Build”, “Filter”,
and “Pre-train”: 1) To build a public Chinese video-text
dataset, we collect over 4.5M videos from the Chinese
websites. 2) To improve the data quality, we propose a novel
method to filter out 1M weakly-paired videos, resulting in
the CNVid-3.5M dataset. And 3) we benchmark CNVid3.5M with three mainstream pixel-level pre-training architectures. At last, we propose the Hard Sample Curriculum
Learning strategy to promote the pre-training performance.
To the best of our knowledge, CNVid-3.5M is the largest
public video-text dataset in Chinese, and we provide the
first pixel-level benchmarks for Chinese video-text pretraining. The dataset, codebase, and pre-trained models
are available at https://github.com/CNVid/CNVid-3.5M.

1. Introduction
Owing to well-designed large-scale datasets, video-text
pre-training [15, 17, 19] has achieved superior performance
in various downstream tasks, such as video-text retrieval
[4, 10, 36], video question answering [27, 34, 42], and video
captioning [1, 22, 30]. However, recent large-scale video-

Qingpei Guo2†

dongxingning1998@gmail.com

nieliqiang@gmail.com,

Abstract

Liqiang Nie3 ,

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)

wq176625@antgroup.com,

xiangyuan.rxy@antgroup.com,

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Xiangyuan Ren2 ,

qingpei.gqp@antgroup.com

Large-Scale Video-Text Dataset

Mismatched Data

Chinese

Video: a live show

None

Text:🎶BGM🎶

English
HowTo

WebVid

···

There are no large public
Chinese Video Datasets!
Solution

We BUILD and release
one to fill this blank!

Some videos have weak
vision-text consistency!
Solution

We FILTER the noisy
data by a novel method!

CNVid-3.5M

Pre-training
Dataset

Applications

How to use the dataset
in actual applications?
Solution

We PRE-TRAIN
various benchmarks
for you to choose!

Figure 1. Here presents the motivations of this paper, based on
which we highly summarize our contributions with three verbs:
“Build”, “Filter”, and “Pre-train”.

text datasets are mostly English-only (e.g., Howto100M
[25] and WebVid-2.5M [4]). Though some methods [14,26,
45] turn to study the Chinese video-text pre-training, they
pre-train their models on private datasets whose videos
and text are unavailable. Therefore, the research towards
Chinese video-text pre-training is still in its infancy due to
the lack of large-scale public datasets.
Towards this problem, directly translating English text
into Chinese is a simple solution. However, it may result
in unacceptable performance degradation for two reasons:
1) Translation errors are inevitable. Moreover, since most
of the large-scale video-text datasets employ the Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR) system to generate text, the
language translator would amplify the error from the incomplete and noisy ASR text. And 2) there remains an intrinsic
linguistic gap between English and Chinese. Many widelyused English idioms and slang can hardly find their Chinese
counterparts, leading some translated text incomprehensible
and even contrary to the original meaning.
In this paper, we aim to release and benchmark a largescale public Chinese video-text dataset to facilitate future
researchers and the community. As illustrated in Figure 1,
three verbs could highly summarize our contributions, i.e.,
“Build”, “Filter”, and “Pre-train”.
To build a large-scale Chinese video-text dataset, we
collect over 4.5M videos from Chinese websites. All videos
are associated with user-uploaded titles and ASR text.

14815

