This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Change-Aware Sampling and Contrastive Learning for Satellite Images
Utkarsh Mall

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

Kavita Bala

{utkarshm, bharathh, kb}@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Automatic remote sensing tools can help inform many
large-scale challenges such as disaster management, climate change, etc. While a vast amount of spatio-temporal
satellite image data is readily available, most of it remains
unlabelled. Without labels, this data is not very useful for
supervised learning algorithms. Self-supervised learning
instead provides a way to learn effective representations for
various downstream tasks without labels. In this work, we
leverage characteristics unique to satellite images to learn
better self-supervised features. Specifically, we use the temporal signal to contrast images with long-term and shortterm differences, and we leverage the fact that satellite images do not change frequently. Using these characteristics,
we formulate a new loss contrastive loss called ChangeAware Contrastive (CACo) Loss. Further, we also present a
novel method of sampling different geographical regions.
We show that leveraging these properties leads to better
performance on diverse downstream tasks. For example,
we see a 6.5% relative improvement for semantic segmentation and an 8.5% relative improvement for change detection
over the best-performing baseline with our method.

1. Introduction
Our planet is surrounded by a large number of satellites
constantly collecting images of the world. This massive
trove of visual information can help monitor phenomena at
the world-scale, and inform solutions to global problems
such as climate change or loss of biodiversity. Automatic
vision tools can help by, for example, monitoring land-use
change over time [36] or the evolution of urban areas [6].
However, training all these models requires labeled data.
Unfortunately, labeling the massive trove of satellite images
is expensive, more so than internet images because of the
expertise necessary. This issue is exacerbated by the different label requirements of many monitoring applications.
One way to alleviate this problem of limited labeled
data is to use self-supervised learning techniques to learn
a good feature representation from unlabeled satellite im-

Figure 1. Images of the same location at three different times.
Changes from 2016 to 2020 are due to major urban development,
while those from July to September are seasonal variations. Our
approach, CACo, learns features that are sensitive to the former
but invariant to the latter.

agery. This representation can then be further finetuned
with much fewer labels for specific applications. Modern self-supervised learning approaches are based on contrastive learning. These techniques train a feature space so
that each image in the dataset is embedded close to augmented versions of itself (e.g., with jittered colors) but far
from other images of the dataset. A possible approach is to
directly apply these techniques on satellite image datasets.
However, the spatio-temporal structure of satellite imagery
is much richer than the unstructured collections of internet
images typically used in standard self-supervised learning.
In this work, we ask, how can we best leverage the structure
of satellite images for better self-supervised learning?
The first important aspect of the spatio-temporal structure of satellite images is the availability of multiple
temporally-spaced images for the same location. Past work
has used this structure to sample images spread over a few
weeks or months from each location to encourage invariance to seasonal variations [25]. However, we can access
images not just over a few months, but over many years.
Over such long time spans, we often see significant, per-

5261

