This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Implicit Neural Representations via Instance Pattern Composers
Chiheon Kim*
Kakao Brain

Doyup Lee*
Kakao Brain

Saehoon Kim
Kakao Brain

chiheon.kim@kakaobrain.com

doyup.lee@kakaobrain.com

shkim@kakaobrain.com

Minsu Cho
POSTECH

Wook-Shin Han†
POSTECH

mscho@postech.ac.kr

wshan@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite recent advances in implicit neural representations (INRs), it remains challenging for a coordinate-based
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) of INRs to learn a common
representation across data instances and generalize it for
unseen instances. In this work, we introduce a simple yet
effective framework for generalizable INRs that enables a
coordinate-based MLP to represent complex data instances
by modulating only a small set of weights in an early MLP
layer as an instance pattern composer; the remaining MLP
weights learn pattern composition rules for common representations across instances. Our generalizable INR framework is fully compatible with existing meta-learning and hypernetworks in learning to predict the modulated weight for
unseen instances. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method achieves high performance on a wide range of
domains such as an audio, image, and 3D object, while the
ablation study validates our weight modulation.
Figure 1. The reconstructed images of 178×178 ImageNette by
TransINR [4] (left) and our generalizable INRs (right).

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations (INR) have shown the potential to represent complex data as continuous functions.
Assuming that a data instance comprises the pairs of a coordinate and its output features, INRs adopt a parameterized
neural network as a mapping function from an input coordinate into its output features. For example, a coordinatebased MLP [23] predicts RGB values at each 2D coordinate
as an INR of an image. Despite the popularity of INRs, a
trained MLP cannot be generalized to represent other instances, since each MLP learns to memorize each data instance. Thus, INRs necessitate separate training of MLPs to
represent a lot of data instances as continuous functions.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Generalizable INRs aim to learn common representations of a MLP across instances, while modulating features or weights of the coordinate-based MLP to adapt
unseen data instances [4, 7, 24]. The feature-modulation
method exploits the latent vector of an instance to condition the activations in MLP layers through concatenation [17] or affine-transform [8, 18]. Despite the computational efficiency of feature-modulation, the modulated INRs
have unsatisfactory results to represent complex data due to
their limited modulation capacity. On the other hand, the
weight-modulation method learns to update the whole MLP
weights to increase the modulation capacity for high performance. However, modulating whole MLP weights leads to
unstable and expensive training [4, 7, 9, 24].
In this study, we propose a simple yet effective frame-

11808

