This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teacher-generated spatial-attention labels boost robustness and accuracy of
contrastive models
Yushi Yao⇤
Waymo

Chang Ye⇤
Google

Junfeng He†
Google

Gamaleldin F. Elsayed†
Google

yushiy@waymo.com

yechang@google.com

junfenghe@google.com

gamaleldin@google.com

Abstract

Human spatial attention conveys information about the
regions of visual scenes that are important for performing visual tasks. Prior work has shown that the information about human attention can be leveraged to benefit various supervised vision tasks. Might providing this weak
form of supervision be useful for self-supervised representation learning? Addressing this question requires collecting large datasets with human attention labels. Yet, collecting such large scale data is very expensive. To address
this challenge, we construct an auxiliary teacher model to
predict human attention, trained on a relatively small labeled dataset. This teacher model allows us to generate image (pseudo) attention labels for ImageNet. We then train
a model with a primary contrastive objective; to this standard configuration, we add a simple output head trained
to predict the attention map for each image, guided by the
pseudo labels from teacher model. We measure the quality of learned representations by evaluating classification
performance from the frozen learned embeddings as well as
performance on image retrieval tasks (see supplementary
material). We find that the spatial-attention maps predicted
from the contrastive model trained with teacher guidance
aligns better with human attention compared to vanilla contrastive models. Moreover, we find that our approach improves classification accuracy and robustness of the contrastive models on ImageNet and ImageNet-C. Further, we
find that model representations become more useful for image retrieval task as measured by precision-recall performance on ImageNet, ImageNet-C, CIFAR10, and CIFAR10C datasets.

Figure 1. Illustration. A teacher model is trained to predict human
spatial-attention from a small dataset. Then the model is used to
provide attention labels for larger dataset, which are used as additional targets for contrastive models.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have made significant progress
and obtained notable success on various vision tasks. Despite these promising results, humans continue to perform
better than deep learning models in many applications. A
notable reason is that deep learning models have a tendency
to learn “short-cuts”, i.e., giving significance to physically
meaningless patterns or exploiting features which are predictive in some settings, but not causal [20]. Examples
include focusing on less significant features such as background and textures [13]. These models yield representations that are less generalizable and lead to models that are
highly sensitive to small pixel modulations [42].
Human vision on the other hand is known to be much
more robust and generalizable. One major difference between human and machine vision is that humans tend to
⇤ Equal technical contribution.

† Equal leadership and advising contribution

Correspondence to:
junfenghe@google.com & gamaleldin@google.com

23282

