This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physics-Driven Diffusion Models for Impact Sound Synthesis from Videos
Kaizhi Qian2
Kun Su1 *
1
University of Washington

Eli Shlizerman1
Antonio Torralba3
2
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
MIT

Chuang Gan2,4
4
UMass Amherst

Abstract
Modeling sounds emitted from physical object interactions is critical for immersive perceptual experiences in real
and virtual worlds. Traditional methods of impact sound
synthesis use physics simulation to obtain a set of physics
parameters that could represent and synthesize the sound.
However, they require fine details of both the object geometries and impact locations, which are rarely available in
the real world and can not be applied to synthesize impact
sounds from common videos. On the other hand, existing
video-driven deep learning-based approaches could only
capture the weak correspondence between visual content
and impact sounds since they lack of physics knowledge. In
this work, we propose a physics-driven diffusion model that
can synthesize high-fidelity impact sound for a silent video
clip. In addition to the video content, we propose to use additional physics priors to guide the impact sound synthesis
procedure. The physics priors include both physics parameters that are directly estimated from noisy real-world impact
sound examples without sophisticated setup and learned
residual parameters that interpret the sound environment
via neural networks. We further implement a novel diffusion
model with specific training and inference strategies to combine physics priors and visual information for impact sound
synthesis. Experimental results show that our model outperforms several existing systems in generating realistic impact
sounds. Lastly, the physics-based representations are fully
interpretable and transparent, thus allowing us to perform
sound editing flexibly. We encourage the readers visit our
project page 1 to watch demo videos with the audio turned
on to experience the result.

1. Introduction
Automatic sound effect production has become demanding for virtual reality, video games, animation, and movies.
Traditional movie production heavily relies on talented Foley
artists to record many sound samples in advance and man* Work done while interning at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
1 https://sukun1045.github.io/video-physics-sound-

diffusion/

Figure 1. The physics-driven diffusion model takes physics priors
and video input as conditions to synthesize high-fidelity impact
sound. Please also see the supplementary video and materials with
sample results.

ually perform laborious editing to fit the recorded sounds
to visual content. Though we could obtain a satisfactory
sound experience at the cinema, it is labor-intensive and
challenging to scale up the sound effects generation of various complex physical interactions.
Recently, much progress has been made in automatic
sound synthesis, which can be divided into two main categories. The first category is physics-based modal synthesis
methods [37, 38, 50], which are often used for simulating
sounds triggered by various types of object interactions. Although the synthesized sounds can reflect the differences
between various interactions and the geometry property of
the objects, such approaches require a sophisticated designed
environment to perform physics simulation and compute a
set of physics parameters for sound synthesis. It is, therefore,
impractical to scale up for a complicated scene because of
the time-consuming parameter selection procedure. On the
other hand, due to the availability of a significant amount
of impact sound videos in the wild, training deep learning
models for impact sound synthesis turns out to be a promising direction. Indeed, several works have shown promising
results in various audio-visual applications [63]. Unfortunately, most existing video-driven neural sound synthesis
methods [7, 62] apply end-to-end black box model training
and lack of physics knowledge which plays a significant role
in modeling impact sound because a minor change in the
impact location could exert a significant difference in the
sound generation process. As a result, these methods are
prone to learning an average or smooth audio representation that contains artifacts, which usually leads to generating

9749

