This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Generate Image Embeddings with User-level Differential Privacy
Zheng Xu*
Maxwell Collins∗
Sean Augenstein
Ting Liu

Yuxiao Wang
Liviu Panait
Sewoong Oh
Florian Schroff
H. Brendan McMahan
Google Research

Abstract
Small on-device models have been successfully trained
with user-level differential privacy (DP) for next word prediction and image classification tasks in the past. However,
existing methods can fail when directly applied to learn embedding models using supervised training data with a large
class space. To achieve user-level DP for large imageto-embedding feature extractors, we propose DP-FedEmb,
a variant of federated learning algorithms with per-user
sensitivity control and noise addition, to train from userpartitioned data centralized in the datacenter. DP-FedEmb
combines virtual clients, partial aggregation, private local
fine-tuning, and public pretraining to achieve strong privacy utility trade-offs. We apply DP-FedEmb to train image embedding models for faces, landmarks and natural
species, and demonstrate its superior utility under same
privacy budget on benchmark datasets DigiFace, EMNIST,
GLD and iNaturalist. We further illustrate it is possible to
achieve strong user-level DP guarantees of ϵ < 2 while controlling the utility drop within 5%, when millions of users
can participate in training .

1. Introduction
Representation learning, by training deep neural networks as feature extractors to generate compact embedding
vectors from images, is a fundamental component in computer vision. Metric learning, a kind of representation learning using supervised data, has been widely applied to image recognition, clustering, and retrieval [61, 75, 77]. Machine learning models have the capacity to memorize training data [10, 11], leading to privacy risks when the models
are deployed. Privacy risk can also be audited by membership inference attacks [9, 63], i.e. detecting whether certain data was used to train a model and potentially exposing users’ usage behaviors. Defending against such risks is
a critical responsibility when training on privacy-sensitive
data.
* The first two authors contributed equally. Correspondence to Zheng
Xu xuzheng@google.com

Differential Privacy (DP) [23] is an extensively used
quantifiable measurement of privacy risk, now generally accepted as a standard notion of privacy in both industry and
government [5, 18, 50, 70]. Applied to machine learning,
DP requires a training procedure with explicit randomness,
and guarantees that the distribution over output models is
quantifiably similar given a certain scope of change to the
training dataset. A DP guarantee with respect to the change
of a single arbitrary training example is known as examplelevel DP, which provides plausible deniability (in the binary
hypothesis testing sense of [38]) that any single example
(e.g., image) occurred in the training dataset. If we instead
consider how the distribution of output models changes if
the data (including even the number of examples) from any
single user change arbitrarily, we have user-level DP [22].
This ensures model training is quantifiably insensitive to all
of the data from any one user, and hence it is impossible
to tell if a user has participated in training with high confidence. This guarantee can be exponentially stronger than
example-level DP if one user may contribute many examples to training.
Recently, DP-SGD [1] (essentially, SGD with the additional steps of clipping each individual gradient to have
a maximum norm, and adding correspondingly calibrated
noise) has been used to achieve example-level DP for relatively large models in language modeling and image classification tasks [4, 16, 42, 45, 81], often utilizing techniques
like large batch training and pretraining on public data. DPSGD can be modified to guarantee user-level DP, which
is often combined with federated learning algorithms and
called DP-FedAvg [49]. User-level DP has only been studied for small on-device models that have less than 10 million parameters [36, 49, 57].
We consider user-level DP for relatively large models in
representation learning with supervised data. In our setting, similar to federated learning (FL), the data are userpartitioned; but in contrast to decentralized FL, we are primarily motivated by centralized data that benefit from access to richer computation resources and the ability to form
virtual clients at random. Throughout this work, we use
user as the basic unit of data partitioning and the granular-

7969

