This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cut and Learn for Unsupervised Object Detection and Instance Segmentation
Xudong Wang1,2
1
FAIR, Meta AI

Rohit Girdhar1
Stella X. Yu2,3
Ishan Misra1
2
3
UC Berkeley / ICSI
University of Michigan
Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/CutLER

Domains

paintings

sketches

clip arts

Watercolor

Comic

Clipart

30.4

21.1

natural images

videos

traffic images

UVO

KITTI

Sample
Results

Datasets

AP50
Prev. SOTA
CutLER

37.5

6.7

9.9

7.9

COCO 20K

COCO

LVIS

VOC

21.9

8.4

36.9

22.4

9.7

9.6

3.8

15.9

OpenImages Objects365
17.3

31.7

21.6

9.9
8.1

10

18.4

7.7

Figure 1. Zero-shot unsupervised object detection and instance segmentation using our CutLER model, which is trained without
human supervision. We evaluate the model using the standard detection APbox
50 . CutLER gives a strong performance on a variety of
benchmarks spanning diverse image domains - video frames, paintings, clip arts, complex scenes, etc. Compared to the previous stateof-the-art method, FreeSOLO [47] with a backbone of ResNet101, CutLER with a backbone of ResNet50 provides strong gains on all
benchmarks, increasing performance by more than 2× on 10 of the 11 benchmarks. We evaluate [47] with its official code and checkpoint.

Abstract
We propose Cut-and-LEaRn (CutLER), a simple approach for training unsupervised object detection and segmentation models. We leverage the property of selfsupervised models to ‘discover’ objects without supervision
and amplify it to train a state-of-the-art localization model
without any human labels. CutLER first uses our proposed
MaskCut approach to generate coarse masks for multiple
objects in an image, and then learns a detector on these
masks using our robust loss function. We further improve
performance by self-training the model on its predictions.
Compared to prior work, CutLER is simpler, compatible
with different detection architectures, and detects multiple
objects. CutLER is also a zero-shot unsupervised detector and improves detection performance AP50 by over 2.7×
on 11 benchmarks across domains like video frames, paintings, sketches, etc. With finetuning, CutLER serves as a lowshot detector surpassing MoCo-v2 by 7.3% APbox and 6.6%
APmask on COCO when training with 5% labels.

1. Introduction
Object localization is a critical task in computer vision
that enables AI systems to perceive, reason, plan and act in

an object-centric manner. Training models for localization
require special annotations like object boxes, masks, localized points, etc. which are both difficult and resource intensive to collect. Without accounting for overhead, annotating
∼164K images in the COCO dataset [32] with masks for
just 80 classes took more than 28K human hours of annotation time. In this work, we study unsupervised object detection and instance segmentation models that can be trained
without any human labels. Our key insight is that simple
probing and training mechanisms can amplify the innate localization ability of self-supervised models [7], leading to
state-of-the-art unsupervised zero-shot detectors.
Our method Cut-and-LEaRn (CutLER) consists of three
simple, architecture- and data-agnostic mechanisms. Consistent with prior self-supervised learning methods [7–9,
26], CutLER is trained exclusively on unlabeled ImageNet
data without needing additional training data, but contrary
to these methods, CutLER can be directly employed to perform complex segmentation and detection tasks over a wide
range of domains. First, we propose MaskCut that can automatically produce multiple initial coarse masks for each
image, using the pretrained self-supervised features. Second, we propose a simple loss dropping strategy to train
detectors using the coarse masks while being robust to objects missed by MaskCut. Finally, we observe that despite
learning from these coarse masks, the detectors ‘clean’ the

3124

