This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperbolic Contrastive Learning for Visual Representations beyond Objects
Songwei Ge⇤1 , Shlok Mishra⇤1 , Simon Kornblith2 ,
Chun-Liang Li2 , David Jacobs1,3
1
University of Maryland, College Park, 2 Google Research, 3 Meta
{songweig,shlokm,dwj}@umd.edu, {chunliang,skornblith}@google.com
Abstract
Although self-/un-supervised methods have led to rapid
progress in visual representation learning, these methods
generally treat objects and scenes using the same lens. In this
paper, we focus on learning representations for objects and
scenes that preserve the structure among them. Motivated by
the observation that visually similar objects are close in the
representation space, we argue that the scenes and objects
should instead follow a hierarchical structure based on their
compositionality. To exploit such a structure, we propose a
contrastive learning framework where a Euclidean loss is
used to learn object representations and a hyperbolic loss is
used to encourage representations of scenes to lie close to
representations of their constituent objects in a hyperbolic
space. This novel hyperbolic objective encourages the sceneobject hypernymy among the representations by optimizing
the magnitude of their norms. We show that when pretraining on the COCO and OpenImages datasets, the hyperbolic
loss improves downstream performance of several baselines
across multiple datasets and tasks, including image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. We also
show that the properties of the learned representations allow
us to solve various vision tasks that involve the interaction
between scenes and objects in a zero-shot fashion.

Figure 1. Illustration of the representation space learned by our
models. Object images of the same class tend to gather near the
center around similar directions, while the scene images are far
away in these directions with larger norms.

1. Introduction

the same space while preserving such hierarchical structures.

Our visual world is diverse and structured. Imagine taking
a close-up of a box of cereal in the morning. If we zoom out
slightly, we may see different nearby objects such as a pitcher
of milk, a cup of hot coffee, today’s newspaper, or reading
glasses. Zooming out further, we will probably recognize
that these items are placed on a dining table with the kitchen
as background rather than inside a bathroom. Such sceneobject structure is diverse, yet not completely random. In
this paper, we aim at learning visual representations of both
the cereal box (objects) and the entire dining table (scenes) in

Un-/self-supervised learning has become a standard
method to learn visual representations [7, 12, 24, 26, 27, 51].
Although these methods attain superior performance over
supervised pretraining on object-centric datasets such as ImageNet [6], inferior results are observed on images depicting
multiple objects such as OpenImages or COCO [68]. Several
methods have been proposed to mitigate this issue, but all focus either on learning improved object representations [1,68]
or dense pixel representations [39, 64, 69], instead of explicitly modeling representations for scene images. The object
representations learned by these methods present a natural
topology [67]. That is, the objects from visually similar

⇤ Equal Contribution. The order is decided randomly.

𝑂

6840

