This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupling Learning and Remembering: a Bilevel Memory Framework
with Knowledge Projection for Task-Incremental Learning
Wenju Sun1 Qingyong Li1,2,3 Jing Zhang1 Wen Wang1 Yangli-ao Geng1,2,3, *
1
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Frontiers Science Center for Smart High-speed Railway System, Beijing Jiaotong University
3
The Key Laboratory of Cognitive Computing and Intelligent Information Processing of
Fujian Education Institutions, Wuyi University
{SunWenJu,liqy,j_zhang,wangwen,gengyla}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The dilemma between plasticity and stability arises as a
common challenge for incremental learning. In contrast, the
human memory system is able to remedy this dilemma owing
to its multi-level memory structure, which motivates us to propose a Bilevel Memory system with Knowledge Projection
(BMKP) for incremental learning. BMKP decouples the
functions of learning and remembering via a bilevel-memory
design: a working memory responsible for adaptively model
learning, to ensure plasticity; a long-term memory in charge
of enduringly storing the knowledge incorporated within the
learned model, to guarantee stability. However, an emerging
issue is how to extract the learned knowledge from the working memory and assimilate it into the long-term memory. To
approach this issue, we reveal that the parameters learned
by the working memory are actually residing in a redundant
high-dimensional space, and the knowledge incorporated in
the model can have a quite compact representation under
a group of pattern basis shared by all incremental learning
tasks. Therefore, we propose a knowledge projection process to adaptively maintain the shared basis, with which the
loosely organized model knowledge of working memory is
projected into the compact representation to be remembered
in the long-term memory. We evaluate BMKP on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet. The experimental results
show that BMKP achieves state-of-the-art performance with
lower memory usage1 .

1. Introduction
In an ever-changing environment, intelligent systems are
expected to learn new knowledge incrementally without forgetting, which is referred to as incremental learning (IL)
* Corresponding author: Yangli-ao Geng (gengyla@bjtu.edu.cn).
1 The code is available at https://github.com/SunWenJu123/BMKP

[8,18]. Based on different design principles, many incremental learning methods have been proposed [16,19,24]. Among
them, memory-based models are leading the way in performance and have attracted enormous attention [3, 17, 26, 33].
The core idea of memory-based methods is to utilize
partial old-task information to guide the model to learn without forgetting [20]. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), memorybased methods typically maintain a memory to store the oldtask information. According to the type of stored information, memory-based methods further fall into two categories:
rehearsal-based and gradient-memory-based. Rehearsalbased methods [3, 17, 28, 29, 39] keep an exemplar memory
(or generative model) to save (or generate) old-task samples
or features, and replay them to recall old-task knowledge
when learning new tasks. However, the parameter fitting of
new tasks has the potential to overwrite the old-task knowledge, especially when the stored samples are unable to accurately simulate old-task data distributions, leading to low
stability. Gradient-memory-based methods [26, 33] maintain
a memory to store the gradient directions that may interfere
with the performance of old tasks, and only update the learning model with the gradients that are orthogonal to the stored
ones. Although the gradient directions restriction guarantees
stability, this restriction may prevent the model from being
optimized toward the right direction for a new task, which
would result in low plasticity. Therefore, both of these two
types of methods suffer the low plasticity or stability. The
reason is that their model is in charge of both learning new
task knowledge and maintaining old task knowledge. The
limited model capacity will inevitably lead to a plasticitystability trade-off in the face of a steady stream of knowledge,
i.e., plasticity-stability dilemma [21].
In contrast, human brains are known for both high plasticity and stability for incremental learning, owing to its
multi-level memory system [7]. Figure 1 (b) illustrates how
a human brain works in the classic Aktinson-Shiffrin human

20186

