This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DC2 : Dual-Camera Defocus Control by Learning to Refocus
Hadi Alzayer1,2 Abdullah Abuolaim1 Leung Chun Chan1
Yang Yang1 Ying Chen Lou1 Jia-Bin Huang2 Abhishek Kar1
1 Google

Ultra-wide

2 University of Maryland, College Park

Wide

Refocused

Input

Deblurred
Our results

Shallow DoF

Figure 1. Post-capture depth-of-field (DoF) control from dual camera. (Left) Using photos captured from dual cameras with a wide
field of view (FoV) and ultra-wide FoV, our method enables various DoF manipulations. (Right) We showcase our results of refocusing
(changing the focal plane), deblurring (creating all-in-focus imagery), and synthesizing a shallower DoF (producing bokeh effects).

Abstract
Smartphone cameras today are increasingly approaching the versatility and quality of professional cameras
through a combination of hardware and software advancements. However, fixed aperture remains a key limitation,
preventing users from controlling the depth of field (DoF)
of captured images. At the same time, many smartphones
now have multiple cameras with different fixed apertures specifically, an ultra-wide camera with wider field of view
and deeper DoF and a higher resolution primary camera
with shallower DoF. In this work, we propose DC2 , a system
for defocus control for synthetically varying camera aperture, focus distance and arbitrary defocus effects by fusing
information from such a dual-camera system. Our key insight is to leverage real-world smartphone camera dataset
by using image refocus as a proxy task for learning to control defocus. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations on
real-world data demonstrate our system’s efficacy where we
outperform state-of-the-art on defocus deblurring, bokeh
rendering, and image refocus. Finally, we demonstrate creative post-capture defocus control enabled by our method,
including tilt-shift and content-based defocus effects.

1. Introduction
Smartphone cameras are the most common modality
for capturing photographs today [13]. Recent advancements in computational photography such as burst photography [18], synthetic bokeh via portrait mode [48], superresolution [55], and more have been highly effective at closing the gap between professional DSLR and smartphone
photography. However, a key limitation for smartphone
cameras today is depth-of-field (DoF) control, i.e., controlling parts of the scene that appear in (and out of) focus. This
is primarily an artifact of their relatively simple optics and
imaging systems (e.g., fixed aperture, smaller imaging sensors, etc.). To bridge the gap, modern smartphones tend to
computationally process the images for further post-capture
enhancements such as synthesizing shallow DoF (e.g., portrait mode [37, 48]). However, this strategy alone does not
allow for DoF extension or post-capture refocus. In this
work, we propose Dual-Camera Defocus Control (DC2 ), a
framework that can provide post-capture defocus control
leveraging multi-camera systems prevalent in smartphones
today. Figure 1 shows example outputs from our framework for various post-capture DoF variations. In particular,

21488

