This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimal Transport Minimization:
Crowd Localization on Density Maps for Semi-Supervised Counting
Wei Lin
Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
elonlin24@gmail.com, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
The accuracy of crowd counting in images has improved
greatly in recent years due to the development of deep neural networks for predicting crowd density maps. However,
most methods do not further explore the ability to localize
people in the density map, with those few works adopting
simple methods, like finding the local peaks in the density
map. In this paper, we propose the optimal transport minimization (OT-M) algorithm for crowd localization with density maps. The objective of OT-M is to find a target point
map that has the minimal Sinkhorn distance with the input density map, and we propose an iterative algorithm
to compute the solution. We then apply OT-M to generate hard pseudo-labels (point maps) for semi-supervised
counting, rather than the soft pseudo-labels (density maps)
used in previous methods. Our hard pseudo-labels provide stronger supervision, and also enable the use of recent
density-to-point loss functions for training. We also propose
a confidence weighting strategy to give higher weight to the
more reliable unlabeled data. Extensive experiments show
that our methods achieve outstanding performance on both
crowd localization and semi-supervised counting. Code is
available at https://github.com/Elin24/OT-M .

1. Introduction
Crowd understanding gains much attention due to its
wide applications in surveillance [33, 61] and crowd disaster prevention. Most studies in this area concentrate
on crowd counting, whose objective is to provide the total number and distribution of crowds in a scene automatically. Due to the development of deep learning, recent
methods [5,58,59,62,67] have achieved success on a variety
of counting benchmarks [50, 61, 62, 66]. Counting methods
can be extended to other applications, such as traffic management [63], animal protection [2], and health care [32].
Although crowd counting has been greatly developed,
most methods do not explore further applications of the
estimated density maps after obtaining the count. Specifi-

CNN

OT-M
(ours)

Figure 1. The relationship between crowd counting CNNs and OTM algorithm. CNNs are trained to generate density maps (soft labels). OT-M produces point maps (hard labels) from the predicted
density maps, without needing training.

cally, there is limited research on crowd localization, tracking, or group analysis with predicted density maps. Taking
crowd localization as an example, only a few methods, such
as local maximum [13, 58, 65], integer programming [36],
or Gaussian mixture models (GMM) [14], have been proposed to locate pedestrians or tiny objects from density
maps. Moreover, recent localization methods ignore the
counting density map, and instead are based on point detection [40, 54], blob segmentation [1, 10, 17], or inverse
distance maps [24]. However, this will increase the inefficiency of a crowd understanding system, since separate
networks are required for counting and localization.
To broaden the application of density maps for localization, in this paper we propose a parameter-free algorithm,
Optimal Transport Minimization (OT-M), to estimate the
point map indicating locations of objects from a counting
density map (see Fig. 1). OT-M minimizes the Sinkhorn
distance [7] between the density map (source) and point localization map (target), through an alternating scheme that
estimates the optimal transport plan from the current point
map (the OT-step), and updates the point map by minimizing their transport cost (the M-step). OT-M is parameterfree and requires no training, and thus can be applied to any
crowd-counting method using density maps.
To demonstrate the applicability of density-map based
localization, we apply OT-M to semi-supervised counting.
In previous work, [38] builds a baseline for semi-supervised
counting based on the mean-teacher framework [55], but
finds it ineffective. Looking closely, we note that the baseline in [38] uses a soft pseudo-label (density map) to supervise the student model, whereas successful semi-supervised
classification [52] or segmentation [6, 55] methods usually

21663

