This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiGA: Distil to Generalize and then Adapt for Domain Adaptive
Semantic Segmentation

1

Fengyi Shen1,2,3 , Akhil Gurram2 , Ziyuan Liu2 , He Wang3 *, Alois Knoll1 *
Technical University of Munich, 2 Huawei Munich Research Center, 3 EPIC Lab, Peking University
1

fengyi.shen@tum.de,knoll@in.tum.de,2 {first.last}@huawei.com,3 hewang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive semantic segmentation methods commonly utilize stage-wise training, consisting of a warm-up
and a self-training stage. However, this popular approach
still faces several challenges in each stage: for warm-up,
the widely adopted adversarial training often results in limited performance gain, due to blind feature alignment; for
self-training, finding proper categorical thresholds is very
tricky. To alleviate these issues, we first propose to replace the adversarial training in the warm-up stage by a
novel symmetric knowledge distillation module that only accesses the source domain data and makes the model domain generalizable. Surprisingly, this domain generalizable warm-up model brings substantial performance improvement, which can be further amplified via our proposed cross-domain mixture data augmentation technique.
Then, for the self-training stage, we propose a thresholdfree dynamic pseudo-label selection mechanism to ease the
aforementioned threshold problem and make the model better adapted to the target domain. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our framework achieves remarkable and
consistent improvements compared to the prior arts on
popular benchmarks. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/fy-vision/DiGA

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [7,42,45,82] is an essential component in autonomous driving [20], image editing [54, 79],
medical imaging [60], etc. However, for images in a specific domain, training deep neural networks [35, 37, 38, 62]
for semantic segmentation often requires a vast amount of
pixel-wisely annotated data, which is expensive and laborious. Therefore, domain adaptive semantic segmentation, i.e. learning semantic segmentation from a labelled source domain (either virtual data or an existing
dataset) and then performing unsupervised domain adapta* corresponding author

tion (UDA) [3, 15, 21, 46, 63] to the target domain, becomes
an important research topic. Yet the remaining challenge is
the severe model performance degradation caused by the visual domain gap between source and target domain data. In
this work, we tackle this domain adaptive semantic segmentation problem, with the goal of aligning correct categorical
information pixel-wisely from the labelled source domain
onto the unlabelled target domain.
Currently, stage-wise training, composed of a warm-up
and a self-training stage, has been widely adopted in domain adaptive semantic segmentation [1,41,50,80,81,84] as
it stabilizes the domain adaptive learning [81] and thus reduces the performance drop across domains. However, the
gap is far from being closed and, in this work, we identify
that there is still a large space to improve in both warm-up
and self-training.
Regarding warm-up, recent works in this field [41, 50,
80, 81, 84] mostly adopt adversarial training [21, 67, 68] as
their basic strategy, which usually contributes to limited
adaptation improvements. Without knowing the target domain labels, this adversarial learning proposes to align the
overall feature distributions across domains. Note that this
alignment is class-unaware and fails to guarantee the features from the same semantic category are well aligned between the source and target domain, thus being sub-optimal
as a warm-up strategy.
In contrast, we take an alternative perspective to improve
the warm-up: simply enhancing the model’s domain generalizability without considering target data. To be specific,
we introduce a pixel-wise symmetric knowledge distillation
technique. The benefits are threefold: i. knowledge distillation is performed on the source domain where groundtruths are available, the learning thus becomes class-aware,
which avoids the blind alignment as observed in adversarial
training; ii. the soft labels created in the process of distillation can effectively avoid the model overfitting to domainspecific bias [71] and help to learn more generalized features across domains; iii. our symmetric proposal ensures
the bidirectional consistency between the original source
view and its augmented view, leading to more generaliz-

15866

