This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inverse Rendering of Translucent Objects using Physical and Neural Renderers
Chenhao Li, Trung Thanh Ngo, Hajime Nagahara
Institute for Datability Science, Osaka University
{lch@is.ids, nagahara@ids, trung@am.sanken}.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
In this work, we propose an inverse rendering model that
estimates 3D shape, spatially-varying reflectance, homogeneous subsurface scattering parameters, and an environment illumination jointly from only a pair of captured images of a translucent object. In order to solve the ambiguity problem of inverse rendering, we use a physically-based
renderer and a neural renderer for scene reconstruction and
material editing. Because two renderers are differentiable,
we can compute a reconstruction loss to assist parameter
estimation. To enhance the supervision of the proposed neural renderer, we also propose an augmented loss. In addition, we use a flash and no-flash image pair as the input.
To supervise the training, we constructed a large-scale synthetic dataset of translucent objects, which consists of 117K
scenes. Qualitative and quantitative results on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed model. Code and Data are available
at https://github.com/ligoudaner377/homo translucent

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering is a long-standing problem in computer vision, which decomposes captured images into multiple intrinsic factors such as geometry, illumination, and
material. With the estimated factors, many challenging applications like relighting [40,47,51,60,65,72], material editing [41, 52] and object manipulation [29, 57, 62, 70] become
feasible. In this work, we focus on a very complicated object for inverse rendering: translucent objects. From biological tissue to various minerals, from industrial raw materials
to a glass of milk, translucent objects are everywhere in our
daily lives. A critical physical phenomenon in translucent
objects is SubSurface Scattering (SSS): a photon penetrates
the object’s surface and, after multiple bounces, is eventually absorbed or exits at a different surface point. This
non-linear, multiple bounces, multiple path process makes
inverse rendering extremely ill-posed. To reduce the complexity of the task, we assume that the SSS parameters of
the object are constant in a continuous 3-dimensional space

(homogeneous subsurface scattering). So, given a translucent object, our task is to simultaneously estimate shape,
spatially-varying reflectance, homogeneous SSS parameters, and environment illumination.
However, a well-known issue of inverse rendering is the
ambiguity problem—the final appearance of an object results from a combination of illumination, geometry, and material. For instance, a brighter area in the image may be due
to the specular highlight. It may be very close to the light
source; the coloration may also come from the light source
or the object itself. The situation becomes more complicated when SSS is also considered because it is hard to tell
the object intensity comes whether from the surface, subsurface, or both.
Solutions to the ambiguity problem can be roughly divided into two groups. The first group of researchers
addresses the ambiguity problem by providing more information to the model. For example, some works use
multi-view [5–7, 38, 59, 63, 69] or multi-light [8, 59] set
up. The solution of the second group is based on various assumptions and simplifications. For example, some
researchers simplify the reflectance model by assuming a
Lambertian reflectance [51], some simplify the illumination by assuming that the object is illuminated by a single point light source [15], some simplify the geometry by
assuming a near-planar [35]. For the SSS, most existing
works [4, 8, 9, 12, 16, 34, 37, 45, 49, 50, 56, 58] simply ignore it by assuming that light does not penetrate the object’s surface, and the final appearance only depends on
the pure surface reflectance. On the other hand, some researchers [11, 21, 22, 28, 30, 71] consider a pure SSS without surface reflectance. Some works [14, 17, 26, 61] use the
BSSRDF model to simplify SSS of optically thick materials
in the form of complex surface reflectance. The limitation
of these works is obvious: most translucent objects (e.g.
wax, plastic, crystal) in our world can easily break their assumptions, as it contains both surface reflectance and SSS.
We tackle a more challenging problem by considering both
surface reflectance and SSS of translucent objects with an
arbitrary shape under an environment illumination. However, using a complex scene representation means introduc-

12510

