This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning 3D-aware Image Synthesis with Unknown Pose Distribution
Zifan Shi†*1

Yujun Shen†2 Yinghao Xu*3 Sida Peng4 Yiyi Liao4
Qifeng Chen1 Dit-Yan Yeung1
1

HKUST

2

Ant Group

3

CUHK

4

Sheng Guo2

Zhejiang University

Abstract
Existing methods for 3D-aware image synthesis largely
depend on the 3D pose distribution pre-estimated on the
training set. An inaccurate estimation may mislead the
model into learning faulty geometry. This work proposes
PoF3D that frees generative radiance fields from the requirements of 3D pose priors. We first equip the generator
with an efficient pose learner, which is able to infer a pose
from a latent code, to approximate the underlying true pose
distribution automatically. We then assign the discriminator
a task to learn pose distribution under the supervision
of the generator and to differentiate real and synthesized
images with the predicted pose as the condition. The
pose-free generator and the pose-aware discriminator are
jointly trained in an adversarial manner. Extensive results
on a couple of datasets confirm that the performance of
our approach, regarding both image quality and geometry
quality, is on par with state of the art. To our best
knowledge, PoF3D demonstrates the feasibility of learning
high-quality 3D-aware image synthesis without using 3D
pose priors for the first time. Project page can be found
here.

1. Introduction
3D-aware image generation has recently received growing attention due to its potential applications [3, 4, 9,
21, 30, 34, 47]. Compared with 2D synthesis, 3D-aware
image synthesis requires the understanding of the geometry
underlying 2D images, which is commonly achieved by
incorporating 3D representations, such as neural radiance
fields (NeRF) [2, 16, 17, 24, 25, 50], into generative models
like generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8]. Such a
formulation allows explicit camera control over the synthesized results, which fits better with our 3D world.
To enable 3D-aware image synthesis from 2D image
collections, existing attempts usually rely on adequate
camera pose priors [3, 4, 9, 20, 21, 30, 47] for training.
† indicates equal contribution.
* This work was done during an internship at Ant Group.

(a) 𝜋-GAN: good pose distribution

(b) 𝜋-GAN: bad pose distribution

(c) CAMPARI: good pose initialization

(d) CAMPARI: bad pose initialization

Figure 1. Sensitivity to pose priors in existing 3D-aware image
synthesis approaches. π-GAN [4] works well given an adequate
pose distribution in (a), but fails to learn decent geometries given
a slightly changed distribution in (b). CAMPARI [20] delivers
reasonable results relying on a good initial pose distribution in (c),
but suffers from a wrongly estimated initialization in (d).

The priors are either estimated by conducting multiple preexperiments [4, 9, 47], or obtained by borrowing external
pose predictors or annotations [3]. Besides using a fixed
distribution for pose sampling, some studies also propose to
tune the pose priors together with the learning of image generation [20], but they are still dependent on the initial pose
distribution. Consequently, although previous methods can
produce satisfying images and geometry, their performance
is highly sensitive to the given pose prior. For example,
on the Cats dataset [51], π-GAN [4] works well with a
uniform pose distribution [-0.5, 0.5] (Fig. 1a), but fails
to generate a decent underlying geometry when changing
the distribution to [-0.3, 0.3] (Fig. 1b). Similarly, on the
CelebA dataset [15], CAMPARI [20] learns 3D rotation
when using Gaussian distribution N (0, 0.24) as the initial
prior (Fig. 1c), but loses the canonical space (e.g., the
middle image of Fig. 1d should be under the frontal view)
when changing the initialization to N (0, 0.12) (Fig. 1d).
Such a reliance on pose priors causes unexpected instability
of 3D-aware image synthesis, which may burden this task
with heavy experimental cost.

13062

