This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lite-Mono: A Lightweight CNN and Transformer Architecture for
Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Ning Zhang*

Francesco Nex
George Vosselman
University of Twente

Norman Kerle

{n.zhang, f.nex, george.vosselman, n.kerle}@utwente.nl

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation that does
not require ground truth for training has attracted attention
in recent years. It is of high interest to design lightweight
but effective models so that they can be deployed on edge
devices. Many existing architectures benefit from using
heavier backbones at the expense of model sizes. This paper
achieves comparable results with a lightweight architecture.
Specifically, the efficient combination of CNNs and Transformers is investigated, and a hybrid architecture called
Lite-Mono is presented. A Consecutive Dilated Convolutions (CDC) module and a Local-Global Features Interaction (LGFI) module are proposed. The former is used to
extract rich multi-scale local features, and the latter takes
advantage of the self-attention mechanism to encode longrange global information into the features. Experiments
demonstrate that Lite-Mono outperforms Monodepth2 by
a large margin in accuracy, with about 80% fewer trainable parameters. Our codes and models are available at
https://github.com/noahzn/Lite-Mono.

1. Introduction
Many applications in the field of robotics, autonomous
driving, and augmented reality rely on depth maps, which
represent the 3D geometry of a scene. Since depth sensors increase costs, research on inferring depth maps using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) from images
emerged. With the annotated depth one can train a regression CNN to predict the depth value of each pixel on a single image [10, 11, 22]. Lacking large-scale accurate dense
ground-truth depth for supervised learning, self-supervised
methods that seek supervisory signals from stereo-pairs of
frames or monocular videos are favorable and have made
great progress in recent years. These methods regard the
depth estimation task as a novel view synthesis problem
and minimize an image reconstruction loss [5,14,15,41,45].
* Corresponding Author

Input

Monodepth2

R-MSFM6

Lite-Mono (Ours)

Figure 1. The proposed Lite-Mono has fewer parameters than
Monodepth2 [15] and R-MSFM [46], but generates more accurate depth maps.

The camera motion is known when using stereo-pairs of images, so a single depth estimation network is adopted to predict depth. But if only using monocular videos for training
an additional pose network is needed to estimate the motion
of the camera. Despite this, self-supervised methods that
only require monocular videos are preferred, as collecting
stereo data needs complicated configurations and data processing. Therefore, this paper also focuses on monocular
video training.
In addition to increasing the accuracy of monocular
training by introducing improved loss functions [15] and
semantic information [5, 21] to mitigate the occlusion and
moving objects problems, many works focused on designing more effective CNN architectures [17, 33, 39, 41, 46].
However, the convolution operation in CNNs has a local
receptive field, which cannot capture long-range global information. To achieve better results a CNN-based model
can use a deeper backbone or a more complicated architecture [15, 28, 44], which also results in a larger model
size. The recently introduced Vision Transformer (ViT) [8]
is able to model global contexts, and some recent works apply it to monocular depth estimation architectures [3, 35] to
obtain better results. However, the expensive calculation of
the Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) module in a Transformer hinders the design of lightweight and fast inference
models, compared with CNN models [35].
This paper pursues a lightweight and efficient selfsupervised monocular depth estimation model with a hybrid CNN and Transformer architecture. In each stage of
the proposed encoder a Consecutive Dilated Convolutions
(CDC) module is adopted to capture enhanced multi-scale
local features. Then, a Local-Global Features Interaction
(LGFI) module is used to calculate the MHSA and encode

18537

