This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hi4D: 4D Instance Segmentation of Close Human Interaction
Yifei Yin

(A) 4D Textured Scans

Chen Guo

Manuel Kaufmann Juan Jose Zarate
ETH Zurich

(B) Instance Meshes
with Contact Annotations

(C) Instance Segmentation Masks
in 2D and 3D

Jie Song

Otmar Hilliges

(D) Parametric Body Models
with Contact Annotations

Figure 1. Method and dataset. We propose a method that leverages personalized human avatars to segment merged (A) 4D textured scans
of multiple closely interacting humans. Based on the (B) instance meshes (with vertex-level contact annotations) we obtained in 3D space,
we further provide (C) instance segmentation masks in 2D and 3D, (D) registered parametric body models with contact annotations.

Abstract
We propose Hi4D, a method and dataset for the automatic analysis of physically close human-human interaction
under prolonged contact. Robustly disentangling several
in-contact subjects is a challenging task due to occlusions
and complex shapes. Hence, existing multi-view systems
typically fuse 3D surfaces of close subjects into a single,
connected mesh. To address this issue we leverage i) individually fitted neural implicit avatars; ii) an alternating
optimization scheme that refines pose and surface through
periods of close proximity; and iii) thus segment the fused
raw scans into individual instances. From these instances
we compile Hi4D dataset of 4D textured scans of 20 subject pairs, 100 sequences, and a total of more than 11K
frames. Hi4D contains rich interaction-centric annotations
in 2D and 3D alongside accurately registered parametric
body models. We define varied human pose and shape estimation tasks on this dataset and provide results from stateof-the-art methods on these benchmarks. Hi4D dataset can
be found at https://ait.ethz.ch/Hi4D.

1. Introduction
While computer vision systems have made rapid
progress in estimating the 3D body pose and shape of
individuals and well-spaced groups, currently there are
no methods that can robustly disentangle and reconstruct
closely interacting people. This is in part due to the lack of
suitable datasets. While some 3D datasets exist that contain
human-human interactions, like ExPI [72] and CHI3D [22],
they typically lack high-fidelity dynamic textured geometry,
do not always provide registered parametric body models
and do not always provide rich contact information and are
therefore not well suited to study closely interacting people.
Taking a first step towards future AI systems that are
able to interpret the interactions of multiple humans in close
physical interaction and under strong occlusion, we propose a method and dataset that enables the study of this
new setting. Specifically, we propose Hi4D, a comprehensive dataset that contains segmented, yet complete 4D
textured geometry of closely interacting humans, alongside corresponding registered parametric human models, instance segmentation masks in 2D and 3D, and vertex-level
contact annotations (see Fig. 1). To enable research to-

17016

