This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MARLIN: Masked Autoencoder for facial video Representation LearnINg
Zhixi Cai1 , Shreya Ghosh1,2 , Kalin Stefanov1 , Abhinav Dhall1,3 , Jianfei Cai1 ,
Hamid Rezatofighi1 , Reza Haffari1 , Munawar Hayat1
1
Monash University, 2 Curtin University, 3 Indian Institute of Technology Ropar
{zhixi.cai,kalin.stefanov,jianfei.cai,hamid.rezatofighi,gholamreza.haffari,
munawar.hayat}@monash.edu,shreya.ghosh@curtin.edu.au,abhinav@iitrpr.ac.in

Abstract
This paper proposes a self-supervised approach to learn
universal facial representations from videos, that can transfer across a variety of facial analysis tasks such as Facial
Attribute Recognition (FAR), Facial Expression Recognition
(FER), DeepFake Detection (DFD), and Lip Synchronization (LS). Our proposed framework, named MARLIN, is a
facial video masked autoencoder, that learns highly robust
and generic facial embeddings from abundantly available
non-annotated web crawled facial videos. As a challenging
auxiliary task, MARLIN reconstructs the spatio-temporal
details of the face from the densely masked facial regions
which mainly include eyes, nose, mouth, lips, and skin to
capture local and global aspects that in turn help in encoding generic and transferable features. Through a variety of
experiments on diverse downstream tasks, we demonstrate
MARLIN to be an excellent facial video encoder as well
as feature extractor, that performs consistently well across
a variety of downstream tasks including FAR (1.13% gain
over supervised benchmark), FER (2.64% gain over unsupervised benchmark), DFD (1.86% gain over unsupervised
benchmark), LS (29.36% gain for Frechet Inception Distance), and even in low data regime. Our code and models
are available at https://github.com/ControlNet/MARLIN.

1. Introduction
Facial analysis tasks [34, 43, 70, 85] provide essential
cues for human non-verbal behavior analysis, and help unfold meaningful insights regarding social interaction [36],
communication [40], cognition [68] with potential applications in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and Affective Computing domains. Recently, we have witnessed significant progress in deep neural network models to solve
facial analysis tasks such as Facial Attribute Recognition
(FAR) [34, 85], Facial Expression Recognition (FER) [48],
DeepFake Detection (DFD) [70], and Lip Synchronization
(LS) [43]. While these deep models can achieve remark-

Large Unlabelled Facial Video Dataset
Downstream Adaptation

Pretrained

Facial Attribute Recognition
Facial Expression Recognition
DeepFake Detection
Lip Synchronization

Video

MARLIN Encoder Features

Other downstream tasks ...

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed Masked Autoencoder for facial Representation LearnINg aka MARLIN. MARLIN aims to
learn a universal facial representation from abundantly available
non-annotated facial video data.

able performance, they often require large-scale annotated
datasets, which is not only a resource-expensive and timeconsuming process but also infeasible for some applications
requiring domain expertise for annotation (e.g. FER).
To this end, self-supervised pre-training [26, 37, 71] has
lately emerged as an effective strategy to address the limitations of fully supervised methods, as it enables generic
representation learning from non-annotated data, that can
then be transferred across tasks having limited labels.
For images of natural scenes and objects, self-supervised
learning approaches using self-distillation [14], contrastivelearning [18, 19], solving pre-text tasks such as jigsaw puzzle [53], and more recently autoencoding [37,71] have even
outperformed the supervised learning approaches.
Despite the promises offered by these self-supervised
methods in learning scalable and generic representations
for natural scene images and videos, these have not yet
been investigated for learning representations from facial
video data. Facial representation learning requires tracking of fine-grained face specific details which might not
be perfectly captured by linear tube masking [71]. Until now, most of the existing approaches associated with
facial analysis tasks are highly specialized and develop

1493

