This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AttriCLIP: A Non-Incremental Learner for Incremental Knowledge Learning
Runqi Wang1,2∗ , Xiaoyue Duan1 ,* Guoliang Kang1,4 , Jianzhuang Liu2 ,
Shaohui Lin3 , Songcen Xu2 , Jinhu Lv1,4 , Baochang Zhang1,4†
1
Beihang University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
East China Normal University 4 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing China

Abstract
Continual learning aims to enable a model to incrementally learn knowledge from sequentially arrived data.
Previous works adopt the conventional classification
architecture, which consists of a feature extractor and a
classifier. The feature extractor is shared across sequentially arrived tasks or classes, but one specific group of
weights of the classifier corresponding to one new class
should be incrementally expanded. Consequently, the
parameters of a continual learner gradually increase.
Moreover, as the classifier contains all historical arrived
classes, a certain size of the memory is usually required
to store rehearsal data to mitigate classifier bias and
catastrophic forgetting. In this paper, we propose a nonincremental learner, named AttriCLIP, to incrementally
extract knowledge of new classes or tasks. Specifically,
AttriCLIP is built upon the pre-trained visual-language
model CLIP. Its image encoder and text encoder are fixed
to extract features from both images and text. Text consists
of a category name and a fixed number of learnable
parameters which are selected from our designed attribute
word bank and serve as attributes. As we compute the
visual and textual similarity for classification, AttriCLIP is
a non-incremental learner. The attribute prompts, which
encode the common knowledge useful for classification, can
effectively mitigate the catastrophic forgetting and avoid
constructing a replay memory. We evaluate our AttriCLIP
and compare it with CLIP-based and previous state-of-theart continual learning methods in realistic settings with
domain-shift and long-sequence learning. The results show
that our method performs favorably against previous stateof-the-arts. The implementation code will be available at
https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/
cv/AttriCLIP.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved remarkable progress in classification when all the classes (or
* Co-First Author.
† Corresponding Author.

tasks) are jointly trained. However, in real scenarios, the
tasks or classes usually sequentially arrive. Continual learning [13, 21, 28] aims to train a model which incrementally
expands its knowledge so as to deal with all the historical tasks or classes, behaving as if those tasks or classes
are jointly trained. The conventional continual learning
methods learn sequentially arrived tasks or classes with a
shared model, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Such processing that
fine-tunes the same model in sequence inevitably results in
subsequent values of the parameters overwriting previous
ones [20], which leads to catastrophic forgetting. Besides,
the classification ability on historical data can be easily destroyed by current-stage learning. In the conventional continual learning methods, a classifier on top of the feature
extractor is employed to perform recognition. As one group
of weights in the classifier is responsible for the prediction
of one specific class, the classifier needs to be expanded
sequentially to make a continual learner able to recognize
novel classes. Moreover, extra replay data is usually required to reduce the classifier bias and the catastrophic forgetting of learned features. It is still challenging if we expect a non-incremental learner, i.e., the trainable parameters of the model do not incrementally increase and no replay data is needed to avoid the classifier bias and the catastrophic forgetting.
To address the above issues, this paper proposes a continual learning method named AttriCLIP , which adopts the
frozen encoders of CLIP [19]. It is a typical visual-language
model that conducts image classification by contrasting the
features of images and their descriptive texts. In the face of
increasing instances, we design a prompt tuning scheme for
continual learning. As shown in Fig. 1(b), there are similar attributes in images with different categories, such as “a
brown-white dog lying on the grass” and “a brown-white
cat lying on the grass”. They belong to different categories
but both have “lying on the grass” and “brown-white” attributes, so the distance between these two images of different categories may be close in the feature space. Therefore,
we selectively train different prompts based on the attributes
of the images rather than the categories. In this way, there is

3654

