This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pseudo-label Guided Contrastive Learning for Semi-supervised Medical Image
Segmentation
Hritam Basak
Stony Brook University, NY, USA

Zhaozheng Yin
Stony Brook University, NY, USA

hbasak@cs.stonybrook.edu

zyin@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Although recent works in semi-supervised learning
(SemiSL) have accomplished significant success in natural image segmentation, the task of learning discriminative representations from limited annotations has been
an open problem in medical images. Contrastive Learning (CL) frameworks use the notion of similarity measure
which is useful for classification problems, however, they
fail to transfer these quality representations for accurate
pixel-level segmentation. To this end, we propose a novel
semi-supervised patch-based CL framework for medical image segmentation without using any explicit pretext task.
We harness the power of both CL and SemiSL, where the
pseudo-labels generated from SemiSL aid CL by providing
additional guidance, whereas discriminative class information learned in CL leads to accurate multi-class segmentation. Additionally, we formulate a novel loss that synergistically encourages inter-class separability and intraclass compactness among the learned representations. A
new inter-patch semantic disparity mapping using average patch entropy is employed for a guided sampling of
positives and negatives in the proposed CL framework.
Experimental analysis on three publicly available datasets
of multiple modalities reveals the superiority of our proposed method as compared to the state-of-the-art methods.
Code is available at: GitHub.

1. Introduction
Accurate segmentation of medical images provides
salient and insightful information to clinicians for appropriate diagnosis, disease progression, and proper treatment
planning. With the recent emergence of neural networks,
supervised deep learning approaches have achieved stateof-the-art performance in multiple medical image segmentation tasks [11, 36, 41]. This can be attributed to the availability of large annotated datasets. But, obtaining pixelwise annotations in a large scale is often time-consuming,

requires expertise, and incurs a huge cost, thus methods alleviating these requirements are highly expedient.
Semi-supervised learning (SemiSL) based methods are
promising directions to this end, requiring a very small
amount of annotations, and producing pseudo-labels for a
large portion of unlabeled data, which are further utilized
to train the segmentation network [32, 33]. In recent years,
these methods have been widely recognized for their superior performance in downstream tasks (like segmentation,
object detection, etc.), not only in natural scene images but
also in biomedical image analysis [3, 4, 64]. Traditional
SemiSL methods employ regression, pixel-wise cross entropy (CE), or mean squared error (MSE) loss terms or
their variants. But, none of these losses imposes intra-class
compactness and inter-class separability, restricting their
full learning potential. Recent SemiSL methods in medical vision employing self-ensembling strategy [14, 44] have
received attention because of their state-of-the-art performance in segmentation tasks. However, they are designed
for a single dataset, failing to generalize across domains.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [18, 61] can be
utilized to address this problem, e.g., Xie et al. [60] proposed an efficient UDA method with self-training strategy to unleash the learning potential. However, most of
these methods heavily rely upon abundant source labels,
hence producing substandard performance with limited labels in clinical deployment [71]. Representational learning is another promising way to learn from limited annotations, where models trained for pretext tasks on large
source domains can be transferred for downstream tasks
in the target domain. Current advancements in representational learning have been ascribed as the upturn of contrastive learning (CL) [23], that aims to distinguish similar samples (positive) from dissimilar ones (negative) regarding a specified anchor point in a projected embedding
space. This idea has resulted in substantial advancements
in self-supervision paradigms by learning useful representations from large-scale unlabeled data [9, 43, 57]. The fundamental idea of CL is to pull the semantically similar samples together and push the dissimilar ones apart in the em-

19786

