This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Combining Implicit-Explicit View Correlation for Light Field
Semantic Segmentation
Ruixuan Cong1,2,3 , Da Yang1,2,3 , Rongshan Chen1,2,3 , Sizhe Wang1,2,3 , Zhenglong Cui1,2,3 , Hao Sheng1,2,3*
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Beihang Hangzhou Innovation Institute Yuhang
3
Faculty of Applied Sciences, Macao Polytechnic University
{congrx, da.yang, rongshan, sizhewang, zhenglong.cui, shenghao}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
···
* Corresponding author

···

Semantic segmentation is a pixel-level task that assigns
a class label to each pixel of the given image, serving as a
key fundamental of visual understanding. Due to the partial
visibility incurred by occlusion as well as high intra-class
variation with diverse appearances, viewpoints and scales,

···

1. Introduction

Macro-pixel image

···

Since light field simultaneously records spatial information and angular information of light rays, it is considered
to be beneficial for many potential applications, and semantic segmentation is one of them. The regular variation of
image information across views facilitates a comprehensive
scene understanding. However, in the case of limited memory, the high-dimensional property of light field makes the
problem more intractable than generic semantic segmentation, manifested in the difficulty of fully exploiting the relationships among views while maintaining contextual information in single view. In this paper, we propose a novel
network called LF-IENet for light field semantic segmentation. It contains two different manners to mine complementary information from surrounding views to segment central view. One is implicit feature integration that leverages
attention mechanism to compute inter-view and intra-view
similarity to modulate features of central view. The other is
explicit feature propagation that directly warps features of
other views to central view under the guidance of disparity.
They complement each other and jointly realize complementary information fusion across views in light field. The proposed method achieves outperforming performance on both
real-world and synthetic light field datasets, demonstrating
the effectiveness of this new architecture.

Sub-aperture image

Figure 1. Illustration of light field imaging. Red rectangle shows
an occlusion scene, in which the front wheel of bicycle is divided into two areas (enclosed in blue and yellow boxes) and the
back wheel is complete (enclosed in green box). Since viewpoints
are arranged on a regular grid in angular plane, the location and
scale of these areas are regularly changed across views, which is a
unique advantage of light field. Influenced by the pedestrian with
big disparity, the changes near the front wheel are significant.

accurate segmentation is a fairly challenging problem. A
series of image segmentation methods [4, 11, 41, 43] have
been proposed to address these challenges. Furthermore,
[1, 7, 23, 37] take depth information into consideration to
overcome the deficiency of single image. Recently, [16, 24]
employ light field to achieve impressive performance, providing a new perspective for semantic segmentation.
Compared to traditional imaging system, 4D light field
records intensity for rays in terms of position and direction,
yielding a regularly distributed multi-view image array. The
information embedded in additional angular dimensions is
beneficial for detail analysis to thoroughly parse scenes. As
shown in Fig. 1, the front wheel of bicycle is occluded,
forming two small areas that are hard to assign labels. With
the transformation of viewpoint, the scale of areas changes
accordingly. Capturing such regular change with the help

9172

