This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FashionSAP: Symbols and Attributes Prompt for Fine-grained Fashion
Vision-Language Pre-training
Yunpeng Han1 ,Lisai Zhang1 ,Qingcai Chen1,2∗, Zhijian Chen3 ,Zhonghua Li3 ,Jianxin Yang3 ,Zhao Cao3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, China
2
PengCheng Laboratory, Shenzhen China, 3 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
hanyunpeng.hyp@gmail.com, lisaizhang@foxmail.com, qingcai.chen@hit.edu.cn
{chenzhijian13, lizhonghua3, yangjianxin4, caozhao1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Fashion vision-language pre-training models have
shown efficacy for a wide range of downstream tasks.
However, general vision-language pre-training models pay
less attention to fine-grained domain features, while these
features are important in distinguishing the specific domain tasks from general tasks. We propose a method for
fine-grained fashion vision-language pre-training based on
fashion Symbols and Attributes Prompt (FashionSAP) to
model fine-grained multi-modalities fashion attributes and
characteristics. Firstly, we propose the fashion symbols,
a novel abstract fashion concept layer, to represent different fashion items and to generalize various kinds of finegrained fashion features, making modelling fine-grained
attributes more effective. Secondly, the attributes prompt
method is proposed to make the model learn specific attributes of fashion items explicitly. We design proper prompt
templates according to the format of fashion data. Comprehensive experiments are conducted on two public fashion
benchmarks, i.e., FashionGen and FashionIQ, and FashionSAP gets SOTA performances for four popular fashion
tasks. The ablation study also shows the proposed abstract
fashion symbols, and the attribute prompt method enables
the model to acquire fine-grained semantics in the fashion
domain effectively. The obvious performance gains from
FashionSAP provide a new baseline for future fashion task
research.1

1. Introduction
Vision-Language pre-training (VLP) attracts wide attention [10, 16–18, 43] as a foundation for general multi-modal
tasks. VLP methods aim at learning multimodal knowledge
∗ Corresponding author
1 The source code is available at https://github.com/hssip/
FashionSAP

(a) General item
Caption: a young man
in a suit securing his
tie.

(b) Fashion item
Caption: long sleeve shirt
in red, white, and black
plaid, single-button barrel
cuffs, …

Attribute(b): Season: spring-summer; Gender: men, …
Figure 1. Two text-image instances from general (a) and fashion
domain (b). The captions of the general domain only describe
object-level (underlined words) image content, while fashion domain captions emphasise attribute-level semantics.

from large-scale text and image pairs data containing common objects in daily life. For example, MSCOCO [19], a
public vision-language benchmark, is introduced with common object labels. The fashion domain is an important
application of VLP methods, where the online retail market needs retrieval and recommendation services. To satisfy such requirements, the VLP model needs to learn highquality representations containing fine-grained attributes
from the fashion data.
Many works have adapted general VLP models to fashion tasks directly. However, the general pre-training models are not effective for learning fashion knowledge to describe fashion items comprehensively, as the fashion descriptions are usually associated with fine-grained attributelevel features. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the description text
of a fashion item (right) refers to fine-grained attributes like
long sleeves, while such features are ignored by the de-

15028

