This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Train-Once-for-All Personalization
Hong-You Chen† *
†

Yandong Li♢
Yin Cui♢
Mingda Zhang♢
Wei-Lun Chao†
†
The Ohio State University ♢ Google Research

Li Zhang♢

{chen.9301, chao.209}@osu.edu, ♢ {yandongli, yincui, mingdaz, zhl}@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of how to train a “personalizationfriendly” model such that given only the task descriptions,
the model can be adapted to different end-users’ needs, e.g.,
for accurately classifying different subsets of objects. One
baseline approach is to train a “generic” model for classifying a wide range of objects, followed by class selection. In
our experiments, we however found it suboptimal, perhaps
because the model’s weights are kept frozen without being
personalized. To address this drawback, we propose Trainonce-for-All PERsonalization (TAPER), a framework that
is trained just once and can later customize a model for
different end-users given their task descriptions. TAPER
learns a set of “basis” models and a mixer predictor, such
that given the task description, the weights (not the predictions!) of the basis models can be on the fly combined
into a single “personalized” model. Via extensive experiments on multiple recognition tasks, we show that TAPER
consistently outperforms the baseline methods in achieving
a higher personalized accuracy. Moreover, we show that
TAPER can synthesize a much smaller model to achieve
comparable performance to a huge generic model, making it “deployment-friendly” to resource-limited end devices. Interestingly, even without end-users’ task descriptions, TAPER can still be specialized to the deployed context based on its past predictions, making it even more
“personalization-friendly”.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed multiple breakthroughs in
visual recognition [10, 17, 23, 25, 36], thanks to the advance
in deep learning and the accessibility to large datasets.
Specifically, existing works have shown the possibility to
train a gigantic and versatile “generic” model capable of
classifying a wide range of over tens of thousands of
objects [22, 33], rendering the promising future towards
general-purposed AI.
* Work done as a student researcher at Google Research.

Figure 1. Examples of personalization via task description. We
propose a useful formulation: train-once-for-all personalization.
Our “personalization-friendly” framework TAPER can on the fly
reply to each user’s request with a personalized model promptly
conditioned on the task description only.

However, from an end-user’s perspective, we often do
not need such a versatility at once. Instead, users more often look for models that are specialized to their requests,
e.g., for accurately classifying a few but frequently encountered or safety-critical objects in their environments. Taking ImageNet-1K [9] as an example, a ResNet-152 classifier [17] can achieve around 80% accuracy in recognizing
each of the 1K objects, which, while exciting to the vision
community, may sound terrible to a visually-impaired user
who seeks to smoothly interact with a handful of everyday
objects. A better solution for end-users is perhaps to construct “personalized” models dedicated to their needs, e.g.,
train a 20-way classifier for everyday objects to attain an accuracy closer to 100%. Importantly, a personalized model
usually requires a smaller capacity/size than a generic one,
making it easier to deploy to resource-limited devices.
Personalization is by no means a new concept. A naı̈ve
way to achieve it is to retrain a new model upon request,
using the corresponding data. Doing so, however, is hardly
scalable from a service provider’s point of view: the computation for training simply grows linearly with the number
of users and their requests. The training latency can also degrade the user experience. Suppose the service provider has
sufficient data and is capable of training a generic model, retraining may just sound superfluous: if the objects the enduser cares about are already seen in training the generic
model, why bother training on them again for personalization? In this paper, we therefore ask:

11818

