This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COT: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with Clustering and Optimal Transport
Yang Liu 1 *

Zhipeng Zhou 1 *
1
Alibaba Group

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to transfer the knowledge from a labeled source domain to an
unlabeled target domain. Typically, to guarantee desirable knowledge transfer, aligning the distribution between
source and target domain from a global perspective is
widely adopted in UDA. Recent researchers further point
out the importance of local-level alignment and propose to
construct instance-pair alignment by leveraging on Optimal
Transport (OT) theory. However, existing OT-based UDA
approaches are limited to handling class imbalance challenges and introduce a heavy computation overhead when
considering a large-scale training situation. To cope with
two aforementioned issues, we propose a Clustering-based
Optimal Transport (COT) algorithm, which formulates the
alignment procedure as an Optimal Transport problem and
constructs a mapping between clustering centers in the
source and target domain via an end-to-end manner. With
this alignment on clustering centers, our COT eliminates
the negative effect caused by class imbalance and reduces
the computation cost simultaneously. Empirically, our COT
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several authoritative benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the availability of large-scale data, deep
learning has achieved tremendous success over the past
few years. However, directly applying a well-trained convolution neural network on a new domain frequently suffers from the domain gap/discrepancy challenge, resulting
in spurious predictions on the new domain. To remedy
this, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) has attracted
many researchers’ attention, which can transfer the knowledge from a labeled domain to an unlabeled domain.
A major line of UDA approaches [1,1,28,42,49,53] aim
Email: ly261666@alibaba-inc.com
* Equal Contribution

Baigui Sun 1 †

to learn a global domain shift by aligning the global source
and target distribution while ignoring the local-level alignment between two domains. By leveraging on global domain adaptation, the global distributions of source and target domain are almost the same, thus losing the fine-grained
information for each class (class-structure) on the source
and target domain.
Recently, to preserve class structure in both domains,
several works [6, 15, 23, 30, 38, 40, 44, 51, 54] adopt optimal
transport (OT) to minimize the sample-level transportation
cost between source and target domain, achieving a significant performance on UDA. However, there exist two issues
on recent OT-based UDA approaches. (i) When considering
a realistic situation, i.e. the class imbalance1 phenomenon
occurs between the source and target domain, samples belonging to the same class in the target domain are assigned
with false pseudo labels due to the mechanism of optimal
transport, which requires each sample in source domain can
be mapped to target samples. As a result, existing OT-based
UDA methods provide poor pair-wise matching when facing class imbalance challenges. (ii) OT-based UDA methods tend to find a sample-level optimal counterpart, which
requires a large amount of computation overhead, especially
training on large-scale datasets.
To solve two aforementioned issues, we propose a
Clustering-based Optimal Transport algorithm, termed
COT, to construct a clustering-level instead of sample-level
mapping between source and target domain. Clusters in the
source domain are obtained from the classifiers supervised
by the labeled source domain data. While for the target domain, COT utilizes a set of learnable clusters to represent
the feature distribution of the target domain, which can describe the sub-domain information [50, 57]. For instance,
in many object recognition tasks [13, 20] an object could
contain many attributes. Each attribute can be viewed as
a sub-domain. To this end, the clusters on the source and
target domain can represent the individual sub-domain information, respectively, such that optimal transport between
clusters intrinsically provides a local mapping from the subdomain in the source domain to those in the target domain.
Moreover, we provide a theoretical analysis and compre-

† Corresponding Author
1 label distribution are different in two domains, P

19998

s (y) ̸= P t (y)

