This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Detection in Crowd Analysis via Underutilized Output Features
Shaokai Wu1,∗
Jilin University1

Fengyu Yang2,∗
University of Michigan2

Abstract
Detection-based methods have been viewed unfavorably
in crowd analysis due to their poor performance in dense
crowds. However, we argue that the potential of these methods has been underestimated, as they offer crucial information for crowd analysis that is often ignored. Specifically,
the area size and confidence score of output proposals and
bounding boxes provide insight into the scale and density
of the crowd. To leverage these underutilized features, we
propose Crowd Hat, a plug-and-play module that can be
easily integrated with existing detection models. This module uses a mixed 2D-1D compression technique to refine
the output features and obtain the spatial and numerical
distribution of crowd-specific information. Based on these
features, we further propose region-adaptive NMS thresholds and a decouple-then-align paradigm that address the
major limitations of detection-based methods. Our extensive evaluations on various crowd analysis tasks, including
crowd counting, localization, and detection, demonstrate
the effectiveness of utilizing output features and the potential of detection-based methods in crowd analysis. Our code
is available at https://github.com/wskingdom/
Crowd-Hat.

1. Introduction
Crowd analysis is a critical area in computer vision due
to its close relation with humans and its wide range of applications in public security, resource scheduling, crowd monitoring [18, 28, 33]. This field can be divided into three
concrete tasks: crowd counting [12, 17, 27], crowd localization [1, 23, 26], and crowd detection [16, 20, 30]. While
most existing methods mainly focus on the first two tasks
due to the extreme difficulty of detecting dense crowds,
simply providing the number of the crowd or representing
each person with a point is insufficient for the growing realworld demand. Crowd detection, which involves localizing each person with a bounding box, supports more downstream tasks, such as crowd tracking [24] and face recogni* Indicates equal contribution

Output Feature Compression

Decouple-then-Align
Crowd Count

Region-adaptive
NMS thresholds

Global
Feature

Local
Feature

1D Conv

2D Conv

Figure 1. Our approach involves extracting output features from
the detection outputs and refining them into 2D compressed matrices and 1D distribution vectors. These features are then encoded
into local and global feature vectors to regress region-adaptive
NMS thresholds and the crowd count. We select the final output
bounding boxes using the decouple-then-align paradigm.

tion [35]. Therefore, constructing a comprehensive crowd
analysis framework that addresses all three tasks is essential
to meet real-world demands.
Although object detection may seem to meet the demands above, most relevant research views it pessimistically, especially in dense crowds [12, 23, 27, 28, 37]. First
and foremost, compared to general object detection scenarios with bounding box annotations, most crowd analysis datasets only provide limited supervision in the form
of point annotations. As a result, detection methods are
restricted to using pseudo bounding boxes generated from
point labels for training [16, 20, 30]. However, the inferior
quality of these pseudo bounding boxes makes it difficult
for neural networks to obtain effective supervision [1, 23].
Secondly, the density of crowds varies widely among
images, ranging from zero to tens of thousands [6, 20, 22,
28, 38], and may vary across different regions in the same
image, presenting a significant challenge in choosing the
allowed overlapping region in Non-Maximum-Suppression
(NMS). A fixed NMS threshold is often considered a hy-

15609

