This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Partial Network Cloning
Jingwen Ye Songhua Liu Xinchao Wang†
National University of Singapore
jingweny@nus.edu.sg, songhua.liu@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we study a novel task that enables partial knowledge transfer from pre-trained models, which we
term as Partial Network Cloning (PNC). Unlike prior methods that update all or at least part of the parameters in the
target network throughout the knowledge transfer process,
PNC conducts partial parametric “cloning” from a source
network and then injects the cloned module to the target,
without modifying its parameters. Thanks to the transferred
module, the target network is expected to gain additional
functionality, such as inference on new classes; whenever
needed, the cloned module can be readily removed from the
target, with its original parameters and competence kept
intact. Specifically, we introduce an innovative learning
scheme that allows us to identify simultaneously the component to be cloned from the source and the position to be
inserted within the target network, so as to ensure the optimal performance. Experimental results on several datasets
demonstrate that, our method yields a significant improvement of 5% in accuracy and 50% in locality when compared with parameter-tuning based methods. Our code is
available at https://github.com/JngwenYe/PNCloning.

1. Introduction
With the recent advances in deep learning, an increasingly number of pre-trained models have been released
online, demonstrating favourable performances on various
computer vision applications. As such, many model-reuse
approaches have been proposed to take advantage of the
pre-trained models. In practical scenarios, users may request to aggregate partial functionalities from multiple pretrained networks, and customize a target network whose
competence differs from any network in the model zoo.
A straightforward solution to the functionality dynamic
changing is to re-train the target network using the original training dataset, or to conduct finetuning together with
regularization strategies to alleviate catastrophic forget† Corresponding author.

Source Models

…

…
𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙(4)
… Transferable
Modules

𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙(4)

𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑡(4)

𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑡(4)

Functional
Addition

Target Model

…

Figure 1. Illustration of partial network cloning. Given a set of
pre-trained source models, we “clone” the transferable modules
from the source, and insert them into the target model (left) while
preserving the functionality (right).

ting [3,19,39], which is known as continual learning. However, direct re-training is extremely inefficient, let alone the
fact that original training dataset is often unavailable. Continual learning, on the other hand, is prone to catastrophic
forgetting especially when the amount of data for finetuning is small, which, unfortunately, often occurs in practice.
Moreover, both strategies inevitably overwrite the original
parameters of the target network, indicating that, without
explicitly storing original parameters of the target network,
there is no way to recover its original performance or competence when this becomes necessary.
In this paper, we investigate a novel task, termed as
Partial Network Cloning (PNC), to migrate knowledge
from the source network, in the form of a transferable module, to the target one. Unlike prior methods that rely on
updating parameters of the target network, PNC attempts to
clone partial parameters from the source network and then
directly inject the cloned module into the target, as shown
in Fig. 1. In other words, the cloned module is transferred
to the target in a copy-and-paste manner. Meanwhile, the

20137

