This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MSF: Motion-guided Sequential Fusion for Efficient 3D
Object Detection from Point Cloud Sequences
Chenhang He* Ruihuang Li∗ Yabin Zhang Shuai Li Lei Zhang†
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{csche, csrhli, csybzhang, cssli, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

（current)

Point cloud sequences are commonly used to accurately
detect 3D objects in applications such as autonomous driving. Current top-performing multi-frame detectors mostly
follow a Detect-and-Fuse framework, which extracts features from each frame of the sequence and fuses them to
detect the objects in the current frame. However, this
inevitably leads to redundant computation since adjacent
frames are highly correlated. In this paper, we propose an
efficient Motion-guided Sequential Fusion (MSF) method,
which exploits the continuity of object motion to mine useful
sequential contexts for object detection in the current frame.
We first generate 3D proposals on the current frame and
propagate them to preceding frames based on the estimated
velocities. The points-of-interest are then pooled from the
sequence and encoded as proposal features. A novel Bidirectional Feature Aggregation (BiFA) module is further proposed to facilitate the interactions of proposal features
across frames. Besides, we optimize the point cloud pooling by a voxel-based sampling technique so that millions of
points can be processed in several milliseconds. The proposed MSF method achieves not only better efficiency than
other multi-frame detectors but also leading accuracy, with
83.12% and 78.30% mAP on the LEVEL1 and LEVEL2 test
sets of Waymo Open Dataset, respectively. Codes can be
found at https://github.com/skyhehe123/MSF.

1. Introduction
3D object detection [1, 2, 6, 7, 9, 14, 21, 27–29, 36] is one
of the key technologies in autonomous driving, which helps
the vehicle to better understand the surrounding environment and make critical decisions in the downstream tasks.
As an indispensable sensing device in autonomous driving
systems, LiDAR collects 3D measurements of the scene in
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

MSF (ours)

Detect-and-Fuse

Abstract

（current)

（current)

Propagate

LSTM/
Transformer

Points
Pool

Points
Pool

Points
Pool

Points
Pool

Points
Pool

R-Net

Tracker

(a)

R-Net

Points
Pool

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The “Detect-and-Fuse” framework extracts features
from each frame of the sequence and then fuses them, while (b)
our proposed “Motion-guided Sequential Fusion” (MSF) method
generates proposals on the current frame and propagates them to
preceding frames to explore useful contexts in the sequence.

the form of point clouds. However, LiDAR can only produce partial view of the scene at a time, and the sparse and
incomplete representation of point clouds brings considerable challenges to the 3D object detection task. In practice,
the LiDAR sensor will continuously sense the environment
and produce a sequence of point cloud frames over time.
The multi-frame data can provide a denser representation
of the scene as the vehicle moves. Therefore, how to fuse
these multi-frame point cloud data for more accurate object
detection is worth deep investigation.
Recent works mainly focus on deep feature fusion with
multi-frame point clouds, for example, aggregating dense
birds-eye-view features via Transformer models [31, 37],
passing the voxel features to LSTM [8] or GRU [32] modules for temporal modeling. Some top-performing detectors
[2, 18] focus on fusing proposal features, where a tracker
is employed to associate the 3D proposals across frames,
and a region-based network is applied to refine the current proposals by incorporating contextual features from the
proposal trajectories. These approaches generally follow a
“Detect-and-Fuse” framework, as shown in Fig. 1(a), where
the model requires to process each frame of the sequence,

5196

