This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PVO: Panoptic Visual Odometry
Weicai Ye1,2 * Xinyue Lan1,2 * Shuo Chen1,2

Yuhang Ming3,4

Zhaopeng Cui1

Xingyuan Yu1,2

Hujun Bao1,2

Guofeng Zhang1,2†

1 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

2 ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision

3 School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University

4 VIL, University of Bristol

{weicaiye, xinyuelan, chenshuo.eric, RickyYXY, baohujun, zhpcui, zhangguofeng}@zju.edu.cn
yuhang.ming@hdu.edu.cn
https://zju3dv.github.io/pvo/

Panoptic Visual Odometry（PVO）
iteration

...

...
Monocular Video

VO

VPS

iteration

PVO Results

Figure 1. Panoptic Visual Odometry. PVO takes monocular video as input and outputs the panoptic 3D map while simultaneously
localizing the camera itself with respect to the map.

Abstract
We present PVO, a novel panoptic visual odometry framework to achieve more comprehensive modeling of the scene
motion, geometry, and panoptic segmentation information.
Our PVO models visual odometry (VO) and video panoptic segmentation (VPS) in a unified view, which makes the
two tasks mutually beneficial. Specifically, we introduce
a panoptic update module into the VO Module with the
guidance of image panoptic segmentation. This PanopticEnhanced VO Module can alleviate the impact of dynamic
objects in the camera pose estimation with a panoptic-aware
dynamic mask. On the other hand, the VO-Enhanced VPS
Module also improves the segmentation accuracy by fusing
the panoptic segmentation result of the current frame on the
fly to the adjacent frames, using geometric information such
as camera pose, depth, and optical flow obtained from the
VO Module. These two modules contribute to each other
through recurrent iterative optimization. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PVO outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in both visual odometry and video panoptic segmentation tasks.

∗ indicates equal contribution. † indicates the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Understanding the motion, geometry, and panoptic segmentation of the scene plays a crucial role in computer vision
and robotics, with applications ranging from autonomous
driving to augmented reality. In this work, we take a step toward solving this problem to achieve a more comprehensive
modeling of the scene with monocular videos.
Two tasks have been proposed to address this problem,
namely visual odometry (VO) and video panoptic segmentation (VPS). In particular, VO [9, 11, 36] takes monocular
videos as input and estimates the camera poses under the
static scene assumption. To handle dynamic objects in the
scene, some dynamic SLAM systems [2, 43] use instance
segmentation network [14] for segmentation and explicitly
filter out certain classes of objects, which are potentially
dynamic, such as pedestrians or vehicles. However, such approaches ignore the fact that potentially dynamic objects can
actually be stationary in the scene, such as a parked vehicle.
In contrast, VPS [17, 42, 49] focuses on tracking individual
instances in the scene across video frames given some initial panoptic segmentation results. Current VPS methods
do not explicitly distinguish whether the object instance is
moving or not. Although existing approaches broadly solve
these two tasks independently, it is worth noticing that dy-

9579

