This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OCELOT: Overlapped Cell on Tissue Dataset for Histopathology
Jeongun Ryu∗ Aaron Valero Puche∗ JaeWoong Shin∗ Seonwook Park Biagio Brattoli Jinhee Lee
Wonkyung Jung Soo Ick Cho Kyunghyun Paeng Chan-Young Ock Donggeun Yoo Sérgio Pereira
Lunit Inc.
{rjw0205, aaron.valero, jwoong.shin, spark, biagio, jinhee.lee,
wkjung, sooickcho, khpaeng, ock.chanyoung, dgyoo, sergio}@lunit.io

Abstract
Cell detection is a fundamental task in computational
pathology that can be used for extracting high-level medical
information from whole-slide images. For accurate cell detection, pathologists often zoom out to understand the tissuelevel structures and zoom in to classify cells based on their
morphology and the surrounding context. However, there is
a lack of efforts to reflect such behaviors by pathologists in
the cell detection models, mainly due to the lack of datasets
containing both cell and tissue annotations with overlapping regions. To overcome this limitation, we propose and
publicly release OCELOT, a dataset purposely dedicated
to the study of cell-tissue relationships for cell detection in
histopathology. OCELOT provides overlapping cell and tissue annotations on images acquired from multiple organs.
Within this setting, we also propose multi-task learning approaches that benefit from learning both cell and tissue tasks
simultaneously. When compared against a model trained
only for the cell detection task, our proposed approaches
improve cell detection performance on 3 datasets: proposed
OCELOT, public TIGER, and internal CARP datasets. On
the OCELOT test set in particular, we show up to 6.79
improvement in F1-score. We believe the contributions of
this paper, including the release of the OCELOT dataset
at https://lunit- io.github.io/research/
publications/ocelot are a crucial starting point toward the important research direction of incorporating celltissue relationships in computation pathology.

1. Introduction
Computational Pathology (CPATH) [3] is a branch of
digital pathology that develops methodologies for the analysis of digitized patient specimens, such as Whole-SlideImages (WSIs). Cell detection in histology images [26, 37,
49] is one of the most important tasks in CPATH. It allows
the quantification and analysis of different cell types, which
can lead to better prognosis evaluation [34, 40] and patient
∗ : Equal contribution

treatment planning while maintaining medical interpretability [13]. Since it has the potential to impact human lives,
high-performance cell detection models are essential in realworld applications and need to be investigated.
To better locate and classify cells, detailed morphological
characteristics such as color and shape are crucial. Consequently, cell detection datasets are typically collected at high
magnification but small Field-of-View (FoV). However, this
can make the cell detection model overly rely on appearance details, without understanding the broader context [42].
This context can help cell detection by providing information about how cells are arranged and grouped together to
form high-level tissue structures. In practice, expert annotators (pathologists) first zoom out to understand these broad
tissue structures. Next, they zoom in to better classify individual cells while taking into account the context information, as depicted in Fig. 1.
The behavior of pathologists can be transferred to deep
learning, for instance, through a multi-task strategy combining cell detection tasks at high magnification and tissue
segmentation at low magnification. This type of approach
would allow the model to share knowledge across different tasks and FoVs. However, to train such an approach,
a combined dataset with cell-tissue overlapping regions is
required; unfortunately, most existing datasets only target a
single task, either cell detection [17, 25] or tissue segmentation [7, 11].
In this paper, we introduce a new research direction:
studying cell-tissue relationships for cell detection. First, we
publish the OCELOT dataset, which contains cell and tissue annotations in small and large FoV patches, respectively,
with overlapping regions. Additionally, the data is collected
from WSIs of multiple organs. This can provide the necessary data for researchers to study cell-tissue relationships
and their effect on cell detection. Second, we introduce simple multi-task learning approaches for cell detection that can
benefit from cell-tissue relationships and demonstrate their
advantages over 3 different datasets. These approaches consistently show better cell detection performance compared to

23902

