This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HaLP: Hallucinating Latent Positives for Skeleton-based Self-Supervised
Learning of Actions
Shlok Mishra2
Ketul Shah1 *
Anshul Shah1
Aniket Roy1 *
2,3
4
David Jacobs
Anoop Cherian
Rama Chellappa1
1
2
3
Johns Hopkins University
University of Maryland, College Park
Meta
{ashah95, aroy28, kshah33, rchella4}@jhu.edu

{shlokm, dwj}@umd.edu

4

MERL

cherian@merl.com

Abstract
Supervised learning of skeleton sequence encoders for action recognition has received significant attention in recent
times. However, learning such encoders without labels continues to be a challenging problem. While prior works have
shown promising results by applying contrastive learning to
pose sequences, the quality of the learned representations
is often observed to be closely tied to data augmentations
that are used to craft the positives. However, augmenting
pose sequences is a difficult task as the geometric constraints
among the skeleton joints need to be enforced to make the
augmentations realistic for that action. In this work, we propose a new contrastive learning approach to train models
for skeleton-based action recognition without labels. Our
key contribution is a simple module, HaLP – to Hallucinate Latent Positives for contrastive learning. Specifically,
HaLP explores the latent space of poses in suitable directions to generate new positives. To this end, we present a
novel optimization formulation to solve for the synthetic
positives with an explicit control on their hardness. We propose approximations to the objective, making them solvable in closed form with minimal overhead. We show via
experiments that using these generated positives within a
standard contrastive learning framework leads to consistent
improvements across benchmarks such as NTU-60, NTU120, and PKU-II on tasks like linear evaluation, transfer
learning, and kNN evaluation. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/anshulbshah/HaLP.

1. Introduction
Recognizing human actions from videos is of immense
practical importance with applications in behavior understanding [52], medical assistive applications [5], AR/VR
applications [26] and surveillance [12]. Action recognition
has been an active area of research [29] with a focus on
* Aniket Roy and Ketul Shah contributed equally

easy
positive
anchor

hard
positive

Prototypes
Anchor
Hallucinated Latent Positives (HaLP)

Figure 1. HaLP: We propose an approach to hallucinate latent positives for use within a contrastive learning pipeline. Our approach
works as follows: 1) We extract prototypes which succinctly represent the data at a particular step in training, 2) We randomly select a
prototype from the prototype set, 3) Our approach then determines
an optimal vector which when added to the anchor can generate
positives of varying hardness. We generate a number of positives
using this approach which are then used within a contrastive learning pipeline to train a model without labels.

temporal understanding [14], faster and efficient models for
understanding complex actions [38], etc. Most works in the
past have focused on action recognition from appearance
information. But recent methods have shown the advantages
of using pose/skeleton information as a separate cue with
benefits in robustness to scene and object biases [34, 35, 53],
reduced privacy concerns [27], apart from succinctly representing human motion [24]. However, annotating videos
for skeleton-based action recognition is an arduous task and

18846

