This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Optical Expansion from Scale Matching
Han Ling1 Yinghui Sun1 Quansen Sun1 * Zhenwen Ren 1,2,3†
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Southwest University of Science and Technology
3
SongShan Laboratory
{321106010190,yinghuisun,sunquansen,rzw}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper address the problem of optical expansion
(OE). OE describes the object scale change between two
frames, widely used in monocular 3D vision tasks. Previous methods estimate optical expansion mainly from optical flow results, but this two-stage architecture makes their
results limited by the accuracy of optical flow and less robust. To solve these problems, we propose the concept of
3D optical flow by integrating optical expansion into the
2D optical flow, which is implemented by a plug-and-play
module, namely TPCV. TPCV implements matching features
at the correct location and scale, thus allowing the simultaneous optimization of optical flow and optical expansion
tasks. Experimentally, we apply TPCV to the RAFT optical
flow baseline. Experimental results show that the baseline
optical flow performance is substantially improved. Moreover, we apply the optical flow and optical expansion results to various dynamic 3D vision tasks, including motionin-depth, time-to-collision, and scene flow, often achieving significant improvement over the prior SOTA. Code is
available at https://github.com/HanLingsgjk/
TPCV .

𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒1
𝑠 1

𝐹rame1

𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒2
𝑠 1
𝑠

0.7

𝑠

0.5

𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 𝑆𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒 𝐹rame2
Figure 1. Scale matching idea. Left: multi-scale matching between two frames. Right: texture around the matching point,
where s is the size of the image scaling. The core idea of scale
matching is to match texture features at the correct location and
scale. As seen above, the texture at the license plate can be better
matched when the second frame is scaled 0.7 times in size, where
the scaling magnification also reflects the optical expansion of that
local pixel between the two frames. Furthermore, scale matching
can better handle the motion in the depth direction and contains
potential 3D motion information.

1. Introduction
Optical expansion (OE) is a fundamental and important
concept in monocular dynamic 3D vision tasks [1, 3, 22, 23,
32]. OE describes the scale change of an object between
two frames, which can be translated into motion in the depth
direction. It has essential applications in time-to-collision,
scene flow, and motion-in-depth estimation. OE schemes
have unique advantages in 3D motion estimation tasks, requiring only a single camera and enabling dense and fixed
baseline independent results. In this paper, we discuss a robust and novel approach for OE estimation.
* Corresponding author
† Corresponding author

Prior works In early time-to-collision (TTC) studies
[4, 22, 23], OE was obtained from motion modeling, where
the motion estimation was provided by optical flow or SIFT
[10]. Such algorithms relied on optical flow results and
specific model assumptions, often yielding only sparse and
low-accuracy results. Some recent methods [32] regress OE
based on existing optical flow results and achieve better outcomes. However, these two-stage estimation methods rely
on accurate optical flow results and decrease computational
efficiency. Instead, we consider optical flow and expansion estimation as two complementary tasks. Introducing OE in optical flow can realize matching features at the
correct location and scale. As shown in Fig. 1, this fusion

5445

