This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing What You Said: Talking Face Generation Guided
by a Lip Reading Expert
Jiadong Wang1∗ , Xinyuan Qian2† , Malu Zhang3 , Robby T. Tan1 , Haizhou Li4,1
National University of Singapore, 2 University of Science and Technology Beijing
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
SRIBD, School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
1

Abstract
Talking face generation, also known as speech-to-lip
generation, reconstructs facial motions concerning lips
given coherent speech input. The previous studies revealed
the importance of lip-speech synchronization and visual
quality. Despite much progress, they hardly focus on the
content of lip movements i.e., the visual intelligibility of the
spoken words, which is an important aspect of generation
quality. To address the problem, we propose using a lipreading expert to improve the intelligibility of the generated lip regions by penalizing the incorrect generation results. Moreover, to compensate for data scarcity, we train
the lip-reading expert in an audio-visual self-supervised
manner. With a lip-reading expert, we propose a novel
contrastive learning to enhance lip-speech synchronization,
and a transformer to encode audio synchronically with
video, while considering global temporal dependency of audio. For evaluation, we propose a new strategy with two
different lip-reading experts to measure intelligibility of the
generated videos. Rigorous experiments show that our proposal is superior to other State-of-the-art (SOTA) methods,
such as Wav2Lip, in reading intelligibility i.e., over 38%
Word Error Rate (WER) on LRS2 dataset and 27.8% accuracy on LRW dataset. We also achieve the SOTA performance in lip-speech synchronization and comparable performances in visual quality.

1. Introduction
Talking Face Generation (TFG) aims at generating highfidelity talking heads which are temporally synchronized
with the input speech. It plays a significant role in many
Human Robot Interaction (HRI) applications, such as film
dubbing [1], video editing, face animation [2, 3], and communication with people who has hearing loss but master in
lip-reading. Thanks to its various practical usage, TFG has
∗ jiadong.wang@u.nus.edu
† corresponding author (qianxy@ustb.edu.cn)

also received an increasing attention in both industrial and
research community over the past decades [4, 5].
In TFG, there are two major aspects of concerna: lipspeech synchronization and visual quality. While humans are sensitive to subtle abnormalities in asynchronized
speech and facial motions [6], the mechanism of speech
production highly relies on lip movements [7]. As a result,
the main challenge of TFG exists in temporal alignment
between the input speech and synthesized video streams.
One solution to this problem is to place an auxiliary embedding network at the end of the generator to analyze the
audio-visual coherence. For example, [8] uses a pre-trained
embedding network [9] as the lip-sync discriminator, while
[10] investigates an asymmetric mutual information estimator. Another solution is to compute a sync loss between
visual lip features of ground truth and generated video sequences [11]. Other attempts use the encoder-decoder structure to facilitate TFG by improving audio and visual representations, such as [12, 13], which disentangle the visual
features to enhance audio representations into a shared latent space; or, [14], which disentangles audio factors, i.e.,
emotional and phonetic content, to remove sync-irrelevant
features.
Apart from lip-speech synchronization, blurry or unrealistic visual quality also penalizes generation performance.
To preserve defining facial features of target persons, skip
connections [15] are applied [5]. Others [12, 16] employ
Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) to distinguish real and
synthesized results by modelling the temporal dynamics of
visual outputs. In this way, the resulting models can generate more plausible talking heads that can be qualitatively
measured by subjective evaluations.
In addition, reading intelligibility should be indispensable, but it has not been emphasized. Reading intelligibility indicates how much text content can be interpreted from
face videos by humans’ lip reading ability, which is especially significant for hearing-impaired users. However, image quality and lip-speech synchronization do not explicitly
reflect reading intelligibility. Specifically, a well-qualified

14653

