This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape-aware Text-driven Layered Video Editing
Yao-Chih Lee

Ji-Ze Genevieve Jang
Yi-Ting Chen
Elizabeth Qiu
University of Maryland, College Park
https://text-video-edit.github.io

Jia-Bin Huang

Figure 1. Shape-aware consistent video editing. Our method enables consistent text-guided video editing with both appearance and
shape changes. The top row shows the input frames. The second and third rows present editing results from two text prompts: “running
sports car” and “running minivan”, respectively. Note that text-driven editing involves both texture and structure editing on the
foreground object. Our method performs consistent edits on sequential frames while preserving the object motion in the input video.

Abstract

Temporal consistency is essential for video editing applications. Existing work on layered representation of videos
allows propagating edits consistently to each frame. These
methods, however, can only edit object appearance rather
than object shape changes due to the limitation of using
a fixed UV mapping field for texture atlas. We present
a shape-aware, text-driven video editing method to tackle
this challenge. To handle shape changes in video editing,
we first propagate the deformation field between the input and edited keyframe to all frames. We then leverage
a pre-trained text-conditioned diffusion model as guidance
for refining shape distortion and completing unseen regions.
The experimental results demonstrate that our method can
achieve shape-aware consistent video editing and compare
favorably with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Image editing. Recently, image editing [19, 20, 24, 34,
40, 44] has made tremendous progress, especially those
using diffusion models [19, 20, 40, 44]. With free-form
text prompts, users can obtain photo-realistic edited images
without artistic skills or labor-intensive editing. However,
unlike image editing, video editing is more challenging due
to the requirement of temporal consistency. Independently
editing individual frames leads to undesired inconsistent
frames, as shown in Fig. 2a. A naı̈ve way to deal with temporal consistency in video editing is to edit a single frame
and then propagate the change to all the other frames. Nevertheless, artifacts are presented when there are unseen pixels from the edited frame in the other frames, as shown in
Fig. 2b.
Video editing and their limitations. For consistent video
editing, Neural Layered Atlas (NLA) [18] decomposes a
video into unified appearance layers atlas. The layered decomposition helps consistently propagate the user edit to

14317

