This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Generate Language-supervised and Open-vocabulary Scene Graph
using Pre-trained Visual-Semantic Space
Yong Zhang† , Yingwei Pan‡ , Ting Yao‡ , Rui Huang† *, Tao Mei‡ , and Chang-Wen Chen§
†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

‡

HiDream.ai Inc.

§

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

yongzhang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, ruihuang@cuhk.edu.cn,
tmei@hidream.ai, changwen.chen@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

a

Visually-grounded
semantic graph

Image language description

Scene graph generation (SGG) aims to abstract an image into a graph structure, by representing objects as graph
nodes and their relations as labeled edges. However, two
knotty obstacles limit the practicability of current SGG
methods in real-world scenarios: 1) training SGG models requires time-consuming ground-truth annotations, and
2) the closed-set object categories make the SGG models limited in their ability to recognize novel objects outside of training corpora. To address these issues, we novelly exploit a powerful pre-trained visual-semantic space
(VSS) to trigger language-supervised and open-vocabulary
SGG in a simple yet effective manner. Specifically, cheap
scene graph supervision data can be easily obtained by
parsing image language descriptions into semantic graphs.
Next, the noun phrases on such semantic graphs are directly grounded over image regions through region-word
alignment in the pre-trained VSS. In this way, we enable
open-vocabulary object detection by performing object category name grounding with a text prompt in this VSS. On
the basis of visually-grounded objects, the relation representations are naturally built for relation recognition, pursuing open-vocabulary SGG. We validate our proposed approach with extensive experiments on the Visual Genome
benchmark across various SGG scenarios (i.e., supervised
/ language-supervised, closed-set / open-vocabulary). Consistent superior performances are achieved compared with
existing methods, demonstrating the potential of exploiting
pre-trained VSS for SGG in more practical scenarios.

1. Introduction
Scene graph [10] is a structured representation for describing image semantics. It abstracts visual objects as
graph nodes and represents their relations as labeled graph
edges. The task of scene graph generation (SGG) [6, 14,
* Corresponding author

A man holds a baseball bat on the ground.

Semantic
parsing

man
hold

on

baseball
bat

Phrase
grounding

ground

Used as weak scene
graph supervision

Image

b
man
player

player
hold
baseball
bat

Novel
object
on

ground

Predicted scene graph
Open-vocabulary
generalization

Visual-Semantic Space
baseball bat. ground. ... player.

Word embedding

Region embedding

Novel class

Text prompt input

Figure 1. An illustration of exploiting a pre-trained visualsemantic space (VSS) to trigger language-supervised and openvocabulary scene graph generation (SGG). (a) We acquire weak
scene graph supervision by semantically parsing the image language description and grounding noun phrases on image regions via VSS. (b) At SGG inference time, thanks to the openvocabulary generalization naturally rooted in VSS, the novel object name (e.g., player) in the text prompt input can be well aligned
to one image region, which is regarded as its detection.

20, 26, 40, 47, 48, 50, 51, 57, 60, 63, 64] plays an important
role for fine-grained visual understanding, which has shown
promising results in facilitating various downstream applications, such as image-text retrieval [24, 38, 49], image captioning [2, 22, 32, 35, 52, 54, 55, 66], cross-media knowledge
graph construction [18, 45] and robot planning [1].
Though great effort has been made, SGG of the current
stage still faces two knotty obstacles that limit its practicability in real-world scenarios. 1) Training SGG models requires massive ground-truth scene graphs that are expensive for manual annotation. Annotators have to draw
bounding boxes for all objects in an image and connect
possible interacted object pairs, and assign object/relation
labels. Since assigned labels might be ambiguous, further
verification and canonicalization processing are usually required [14]. Finally, a scene graph in the form of a set of
⟨subject, predicate, object⟩ triplets with subject and object bounding boxes is constructed. Such annotating pro-

2915

