This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teleidoscopic Imaging System for Microscale 3D Shape Reconstruction
Ryo Kawahara
Kyushu Institute of Technology

Meng-Yu Jennifer Kuo
University of Minnesota

Shohei Nobuhara
Kyoto University

rkawahara@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

kuo00052@umn.edu

nob@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Estimated
3D shape

Projector
Virtual camera

Monocentric lens

Virtual cameras

Room-light
appearance

Kaleidoscope
Camera
Object

Camera

(a)(a)

(b)
(b)

(c)
(c)

Figure 1. Teleidoscopic Imaging System. (a) We propose a novel system for microscale 3D imaging using an imaging setup that consists
of a camera, a kaleidoscopic multi-facet mirror with a monocentric front lens, and a projector. (b) Our system realizes a dense close-up
surrounding multi-view capture of the target. (c) Our method enables fuller and dense reconstruction of microscale objects.

Abstract
This paper proposes a practical method of microscale
3D shape capturing by a teleidoscopic imaging system. The
main challenge in microscale 3D shape reconstruction is
to capture the target from multiple viewpoints with a large
enough depth-of-field. Our idea is to employ a teleidoscopic
measurement system consisting of three planar mirrors and
monocentric lens. The planar mirrors virtually define multiple viewpoints by multiple reflections, and the monocentric lens realizes a high magnification with less blurry and
surround view even in closeup imaging. Our contributions
include, a structured ray-pixel camera model which handles refractive and reflective projection rays efficiently, analytical evaluations of depth of field of our teleidoscopic
imaging system, and a practical calibration algorithm of
the teleidoscopic imaging system. Evaluations with real images prove the concept of our measurement system.

1. Introduction
Microscale 3D reconstruction has found profound applications in a wide range of domains including medical imaging, life science, and aquaculture, due to its non-constrained
and non-invasive measurements. The main challenges in
image-based microscopic 3D shape measurement is its shallow depth of field and camera arrangement in the closeup
scenario. Applying conventional multiple camera system
designed for human-size capture [14, 30] cannot be a feasible solution due to limitations on camera placement. Con-

ventional multiple mirror system [33] also have difficulties
inevitably in depth-of-focus due to differences in their optical path lengths with varying numbers of bounces.
In this paper, we show that the fuller 3D shape of a microscale object can be recovered. Our key idea is to employ
a catadioptric imaging system which realizes a practical
closeup multi-view imaging. The point of our design is that
the system has a monocentric front lens like a teleidoscope,
instead of using microscopic system in the camera side.
That is, as shown in Fig. 1(a), we introduce a kaleidoscopic
multi-facet mirror between the front lens and the camera,
where the design realizes a deeper depth-of-field and results
in less blurring imaging. Unlike conventional microscopic
imaging system such as differential phase contrast (DPC)
microscopy [4, 34] and multi-focus approaches [15, 24, 26],
our method realizes a multi-view capture of the target from
a single physical viewpoint which can contribute to freeviewpoint rendering, 3D shape reconstruction, and reflection analysis. Our system also has an advantage over existing imaging systems that build multiple views behind the
main lens [7, 21] in a closeup environment. The wide FoV
with a monocentric main lens and virtual multiple views
with mirrors allow closeup and surrounding view capturing
in focus.
We call our system teleidoscopic imaging system and
show that the system can be compactly modeled by a structured ray-pixel camera model [11], which handles refractive
and reflective projection rays efficiently. Based on our raypixel camera model, we derive a practical calibration algo-

20813

