This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskCLIP: Masked Self-Distillation Advances Contrastive
Language-Image Pretraining
Xiaoyi Dong1 *†, Jianmin Bao2∗ , Yinglin Zheng3 , Ting Zhang2 , Dongdong Chen4,† , Hao Yang2 ,
Ming Zeng3 , Weiming Zhang1 , Lu Yuan4 , Dong Chen2 , Fang Wen2 , Nenghai Yu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Xiamen University 4 Microsoft Cloud + AI
{dlight@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}.ustc.edu.cn cddlyf@gmail.com
{jianbao, ting.zhang, luyuan, doch, fangwen}@microsoft.com
{zhengyinglin@stu., zengming@}xmu.edu.cn yanghao.alexis@foxmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents a simple yet effective framework
MaskCLIP, which incorporates a newly proposed masked
self-distillation into contrastive language-image pretraining.
The core idea of masked self-distillation is to distill representation from a full image to the representation predicted
from a masked image. Such incorporation enjoys two vital
beneﬁts. First, masked self-distillation targets local patch
representation learning, which is complementary to visionlanguage contrastive focusing on text-related representation. Second, masked self-distillation is also consistent with
vision-language contrastive from the perspective of training objective as both utilize the visual encoder for feature
aligning, and thus is able to learn local semantics getting
indirect supervision from the language. We provide specially
designed experiments with a comprehensive analysis to validate the two beneﬁts. Symmetrically, we also introduce the
local semantic supervision into the text branch, which further
improves the pretraining performance. With extensive experiments, we show that MaskCLIP, when applied to various
challenging downstream tasks, achieves superior results in
linear probing, ﬁnetuning, and zero-shot performance with
the guidance of the language encoder. Code will be release
at https://github.com/LightDXY/MaskCLIP.

1. Introduction
Vision-language (VL) contrastive learning [31, 51] has
shown remarkable success in pretraining for various tasks.
With large-scale image-text pairs available on the Internet,
the model composed of a simple dual encoder design learns
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding Author
† Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia

strong semantic prior by aligning between image and text.
The resulting visual encoder not only exhibits excellent linear probing and ﬁnetuning performance, but also enables
impressive zero-shot performance with the guidance of the
language encoder, showing the generality of natural language
and its ability to supervise a wide range of visual concepts.
Nonetheless, the associated language description, though
providing richer information than mere class labels, still
can hardly describe all the information in the corresponding
image, as images are continuous signals with ﬁne-grained details and complex semantics. As a result, the VL contrastive
by aligning global representations may only focus on the
text-described objects and ignore the rest which might be
useful for downstream tasks.
In this paper, we are interested in how to fully leverage
the image itself to facilitate the VL contrastive to further
improve the transfer capability. (1) Firstly, the learned feature representation shall characterize local patches, serving
as a complementary for global representation in VL contrastive. Inspired by the recent success of masked image
modeling [4, 19, 26, 51, 60, 61] in learning patch representations, we also randomly mask the input image with a large
portion to force the visual encoder to focus on the remaining
visible patches. (2) Secondly, the learned representation for
local patches shall possess semantic meanings, being consistent with the global representation receiving semantic text
supervision. We bring mean teacher self-distillation [25, 57]
to supervise the learned patch representations with the visual feature representations, enabling implicit supervision
from natural language. The resulting objective is denoted
as masked self-distillation where the student model and the
teacher model come from the same neural networks and the
knowledge is distilled from the full image (fed to the teacher
model) to the masked image (fed to student model). To this
end, we introduce MaskCLIP by incorporating masked self-

10995

