This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hybrid Neural Rendering for Large-Scale Scenes with Motion Blur
Peng Dai1 *

Yinda Zhang2∗
Xin Yu1
Xiaoyang Lyu1
1
2
The University of Hong Kong
Google

Xiaojuan Qi1†

Abstract
Rendering novel view images is highly desirable for
many applications. Despite recent progress, it remains
challenging to render high-fidelity and view-consistent
novel views of large-scale scenes from in-the-wild images
with inevitable artifacts (e.g., motion blur). To this end,
we develop a hybrid neural rendering model that makes
image-based representation and neural 3D representation
join forces to render high-quality, view-consistent images.
Besides, images captured in the wild inevitably contain artifacts, such as motion blur, which deteriorates the quality of rendered images. Accordingly, we propose strategies
to simulate blur effects on the rendered images to mitigate
the negative influence of blurriness images and reduce their
importance during training based on precomputed qualityaware weights. Extensive experiments on real and synthetic data demonstrate our model surpasses state-of-theart point-based methods for novel view synthesis. The code
is available at https://daipengwa.github.io/
Hybrid-Rendering-ProjectPage/.

1. Introduction
Novel-view synthesis of a scene is one critical feature required by various applications, e.g., AR/VR, robotics, and
video games, to name a few. Neural radiance field (NeRF)
[23] and its follow-up works [3, 19, 24, 39, 43, 47] enable
high-quality view synthesis on objects or synthetic data.
However, synthesizing high-fidelity and view-consistent
novel view images of real-world large-scale scenes remains
challenging, especially in the presence of inevitable artifacts from the data-capturing process, such as motion blur
(see Figure 1 & supplementary material).
To improve novel view synthesis, mainstream research
can be mainly categorized into two lines. One line of methods directly resorts to features from training data to synthesize novel view images [4, 11, 29, 40], namely image-based
rendering. By directly leveraging rich high-quality features from neighboring high-resolution images, these meth* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Point-NeRF

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Our hybrid neural rendering model generates highfidelity novel view images. Please note characters in the book
where the result of Point-Nerf is blurry and the GT is contaminated by blur artifacts.

ods have a better chance of generating high-fidelity images
with distinctive details. Nevertheless, the generated images often lack consistency due to the absence of global
structural regularization, and boundary image pixels often
contain serious artifacts. Another line of work attempts to
equip NeRF with explicit 3D representations in the form of
point cloud [28,43], surface mesh [30,44] or voxel grid features [9,19,46], namely neural 3D representation. Thanks to
the global geometric regularization from explicit 3D representations, they can efficiently synthesize consistent novel
view images but yet struggle with producing high-fidelity
images in large-scale scenes (see the blurry images from
Point-NeRF [43] in Fig. 1). This may be caused by lowresolution 3D representations [19], noisy geometries [1, 7],
imperfect camera calibrations [2], or inaccurate rendering
formulas [3], which make encoding a large-scale scene into
a global neural 3D representation non-trivial and inevitably
loses high-frequency information.
Albeit advancing the field, the above work all suffer immediately from low-quality training data, e.g., blurry images. Recently, Deblur-NeRF [21] aims to address the problem of blurry training data and proposed a pipeline to simulate blurs by querying multiple auxiliary rays, which, however, is computation and memory inefficient, hindering their
applicability in large-scale scenes.
In this paper, we aim at synthesizing high-fidelity and
view-consistent novel view images in large-scale scenes using in-the-wild unsatisfactory data, e.g., blurry data. First,
to simultaneously address high fidelity and view consistency, we put forward a hybrid neural rendering approach
that enjoys the merits of both image-based representation
and neural 3D representation. Our fundamental design

154

