This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AVFace: Towards Detailed Audio-Visual 4D Face Reconstruction
Aggelina Chatziagapi, Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University
{aggelina,samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Figure 1. Given a monocular talking face video and the corresponding speech segment, AVFace reconstructs the detailed 4D face geometry
for any input speaker, and it is robust in cases when either modality is insufficient.

Abstract
In this work, we present a multimodal solution to the
problem of 4D face reconstruction from monocular videos.
3D face reconstruction from 2D images is an underconstrained problem due to the ambiguity of depth. Stateof-the-art methods try to solve this problem by leveraging
visual information from a single image or video, whereas
3D mesh animation approaches rely more on audio. However, in most cases (e.g. AR/VR applications), videos include both visual and speech information. We propose AVFace that incorporates both modalities and accurately reconstructs the 4D facial and lip motion of any speaker, without requiring any 3D ground truth for training. A coarse
stage estimates the per-frame parameters of a 3D morphable model, followed by a lip refinement, and then a fine
stage recovers facial geometric details. Due to the temporal
audio and video information captured by transformer-based
modules, our method is robust in cases when either modality
is insufficient (e.g. face occlusions). Extensive qualitative
and quantitative evaluation demonstrates the superiority of
our method over the current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 4D geometry of the human face has
been a long standing research problem in computer vision and graphics. Accurate spatio-temporal (4D) face re-

construction has extensive applications in AR/VR, video
games, virtual communication, the movie industry etc.
However, recovering the per-frame 3D head pose and facial geometry from 2D images is an ill-posed problem due
to the ambiguity of depth. Current approaches are largely
based on 3D morphable models (3DMMs). Usually, they
take a single image [18, 22] or video [60] as input and predict the 3DMM parameters. Some have also tried to predict additional geometric facial details, using the 3DMM
fitting as prior [13, 18, 22]. However, most of these videoonly methods are either speaker-specific [13,23,29], requiring to overfit to a specific speaker to recover their facial
details, or fail to accurately capture fine details, like wrinkles and lip movements. In addition, they cannot handle
face occlusions, since they solely rely on the visual input.
On the other hand, audio-driven 3D mesh animation approaches [17,21,52] learn better lip motion, but they require
4D ground truth scans for training, which are rare and expensive to capture. Furthermore, such audio-only methods
cannot capture any speaker-specific characteristics or facial expressions, as they do not use any visual information.
There is limited work in audio-visual 4D face reconstruction [1, 15, 44], but these methods also require 4D ground
truth scans and do not recover any facial geometric details.
In this work, we propose AVFace that learns to reconstruct detailed 4D face geometry from monocular talking
face videos, leveraging both audio and video modalities.
Without requiring any 3D ground truth scans, it can recover

16878

