This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EcoTTA: Memory-Efficient Continual Test-time Adaptation
via Self-distilled Regularization
Junha Song1,2 * , Jungsoo Lee1 , In So Kweon2 , Sungha Choi1†
1
Qualcomm AI Research‡ , 2 KAIST

ti
ti

ti

1. Introduction
Despite recent advances in deep learning [14, 21, 20, 19],
deep neural networks often suffer from performance degradation when the source and target domains differ significantly [8, 36, 31]. Among several tasks addressing such
domain shifts, test-time adaptation (TTA) has recently received a significant amount of attention due to its practicality and wide applicability especially in on-device set* Work done during an internship at Qualcomm AI Research.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of

Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

200

72%
86%

300

900
450

(b)

Param

Ac va on
TENT/EATA

WideResNet-40

100
0
CoTTA

ResNet-50
CIFAR10-C Error (%)

59%
80%

400

1350

0

Param
Ours

Ac va on

TTT++

Con nual TENT
Single domain TENT
Ours (K=4)
Ours (K=5)

WideResNet-40
CIFAR100-C Error (%)

This paper presents a simple yet effective approach that
improves continual test-time adaptation (TTA) in a memoryefficient manner. TTA may primarily be conducted on edge
devices with limited memory, so reducing memory is crucial but has been overlooked in previous TTA studies. In
addition, long-term adaptation often leads to catastrophic
forgetting and error accumulation, which hinders applying TTA in real-world deployments. Our approach consists of two components to address these issues. First, we
present lightweight meta networks that can adapt the frozen
original networks to the target domain. This novel architecture minimizes memory consumption by decreasing the
size of intermediate activations required for backpropagation. Second, our novel self-distilled regularization controls
the output of the meta networks not to deviate significantly
from the output of the frozen original networks, thereby
preserving well-trained knowledge from the source domain.
Without additional memory, this regularization prevents error accumulation and catastrophic forgetting, resulting in
stable performance even in long-term test-time adaptation.
We demonstrate that our simple yet effective strategy outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on various benchmarks for image classification and semantic segmentation
tasks. Notably, our proposed method with ResNet-50 and
WideResNet-40 takes 86% and 80% less memory than the
recent state-of-the-art method, CoTTA.

ResNet-50

1800
Memory (MB)

(a)

Abstract

SWR&NSP

CoTTA
EATA

NOTE
TTT++

Con nual TENT
Ours (K=4)
Ours (K=5)

EATA
Single domain TENT

CoTTA
SWR&NSP

Memory (MB)

Figure 1. (a) Memory cost comparison between TTA methods.
The size of activations, not the parameters, is the primary memory bottleneck during training. (b) CIFAR-C adaptation performance. We perform the continual online adaptation on CIFAR-C
dataset. The x- and y-axis are the average error of all corruptions
and the total memory consumption including the parameters and
activations, respectively. Our approach, EcoTTA, achieves the best
results while consuming the least amount of memory, where K is
the model partition factor used in our method.

tings [53, 35, 26, 15]. This task focuses on adapting the
model to unlabeled online data from the target domain without access to the source data.
While existing TTA methods show improved TTA performances, minimizing the sizes of memory resources have
been relatively under-explored, which is crucial considering
the applicability of TTA in on-device settings. For example,
several studies [54, 35, 9] update entire model parameters

11920

