This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BBDM: Image-to-Image Translation with Brownian Bridge Diffusion Models
Bo Li, Kaitao Xue, Bin Liu
School of Mathematics and Information Science, Nanchang Hangkong University, Nanchang, China
Yu-Kun Lai
School of Computer Sciences and Informatics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

Abstract
Image-to-image translation is an important and challenging problem in computer vision and image processing. Diffusion models (DM) have shown great potentials
for high-quality image synthesis, and have gained competitive performance on the task of image-to-image translation.
However, most of the existing diffusion models treat imageto-image translation as conditional generation processes,
and suffer heavily from the gap between distinct domains.
In this paper, a novel image-to-image translation method
based on the Brownian Bridge Diffusion Model (BBDM)
is proposed, which models image-to-image translation as a
stochastic Brownian Bridge process, and learns the translation between two domains directly through the bidirectional diffusion process rather than a conditional generation process. To the best of our knowledge, it is the
first work that proposes Brownian Bridge diffusion process
for image-to-image translation. Experimental results on
various benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed BBDM
model achieves competitive performance through both visual inspection and measurable metrics.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation [14] refers to building a mapping between two distinct image domains. Numerous problems in computer vision and graphics can be formulated as
image-to-image translation problems, such as style transfer [3,9,13,22], semantic image synthesis [21,24,34,36,37,
40] and sketch-to-photo synthesis [2, 14, 43].
A natural approach to image-to-image translation is to
learn the conditional distribution of the target images given
the samples from the input domain. Pix2Pix [14] is one
of the most popular image-to-image translation methods.
It is a typical conditional Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) [26], and the domain translation is accomplished by
learning a mapping from the input image to the output im-

Figure 1. Comparison of directed graphical models of BBDM
(Brownian Bridge Diffusion Model) and DDPM (Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model).

age. In addition, a specific adversarial loss function is also
trained to constrain the domain mapping. Despite the high
fidelity translation performance, they are notoriously hard
to train [1, 10] and often drop modes in the output distribution [23, 27]. In addition, most GAN-based image-toimage translation methods also suffer from the lack of diverse translation results since they typically model the task
as a one-to-one mapping. Although other generative models
such as Autoregressive Models [25, 39], VAEs (Variational
Autoencoders) [16, 38], and Normalizing Flows [7, 15] succeeded in some specific applications, they have not gained
the same level of sample quality and general applicability
as GANs.
Recently, diffusion models [12, 31] have shown competitive performance on producing high-quality images compared with GAN-based models [6]. Several conditional diffusion models [2, 4, 28–30] have been proposed for imageto-image translation tasks. These methods treat image-toimage translation as conditional image generation by integrating the encoded feature of the reference image into
the U-Net in the reverse process (the first row of Figure 1)
to guide the diffusion towards the target domain. De-

1952

