This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Paired-Point Lifting for Enhanced Privacy-Preserving Visual Localization
Chunghwan Lee1 Jaihoon Kim2,3 Chanhyuk Yun1 Je Hyeong Hong1 *
1
Dept. Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University 2 Samsung Electronics 3 KAIST
Abstract
Visual localization refers to the process of recovering
camera pose from input image relative to a known scene,
forming a cornerstone of numerous vision and robotics systems. While many algorithms utilize sparse 3D point cloud
of the scene obtained via structure-from-motion (SfM) for
localization, recent studies have raised privacy concerns by
successfully revealing high-fidelity appearance of the scene
from such sparse 3D representation. One prominent approach for bypassing this attack was to lift 3D points to
randomly oriented 3D lines thereby hiding scene geometry, but latest work have shown such random line cloud
has a critical statistical flaw that can be exploited to break
through protection. In this work, we present an alternative
lightweight strategy called Paired-Point Lifting (PPL) for
constructing 3D line clouds. Instead of drawing one randomly oriented line per 3D point, PPL splits 3D points into
pairs and joins each pair to form 3D lines. This seemingly
simple strategy yields 3 benefits, i) new ambiguity in feature selection, ii) increased line cloud sparsity and iii) nontrivial distribution of 3D lines, all of which contributes to
enhanced protection against privacy attacks. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the strength of PPL in concealing scene details without compromising localization accuracy, unlocking the true potential of 3D line clouds.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the fundamental problem of estimating the camera pose from an input image with respect to
a known 3D scene. It plays a crucial role in many computer vision and robotics applications, including humancomputer interaction based on augmented or mixed reality (AR/MR), 3D reconstruction via structure-from-motion
(SfM) [1, 36, 37, 39] and autonomous navigation systems in
drones, self-driving vehicles, or robots using simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) [5, 22, 26].
To this date, many practical visual localization algorithms are still structure-based approaches [12], utilizing a
global sparse 3D model of the scene obtained from SfM
or SLAM. In such approaches, 2D-3D correspondences
are formed between 2D image points and the global 3D
* Corresponding author

(a) Point cloud

(b) Line cloud [40]

(c) PPL (ours)

Figure 1. Visualization of different 3D scene representations and
respective image reconstruction results using InvSfM [30]. Images
in (b) and (c) are reconstructed by estimating the 3D point clouds
from line clouds via [3]. While images revealed from original line
clouds (OLC) [40] still contain basic scene details, those from the
proposed method (PPL) exhibit much degraded scene quality.

structure by comparing feature descriptors (e.g., SIFT [21],
ORB [34], or other alternatives [25, 43]), after which they
are used to perform robust camera pose estimation based on
geometric constraints and RANSAC [2, 8, 31]. While most
research over the last decade have made significant progress
in improving algorithm accuracy, scalability [19, 23, 35, 47]
and efficiency [12,20], the requirement that sparse 3D point
cloud and associated feature descriptors need to be persistently accessible has largely remained unchanged.
Recently, it caught the research community by surprise
when Pittaluga et al. [30] showed sparse 3D point clouds
can retain enough scene details such as characters and textures that can be used to uncover a high-fidelity image of the
scene. Since this process only requires 2D projection of 3D
points and their respective feature descriptors, this raised
privacy concerns related to uploading sparse 3D models in
the cloud or storing them on the end-user device, both of
which are commonly found settings in visual localization.

17266

