This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalist: Decoupling Natural and Robust Generalization
Hongjun Wang1 * Yisen Wang1,2†
1
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning techniques have achieved remarkable success in many fields, including computer vision
[14, 16], natural language processing [10, 31], and speech
recognition [28, 36]. Yet, deep neural networks (DNNs)
suffer a catastrophic performance degradation by human
imperceptible adversarial perturbations where wrong predictions are made with extremely high confidence [13, 29, 34].
The vulnerability of DNNs has led to the proposal of various defense approaches [3, 24, 25, 33, 40] for protecting
DNNs from adversarial attacks. One of those representa* Work was done as an internship at Peking University. Now, he is a
Ph.D. student at the University of Hong Kong.
† Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn)

Robust Accuracy (AA)

47.5

Deep neural networks obtained by standard training have
been constantly plagued by adversarial examples. Although
adversarial training demonstrates its capability to defend
against adversarial examples, unfortunately, it leads to an
inevitable drop in the natural generalization. To address the
issue, we decouple the natural generalization and the robust
generalization from joint training and formulate different
training strategies for each one. Specifically, instead of minimizing a global loss on the expectation over these two generalization errors, we propose a bi-expert framework called
Generalist where we simultaneously train base learners with
task-aware strategies so that they can specialize in their own
fields. The parameters of base learners are collected and
combined to form a global learner at intervals during the
training process. The global learner is then distributed to the
base learners as initialized parameters for continued training. Theoretically, we prove that the risks of Generalist will
get lower once the base learners are well trained. Extensive
experiments verify the applicability of Generalist to achieve
high accuracy on natural examples while maintaining considerable robustness to adversarial ones. Code is available
at https://github.com/PKU-ML/Generalist.

45.0
42.5
40.0
37.5
35.0

Madry
TRADES
FAT
Generalist

32.5
83

84

85

86

87

Natural Accuracy

88

89

Figure 1. Comparison with other advanced adversarial training
methods. Both clean accuracy and robust accuracy (against AutoAttack [9]) are given for a handy reference. It is noted that current
adversarial training methods achieve high clean accuracy by greatly
sacrificing robustness. That means it is hard to obtain sufficient
robustness but maintain high clean accuracy in the joint training
framework. Our Generalist attains excellent clean accuracy while
staying competitively robust. The improvement of Generalist is
notable since we only use the naive cross-entropy loss with negligible computational overhead and even without increasing the model
size.

tive techniques is adversarial training (AT) [20, 21, 37, 38],
which dynamically injects perturbed examples that deceive
the current model but preserve the right label into the training set. Adversarial training has been demonstrated to be
the most effective method to improve adversarially robust
generalization [2, 39].
Despite these successes, such attempts of adversarial
training have found a tradeoff between natural and robust
accuracy, i.e., there exists an undesirable increase in the error on unperturbed images when the error on the worst-case
perturbed images decreases, as illustrated in Figure 1. Prior
works [30, 43] even argue that natural and robust accuracy
are fundamentally at odds, which indicates that a robust classifier can be achieved only when compromising the natural
generalization. However, the following works found that

20554

