This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DisCo-CLIP: A Distributed Contrastive Loss
for Memory Efficient CLIP Training
Yihao Chen, Xianbiao Qi, Jianan Wang, Lei Zhang*
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA), Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
{chenyihao, qixianbiao, wangjianan, leizhang}@idea.edu.cn
Abstract
We propose DisCo-CLIP, a distributed memory-efficient
CLIP training approach, to reduce the memory consumption of contrastive loss when training contrastive learning
models. Our approach decomposes the contrastive loss
and its gradient computation into two parts, one to calculate the intra-GPU gradients and the other to compute
the inter-GPU gradients. According to our decomposition,
only the intra-GPU gradients are computed on the current GPU, while the inter-GPU gradients are collected via
all reduce from other GPUs instead of being repeatedly
computed on every GPU. In this way, we can reduce the
GPU memory consumption of contrastive loss computation
2
from O(B 2 ) to O( BN ), where B and N are the batch size
and the number of GPUs used for training. Such a distributed solution is mathematically equivalent to the original non-distributed contrastive loss computation, without
sacrificing any computation accuracy. It is particularly efficient for large-batch CLIP training. For instance, DisCoCLIP can enable contrastive training of a ViT-B/32 model
with a batch size of 32K or 196K using 8 or 64 A100 40GB
GPUs, compared with the original CLIP solution which requires 128 A100 40GB GPUs to train a ViT-B/32 model with
a batch size of 32K.

1. Introduction
Vision-language representation learning from massive
image-text pairs has recently attracted tremendous attention for its great potential in many applications such as
zero-shot classification and text-image retrieval. Representative works include CLIP [27], ALIGN [17], Florence [47],
CoCa [46], and BASIC [26], which all leverage hundreds
of millions or even billions of image-text pairs collected
from the Web to learn a semantic-rich and language-aligned
visual representation [22]. As the web-collected data inevitably contain noises, CLIP [27] for the first time applies
* Corresponding author.

contrastive learning on 400M image-text pairs, which implies a weak but more proper assumption about the data:
the relevance between paired image and text is greater than
that between unpaired image and text. For its demonstrated
performance in CLIP, contrastive learning has been widely
adopted in subsequent works. Accordingly, several imagetext data sets with increasingly larger scales have also been
developed and made publicly available, such as Conceptual 12M [3], YFCC 100M [38], WIT 37.6M [37], LAION400M [35], and LAION-5B [34].
The goal of contrastive learning in CLIP is to learn an
alignment between image and text via two encoders. That
is, it encourages paired image and text (called a positive
pair) to be similar and meanwhile enforces unpaired image and text (called a negative pair) to be dissimilar. For
any positive image-text pair, as there are normally unlimited number (up to the total number of images or texts in
a data set) of negative image-text pairs, it is crucial to include a sufficiently large number of negative pairs in a contrastive loss to make the representation learning effective,
as validated in all related works such as CLIP [27], Florence [47], OpenCLIP [16], and BASIC [26]. Specifically,
BASIC shows that larger batch size, plus larger data set and
larger model, theoretically lead to a better generalization
performance.
However, a fundamental technical challenge in training
a CLIP-like model is how to enlarge its batch size under
the constraint of limited GPU memory. For instance, when
the batch size is 65,536, the similarity matrix for all imagetext pairs in the batch will cost about 16GB using Float32.
As the backbone part also consumes a significant portion
of GPU memory, especially for large backbones such as
ViT-Large or ViT-Huge [9], scaling up batch size presents
a great challenge, usually requiring hundreds of V100 or
A100 GPUs [16, 27, 47], which are inaccessible for most
research scientists.
In this work, we develop a distributed solution called
DisCo-CLIP for constrastive loss computation, which can
save a large amount of memory for contrastive loss and
make CLIP training more memory-efficient. Our method

22648

