This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncovering the Missing Pattern:
Unified Framework Towards Trajectory Imputation and Prediction
Yi Xu1,2,*

Armin Bazarjani2,3 Hyung-gun Chi2,4 Chiho Choi2,5 Yun Fu1
Northeastern University 2 Honda Research Institute, USA
3
University of Southern California 4 Purdue University 5 Samsung Semiconductor US
1

xu.yi@northeastern.edu, bazarjan@usc.edu, hgchi@purdue.edu
chiho1.choi@samsung.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Trajectory prediction is a crucial undertaking in understanding entity movement or human behavior from observed
sequences. However, current methods often assume that
the observed sequences are complete while ignoring the
potential for missing values caused by object occlusion,
scope limitation, sensor failure, etc. This limitation inevitably hinders the accuracy of trajectory prediction. To
address this issue, our paper presents a unified framework,
the Graph-based Conditional Variational Recurrent Neural
Network (GC-VRNN), which can perform trajectory imputation and prediction simultaneously. Specifically, we introduce a novel Multi-Space Graph Neural Network (MSGNN) that can extract spatial features from incomplete observations and leverage missing patterns. Additionally, we
employ a Conditional VRNN with a specifically designed
Temporal Decay (TD) module to capture temporal dependencies and temporal missing patterns in incomplete trajectories. The inclusion of the TD module allows for valuable
information to be conveyed through the temporal flow. We
also curate and benchmark three practical datasets for the
joint problem of trajectory imputation and prediction. Extensive experiments verify the exceptional performance of
our proposed method. As far as we know, this is the first
work to address the lack of benchmarks and techniques for
trajectory imputation and prediction in a unified manner.

1. Introduction
Modeling and predicting future trajectories play an indispensable role in various applications, i.e., autonomous
driving [23, 25, 65], motion capture [57, 59], behavior understanding [20, 38], etc. However, accurately predicting
movement patterns is challenging due to their complex and
* Work done during Yi’s internship at Honda Research Institute, under
Chiho Choi’s supervision.

𝑻𝑻 = 𝒕𝒕𝟎𝟎

𝑻𝑻 = 𝒕𝒕𝟐𝟐

𝑻𝑻 = 𝒕𝒕𝟏𝟏

𝑻𝑻

𝒕𝒕𝟎𝟎

𝒕𝒕𝟏𝟏

𝒕𝒕𝟐𝟐

𝒕𝒕𝒑𝒑

Figure 1. A typical example of incomplete observed trajectory.
The black car (ego-vehicle) is waiting at the intersection at time
step t0 , and the yellow car is moving. At time step t1 , the red
car is occluded by the yellow car, and the blue car appears. The
bottom right figure indicates the “visibility” of four cars, where
dark means visible and light color means invisible.

subtle nature. Despite significant attention and numerous
proposed solutions [5, 34, 62, 67–69] to the trajectory prediction problem, existing methods often assume that agent
observations are entirely complete, which is too strong an
assumption to satisfy in practice.
For example, in sports games such as football or soccer,
not all players are always visible in the live view due to the
limitation of the camera view. In addition, the live camera
always tracks and moves along the ball, resulting in some
players appearing and disappearing throughout the view,
depending on their relative locations to the ball. Fig. 2 illustrates this common concept. Similar situations also arise in
autonomous driving where occlusion or sensor failure can
cause missing data. As illustrated in Fig. 1, at time step

9632

