This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Role of Transients in Two-Bounce Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
Siddharth Somasundaram1 Akshat Dave2 Connor Henley1
Ashok Veeraraghavan2 Ramesh Raskar1
1
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Rice University
{sidsoma,co24401,raskar}@mit.edu, {akshat,vashok}@rice.edu

Backprojection from
intensity only

Hidden Target

Streets

Corridors

Occluded object

Occluder

Multiplexed
Illumination

Backprojection from
transients
(60 ps resolution)

10 cm

SPAD
Tunnels

(a) Two-Bounce NLOS

Forests

(b) Application Settings

(c) Experimental Setup

(d) Reconstruction with 10 Measurements

Figure 1. Two-bounce Transient NLOS Imaging. (a) We propose using two-bounce transients for NLOS imaging. Two-bounce signals
capture information about the shadows in a scene, and use of transient information can reduce the number of measurements needed for
reconstruction by using multiplexed illumination. (b) Our work can be applicable in many scenarios, such as tunnels, corridors, streets,
and forests. (c)-(d) We experimentally validate the use of two-bounce transients on real objects. We show that time-of-flight information
enables more robust reconstructions of occluded objects while using fewer measurements.

Abstract
The goal of non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging is to image
objects occluded from the camera’s field of view using multiply scattered light. Recent works have demonstrated the
feasibility of two-bounce (2B) NLOS imaging by scanning
a laser and measuring cast shadows of occluded objects in
scenes with two relay surfaces. In this work, we study the
role of time-of-flight (ToF) measurements, i.e. transients, in
2B-NLOS under multiplexed illumination. Specifically, we
study how ToF information can reduce the number of measurements and spatial resolution needed for shape reconstruction. We present our findings with respect to tradeoffs in (1) temporal resolution, (2) spatial resolution, and
(3) number of image captures by studying SNR and recoverability as functions of system parameters. This leads to
a formal definition of the mathematical constraints for 2B
lidar. We believe that our work lays an analytical groundwork for design of future NLOS imaging systems, especially
as ToF sensors become increasingly ubiquitous.

1. Introduction
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging aims to reconstruct
objects occluded from direct line of sight and has the potential to be transformative in numerous applications across
autonomous driving, search and rescue, and non-invasive
medical imaging [24]. The key approach is to measure light
that has undergone multiple surface scattering events and
computationally invert these measurements to estimate hidden geometries. Recent work used two-bounce light, as
shown in Fig. 2a, to reconstruct high quality shapes behind
occluders [15]. The key idea is that two-bounce light captures information about the shadows of the occluded object.
By scanning the laser source at different points l on a relay
surface and measuring multiple shadow images, it is possible to reconstruct the hidden object by computing the visual
hull [20] of the measured shadows.
Benefits of Two-Bounce Two-bounce (2B) light can be
captured using two relay surfaces on opposite sides of the
hidden scene (Fig. 1a). This can occur in a variety of realworld settings such as tunnels, hallways, streets, and clut-

9192

