This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Humans as Light Bulbs: 3D Human Reconstruction from Thermal Reflection
Ruoshi Liu and Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
thermal.cs.columbia.edu
Camera Field of View

RGB Image

Depth Image

Scene (Unobserved)

Thermal Image

Reconstruction

Figure 1. We introduce a method to reconstruct the 3D position and pose of a person from their thermal reflections in everyday objects
with non-planar surfaces. Given an RGBD image and a thermal image in the middle of the figure, our method is able to recover the 3D
mesh of the person (blue) as well as the objects (pink), even though they are not within the field of view of the camera system. Our system
never sees the scene on the left, which is only shown for visualization purposes.

Abstract
The relatively hot temperature of the human body causes
people to turn into long-wave infrared light sources. Since
this emitted light has a larger wavelength than visible light,
many surfaces in typical scenes act as infrared mirrors with
strong specular reflections. We exploit the thermal reflections of a person onto objects in order to locate their position and reconstruct their pose, even if they are not visible
to a normal camera. We propose an analysis-by-synthesis
framework that jointly models the objects, people, and their
thermal reflections, which combines generative models with
differentiable rendering of reflections. Quantitative and
qualitative experiments show our approach works in highly
challenging cases, such as with curved mirrors or when the
person is completely unseen by a normal camera.

1. Introduction
One of the major goals of the computer vision community is to locate people and reconstruct their poses in everyday environments. What makes thermal cameras particularly interesting for this task is the fact that humans are often
the hottest objects in indoor environments, thus becoming
infrared light sources. Humans have a relatively stable body
temperature of 37 degrees Celcius, which according to the
Stefan-Boltzmann law, turns people into a light source with
constant brightness under long-wave infrared (LWIR). This
makes LWIR images a robust source of signals of human
activities under many different light and camera conditions.
Since infrared light on the LWIR spectrum has a wavelength that is much longer than visible light (8µm-14µm vs.
0.38µm-0.7µm), the objects in typical scenes look qualitatively very different from human vision. Many surfaces of

12531

