This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlendFields: Few-Shot Example-Driven Facial Modeling
Kacper Kania1,2,† Stephan J. Garbin3
Kwang Moo Yi2 Julien Valentin3

Andrea Tagliasacchi4,5,‡ Virginia Estellers3
Tomasz Trzciński1,6,7 Marek Kowalski3

Ours

VolTeMorph [15]

Warsaw University of Technology1 University of British Columbia2 Microsoft3
Simon Fraser University4 Google Brain5 IDEAS NCBR6 Tooploox7

Rendered training expressions

Novel expression

Figure 1. Teaser – Given five multi-view frames of different expressions, our approach generates a model capable of capturing the
fine-grained details of a novel expression beyond the resolution of the underlying face model [15] (top right corner). This is achieved
by blending the radiance fields computed for individual expressions, where the blending coefficients are modulated accordingly to local
volumetric changes. These volumetric changes are measured as the difference in the tetrahedral volume of a mesh that deforms with the
expression ( increase, decrease, and no change in volume). Such an approach allows BlendFields to render sharp, expression-dependent
details of the face without increasing the resolution of the mesh (bottom right corner).

Abstract
Generating faithful visualizations of human faces requires capturing both coarse and fine-level details of the
face geometry and appearance. Existing methods are either
data-driven, requiring an extensive corpus of data not publicly accessible to the research community, or fail to capture fine details because they rely on geometric face models that cannot represent fine-grained details in texture with
a mesh discretization and linear deformation designed to
model only a coarse face geometry. We introduce a method
that bridges this gap by drawing inspiration from traditional computer graphics techniques. Unseen expressions
† Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Cambridge.
‡ Work done at Simon Fraser University.

are modeled by blending appearance from a sparse set of
extreme poses. This blending is performed by measuring
local volumetric changes in those expressions and locally
reproducing their appearance whenever a similar expression is performed at test time. We show that our method
generalizes to unseen expressions, adding fine-grained effects on top of smooth volumetric deformations of a face,
and demonstrate how it generalizes beyond faces.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural rendering of 3D scenes [53]
offer 3D reconstructions of unprecedented quality [36] with
an ever-increasing degree of control [23, 29]. Human
faces are of particular interest to the research commu-

404

