This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Out-of-distribution (OOD) Detection:
Masked Image Modeling is All You Need
Jingyao Li1

Pengguang Chen2

Zexin He1

Shaozuo Yu1

Shu Liu2

Jiaya Jia1,2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong1 SmartMore2
jingyao.li@link.cuhk.edu.hk leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The core of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is to
learn the in-distribution (ID) representation, which is distinguishable from OOD samples. Previous work applied
recognition-based methods to learn the ID features, which
tend to learn shortcuts instead of comprehensive representations. In this work, we find surprisingly that simply
using reconstruction-based methods could boost the performance of OOD detection significantly. We deeply explore the main contributors of OOD detection and find that
reconstruction-based pretext tasks have the potential to provide a generally applicable and efficacious prior, which
benefits the model in learning intrinsic data distributions
of the ID dataset. Specifically, we take Masked Image Modeling as a pretext task for our OOD detection framework
(MOOD). Without bells and whistles, MOOD outperforms
previous SOTA of one-class OOD detection by 5.7%, multiclass OOD detection by 3.0%, and near-distribution OOD
detection by 2.1%. It even defeats the 10-shot-per-class outlier exposure OOD detection, although we do not include
any OOD samples for our detection. Codes are available at
https://github.com/lijingyao20010602/MOOD.

1. Introduction
A reliable visual recognition system not only provides correct predictions on known context (also known
as in-distribution data) but also detects unknown out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples and rejects (or transfers) them
to human intervention for safe handling. This motivates applications of outlier detectors before feeding input to the
downstream networks, which is the main task of OOD detection, also referred to as novelty or anomaly detection.
OOD detection is the task of identifying whether a test sample is drawn far from the in-distribution (ID) data or not. It
is at the cornerstone of various safety-critical applications,
including medical diagnosis [5], fraud detection [45], autonomous driving [14], etc.

100
96
92
88
100
99
98
97
96

(a) One-class
94.9
89.2
CSI*
ours
(c) Near-Distribution

(b) Multi-class

100

97.6

98
96
94
100

94.6
SSD+* ours
(d) Few-shot Outlier Exposure

98.3
96.2
R50+ViT* ours

99.3
99

99.4

99.0
R50+ViT* R50+ViT* ours
(1-shot) (10-shot) (0-shot)

Figure 1. Performance of MOOD compared with current SOTA
(indicated by ‘*’) on four OOD detection tasks: (a) one-class OOD
detection; (b) multi-class detection; (c) near-distribution detection;
and (d) few-shot outlier exposure OOD detection.

Many previous OOD detection approaches depend on
outlier exposure [15, 53] to improve the performance of
OOD detection, which turns OOD detection into a simple
binary classification problem. We claim that the core of
OOD detection is, instead, to learn the effective ID representation to discover OOD samples without any known outlier exposure.
In this paper, we first present our surprising finding – that
is, simply using reconstruction-based methods can notably
boost the performance on various OOD detection tasks.
Our pioneer work along this line even outperforms previous few-shot outlier exposure OOD detection, albeit we do
not include any OOD samples.
Existing methods perform contrastive learning [53,58] or
pretrain classification on a large dataset [15] to detect OOD
samples. The former methods classify images according to
the pseudo labels while the latter classifies images based on
ground truth, whose core tasks are both to fulfill the classification target. However, research on backdoor attack [50,51]
shows that when learning is represented by classifying data,
networks tend to take a shortcut to classify images.

11578

