This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re2 TAL: Rewiring Pretrained Video Backbones for
Reversible Temporal Action Localization

1

Chen Zhao1 Shuming Liu1 Karttikeya Mangalam2 Bernard Ghanem1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia 2 UC Berkeley, US
{chen.zhao, shuming.liu, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

mangalam@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Temporal action localization (TAL) requires long-form
reasoning to predict actions of various durations and complex content. Given limited GPU memory, training TAL end
to end (i.e., from videos to predictions) on long videos is
a significant challenge. Most methods can only train on
pre-extracted features without optimizing them for the localization problem, consequently limiting localization performance. In this work, to extend the potential in TAL networks, we propose a novel end-to-end method Re2 TAL,
which rewires pretrained video backbones for reversible
TAL. Re2 TAL builds a backbone with reversible modules,
where the input can be recovered from the output such
that the bulky intermediate activations can be cleared from
memory during training. Instead of designing one single
type of reversible module, we propose a network rewiring
mechanism, to transform any module with a residual connection to a reversible module without changing any parameters. This provides two benefits: (1) a large variety of reversible networks are easily obtained from existing and even future model designs, and (2) the reversible
models require much less training effort as they reuse the
pre-trained parameters of their original non-reversible versions. Re2 TAL, only using the RGB modality, reaches
37.01% average mAP on ActivityNet-v1.3, a new state-ofthe-art record, and mAP 64.9% at tIoU=0.5 on THUMOS14, outperforming all other RGB-only methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/coolbay/Re2TAL.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) [36,53,73] is a fundamental problem of practical importance in video understanding. It aims to bound semantic actions within start
and end timestamps. Localizing such video segments is
very useful for a variety of tasks such as video-language
grounding [23, 56], moment retrieval [9, 21], video captioning [30, 50]. Since video actions have a large variety of

Figure 1. Illustration of TAL network activations in training. Top: non-reversible network stores activations of all layers
in memory. Bottom: reversible network only needs to store the
activations of inter-stage downsampling layers. Backbone activations dominate memory occupation, compared to Localizer.

temporal durations and content, to produce high-fidelity localization, TAL approaches need to learn from a long temporal scope of the video, which contains a large number of
frames. To accommodate all these frames along with their
network activations in GPU memory is extremely challenging, given the current GPU memory size (e.g. the commodity GPU GTX1080Ti only has 11GB). Often, it is impossible to train one video sequence on a GPU without substantially downgrading the video spatial/temporal resolutions.
To circumvent the GPU-memory bottleneck, most TAL
methods deal with videos in two isolated steps (e.g. [4, 67,
69, 71–73]). First is a snippet-level feature extraction step,
which simply extracts snippet representations using a pretrained video network (backbone) in inference mode. The
backbone is usually a large neural network trained for an
auxiliary task on a large dataset of trimmed video clips
(e.g., action recognition on Kinetics-400 [28]). The second
step trains a localizer on the pre-extracted features. In this
way, only the activations of the TAL head need to be stored
in memory, which is tiny compared to those of the backbone (see the illustration of the activation contrast between
backbone and localizer in Fig. 1). However, this two-step
strategy comes at a steep price. The pre-extracted features
can suffer from domain shift from the auxiliary pre-training

10637

