This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RGBD2: Generative Scene Synthesis via Incremental
View Inpainting using RGBD Diffusion Models
Jiabao Lei1 , Jiapeng Tang2 , Kui Jia1,3,†
1
South China University of Technology
2
Technical University of Munich, 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
Abstract
We address the challenge of recovering an underlying
scene geometry and colors from a sparse set of RGBD
view observations. In this work, we present a new solution
termed RGBD2 that sequentially generates novel RGBD
views along a camera trajectory, and the scene geometry
is simply the fusion result of these views. More speciﬁcally,
we maintain an intermediate surface mesh used for rendering new RGBD views, which subsequently becomes complete by an inpainting network; each rendered RGBD view
is later back-projected as a partial surface and is supplemented into the intermediate mesh. The use of intermediate
mesh and camera projection helps solve the tough problem
of multi-view inconsistency. We practically implement the
RGBD inpainting network as a versatile RGBD diffusion
model, which is previously used for 2D generative modeling; we make a modiﬁcation to its reverse diffusion process
to enable our use. We evaluate our approach on the task
of 3D scene synthesis from sparse RGBD inputs; extensive
experiments on the ScanNet dataset demonstrate the superiority of our approach over existing ones. Project page:
https://jblei.site/proj/rgbd-diffusion.

‫ݐ‬ൌͲ

‫ݐ‬ൌͳ

‫ݐ‬ൌʹ

…
Final Result
Figure 1. Illustration of Our Generative Scene Synthesis. We
incrementally reconstruct the scene geometry by inpainting RGBD
views as the camera moves in the scene.
‫ݐ‬ൌ͵

potential in this regard, yet they are not exempt from limitations. NeRFs are designed to reconstruct complete scenes
by ﬁtting multi-view images, and they cannot generate or
infer missing parts when the input is inevitably incomplete
or missing. While recently some studies [3,5,8,56,63] have
attempted to equip NeRFs with generative and extrapolation capabilities, this functionality relies on a comparatively
short representation with limited elements (e.g. typically,
the length of a global latent code is much shorter than that of
an image: (F = 512)  (H ×W = 128×128 = 16, 384))
that signiﬁcantly constrains their capacity to accurately capture ﬁne-grained details in the observed data. Consequently,
the effectiveness of these methods has only been established
for certain categories of canonical objects, such as faces or
cars [8, 63], or relatively small toy scenes [5].
We introduce a novel task of generative scene synthesis
from sparse RGBD views, which involves learning across
multiple scenes to later enable scene synthesis from a sparse
set of multi-view RGBD images. This task presents a challenging setting wherein a desired solution should simultaneously (1) preserve observed regions, hallucinate missing
parts of the scene, (2) eliminate additional computational
costs during inference for each individual test scene, (3) en-

1. Introduction
Scene synthesis is an essential requirement for many
practical applications. The resulting scene representation
can be readily utilized in diverse ﬁelds, such as virtual reality, augmented reality, computer graphics, and game development. Nevertheless, conventional approaches to scene
synthesis usually involve reconstructing scenes (e.g., indoor
scenes with varying sizes) by ﬁtting given observations,
such as multi-view images or point clouds. The increasing prevalence of RGB/RGBD scanning devices has established multi-view data as a favored input modality, driving
and promoting technical advancements in the realm of scene
reconstruction from multi-view images.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [42] have demonstrated
† Correspondence to Kui Jia: <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>.

8422

