This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DisCoScene: Spatially Disentangled Generative Radiance Fields
for Controllable 3D-aware Scene Synthesis
Yinghao Xu1,2 * Menglei Chai2† Zifan Shi3 Sida Peng4
Ivan Skorokhodov5,2∗ Aliaksandr Siarohin2 Ceyuan Yang1 Yujun Shen1
Hsin-Ying Lee2 Bolei Zhou6 Sergey Tulyakov2
1

CUHK

2

Snap Inc.

3

Abstract
Existing 3D-aware image synthesis approaches mainly
focus on generating a single canonical object and show
limited capacity in composing a complex scene containing
a variety of objects. This work presents DisCoScene: a 3Daware generative model for high-quality and controllable
scene synthesis. The key ingredient of our method is a
very abstract object-level representation (i.e., 3D bounding
boxes without semantic annotation) as the scene layout
prior, which is simple to obtain, general to describe various
scene contents, and yet informative to disentangle objects
and background. Moreover, it serves as an intuitive user
control for scene editing. Based on such a prior, the
proposed model spatially disentangles the whole scene into
object-centric generative radiance fields by learning on
only 2D images with the global-local discrimination. Our
model obtains the generation fidelity and editing flexibility
of individual objects while being able to efficiently compose
objects and the background into a complete scene. We
demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on many scene
datasets, including the challenging Waymo outdoor dataset.
Project page can be found here.

1. Introduction
3D-consistent image synthesis from single-view 2D data
has become a trendy topic in generative modeling. Recent
approaches like GRAF [40] and Pi-GAN [5] introduce
3D inductive bias by taking neural radiance fields [1,
28, 29, 36, 38] as the underlying representation, gaining
the capability of geometry modeling and explicit camera
control. Despite their success in synthesizing individual
objects (e.g., faces, cats, cars), they struggle on scene
images that contain multiple objects with non-trivial layouts
and complex backgrounds. The varying quantity and large
* Work partially done during internships at Snap Inc.
† Corresponding author.

4

HKUST

ZJU

5

KAUST

6

UCLA

diversity of objects, along with the intricate spatial arrangement and mutual occlusions, bring enormous challenges,
which exceed the capacity of the object-level generative
models [4, 13, 15, 33, 45, 46, 60].
Recent efforts have been made towards 3D-aware scene
synthesis. Despite the encouraging progress, there are still
fundamental drawbacks. For example, Generative Scene
Networks (GSN) [8] achieve large-scale scene synthesis by
representing the scene as a grid of local radiance fields and
training on 2D observations from continuous camera paths.
However, object-level editing is not feasible due to spatial
entanglement and the lack of explicit object definition. On
the contrary, GIRAFFE [32] explicitly composites objectcentric radiance fields [16, 34, 56, 63] to support objectlevel control. Yet, it works poorly on challenging datasets
containing multiple objects and complex backgrounds due
to the absence of proper spatial priors.
To achieve high-quality and controllable scene synthesis,
the scene representation stands out as one critical design
focus. A well-structured scene representation can scale
up the generation capability and tackle the aforementioned
challenges. Imagine, given an empty apartment and a
furniture catalog, what does it take for a person to arrange
the space? Would people prefer to walk around and throw
things here and there, or instead figure out an overall
layout and then attend to each location for the detailed
selection? Obviously, a layout describing the arrangement
of each furniture in the space substantially eases the scene
composition process [17, 26, 58]. From this vantage point,
here comes our primary motivation — an abstract objectoriented scene representation, namely a layout prior, could
facilitate learning from challenging 2D data as a lightweight
supervision signal during training and allow user interaction
during inference. More specifically, to make such a prior
easy to obtain and generalizable across different scenes, we
define it as a set of object bounding boxes without semantic
annotation, which describes the spatial composition of objects in the scene and supports intuitive object-level editing.

4402

