This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OPE-SR: Orthogonal Position Encoding for Designing a Parameter-free
Upsampling Module in Arbitrary-scale Image Super-Resolution
Gaochao Song1 Qian Sun2 * Luo Zhang3 Ran Su1 Jianfeng Shi2 Ying He3
1
Tianjin University 2 Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
3
Nanyang Technological University
gaochaosong 21@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Arbitrary-scale image super-resolution (SR) is often
tackled using the implicit neural representation (INR) approach, which relies on a position encoding scheme to improve its representation ability. In this paper, we introduce
orthogonal position encoding (OPE), an extension of position encoding, and an OPE-Upscale module to replace
the INR-based upsampling module for arbitrary-scale image super-resolution. Our OPE-Upscale module takes 2D
coordinates and latent code as inputs, just like INR, but
does not require any training parameters. This parameterfree feature allows the OPE-Upscale module to directly
perform linear combination operations, resulting in continuous image reconstruction and achieving arbitrary-scale
image reconstruction. As a concise SR framework, our
method is computationally efficient and consumes less memory than state-of-the-art methods, as confirmed by extensive experiments and evaluations. In addition, our method
achieves comparable results with state-of-the-art methods
in arbitrary-scale image super-resolution. Lastly, we show
that OPE corresponds to a set of orthogonal basis, validating our design principle. 1

1. Introduction
Photographs are composed of discrete pixels of varying precision due to the limitations of sampling frequency,
which breaks the continuous visual world into discrete
parts. The single image super-resolution (SISR) task aims
to restore the original continuous world in the image as
much as possible. In an arbitrary-scale SR task, one often reconstructs the continuous representation of a lowresolution image and then adjusts the resolution of the target
image as needed. The recent rise of implicit neural representation (INR) in 3D vision has enabled the representation
* Corresponding author.
1 Project page: https://github.com/gaochao-s/ope-sr

sunqian@nuist.edu.cn

of complex 3D objects and scenes in a continuous manner [14,19,41,42,44,45,47,49,57,58], which also opens up
possibilities for continuous image and arbitrary-scale image
super-resolution [5, 18, 32, 72].
Existing methods for arbitrary-scale SR typically use a
post-upsampling framework [70]. In this approach, lowresolution (LR) images first pass through a deep CNN
network (encoder) without improving the resolution, and
then pass through an INR-based upsampling module (decoder) with a specified target resolution to reconstruct highresolution (HR) images. The decoder establishes a mapping
from feature maps (the output of encoder) to target image
pixels using a pre-assigned grid partitioning and achieves
arbitrary-scale with the density of the grid in Cartesian coordinate system. However, the INR approach has a defect of
learning low-frequency information, also known as spectral
bias [50]. To address this issue, sinusoidal positional encoding is introduced to embed input coordinates to higher
dimensions and enable the network to learn high-frequency
details. This inspired recent works on arbitrary-scale SR to
further improve the representation ability [32, 72].
Despite its effectiveness in arbitrary-scale SR, the INRbased upsampling module increases the complexity of the
entire SR framework as two different networks are jointly
trained. Additionally, as a black-box model, it represents
a continuous image with a strong dependency on both the
feature map and the decoder (e.g., MLP). However, its representation ability decreases after flipping the feature map,
a phenomenon known as flipping consistency decline. As
shown in Fig. 1, flipping the feature map horizontally before the upsampling module of LIIF results in a blurred target image that does not have the expected flip transformation. This decline could be due to limitations of the MLP in
learning the symmetry feature of the image.
MLP is a universal function approximator [17], which
tries to fit a mapping function from feature map to the continuous image, therefore, it is reasonable to assume that
such process could be solved by an analytical solution. In
this paper, we re-examine position encoding from the per-

10009

