This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReVISE: Self-Supervised Speech Resynthesis with Visual Input
for Universal and Generalized Speech Regeneration
Wei-Ning Hsu1 , Tal Remez1 , Bowen Shi1,3 , Jacob Donley2 , Yossi Adi1,4
1
FAIR, Meta AI Research 2 Meta Reality Labs Research
3
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 4 The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
{wnhsu,talr,bshi,jdonley,adiyoss}@meta.com

Abstract
Prior works on improving speech quality with visual input typically study each type of auditory distortion separately (e.g., separation, inpainting, video-to-speech) and
present tailored algorithms. This paper proposes to unify
these subjects and study Generalized Speech Regeneration, where the goal is not to reconstruct the exact reference clean signal, but to focus on improving certain aspects of speech while not necessarily preserving the rest
such as voice. In particular, this paper concerns intelligibility, quality, and video synchronization. We cast the
problem as audio-visual speech resynthesis, which is composed of two steps: pseudo audio-visual speech recognition
(P-AVSR) and pseudo text-to-speech synthesis (P-TTS). PAVSR and P-TTS are connected by discrete units derived
from a self-supervised speech model. Moreover, we utilize
self-supervised audio-visual speech model to initialize PAVSR. The proposed model is coined ReVISE. ReVISE is
the first high-quality model for in-the-wild video-to-speech
synthesis and achieves superior performance on all LRS3
audio-visual regeneration tasks with a single model. To
demonstrates its applicability in the real world, ReVISE
is also evaluated on EasyCom, an audio-visual benchmark
collected under challenging acoustic conditions with only
1.6 hours of training data. Similarly, ReVISE greatly suppresses noise and improves quality. Project page: https:
//wnhsu.github.io/ReVISE/.

1. Introduction
Unlike anechoic studio recordings, speech in-the-wild
is rarely clean: outdoor recordings are corrupted with all
sorts of natural and non-natural sounds like wind and traffic noise [6]. Speech recorded indoor often contains reverberation, mechanical noise, and overlapping speech from
non-target speakers [54]. On top of those, recording devices and network may also introduce other types of dis-

(a) Speech inpainting

(c) Speech separation

Masked speech

Overlapping speech

(b) Video-to-speech

(d) Speech denoising

No speech

∅

Noisy speech

Figure 1. Illustration of AVSE with various distortion.

tortion, such as amplitude clipping, band-pass filtering, and
package loss [1]. Distortion makes it hard for both human
and machines to comprehend speech [10, 31]. Improving
the quality and the intelligibility of corrupted speech is essential for assistive listening and robust speech processing.
Generating clean speech signal based on its corrupted version is herein referred to as speech enhancement.
In speech enhancement, one line of research uses visual speech to provide auxiliary information [14, 17, 19,
57], which is known as audio-visual speech enhancement.
Audio-visual speech (e.g., talking-head videos) can be seen
as a multimodal view of the speech. Since visual modality
is immune to acoustic noise, combining both views enables
more robust estimation of shared generating factors such as
textual content. Meanwhile, despite sharing the same goal
of recovering corrupted speech, prior work often treats enhancement from each type of distortion as a separate problem: speech denoising and dereverberation addresses additive and convolutive non-speech noises [17], speech separation focuses on speech noises that exhibit similar characteristics to the target speech [19], speech inpainting aims to recover dropped audio frames [38], and video-to-speech synthesis is the extreme case of inpainting where all the frames
are dropped [15, 36]. As a result, algorithms designed for
one type of distortion may not be effective for another.
In this paper, we advocate a more holistic approach
to audio-visual speech enhancement, where an algorithm
18795

