This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning a Simple Low-light Image Enhancer from Paired Low-light Instances
Zhenqi Fu1 , Yan Yang2 , Xiaotong Tu1 ,* Yue Huang1 , Xinghao Ding1 , Kai-Kuang Ma3
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
fuzhenqi@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yangyanyy@hdu.edu.cn,
{xttu, yhuang2010, dxh}@xmu.edu.cn, ekkma@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Solution:

Priors

Adaptability

Low-light Image Enhancement (LIE) aims at improving
contrast and restoring details for images captured in lowlight conditions. Most of the previous LIE algorithms adjust illumination using a single input image with several
handcrafted priors. Those solutions, however, often fail in
revealing image details due to the limited information in
a single image and the poor adaptability of handcrafted
priors. To this end, we propose PairLIE, an unsupervised
approach that learns adaptive priors from low-light image pairs. First, the network is expected to generate the
same clean images as the two inputs share the same image content. To achieve this, we impose the network with
the Retinex theory and make the two reflectance components consistent. Second, to assist the Retinex decomposition, we propose to remove inappropriate features in the
raw image with a simple self-supervised mechanism. Extensive experiments on public datasets show that the proposed PairLIE achieves comparable performance against
the state-of-the-art approaches with a simpler network and
fewer handcrafted priors. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/zhenqifu/PairLIE.

1. Introduction
Images captured under low-light environments always
suffer from multiple distortions, such as low contrast, poor
visibility, and sensor noise. Those low-light images are unsatisfactory for information transmission because they incur
challenges in human visualization and subsequent computer
vision tasks [25]. To correct contrast, uncover textures, and
remove sensor noise, great efforts have been made in developing Low-light Image Enhancement (LIE) algorithms in
the past decades [1, 5, 6, 8, 28, 35].
* Corresponding author.

Network

Losses

Outputs

(a)

Single Low-light Image

Solution:

Priors

Adaptability
Network
Paired Low-light Images

Outputs

Losses

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between the previous solution (a) and the
proposed method (b) from the aspect of Retinex theory. The key
idea of our method is to learn adaptive priors from low-light image
pairs. As a result, our solution needs fewer handcrafted priors and
the network is more robust. Note that image pairs are only used in
the training phase.

Histogram-based and Retinex-based approaches are two
well-known LIE techniques. The former enhances the contrast of an image by redistributing the luminous intensity on
the histogram [3, 14]. The latter decomposes an observed
image I into illumination L and reflectance R via I = L◦R,
where ◦ denotes the element-wise multiplication [6, 13, 17].
Specifically, the reflectance component R is assumed to be
consistent under different light conditions because R represents the physical properties of the objects. As the Retinex
theory can well model color perceptions of human vision,
Retinex-based methods have attracted relatively more attention in the LIE community.
Recent years have witnessed great success in developing
learning-based LIE algorithms. Among these approaches,
most solutions rely on low-light and normal-light image

22252

