This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReasonNet: End-to-End Driving with Temporal and Global Reasoning
Hao Shao1
Letian Wang2
Ruobing Chen1
Steven L. Waslander2 Hongsheng Li3 Yu Liu1,4 *
1

SenseTime Research 2 University of Toronto 3 CUHK MMLab
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Abstract
The large-scale deployment of autonomous vehicles is
yet to come, and one of the major remaining challenges
lies in urban dense traffic scenarios. In such cases, it
remains challenging to predict the future evolution of the
scene and future behaviors of objects, and to deal with rare
adverse events such as the sudden appearance of occluded
objects. In this paper, we present ReasonNet, a novel endto-end driving framework that extensively exploits both temporal and global information of the driving scene. By reasoning on the temporal behavior of objects, our method
can effectively process the interactions and relationships
among features in different frames. Reasoning about the
global information of the scene can also improve overall
perception performance and benefit the detection of adverse
events, especially the anticipation of potential danger from
occluded objects. For comprehensive evaluation on occlusion events, we also release publicly a driving simulation
benchmark DriveOcclusionSim consisting of diverse occlusion events. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple CARLA benchmarks, where our model outperforms all
prior methods, ranking first on the sensor track of the public
CARLA Leaderboard [53].

1. Introduction
Despite significant recent progress in the field of autonomous driving, truly large-scale deployment of autonomous vehicles (AVs) on public roads has yet to be
established. The majority of the remaining issues lie in
navigating dense urban traffic scenes, where a large number of different dynamic objects (e.g. vehicles, bicycles,
pedestrians), complex road geometries and road user interactions are involved. In such circumstances, currently deployed or tested solutions could make incorrect or unexpected decisions , resulting in severe accidents or traffic infractions [4, 24, 53]. Two of the major challenges behind
* Corresponding author

Potential Danger

Temporal Reasoning

Brake
Occluded
Area

Global Reasoning

Figure 1. Temporal reasoning on the historic behaviors of surrounding objects can benefit the prediction of the scene evolution
and objects’ future behaviors. Global reasoning on the interaction
among objects and the environment allows for inference about unobservable space and occluded objects, anticipating potential danger and enhancing perception/driving performance.

such autonomous incompetence include 1) how to achieve
a comprehensive understanding of the driving scene and,
more importantly, how to make high-fidelity predictions on
the future evolution of the driving scene; 2) how to deal
with rare adverse events in long-tail distributions, such as
undetected but relevant objects in occluded regions.
Comprehensive scene understanding and high-fidelity
prediction of how objects in the scene will move in the future are vital for autonomous vehicles to take safe and reliable actions. Toward this end, modularized methods were
proposed to decompose the task into three sequential subtasks: detection [37–40, 42], tracking [5, 65], and forecasting [6, 26, 28, 32, 33, 59–61]. While more interpretability is
provided by developing each module independently, these
sub-tasks are still regarded as open research questions and
errors in each sub-task can propagate and accumulate, leading to unstable overall performance. In contrast, end-toend driving methods [9, 10, 51] have recently emerged as a
promising method to solve these subtasks in a monolithic
manner directly. However, a high-fidelity future prediction
necessitates sufficient temporal reasoning over the historic

13723

