This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local Implicit Ray Function for Generalizable Radiance Field Representation
Xin Huang1 ,* Qi Zhang2†, Ying Feng2 , Xiaoyu Li2 , Xuan Wang2 , Qing Wang1†
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
2
Tencent AI Lab

Figure 1. We propose LIRF to reconstruct radiance fields of unseen scenes for novel view synthesis. Given that current generalizable
NeRF-like methods cast an infinitesimal ray to render a pixel at different scales, it causes excessive blurring and aliasing. Our method
instead reasons about 3D conical frustums defined by the neighbor rays through the neighbor pixels (as shown in (a)). Our LIRF outputs
the feature of any sample within the conical frustum in a continuous manner (as shown in (b)), which supports NeRF reconstruction at
arbitrary scales. Compared with the previous method, our method can be generalized to represent the same unseen scene at multiple
levels of details (as shown in (c)). Specifically, given a set of input views at a consistent image scale ×1, LIRF enables our method to
both preserve sharp details in close-up shots (anti-blurring as shown in ×2 and ×4 results) and correctly render the zoomed-out images
(anti-aliasing as shown in ×0.5 results).

Abstract
We propose LIRF (Local Implicit Ray Function), a generalizable neural rendering approach for novel view rendering. Current generalizable neural radiance fields (NeRF)
methods sample a scene with a single ray per pixel and may
therefore render blurred or aliased views when the input
views and rendered views capture scene content with different resolutions. To solve this problem, we propose LIRF
to aggregate the information from conical frustums to construct a ray. Given 3D positions within conical frustums,
LIRF takes 3D coordinates and the features of conical frustums as inputs and predicts a local volumetric radiance
field. Since the coordinates are continuous, LIRF renders
high-quality novel views at a continuously-valued scale via
volume rendering. Besides, we predict the visible weights
for each input view via transformer-based feature matching
* Work was done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

to improve the performance in occluded areas. Experimental results on real-world scenes validate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on novel view rendering of unseen scenes at arbitrary scales.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis has garnered recent attention with
compelling applications of neural rendering in virtual and
augmented reality. Different from image-based rendering
[6, 19, 32, 42, 74], Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [43] implicitly represents the 3D scenes within multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) by mapping coordinates to color and geometry of scenes. To render a pixel, the ray projected to that
pixel is traced and the color of each sampled point along the
ray is accumulated based on volume rendering.
Despite NeRF and its variants having demonstrated remarkable performance in providing immersive experiences
in various view synthesis tasks, their practical applications

97

