This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Extracting Class Activation Maps from Non-Discriminative Features as well
Zhaozheng Chen
Singapore Management University

Qianru Sun
Singapore Management University

zzchen.2019@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Extracting class activation maps (CAM) from a classification model often results in poor coverage on foreground
objects, i.e., only the discriminative region (e.g., the “head”
of “sheep”) is recognized and the rest (e.g., the “leg” of
“sheep”) mistakenly as background. The crux behind is
that the weight of the classifier (used to compute CAM) captures only the discriminative features of objects. We tackle
this by introducing a new computation method for CAM
that explicitly captures non-discriminative features as well,
thereby expanding CAM to cover whole objects. Specifically, we omit the last pooling layer of the classification
model, and perform clustering on all local features of an
object class, where “local” means “at a spatial pixel position”. We call the resultant K cluster centers local prototypes — represent local semantics like the “head”, “leg”,
and “body” of “sheep”. Given a new image of the class, we
compare its unpooled features to every prototype, derive K
similarity matrices, and then aggregate them into a heatmap
(i.e., our CAM). Our CAM thus captures all local features of
the class without discrimination. We evaluate it in the challenging tasks of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS), and plug it in multiple state-of-the-art WSSS methods, such as MCTformer [45] and AMN [26], by simply replacing their original CAM with ours. Our extensive experiments on standard WSSS benchmarks (PASCAL VOC and
MS COCO) show the superiority of our method: consistent
improvements with little computational overhead. Our code
is provided at https://github.com/zhaozhengChen/LPCAM.

1. Introduction
Extracting CAM [50] from classification models is the
essential step for training semantic segmentation models
when only image-level labels are available, i.e., in the
WSSS tasks [8, 22, 24, 26, 46]. More specifically, the general pipeline of WSSS consists of three steps: 1) training a
multi-label classification model with the image-level labels;
2) extracting CAM of each class to generate a 0-1 mask

(usually called seed mask), often with a further step of refinement to generate pseudo mask [1, 20]; and 3) taking allclass pseudo masks as pseudo labels to train a semantic segmentation model in a fully-supervised fashion [5, 6, 41]. It
is clear that the CAM in the first step determines the performance of the final semantic segmentation model. However,
the conventional CAM and its variants often suffer from the
poor coverage of foreground objects in the image, i.e., a
large amount of object pixels are mistakenly recognized as
background, as demonstrated in Figure 1(a) where only few
pixels are activated in warm colors.
We point out that this locality is due to the fact that
CAM is extracted from a discriminative model. The training of such model naturally discards the non-discriminative
regions which confuse the model between similar as well as
highly co-occurring object classes. This is a general problem of discriminative models, and is particularly obvious
when the number of training classes is small [37,46,48]. To
visualize the evidence, we use the classifier weights of confusing classes, e.g., “car”, “train” and “person”, to compute
CAMs for the “bus” image, and show them in Figure 1(b).
We find from (a) and (b) that the heating regions in ground
truth class and confusing classes are complementary. E.g.,
the upper and frontal regions (on the “bus” image) respectively heated in the CAMs of “car” and “train” (confusing
classes) are missing in the CAM of “bus” (ground truth),
which means the classifier de-activates those regions for
“bus” as it is likely to recognize them as “car” or “train”.
Technically, for each class, we use two factors to compute CAM: 1) the feature map block after the last conv layer,
and 2) the weight of the classifier for that class. As aforementioned, the second factor is often biased to discriminative features. Our intuition is to replace it with a non-biased
one. The question becomes how to derive a non-biased classifier from a biased classification model, where non-biased
means representing all local semantics of the class. We find
the biased classifier is due to incomplete features, i.e., only
discriminative local features fed into the classifier, and the
non-discriminative ones are kicked out by the global average pooling (GAP) after the last conv layer. To let the model
pay attention to non-discriminative features as well, we pro-

3135

