This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing What You Miss: Vision-Language Pre-training with
Semantic Completion Learning
Jie Jiang2 *
Rongcheng Tu2 *
Yatai Ji1 *
2
Wenzhe Zhao
Hongfa Wang2
1

Weijie Kong2
Yujiu Yang1†
2

Tsinghua University

jyt21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Chengfei Cai2
Wei Liu2†

Tencent

turongcheng@gmail.com

{zeus, jacobkong, fletchercai, carsonzhao, hongfawang}@tencent.com
yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal alignment is essential for vision-language
pre-training (VLP) models to learn the correct corresponding information across different modalities. For this purpose,
inspired by the success of masked language modeling (MLM)
tasks in the NLP pre-training area, numerous masked modeling tasks have been proposed for VLP to further promote
cross-modal interactions. The core idea of previous masked
modeling tasks is to focus on reconstructing the masked
tokens based on visible context for learning local-to-local
alignment. However, most of them pay little attention to
the global semantic features generated for the masked data,
resulting in a limited cross-modal alignment ability of global
representations. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a novel
Semantic Completion Learning (SCL) task, complementary
to existing masked modeling tasks, to facilitate global-tolocal alignment. Specifically, the SCL task complements the
missing semantics of masked data by capturing the corresponding information from the other modality, promoting
learning more representative global features which have a
great impact on the performance of downstream tasks. Moreover, we present a flexible vision encoder, which enables
our model to perform image-text and video-text multimodal
tasks simultaneously. Experimental results show that our
proposed method obtains state-of-the-art performance on
various vision-language benchmarks, such as visual question answering, image-text retrieval, and video-text retrieval.

1. Introduction
Our real-world contains a wide variety of information,
such as texts, images, sounds, etc. For a powerful general
artificial intelligence system, it is necessary to capture the se* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

wl2223@columbia.edu

MVSC

MVM

[CLS]

Image tokens

[MASK]

Text tokens

MLM

MLSC

(a) Cross-Attention Interaction of Masked Modeling

[CLS] Cooking table with assorted

fish and lemons with asparagus.

Pre-training with 

token-level reconstructions

Pre-training with SCL

[CLS] A city street with people 

walking and vehicles on the road.

Pre-training with 

token-level reconstructions

Pre-training with SCL

(b) Cross-Attention Map of [CLS]

Figure 1. (a) The comparisons between previous masked modeling
tasks and our proposed Semantic Completion Learning (SCL),
which is composed of “MVSC” and “MLSC”. (b) The cross-modal
attention map visualization of the text global representation ([CLS])
on the input image for our model pre-trained with or without SCL.

mantic association from different modality sources. Towards
this goal, multimodal representation learning is a crucial
technique to bridge the heterogeneity gap between different
modalities [6, 36]. In this area, vision-language pre-training
models [14, 21, 30, 35, 43] have shown an impressive semantic alignment ability, which brings substantial advances
on various downstream tasks, for instance, visual question
answering, image-text retrieval, etc.
Recently, numerous self-supervised vision-language pretraining models [3, 10, 14, 17, 31, 32, 43] have been proposed.
These methods model the interactions between vision and

6789

