This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Policy Adaptation from Foundation Model Feedback
Yuying Ge1⋆ Annabella Macaluso2 Li Erran Li3† Ping Luo1 Xiaolong Wang2
1
University of Hong Kong 2 University of California, San Diego 3 AWS AI, Amazon
https://geyuying.github.io/PAFF
Test

Train

Test

(a)

(b)

“put triangle in blue bowl”

“put triangle in brown box”

Train

Test

“put red block in yellow bowl”

“put star in brown box”

(c)

“pack purple tape in brown box”

“put square in orange bowl”

Train

Test

(d)

“pack lion figure in brown box”

“rotate right red block”

“push button to turn on led” “move right sliding door”

“grasp and lift pink block”

Figure 1. Examples of the language conditioned policy adaptation experiments, including the evaluation of (i) Compositional Generalization in (a), where we train a policy to pack objects of different shapes in the brown box, and put blocks of different colors in the bowls
of different colors, and adapt it to put objects of different shapes in the bowls of different colors; (ii) Out-of-distribution Generalization
in (c), where we train a policy to pack certain objects in the brown box, and adapt it to pack unseen objects, and in (d), where we adapt a
policy trained on seen environments to an unseen environment with different textures and placements of static elements such as the sliding
door and the light button; (iii) Sim-to-real Transfer in (b), where we adapt a policy trained on simulation data to the real world.

Abstract
Recent progress on vision-language foundation models
have brought significant advancement to building generalpurpose robots. By using the pre-trained models to encode
the scene and instructions as inputs for decision making, the
instruction-conditioned policy can generalize across different objects and tasks. While this is encouraging, the policy
still fails in most cases given an unseen task or environment.
In this work, we propose Policy Adaptation from Foundation model Feedback (PAFF). When deploying the trained
policy to a new task or a new environment, we first let the
policy play with randomly generated instructions to record
the demonstrations. While the execution could be wrong, we
can use the pre-trained foundation models to provide feedback to relabel the demonstrations. This automatically provides new pairs of demonstration-instruction data for policy fine-tuning. We evaluate our method on a broad range
* Work done during internship at UCSD.
† Work done outside of Amazon.

of experiments with the focus on generalization on unseen
objects, unseen tasks, unseen environments, and sim-to-real
transfer. We show PAFF improves baselines by a large margin in all cases.

1. Introduction
Learning generalizable manipulation policies have been
a long standing problem in robotics. The goal is to train
a general-purpose robot which can tackle multiple tasks
with different object compositions in diverse environments.
However, most current policy learning approaches with imitation learning or reinforcement learning can only learn to
solve one task at a time, and usually operate on a fixed set
of objects. To achieve human-level generalization, many
efforts have been made on performing robotic manipulation
tasks specified by natural language [34, 35, 56]. Language
can not only bring its compositionality to low-level robot
skills, but also operate as a high-level planner for longhorizon tasks.

19059

