This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Augmentation Matters: A Simple-yet-Effective Approach to Semi-supervised
Semantic Segmentation

1

Zhen Zhao1 Lihe Yang3 Sifan Long4
2
University of Sydney
Baidu Inc.

Jimin Pi2 Luping Zhou1 * Jingdong Wang2 *
3
4
Nanjing University
Jilin University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Supervised semantic segmentation studies [5, 6, 37, 53]
have recently achieved tremendous progress, but their success depends closely on large datasets with high-quality
pixel-level annotations. Delicate and dense pixel-level labelling is costly and time-consuming, which becomes a significant bottleneck in practical applications with limited labelled data. To this end, semi-supervised semantic segmentation (SSS) [27, 39] has been proposed to train models on
less labelled but larger amounts of unlabeled data.
Consistency regularization [42, 43], the currently dominant fundamental SSS method, effectively incorporates the
* Corresponding authors (luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au, wangjingdong@baidu.com). This work is supported by Australian Research
Council (ARC DP200103223).
1 Code and logs: https://github.com/zhenzhao/AugSeg.

80.0
77.5

mIOU (%)

Recent studies on semi-supervised semantic segmentation (SSS) have seen fast progress. Despite their promising
performance, current state-of-the-art methods tend to increasingly complex designs at the cost of introducing more
network components and additional training procedures.
Differently, in this work, we follow a standard teacherstudent framework and propose AugSeg, a simple and clean
approach that focuses mainly on data perturbations to boost
the SSS performance. We argue that various data augmentations should be adjusted to better adapt to the semisupervised scenarios instead of directly applying these techniques from supervised learning. Specifically, we adopt a
simplified intensity-based augmentation that selects a random number of data transformations with uniformly sampling distortion strengths from a continuous space. Based
on the estimated confidence of the model on different unlabeled samples, we also randomly inject labelled information to augment the unlabeled samples in an adaptive
manner. Without bells and whistles, our simple AugSeg can
readily achieve new state-of-the-art performance on SSS
benchmarks under different partition protocols1 .

75.0
72.5
CPS[CVPR 21]
ST++[CVPR 22]
PSMT[CVPR 22]
U2PL[CVPR 22]
AugSeg(ours)

70.0

0

0

67.5

0

0

65.0

92

183

366

# labeled images

732

1464

Figure 1. Comparison between current SOTAs and our simple
AugSeg on Pascal VOC 2012, using R101 as the encoder.

training on unlabeled data into standard supervised learning [16, 44]. It relies on the label-preserving data or model
perturbations to produce the prediction disagreement on
the same inputs, such that unlabeled samples can be leveraged to train models even if their labeled information is unknown. Some studies in [17, 29, 50, 51] explored different
data augmentations to benefit the SSS training while works
in [7,16,46] mainly focused on various model perturbations
to obtain competitive SSS performance. On top of these
fundamental designs, recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods aim to integrate extra auxiliary tasks [1, 47, 56, 57], e.g.,
advanced contrastive learning techniques, and more trainable modules [28, 30, 36, 38], e.g. multiple ensemble models and additional correcting networks, to further improve
the SSS performance. Despite their promising performance,
SSS studies along this line come at the cost of requiring
more complex methods, e.g., extra network components or
additional training procedures.
In this paper, we break the trend of recent SOTAs
that combine increasingly complex techniques and propose
AugSeg, a simple-yet-effective method that focuses mainly
on data perturbations to boost the SSS performance. Although various auto data augmentations [9, 10] and cutmixrelated transformations [17, 52] in supervised learning have
11350

