This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Soft Augmentation for Image Classification
Yang Liu, Shen Yan, Laura Leal-Taixé, James Hays, Deva Ramanan
Argo AI
youngleoel@gmail.com, shenyan@google.com, leal.taixe@tum.de, hays@gatech.edu, deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Modern neural networks are over-parameterized and
thus rely on strong regularization such as data augmentation and weight decay to reduce overfitting and improve
generalization. The dominant form of data augmentation
applies invariant transforms, where the learning target of a
sample is invariant to the transform applied to that sample. We draw inspiration from human visual classification studies and propose generalizing augmentation with
invariant transforms to soft augmentation where the learning target softens non-linearly as a function of the degree of the transform applied to the sample: e.g., more aggressive image crop augmentations produce less confident
learning targets. We demonstrate that soft targets allow
for more aggressive data augmentation, offer more robust
performance boosts, work with other augmentation policies, and interestingly, produce better calibrated models
(since they are trained to be less confident on aggressively
cropped/occluded examples). Combined with existing aggressive augmentation strategies, soft targets 1) double the
top-1 accuracy boost across Cifar-10, Cifar-100, ImageNet1K, and ImageNet-V2, 2) improve model occlusion performance by up to 4×, and 3) half the expected calibration
error (ECE). Finally, we show that soft augmentation generalizes to self-supervised classification tasks. Code available at https://github.com/youngleox/soft_
augmentation

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have enjoyed great success in the
past decade in domains such as visual understanding [42],
natural language processing [5], and protein structure prediction [41]. However, modern deep learning models are
often over-parameterized and prone to overfitting. In addition to designing models with better inductive biases, strong
regularization techniques such as weight decay and data
augmentation are often necessary for neural networks to
achieve ideal performance. Data augmentation is often a
computationally cheap and effective way to regularize mod-

els and mitigate overfitting. The dominant form of data augmentation modifies training samples with invariant transforms – transformations of the data where it is assumed that
the identity of the sample is invariant to the transforms.
Indeed, the notion of visual invariance is supported by
evidence found from biological visual systems [54]. The
robustness of human visual recognition has long been documented and inspired many learning methods including data
augmentation and architectural improvement [19, 47]. This
paper focuses on the counterpart of human visual robustness, namely how our vision fails. Instead of maintaining
perfect invariance, human visual confidence degrades nonlinearly as a function of the degree of transforms such as
occlusion, likely as a result of information loss [44]. We
propose modeling the transform-induced information loss
for learned image classifiers and summarize the contributions as follows:
• We propose Soft Augmentation as a generalization of data
augmentation with invariant transforms. With Soft Augmentation, the learning target of a transformed training
sample softens. We empirically compare several softening strategies and prescribe a robust non-linear softening
formula.
• With a frozen softening strategy, we show that replacing standard crop augmentation with soft crop augmentation allows for more aggressive augmentation, and doubles the top-1 accuracy boost of RandAugment [8] across
Cifar-10, Cifar-100, ImageNet-1K, and ImageNet-V2.
• Soft Augmentation improves model occlusion robustness
by achieving up to more than 4× Top-1 accuracy boost
on heavily occluded images.
• Combined with TrivialAugment [37], Soft Augmentation
further reduces top-1 error and improves model calibration by reducing expected calibration error by more than
half, outperforming 5-ensemble methods [25].
• In addition to supervised image classification models,
Soft Augmentation also boosts the performance of selfsupervised models, demonstrating its generalizability.

16241

