This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimal Proposal Learning for Deployable End-to-End Pedestrian Detection
Xiaolin Song1 Binghui Chen Pengyu Li Jun-Yan He Biao Wang
Yifeng Geng Xuansong Xie Honggang Zhang1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{sxlshirley, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn, chenbinghui@bupt.cn, lipengyu007@gmail.com,
junyanhe1989@gmail.com, wangbiao225@foxmail.com, gengyifeng@gmail.com

Abstract
End-to-end pedestrian detection focuses on training
a pedestrian detection model via discarding the NonMaximum Suppression (NMS) post-processing. Though a
few methods have been explored, most of them still suffer
from longer training time and more complex deployment,
which cannot be deployed in the actual industrial applications. In this paper, we intend to bridge this gap and propose an Optimal Proposal Learning (OPL) framework for
deployable end-to-end pedestrian detection. Specifically,
we achieve this goal by using CNN-based light detector and
introducing two novel modules, including a Coarse-to-Fine
(C2F) learning strategy for proposing precise positive proposals for the Ground-Truth (GT) instances by reducing the
ambiguity of sample assignment/output in training/testing
respectively, and a Completed Proposal Network (CPN) for
producing extra information compensation to further recall
the hard pedestrian samples. Extensive experiments are
conducted on CrowdHuman, TJU-Ped and Caltech, and the
results show that our proposed OPL method significantly
outperforms the competing methods.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is a popular computer vision task,
which has been widely employed in many applications
such as robotics [20], intelligent surveillance [39] and autonomous driving [21]. It follows the conventional object
detection pipeline and focuses on the detection of pedestrian. To improve the recall of pedestrians, the current popular pedestrian detectors always generate multiple boundingbox (bbox) proposals for a Ground-Truth (GT) instance
during testing. And then the Non-Maximum Suppression
(NMS) post-processing technique is used to guarantee the
final precision of detection by removing the duplicated
bboxes.
However, the crowd density is usually high in some realworld pedestrian detection scenarios, e.g. city centers, railway stations, airports and so on. NMS often performs

poorly in these crowd scenes due to the naive duplicate removal of NMS by a single Intersection-over-Union (IoU)
threshold. For example, a lower threshold may cause the
missed detection of some highly overlapped true positives
while a higher threshold could result in more false positives.
Some existing works have attempted to make some improvements, e.g. generating more compact bounding boxes
[62, 68], soft suppression strategy [1], learning NMS function by extra modules [25] and dynamic suppression threshold [33]. However, these works still cannot achieve end-toend training and easy deployment in actual industrial applications. To this end, a straightforward solution is to establish a fully end-to-end detection pipeline by discarding
NMS. PED [30] and [71] have made some attempts by implementing a NMS-free pipeline for pedestrian detection.
Both of them are query-based methods. Though achieving higher performances, they still suffer from longer training time, more complex deployment and larger computation
costs and cannot be actually deployed on the resource limited devices in industrial applications. Therefore, obtaining
a ‘light and sweet’ end-to-end pedestrian detector remains
important.
Considering the possibility of deployment in actual industrial applications, performing NMS-free technique upon
the one-stage anchor-free CNN-detector, e.g. FCOS [60], is
more practical and attractive since it is much easier and efficient to be deployed on resource limited devices with light
computational cost and less pre/post-processing. To achieve
this goal, the CNN-detector should learn to adaptively and
precisely produce true-positive pedestrian proposals at the
correct locations as well as avoiding the duplicates. In general object detection, some works [53, 55, 61] propose to
replace the commonly used one-to-many label assignment
strategy with one-to-one label assignment during training.
Specifically, for each GT instance, only one proposal will
be assigned as positive sample while other candidate proposals are assigned as negatives.
However, this solution involves two challenges as follows: 1) Problem of ambiguous positive proposals for a

3250

