This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
Segmentation network
Encoder

Decoder

Implicit guidance

SFD2: Semantic-guided Feature Detection and DescriptionEncoder

Explicit guidance
Detector
Head
Descriptor
Head

Local feature network

Fei Xue

Ignas Budvytis Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge
{fx221, ib255, rc10001}@cam.ac.uk

Segmentation network

Abstract

Encoder

Visual localization is a fundamental task for various
applications including autonomous driving and robotics.
Prior methods focus on extracting large amounts of often
redundant locally reliable features, resulting in limited efficiency and accuracy, especially in large-scale environments under challenging conditions. Instead, we propose
to extract globally reliable features by implicitly embedding
high-level semantics into both the detection and description processes. Specifically, our semantic-aware detector is
able to detect keypoints from reliable regions (e.g. building, traffic lane) and suppress unreliable areas (e.g. sky,
car) implicitly instead of relying on explicit semantic labels.
This boosts the accuracy of keypoint matching by reducing
the number of features sensitive to appearance changes and
avoiding the need of additional segmentation networks at
test time. Moreover, our descriptors are augmented with
semantics and have stronger discriminative ability, providing more inliers at test time. Particularly, experiments
on long-term large-scale visual localization Aachen DayNight and RobotCar-Seasons datasets demonstrate that our
model outperforms previous local features and gives competitive accuracy to advanced matchers but is about 2 and
3 times faster when using 2k and 4k keypoints, respectively.
Code is available at https://github.com/feixue94/sfd2.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is key to various applications including autonomous driving and robotics. Structure-based algorithms [54, 57, 64, 69, 73, 79] involving mapping and localization processes still dominate in large-scale localization. Traditionally, handcrafted features (e.g. SIFT [3, 35],
ORB [53]) are widely used. However, these features are
mainly based on statistics of gradients of local patches and
thus are prone to appearance changes such as illumination and season variations in the long-term visual localization task. With the success of CNNs, learning-based features [14, 16, 37, 45, 51, 76, 81] are introduced to replace
handcrafted ones and have achieved excellent performance.

Decoder

Feature-aware
guidance

Encoder

Semantic-aware
guidance
Detector
Head
Descriptor
Head

Feature detection and description network

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. Our model implicitly incorporates semantics into the detection and description processes
with guidance of an off-the-shelf segmentation network during
the training process. Semantic- and feature-aware guidance are
adopted to enhance its ability of embedding semantic information.

With massive data for training, these methods should be
able to automatically extract keypoints from more reliable
regions (e.g. building, traffic lane) by focusing on discriminative features [64]. Nevertheless, due to the lack of explicit semantic signals for training, their ability of selecting
globally reliable keypoints is limited, as shown in Fig. 2
(detailed analysis is provided in Sec. B.1 in the supplementary material). Therefore, they prefer to extract locally reliable features from objects including those which are not
useful for long-term localization (e.g. sky, tree, car), leading to limited accuracy, as demonstrated in Table 2.
Recently, advanced matchers based on sparse keypoints [8, 55, 65] or dense pixels [9, 18, 19, 33, 40, 47, 67,
74] are proposed to enhance keypoint/pixel-wise matching
and have obtained remarkable accuracy. Yet, they have
quadratic time complexity due to the attention and correlation volume computation. Moreover, advanced matchers
rely on spatial connections of keypoints and perform imagewise matching as opposed to fast point-wise matching, so
they take much longer time than nearest neighbor matching
(NN) in both mapping and localization processes because of
a large number of image pairs (much larger than the number of images) [8]. Alternatively, some works leverage semantics [64, 73, 79] to filter unstable features to eliminate
wrong correspondences and report close even better accu-

5206

