This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physical-World Optical Adversarial Attacks on 3D Face Recognition
Yanjie Li,1 Yiquan Li,1 Xuelong Dai,1 Songtao Guo,2 Bin Xiao1 *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Chongqing University
{yanjie.li,yiquan.li,xuelong.dai}@connect.polyu.hk, guosongtao@cqu.edu.cn,
b.xiao@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
The success rate of current adversarial attacks remains
low on real-world 3D face recognition tasks because the
3D-printing attacks need to meet the requirement that the
generated points should be adjacent to the surface, which
limits the adversarial example’ searching space. Additionally, they have not considered unpredictable head movements or the non-homogeneous nature of skin reflectance
in the real world. To address the real-world challenges, we
propose a novel structured-light attack against structuredlight-based 3D face recognition. We incorporate the 3D
reconstruction process and skin’s reflectance in the optimization process to get the end-to-end attack and present
3D transform invariant loss and sensitivity maps to improve robustness. Our attack enables adversarial points to
be placed in any position and is resilient to random head
movements while maintaining the perturbation unnoticeable. Experiments show that our new method can attack
point-cloud-based and depth-image-based 3D face recognition systems with a high success rate, using fewer perturbations than previous physical 3D adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
As 2D face recognition becomes increasingly vulnerable
to attacks, researchers are turning to 3D face data for secure
user authentication and other tasks. Structured light imaging is a popular method of acquiring 3D face data due to
its high precision and superiority in uniform textures [10].
It is widely used in off-the-shelf devices such as Kinect v1
and iPhone [45]. Various 3D face recognition algorithms
are proposed based on structured light [11, 15, 29]. FaceID,
for example, collects 3D face data using a structured light
camera and then uses 3D face data for user authentication.
Although real-world attacks for 2D face recognition have
been thoroughly studied [5,27,41], studies on physically realizable 3D face recognition attacks are insufficient. Tsai
* B. Xiao is the corresponding author.
https://github.com/PolyLiYJ/SLAttack.git.

Our code is available at

Normal Modulated Image

Adversarial Modulated Image

David

Athena

Adversarial Point Cloud

Figure 1. A demonstration of our attack. We project optical noises
on the 3D faces to generate adversarial point clouds. Our attack
modifies fewer points than previous attacks and does not need the
adversarial points to be adjacent to the 3D surface, thus with a high
attack success rate.

et al. [30] first proposed 3D printable adversarial examples
for point cloud classification tasks. However, the perturbations must be strictly adjacent to the surface rather than in
arbitrary positions in 3D-printed examples, greatly limiting
the adversary’s attack ability. Previous optical adversarial
attacks [6, 12, 19, 20, 36, 47] cannot be applied directly to
3D face recognition either. Face reflection is more complex
than opaque objects like the stop sign and the principle of
3D reconstruction is different from 2D imaging.
To address the limitations of existing 3D-printingbased adversarial attacks, we propose a new attack called
Structured-Light Attack on 3D face recognition systems,
which uses adversarial illumination to attack structuredlight-based 3D face recognition. The perturbation can be
concealed in the normal fringe patterns or superimposed on
the original illumination by using the inherent or an additional projector. Figure 1 shows an overview of our attack.
Without the optical noises, the 3D reconstructed point cloud
is recognized as David. While with the elaborate optical
noises, the adversarial point cloud is recognized as Athena.
Our attack achieves a higher success rate than previous
attacks by precisely simulating the real-world 3D reconstruction process and taking the random head movements
into account. We first incorporate the 3D face relighting
process in the attack pipeline through the Lambertian reflectance model. Then, we propose a differential 3D recon-

24699

