This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PeakConv: Learning Peak Receptive Field for Radar Semantic Segmentation
Liwen Zhang*1 Xinyan Zhang*2 Youcheng Zhang1 Yufei Guo1 Yuanpei Chen1 Xuhui Huang1 Zhe Ma†1
1
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, Beijing 100144, China
2
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Heilongjiang 150001, China
lwzhang9161@126.com

zxy20020109@gmail.com

Abstract
The modern machine learning-based technologies have
shown considerable potential in automatic radar scene understanding. Among these efforts, radar semantic segmentation (RSS) can provide more refined and detailed information including the moving objects and background clutters within the effective receptive field of the radar. Motivated by the success of convolutional networks in various
visual computing tasks, these networks have also been introduced to solve RSS task. However, neither the regular
convolution operation nor the modified ones are specific
to interpret radar signals. The receptive fields of existing
convolutions are defined by the object presentation in optical signals, but these two signals have different perception
mechanisms. In classic radar signal processing, the object
signature is detected according to a local peak response,
i.e., CFAR detection. Inspired by this idea, we redefine the
receptive field of the convolution operation as the peak receptive field (PRF) and propose the peak convolution operation (PeakConv) to learn the object signatures in an endto-end network. By incorporating the proposed PeakConv
layers into the encoders, our RSS network can achieve better segmentation results compared with other SoTA methods on a multi-view real-measured dataset collected from
an FMCW radar. Our code for PeakConv is available at
https://github.com/zlw9161/PKC.

1. Introduction
Radar is a remote sensor, which usually uses modulated electromagnetic signals to detect the objects of interest
through directional transmitting antennas in a specific effective working field [22]. As an active detection device, radar
is more robust to extreme weather (e.g., haze, rain or snow)
than other active detection device such as LiDARs [2], and
it is also not susceptible to dim light condition and sun glare,
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This research is supported by Young Science Foundation of National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62206258).

mazhe thu@163.com

as the passive optical sensors are [19]. In addition to the
real-world location information, it can also tell the velocity
of the moving objects thanks to the Doppler effects. Due to
these advantages, radar sensors have played an irreplaceable
role for many automotive security and defense applications,
e.g., autonomous safety driving or UAV early warning.
Conventional radar detection mostly relies on the peak
detection algorithm following constant false alarm rate
(CFAR) [22, 23] principle. Taking frequency modulated
continuous wave (FMCW) radar as example, the raw radar
echos are first converted as multi-domain united frequency
representations, e.g., range-Doppler (RD) and range-angle
(RA) maps, through a series of cascading fast Fourier transformations (FFTs). Then for each cell under test (CUT) in
the input RD/RA map, the CFAR detector will determine
whether it contains moving object information according to
an estimated detection threshold, which fully considers the
characteristics of the radar signal itself. However, to obtain good effect in practical application, it is necessary to
manually fine-tune various hyper-parameters including the
thresholding factor, sizes and shapes of the local scope (i.e.,
the bandwidths of reference and guard units). Beyond that,
conventional radar detection cannot give category information of the object. These two inconveniences hinder the conventional detection method from automatic semantic radar
scene understanding.
Encouraged by the success of modern deep learning
techniques in computational perception, especially the object detection [8, 15, 20, 21, 29] and semantic segmentation [5, 11, 16, 24, 28] in computer vision, some efforts had
been made recently for better automatic radar scene interpretation. These efforts evolve the target-clutter binary hypothesis of conventional radar testing into target semantic
characterization of modern machine learning, i.e., radar object detection (ROD) [10, 17, 27] and radar semantic segmentation (RSS) [3, 13, 18]. Most of these methods used
convolution networks as backbone models, which take radar
frequency representations as input, and then make predictions on RA or RD view or both two views. For example,
a multi-view RSS (MVRSS) network [18] was proposed

17577

