This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Complete 3D Human Reconstruction from a Single Incomplete Image
Junying Wang1
Jae Shin Yoon2
Tuanfeng Y. Wang2
Krishna Kumar Singh2
Ulrich Neumann1
1
2
University of Southern California
Adobe Research
{junyingw,uneumann}@usc.edu {jaeyoon,yangtwan,krishsin}@adobe.com

Abstract
This paper presents a method to reconstruct a complete
human geometry and texture from an image of a person with
only partial body observed, e.g., a torso. The core challenge
arises from the occlusion: there exists no pixel to reconstruct
where many existing single-view human reconstruction methods are not designed to handle such invisible parts, leading
to missing data in 3D. To address this challenge, we introduce a novel coarse-to-fine human reconstruction framework.
For coarse reconstruction, explicit volumetric features are
learned to generate a complete human geometry with 3D convolutional neural networks conditioned by a 3D body model
and the style features from visible parts. An implicit network
combines the learned 3D features with the high-quality surface normals enhanced from multiviews to produce fine local
details, e.g., high-frequency wrinkles. Finally, we perform
progressive texture inpainting to reconstruct a complete appearance of the person in a view-consistent way, which is not
possible without the reconstruction of a complete geometry.
In experiments, we demonstrate that our method can reconstruct high-quality 3D humans, which is robust to occlusion.

1. Introduction
How many portrait photos in your albums have the whole
body captured? Usually, the answer is not many. Taking a
photo of the whole body is often limited by a number of
factors of occlusion such as camera angles, objects, other
people, and self. While existing single-view human reconstruction methods [3, 43] have shown promising results, they
often fail to handle such incomplete images, leading to significant artifacts with distortion and missing data in 3D for
invisible body parts. In this paper, we introduce a method
to reconstruct a complete 3D human model from a single
image of a person with occlusions as shown in Figure 1.
The complete 3D model can be the foundation for a wide
range of applications such as film production, video games,
virtual teleportation, and 3D avatar printing from a groupshot photo. 3D human reconstruction from an image [2, 16]

Input: incomplete image

Output: complete 3D human model

Figure 1. The complete reconstruction results using our method
from the image of a person with occlusion by other people.

has been studied for two decades. The recent progress in
this topic indicates the neural network based implicit approach [3, 44] is a promising way for accurate detail reconstruction. Such an approach often formulated the 3D human
reconstruction problem as a classification task: an implicit
network is designed to learn image features at each pixel,
e.g., pixel-aligned features [18, 43, 44], which enable continual classification of the position in 3D along the camera
ray. While the implicit approaches have shown a strong performance to produce the geometry with high-quality local
details, the learning of such an implicit model is often characterized as 1) reconstructive: it estimates 3D only for the
pixels that are captured from a camera, i.e., no 3D reconstruction is possible for missing pixels of invisible parts; and
2) globally incoherent: the ordinal relationship (front-back
relationship in 3D) of the reconstructed 3D points is often
not globally coherent, e.g., while the reconstruction of the
face surface is locally plausible, its combination with other
parts such as torso looks highly distorted. These properties
fundamentally limit the implicit network to reconstruct the
complete and coherent 3D human model from the image
with a partial body.
In this paper, we overcome these fundamental limitations

8748

