This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SLACK: Stable Learning of Augmentations
with Cold-start and KL regularization
Juliette Marrie1,2
1

Michael Arbel1

Diane Larlus2

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK

Abstract
Data augmentation is known to improve the generalization capabilities of neural networks, provided that the set
of transformations is chosen with care, a selection often
performed manually. Automatic data augmentation aims at
automating this process. However, most recent approaches
still rely on some prior information; they start from a small
pool of manually-selected default transformations that are
either used to pretrain the network or forced to be part of
the policy learned by the automatic data augmentation algorithm. In this paper, we propose to directly learn the
augmentation policy without leveraging such prior knowledge. The resulting bilevel optimization problem becomes
more challenging due to the larger search space and the
inherent instability of bilevel optimization algorithms. To
mitigate these issues (i) we follow a successive cold-start
strategy with a Kullback-Leibler regularization, and (ii) we
parameterize magnitudes as continuous distributions. Our
approach leads to competitive results on standard benchmarks despite a more challenging setting, and generalizes
beyond natural images.1

1. Introduction
Data augmentation, which encourages predictions to be
stable with respect to particular image transformations, has
become an essential component in visual recognition systems. While the data augmentation process is conceptually
simple, choosing the optimal set of image transformations
for a given task or dataset is challenging. For instance,
designing a good set for ImageNet [4] or even CIFAR10/100 [13] has been the result of a long-standing research
effort. Whereas data augmentation strategies that have been
chosen by hand for ImageNet have been used successfully
for many recognition tasks involving natural images, they
may fail to generalize to other domains such as medical
imaging, remote sensing or hyperspectral imaging.
1 Project page: https://europe.naverlabs.com/slack

Julien Mairal1
2

NAVER LABS Europe

This has motivated automating the design of data augmentation strategies [10,12,14–16,19,27,31]. Those are often represented as a stochastic policy that randomly draws a
combination of transformations along with their magnitudes
from a large predefined set, each time an image is sampled.
The goal becomes to learn strategies that effectively compose multiple transformations, which is a challenging task
given the large search space of augmentations.
A natural framework for learning the parameters of this
policy is that of bilevel optimization. Intuitively, one looks
for the best possible policy such that a neural network
trained with this policy on a training set (inner problem)
generalizes well on a distinct validation set (outer problem).
Optimizing the resulting formulation is challenging as the
outer problem depends on the solution of the inner problem.
Classical techniques for solving this bilevel problem, such
as unrolled optimization, can become highly unstable as the
network weights become progressively suboptimal for the
current policy during the learning process.
Moreover, augmentations are often non-differentiable
in the parameters of the policy, thus requiring techniques
other than direct differentiation, such as Bayesian optimization [15], gradient approximations (e.g. RELAX [7]), or the
score method / REINFORCE [28] algorithm. While these
techniques bypass the differentiability issues, they can suffer from large bias or variance. As a result, learning augmentation policies is a difficult problem whose challenges
are exacerbated by the inherent instability of the optimization techniques developed to solve bilevel problems, such
as unrolled optimization [1].
A standard way to improve stability and make the automatic data augmentation problem simpler is to reduce the
search space. This is often achieved by learning the policy on top of “default” transformations such as Cutout [5],
random cropping and resizing, or color jittering, all known
to be well-suited to natural images which compose standard benchmarks such as CIFAR or ImageNet, or by discarding transformations known to be harmful such as Invert. Fixing some of the transformations and removing others mitigate the challenges inherent to learning a compo-

24306

