This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High Fidelity 3D Hand Shape Reconstruction
via Scalable Graph Frequency Decomposition
Tianyu Luan1
Yuanhao Zhai1
Zhang Chen2
Yi Xu2
1

State University of New York at Buffalo

2

Jingjing Meng1
Junsong Yuan1

Zhong Li2

OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology, Inc.

{tianyulu,yzhai6,jmeng2,jsyuan}@buffalo.edu
{zhong.li,zhang.chen,yi.xu}@oppo.com

Abstract
Despite the impressive performance obtained by recent
single-image hand modeling techniques, they lack the capability to capture sufficient details of the 3D hand mesh. This
deficiency greatly limits their applications when high-fidelity
hand modeling is required, e.g., personalized hand modeling. To address this problem, we design a frequency split
network to generate 3D hand mesh using different frequency
bands in a coarse-to-fine manner. To capture high-frequency
personalized details, we transform the 3D mesh into the
frequency domain, and propose a novel frequency decomposition loss to supervise each frequency component. By
leveraging such a coarse-to-fine scheme, hand details that
correspond to the higher frequency domain can be preserved.
In addition, the proposed network is scalable, and can stop
the inference at any resolution level to accommodate different hardware with varying computational powers. To
quantitatively evaluate the performance of our method in
terms of recovering personalized shape details, we introduce a new evaluation metric named Mean Signal-to-Noise
Ratio (MSNR) to measure the signal-to-noise ratio of each
mesh frequency component. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach generates fine-grained details for
high-fidelity 3D hand reconstruction, and our evaluation
metric is more effective for measuring mesh details compared with traditional metrics. The code is available at
https://github.com/tyluann/FreqHand.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity and personalized 3D hand modeling have
seen great demand in 3D games, virtual reality, and the
emerging Metaverse, as it brings better user experiences,
e.g., users can see their own realistic hands in the virtual
space instead of the standard avatar hands. Therefore, it is

0

2

4
6
8
10
Frequency components

12 × 103

Figure 1. An exemplar hand mesh of sufficient details and its graph
frequency decomposition. The x-axis shows frequency components from low to high. The y-axis shows the amplitude of each
component in the logarithm. At the frequency domain, the signal
amplitude generally decreases as the frequency increases.

of great importance to reconstruct high-fidelity hand meshes
that can adapt to different users and application scenarios.
Despite previous successes in 3D hand reconstruction and
modeling [3, 6, 7, 16, 22, 40, 44, 46], few existing solutions
focus on enriching the details of the reconstructed shape,
and most current methods fail to generate consumer-friendly
high-fidelity hands. When we treat the hand mesh as graph
signals, like most natural signals, the low-frequency components have larger amplitudes than those of the high-frequency
parts, which we can observe in a hand mesh spectrum curve
(Fig. 1). Consequently, if we generate the mesh purely in
the spatial domain, the signals of different frequencies could
be biased, thus the high-frequency information can be easily overwhelmed by its low-frequency counterpart. Moreover, the wide usage of compact parametric models, such as
MANO [32], has limited the expressiveness of personalized
details. Even though MANO can robustly estimate the hand
pose and coarse shape, it sacrifices hand details for compactness and robustness in the parameterization process, so the
detail expression ability of MANO is suppressed.
To better model detailed 3D shape information, we transform the hand mesh into the graph frequency domain, and

16795

