This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ALTO: Alternating Latent Topologies for Implicit 3D Reconstruction
Zhen Wang1 * Shijie Zhou1 * Jeong Joon Park2 Despoina Paschalidou2
Suya You3 Gordon Wetzstein2 Leonidas Guibas2 Achuta Kadambi1
1

University of California, Los Angeles

(a) Ground Truth

2

Stanford University

(b) Input (10,000 points)

3

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

(c) POCO [4] (36.8 sec)

(d) ALTO (10.5 sec)

Figure 1. Rethinking latent topologies for fast and detailed implicit 3D reconstructions. Recent work (POCO CVPR’22 [4]) has used
latent encodings for each point to preserve 3D detail. We introduce ALTO, which can alternate between latent topologies like grid latents
and point latents to speed up inference and recover more detail, like the 3D reconstruction of a thin lamp-post. Scene from [52].

Abstract
This work introduces alternating latent topologies
(ALTO) for high-fidelity reconstruction of implicit 3D surfaces from noisy point clouds. Previous work identifies that
the spatial arrangement of latent encodings is important to
recover detail. One school of thought is to encode a latent vector for each point (point latents). Another school
of thought is to project point latents into a grid (grid latents) which could be a voxel grid or triplane grid. Each
school of thought has tradeoffs. Grid latents are coarse
and lose high-frequency detail. In contrast, point latents
preserve detail. However, point latents are more difficult
to decode into a surface, and quality and runtime suffer.
In this paper, we propose ALTO to sequentially alternate
between geometric representations, before converging to
an easy-to-decode latent. We find that this preserves spatial expressiveness and makes decoding lightweight. We
validate ALTO on implicit 3D recovery and observe not
only a performance improvement over the state-of-the-art,
but a runtime improvement of 3-10×. Project website at
https:// visual.ee.ucla.edu/ alto.htm/ .
* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing surfaces from noisy point clouds is an
active problem in 3D computer vision. Today, conditional
neural fields offer a promising way to learn surfaces from
noisy point clouds. Alternatives like voxel regression or
mesh estimation are limited by cubic complexity and the
requirement of a mesh template, respectively. Recent work
has successfully used conditional neural fields to reconstruct 3D surfaces as an occupancy function. A conditional
neural field takes as input a query coordinate and conditions
this on a latent representation, e.g., feature grids. The spatial expressiveness of the latent representation impacts the
overall surface reconstruction quality.
To achieve spatial expression, a neural field is conditioned on a latent space of features (latents) from the conditional input. In 3D surface reconstruction the input point
cloud is transformed into latents arranged in some topological structure. Point latents occur when each point in the
input point cloud is assigned a latent vector [4]. Triplane
latents are formed when point latents are projected into a
3-axis grid [41, 52]. The triplane latent is not as spatially
expressive as freeform points, but the lower spatial complexity makes it easier to decode. Voxel latents are another
type of grid latent where latents are arranged in a feature

259

