This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Token Pruning and Squeezing Towards More Aggressive Compression of
Vision Transformers
Siyuan Wei1 *

Shen Zhang1
Yao Tang1
Tianzhu Ye2 *
2
MEGVII Technology
Tsinghua University

Jiajun Liang1†

1

{weisiyuan, zhangshen,tangyao02,liangjiajun}@megvii.com,ytz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Input Image

Although vision transformers (ViTs) have shown promising results in various computer vision tasks recently, their
high computational cost limits their practical applications.
Previous approaches that prune redundant tokens have
demonstrated a good trade-off between performance and
computation costs. Nevertheless, errors caused by pruning strategies can lead to significant information loss. Our
quantitative experiments reveal that the impact of pruned
tokens on performance should be noticeable. To address
this issue, we propose a novel joint Token Pruning &
Squeezing module (TPS) for compressing vision transformers with higher efficiency. Firstly, TPS adopts pruning to get
the reserved and pruned subsets. Secondly, TPS squeezes
the information of pruned tokens into partial reserved tokens via the unidirectional nearest-neighbor matching and
similarity-based fusing steps. Compared to state-of-theart methods, our approach outperforms them under all token pruning intensities. Especially while shrinking DeiTtiny&small computational budgets to 35%, it improves the
accuracy by 1%-6% compared with baselines on ImageNet
classification. The proposed method can accelerate the
throughput of DeiT-small beyond DeiT-tiny, while its accuracy surpasses DeiT-tiny by 4.78%. Experiments on various
transformers demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
while analysis experiments prove our higher robustness to
the errors of the token pruning policy. Code is available at
https://github.com/megvii-research/TPSCVPR2023.

1. Introduction
The transformer architecture has become popular for various natural language processing (NLP) tasks, and its improved variants have been adopted for many vision tasks.
Vision transformers (ViTs) [5] leverage the long-range de* The first two authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

Label: Lawn Mower

Label: Baseball

Token Pruning

Prediction: Folding Chair ×

Prediction: Rugby Ball ×

Prediction: Lawn Mower √

Prediction: Baseball √

Ours

Figure 1. Comparisons between token pruning paradigm [25] (the
2nd row) and our joint Token Pruning & Squeezing (the 3rd row).
The context information, such as the sod in the examples, is helpful for prediction but is discarded. Our method remits the information loss by squeezing the pruned tokens into reserved ones instead
of naively dropping them, as indicated by the stacked patches. By
this design, we could apply more aggressive token pruning with
less performance drop. The example results are from the ImageNet1K [4], and we reduce the actual patches grid 14 × 14 to
7 × 7 for visualization clarity.

pendencies of self-attention mechanisms to achieve excellent performance, often surpassing that of CNNs. In addition to the vanilla ViT architecture, recent studies [17,
31, 33] have explored hybrid ViT designs incorporating
convolution layers and multi-scale architectures. Despite
their excellent performance, transformers still require relatively high computational budgets. This is due to the
quadratic computation and memory costs associated with
token length. To address this issue, contemporary approaches [8, 14, 16, 21, 25, 27, 35, 36] propose pruning redundant tokens. They trade acceptable performance degradation for a more cost-effective model. Knowledge distillation [11] and other techniques can further mitigate the resulting performance drop.

2092

