This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Robustness of Semantic Segmentation to Motion-Blur using
Class-Centric Augmentation
Aakanksha
Indian Institute of Technology Madras

A. N. Rajagopalan
Indian Institute of Technology Madras

aakankshajha30@gmail.com

raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Semantic segmentation involves classifying each pixel
into one of a pre-defined set of object/stuff classes. Such
a fine-grained detection and localization of objects in the
scene is challenging by itself. The complexity increases
manifold in the presence of blur. With cameras becoming
increasingly light-weight and compact, blur caused by motion during capture time has become unavoidable. Most
research has focused on improving segmentation performance for sharp clean images and the few works that deal
with degradations, consider motion-blur as one of many
generic degradations. In this work, we focus exclusively
on motion-blur and attempt to achieve robustness for semantic segmentation in its presence. Based on the observation that segmentation annotations can be used to generate
synthetic space-variant blur, we propose a Class-Centric
Motion-Blur Augmentation (CCMBA) strategy. Our approach involves randomly selecting a subset of semantic
classes present in the image and using the segmentation
map annotations to blur only the corresponding regions.
This enables the network to simultaneously learn semantic segmentation for clean images, images with egomotion
blur, as well as images with dynamic scene blur. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for both CNN and
Vision Transformer-based semantic segmentation networks
on PASCAL VOC and Cityscapes datasets. We also illustrate the improved generalizability of our method to complex real-world blur by evaluating on the commonly used
deblurring datasets GoPro and REDS .

1. Introduction
Motion-blur has become ubiquitous in our lives driven
largely by the compactness and affordability of light weight
cameras. While camera quality has improved significantly,
sensing technology cannot suppress blur completely yet.
For handheld cameras and cameras mounted on moving vehicles, motion during capture is a major reason for the occurrence of blurred images. Most research in semantic seg-

Figure 1. (a) Motion-blurred images, (b) Segmentation from a
network trained on clean images (c) Segmentation after using our
augmentation for training (d) Ground truth.

mentation especially those that are deep-learning based and
state-of-the-art, focus on increasing accuracy [30], [38] and
throughput [31], [23]. While these models have achieved
significant gains, they are trained on clean data and consequently struggle to perform when presented with out-ofdistribution data [13]. Such wrong predictions can have
grave consequences for safety-critical applications like autonomous driving. Therefore, it becomes essential to focus
on finding ways of making these models robust to unavoidable degradations like motion-blur.
When trying to generalize to blurred images, an off-theshelf approach would be to use a deblurring algorithm to
deblur the image before continuing with the downstream
task of segmentation. However, the generalization abilities of deblurring models are still subpar and they struggle to perform well for real blurred out-of-distribution images [37] . Additionally, many of these image restoration
models process images at multiple-scales in a hierarchical fashion which improves the performance but also increases the latency and memory requirements [34,35]. Consequently, this two-stage approach of using deblurring as

10470

