This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recognizability Embedding Enhancement for Very Low-Resolution Face
Recognition and Quality Estimation
Jacky Chen Long Chai1 Tiong-Sik Ng1 Cheng-Yaw Low2 Jaewoo Park1 Andrew Beng Jin Teoh1
1
Yonsei University 2 Institute for Basic Science
1

{jackyccl,ngtiongsik,julypraise,bjteoh}@yonsei.ac.kr

2

{chengyawlow}@ibs.re.kr

Figure 1. A deep face model pretrained on high-resolution face images introduces a cluster of unrecognizable instances (grey spike),
dubbed unrecognizable identities (UIs) in [9]. (a) shows the bimodal distribution for a very low-resolution face dataset [6] based on distance
against the UIs. Interestingly, a portion of hard-to-recognize faces (red peak) lie close to the UIs, indicating their low recognizability. (b)
We propose to improve the recognizability of hard-to-recognize instances by pushing them away from the UIs center. Consequently,
faces with higher recognizability indexes are further apart from UIs center in the embedding space. Our method not only induces more
discriminative representations but also translates face quality into a measurable indicator that closely matches human cognition.

Abstract
Very low-resolution face recognition (VLRFR) poses
unique challenges, such as tiny regions of interest and poor
resolution due to extreme standoff distance or wide viewing
angle of the acquisition devices. In this paper, we study
principled approaches to elevate the recognizability of a
face in the embedding space instead of the visual quality.
We first formulate a robust learning-based face recognizability measure, namely recognizability index (RI), based on
two criteria: (i) proximity of each face embedding against
the unrecognizable faces cluster center and (ii) closeness
of each face embedding against its positive and negative
class prototypes. We then devise an index diversion loss
to push the hard-to-recognize face embedding with low RI
away from unrecognizable faces cluster to boost the RI,
which reflects better recognizability. Additionally, a perceptibility attention mechanism is introduced to attend to the
most recognizable face regions, which offers better explanatory and discriminative traits for embedding learning. Our
proposed model is trained end-to-end and simultaneously
serves recognizability-aware embedding learning and face
quality estimation. To address VLRFR, our extensive eval-

uations on three challenging low-resolution datasets and
face quality assessment demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed model over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In real-world face recognition deployment scenarios,
the pixel resolution of the detected face images is significantly deflated, due to extreme long-range distance and
broad viewing angle of the acquisition devices, especially
in surveillance applications. These tiny regions of interest
are, in general, ranging from 16×16 to 32×32 pixels [60],
thereby suffering from poor pixel resolution, in addition
to unrestricted noises such as poor illumination conditions,
non-frontal poses with awful angles, unconstrained facial
expressions, blurriness, and occlusions [45]. It is noteworthy that these contaminated very low-resolution (VLR)
face images undermine the overall performance of a face
model trained with its high-resolution (HR) counterparts;
therefore, there is a lack of generalizability to resolve the
VLR face recognition (VLRFR) problem [6]. Apart from
that, training of a VLRFR model often suffers from very
limited representative face examples to extract meaningful

9957

