This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DepGraph: Towards Any Structural Pruning
Gongfan Fang1 Xinyin Ma1 Mingli Song2 Michael Bi Mi3 Xinchao Wang1 *
National University of Singapore1 Zhejiang University2 Huawei Technologies Ltd.3
gongfan@u.nus.edu, maxinyin@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

https://github.com/VainF/Torch-Pruning

Abstract
Structural pruning enables model acceleration by removing structurally-grouped parameters from neural networks. However, the parameter-grouping patterns vary
widely across different models, making architecturespecific pruners, which rely on manually-designed grouping
schemes, non-generalizable to new architectures. In this
work, we study a highly-challenging yet barely-explored
task, any structural pruning, to tackle general structural
pruning of arbitrary architecture like CNNs, RNNs, GNNs
and Transformers. The most prominent obstacle towards
this goal lies in the structural coupling, which not only
forces different layers to be pruned simultaneously, but also
expects all removed parameters to be consistently unimportant, thereby avoiding structural issues and significant performance degradation after pruning. To address this problem, we propose a general and fully automatic method, Dependency Graph (DepGraph), to explicitly model the dependency between layers and comprehensively group coupled
parameters for pruning. In this work, we extensively evaluate our method on several architectures and tasks, including
ResNe(X)t, DenseNet, MobileNet and Vision transformer
for images, GAT for graph, DGCNN for 3D point cloud,
alongside LSTM for language, and demonstrate that, even
with a simple norm-based criterion, the proposed method
consistently yields gratifying performances.

1. Introduction
The recent emergence of edge computing applications
calls for the necessity for deep neural compression [16, 22,
25,33,34,61,65–67,69,75]. Among the many network compression paradigms, pruning has proven itself to be highly
effective and practical [7, 11, 30, 31, 44, 58, 59, 74]. The
goal of network pruning is to remove redundant parameters from a given network to lighten its size and potentially
speed up the inference. Mainstream pruning approaches can
* Corresponding author

+

+

ReLU

MLP

BN2
Conv2
ReLU

×

+
tanh

Norm
+

×
𝜎

𝜎

tanh

×
𝜎

(c) RNNs

Multi-Head
Attention

BN1

GNN
Layer

Conv1

Norm

(a) CNNs

(b) Transformers

(d) GNNs

Figure 1. Parameters from different layers are inherently dependent on each other across network architectures, which forces several layers to be pruned simultaneously. For instance, to prune
the Conv2 in (a), all other layers {Conv1 , BN1 , BN2 } within the
block must be pruned as well. In this work, we introduce a generic
scheme, termed as Dependency Graph, to explicitly account for
such dependencies and execute the pruning of arbitrary architecture in a fully automatic manner.

be roughly categorized into two schemes, structurual pruning [4, 29, 71] and unstructurual pruning [8, 13, 44]. The
core difference between the two lies in that, structural pruning changes the structure of neural networks by physically
removing grouped parameters, while unstructural pruning
conducts zeroing on partial weights without modification
to the network structure. Compared to unstructural ones,
structural pruning does not rely on specific AI accelerators
or software to reduce memory consumption and computational costs, thereby finding a wider domain of applications
in practice [38, 68].
Nevertheless, the nature of structural pruning per se
makes itself a challenging task, especially for modern deep
neural networks with coupled and complex internal structures. The rationale lies in that, deep neural networks are
built upon a large number of basic modules like convolution, normalization, or activation, yet these modules, either
parameterized or not, are intrinsically coupled through the
intricate connections [17, 23]. As a result, even when we
seek to remove only one channel from a CNN illustrated in

16091

