This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Conditional Attributes for Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Qingsheng Wang1 *, Lingqiao Liu2 , Chenchen Jing3 , Hao Chen3 , Guoqiang Liang1 ,
Peng Wang1†, Chunhua Shen3
1
School of Computer Science and Ningbo Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
3
School of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims to train
models to recognize novel compositional concepts based
on learned concepts such as attribute-object combinations.
One of the challenges is to model attributes interacted with
different objects, e.g., the attribute “wet” in “wet apple”
and “wet cat” is different. As a solution, we provide analysis and argue that attributes are conditioned on the recognized object and input image and explore learning conditional attribute embeddings by a proposed attribute learning framework containing an attribute hyper learner and
an attribute base learner. By encoding conditional attributes, our model enables to generate flexible attribute
embeddings for generalization from seen to unseen compositions. Experiments on CZSL benchmarks, including the
more challenging C-GQA dataset, demonstrate better performances compared with other state-of-the-art approaches
and validate the importance of learning conditional attributes. Code‡ is available at https://github.com/
wqshmzh/CANet-CZSL.

1. Introduction
Deep machine learning algorithms today can learn
knowledge of concepts to recognize patterns. Can a machine compose different learned concepts to generalize to
new compositions? Compositional generalization is one of
the hallmarks of human intelligence [3, 18]. To make the
models equipped with this ability, Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning (CZSL) [25] is proposed, where the models are
trained to recognize images of unseen compositions composed of seen concepts. In this work, we concentrate on the
situation where each composition is composed by attribute
(e.g., wet) and object (e.g., apple). For example, given im* E-mail: wqshmzh@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
† Corresponding author. E-mail: peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn
‡ Gitee: https://gitee.com/wqshmzh/canet-czsl

Figure 1. The diagram of our work. We aim to learn conditional
attributes conditioned on the recognized object and input image
through an attribute learning framework containing an attribute hyper learner and an attribute base learner. We first recognize the object in the input image. Then, we feed prior knowledge extracted
from the conditions, which are recognized object word embedding
and input image visual embedding, to the attribute hyper learner.
Finally, conditional attribute embeddings are produced by the attribute base learner parameterized by the attribute hyper learner.

ages of wet apple and dry cat, a well-trained model can recognize images of new compositions dry apple and wet cat.
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning of attribute-object
compositions requires modeling attributes, objects, and the
contextuality between them. Learning to model objects in
CZSL is similar to conventional supervised object classification task since the model has access to all objects in
CZSL task [33]. Learning to model contextuality between
attribute and object is mostly addressed in the literature
[23,25,26,31,39–41]. One of the main challenges of CZSL
is the appearance diversity of an attribute when composed
with different objects, e.g., attribute wet in wet apple and
wet cat is different. This reveals that the information of each
attribute is dependent on different objects. However, most

11197

