This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Action Changes by Measuring Verb-Adverb Textual Relationships
Davide Moltisanti, Frank Keller, Hakan Bilen, Laura Sevilla-Lara
The University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
{davide.moltisanti, frank.keller, h.bilen, l.sevilla}@ed.ac.uk

Training

1. Introduction
Learning how an action is performed in a video is an
important step towards expanding our video understanding
beyond action recognition. This task has been referred to as
“adverb recognition”, and has potential useful applications
in robotics and retrieval. Consider a scenario where a robot
handles fragile objects. In such case we would like to tell
the robot to grasp objects gently to prevent it from breaking things. Similarly, learning how actions are performed
enables more sophisticated queries for retrieval. Imagine
learning a new recipe where a crucial step is stirring a mixture vigorously. It would be useful to find good examples
showing how to whip a mixture in such a manner.

chop...?

grind

The goal of this work is to understand the way actions
are performed in videos. That is, given a video, we aim to
predict an adverb indicating a modification applied to the
action (e.g. cut “finely”). We cast this problem as a regression task. We measure textual relationships between verbs
and adverbs to generate a regression target representing
the action change we aim to learn. We test our approach
on a range of datasets and achieve state-of-the-art results
on both adverb prediction and antonym classification. Furthermore, we outperform previous work when we lift two
commonly assumed conditions: the availability of action labels during testing and the pairing of adverbs as antonyms.
Existing datasets for adverb recognition are either noisy,
which makes learning difficult, or contain actions whose appearance is not influenced by adverbs, which makes evaluation less reliable. To address this, we collect a new high
quality dataset: Adverbs in Recipes (AIR). We focus on instructional recipes videos, curating a set of actions that
exhibit meaningful visual changes when performed differently. Videos in AIR are more tightly trimmed and were
manually reviewed by multiple annotators to ensure high labelling quality. Results show that models learn better from
AIR given its cleaner videos. At the same time, adverb prediction on AIR is challenging, demonstrating that there is
considerable room for improvement.

Testing

spray

Abstract

slowly

coarsely

coarsely
finely
quickly
slowly

change intensity

Figure 1. We aim to predict the way an action is performed in
a video (right). Actions and their outcomes change in different
ways when modified by adverbs, e.g. grinding coffee slowly does
not have the same effect as grinding it coarsely (left). We learn
to predict adverbs by recognising action changes in the video. We
define action changes measuring verb-adverb textual relationships.

Adverb recognition is a challenging problem. Firstly, a
single adverb can modify multiple actions in different ways.
For example, to grind coffee coarsely (see Figure 1) we
need to set a certain granularity in a grinder. Conversely, to
spray something coarsely we would just use a spraying can
more sparingly. Secondly, compared to actions or objects,
adverbs are much harder to identify. Though somewhat subjective [1, 16], the temporal boundaries of an action can be
easily determined. The spatial extent of an object is also
easy to recognise for a human. Adverbs are instead more
abstract: we can see their effect, but we struggle to pinpoint
the spatio-temporal location where the adverb is appearing.
Consider for example the act of spraying something slowly
in Figure 1. We could say that slowly “is located” on the
hand motions. At the same time, spraying something slowly
could implicate a more even coating of a surface. That is,
the outcome of an action and the end-state of the involved
objects can also change according to the adverb. This makes
it hard to label adverbs with visual annotations (e.g. bounding boxes), which makes the problem more challenging.

23110

