This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Masked Autoencoders via Hierarchical Latent Variable Models
Lingjing Kong* 1 Martin Q. Ma∗1 Guangyi Chen1,2
Eric P. Xing1,2 Yuejie Chi1 Louis-Philippe Morency†1 Kun Zhang†1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Masked autoencoder (MAE), a simple and effective selfsupervised learning framework based on the reconstruction
of masked image regions, has recently achieved prominent
success in a variety of vision tasks. Despite the emergence
of intriguing empirical observations on MAE, a theoretically principled understanding is still lacking. In this work,
we formally characterize and justify existing empirical insights and provide theoretical guarantees of MAE. We formulate the underlying data-generating process as a hierarchical latent variable model, and show that under reasonable assumptions, MAE provably identifies a set of latent
variables in the hierarchical model, explaining why MAE
can extract high-level information from pixels. Further, we
show how key hyperparameters in MAE (the masking ratio
and the patch size) determine which true latent variables
to be recovered, therefore influencing the level of semantic
information in the representation. Specifically, extremely
large or small masking ratios inevitably lead to low-level
representations. Our theory offers coherent explanations
of existing empirical observations and provides insights for
potential empirical improvements and fundamental limitations of the masked-reconstruction paradigm. We conduct
extensive experiments to validate our theoretical insights.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has achieved tremendous
success in learning transferable representations without labels, showing strong results in a variety of downstream
tasks [12, 14, 16, 23, 49]. As a major SSL paradigm, masked
image modeling (MIM) [1–3,11,13,22,41,63,69] performs
the reconstruction of purposely masked image pixels as the
pretraining task. Among MIM methods, masked autoencoding (MAE) [22] has gained significant traction due to its
computational efficiency and state-of-the-art performance
in a wide range of downstream tasks.
Empirical observations from previous work reveal various intriguing properties of MAE. In particular, aggressive
* Joint first author. † Joint senior author.

Figure 1. Masking-reconstruction under a hierarchical generating
process. In a hierarchical data-generating process, high-level latent variables (e.g., z1 ) represent high-level information such as semantics, and
low-level latent variables (e.g., [z2 , z3 , z4 ]) represent low-level information such as texture. We show that through proper masking, MAE learns
to recover high-level latent variables with identifiability guarantees.

masking has been shown critical to downstream task performances [22, 28, 61, 63]. It is conjectured that such masking forces the model to learn meaningful high-level semantic understanding of the objects and scenes rather than the
low-level information such as texture. However, it remains
largely unclear whether such intuitions are sound in principle. Theoretically verifying and characterizing these empirical insights would not only grant a certificate to the current
approaches but would also offer theoretical insights for algorithmic advancements.
In this work, we establish a principled yet intuitive
framework for understanding MAE and providing identifiability guarantees. Concretely, we first formulate the underlying data-generating process as a hierarchical latent variable model (Figure 1), with high-level variables corresponding to abstract and semantic information like classes, and
low-level variables corresponding to elaborate and granular
information like texture. Such latent variable models have
been studied in causal discovery [29, 62]. In [27, 50], it is
hypothesized that complex data, such as images, follow a
hierarchical latent structure.
Stemming from this formulation, we show that under
reasonable assumptions, MAE can recover a subset of the

7918

