This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Class-agnostic Motion Prediction for Autonomous Driving
Ruibo Li1,2 ,

Hanyu Shi2 , Ziang Fu3 , Zhe Wang3 , Guosheng Lin1,2∗
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
SenseTime Research
E-mail: ruibo001@e.ntu.edu.sg , gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Understanding the motion behavior of dynamic environments is vital for autonomous driving, leading to increasing attention in class-agnostic motion prediction in LiDAR
point clouds. Outdoor scenes can often be decomposed into
mobile foregrounds and static backgrounds, which enables
us to associate motion understanding with scene parsing.
Based on this observation, we study a novel weakly supervised motion prediction paradigm, where fully or partially (1%, 0.1%) annotated foreground/background binary
masks are used for supervision, rather than using expensive motion annotations. To this end, we propose a twostage weakly supervised approach, where the segmentation
model trained with the incomplete binary masks in Stage1
will facilitate the self-supervised learning of the motion
prediction network in Stage2 by estimating possible moving foregrounds in advance. Furthermore, for robust selfsupervised motion learning, we design a Consistency-aware
Chamfer Distance loss by exploiting multi-frame information and explicitly suppressing potential outliers. Comprehensive experiments show that, with fully or partially binary masks as supervision, our weakly supervised models
surpass the self-supervised models by a large margin and
perform on par with some supervised ones. This further
demonstrates that our approach achieves a good compromise between annotation effort and performance.

1. Introduction
Understanding the dynamics of surrounding environments is vital for autonomous driving [27]. Particularly,
motion prediction, which generates the future positions of
objects from previous information, plays an important role
in path planning and navigation.
Classical approaches [7, 9, 47] achieve motion prediction by object detection, tracking, and trajectory forecast∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin. (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg )

(a) Ground truth motion data,
(moving points are colored by their motion, static points are Gray)

(b) Fully annotated Foreground/Background masks (Purple: FG; Cyan: BG)

(c) Partially annotated Foreground/ Background masks

Figure 1. Illustration of our weak supervision concept. Outdoor scenes can be decomposed into mobile foregrounds and static
backgrounds, which enables us to achieve motion learning with
fully or partially annotated FG/BG masks as weak supervision to
replace expensive ground truth motion data.

ing. These detection-based approaches may fail when encountering unknown categories not included in training
data [42]. To address this issue, many approaches [8,41,42]
propose to directly estimate class-agnostic motion from
bird’s eye view (BEV) map of point clouds and achieve a
good trade-off between accuracy and computational cost.
However, sensors can not capture motion information in
complex environments [27], which makes motion data
scarce and expensive. Therefore, most existing real-world
motion data are produced by semi-supervised learning
methods with auxiliary information, e.g., KITTI [10, 27],
or bootstrapped from human-annotated object detection and

17599

