This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Joint Latent Space EBM Prior Model for Multi-layer Generator
Jiali Cui1 , Ying Nian Wu2 , Tian Han1
1
Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles
{jcui7,than6}@stevens.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the fundamental problem of learning multi-layer generator models. The multi-layer generator model builds multiple layers of latent variables as a
prior model on top of the generator, which benefits learning complex data distribution and hierarchical representations. However, such a prior model usually focuses on
modeling inter-layer relations between latent variables by
assuming non-informative (conditional) Gaussian distributions, which can be limited in model expressivity. To tackle
this issue and learn more expressive prior models, we propose an energy-based model (EBM) on the joint latent space
over all layers of latent variables with the multi-layer generator as its backbone. Such joint latent space EBM prior
model captures the intra-layer contextual relations at each
layer through layer-wise energy terms, and latent variables
across different layers are jointly corrected. We develop
a joint training scheme via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), which involves Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) sampling for both prior and posterior distributions of the latent variables from different layers. To ensure
efficient inference and learning, we further propose a variational training scheme where an inference model is used to
amortize the costly posterior MCMC sampling. Our experiments demonstrate that the learned model can be expressive
in generating high-quality images and capturing hierarchical features for better outlier detection.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models (a.k.a, generator models) have
made promising progress in learning complex data distributions and achieved great successes in image and video
synthesis [21, 34, 37, 39] as well as representation learning [5,48]. Such models usually consist of low-dimensional
latent variables together with a top-down generation model
that maps such latent factors to the observed data. The
latent factors can serve as an abstract data representation,
but it is often modelled via a single latent vector with non-

informative prior distribution which leads to limited model
expressivity and fails to capture different levels of abstractions. Learning an informative prior model for hierarchical
representations is needed, yet research in this direction is
still under-developed.
A principled way to learn such a prior model is by learning the generator models with multiple layers of latent variables. However, the learning of multi-layer generator model
can be challenging as the inter-layer structural relation (i.e.,
latent variables across different layers) and the intra-layer
contextual relation (i.e., latent units within the same layer)
have to be effectively modelled and efficiently learned. Various methods have been proposed [5,28,32,35,40], but they
only focused on inter-layer modeling by assuming the conditional Gaussian distribution across different layers while
ignoring the intra-layer contextual modeling as the latent
units are conditional independent within each layer.
The energy-based models (EBMs), on the other hand, are
shown to be expressive and proved to be powerful in capturing contextual and non-structural data regularities. Notably, [33] considers the EBM in the latent space for the
non-hierarchical generator model, where the energy function is considered as a correction of the non-informative
Gaussian prior. The low dimensionality of the latent space
makes EBM effective in capturing regularities in the data.
However, a single latent vector in [33] is infeasible for capturing the patterns at multiple layers of abstractions, which
limits its model capacity.
In this paper, we propose to combine the strengths of
the latent space EBM and the generator with multiple layers of latent variables for better hierarchical representations
and a more expressive prior model. Specifically, we introduce layer-wise energy terms to exponentially tilt the
non-informative Gaussian conditional at each layer, and latent variables across different layers are modelled jointly
through EBM with the multi-layer generator model as its
backbone. Such a joint EBM prior model seamlessly integrates the intra-layer contextual modeling via layer-wise
energy terms and inter-layer structural modeling with multilayer latent variables.

3603

