This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Neural Field Generation using Triplane Diffusion
J. Ryan Shue*1 Eric Ryan Chan∗2 Ryan Po∗2 Zachary Ankner∗3,4 Jiajun Wu2 Gordon Wetzstein2
1

Milton Academy 2 Stanford University 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 MosaicML

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as the state-of-the-art
for image generation, among other tasks. Here, we present
an efficient diffusion-based model for 3D-aware generation
of neural fields. Our approach pre-processes training data,
such as ShapeNet meshes, by converting them to continuous
occupancy fields and factoring them into a set of axis-aligned
triplane feature representations. Thus, our 3D training
scenes are all represented by 2D feature planes, and we
can directly train existing 2D diffusion models on these
representations to generate 3D neural fields with high quality
and diversity, outperforming alternative approaches to
3D-aware generation. Our approach requires essential
modifications to existing triplane factorization pipelines to
make the resulting features easy to learn for the diffusion
model. We demonstrate state-of-the-art results on 3D
generation on several object classes from ShapeNet.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have seen rapid progress, setting
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance across a variety of
image generation tasks. While most diffusion methods model
2D images, recent work [2, 14, 42, 86] has attempted to
develop denoising methods for 3D shape generation. These
3D diffusion methods operate on discrete point clouds and,
while successful, exhibit limited quality and resolution.
In contrast to 2D diffusion, which directly leverages the
image as the target for the diffusion process, it is not directly
obvious how to construct such 2D targets in the case of 3D
diffusion. Interestingly, recent work on 3D-aware generative
adversarial networks (GANs) (see Sec. 2 for an overview)
has demonstrated impressive results for 3D shape generation
using 2D generators. We build upon this idea of learning to
generate triplane representations [6] that encode 3D scenes or
* Equal contribution.

Part of the work was done during an internship at Stanford.
Project page: https://jryanshue.com/nfd

Figure 1. Our method leverages existing 2D diffusion models for
3D shape generation using hybrid explicit–implicit neural representations. Top: triplane-based 3D shape diffusion process using
our framework. Bottom: Interpolation between generated shapes.

radiance fields as a set of axis-aligned 2D feature planes. The
structure of a triplane is analogous to that of a 2D image and
can be used as part of a 3D generative method that leverages
conventional 2D generator architectures.
Inspired by recent efforts in designing efficient 3D GAN
architectures, we introduce a neural field-based diffusion
framework for 3D representation learning. Our approach
follows a two-step process. In the first step, a training set of
3D scenes is factored into a set of per-scene triplane features
and a single, shared feature decoder. In the second step, a
2D diffusion model is trained on these triplanes. The trained
diffusion model can then be used at inference time to generate
novel and diverse 3D scenes. By interpreting triplanes as
multi-channel 2D images and thus decoupling generation
from rendering, we can leverage current (and likely future)
SOTA 2D diffusion model backbones nearly out of the box.
Fig. 1 illustrates how a single object is generated with our
framework (top), and how two generated objects—even with
different topologies—can be interpolated (bottom).
Our core contributions are as follows:

20875

