This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodality Helps Unimodality:
Cross-Modal Few-Shot Learning with Multimodal Models
Zhiqiu Lin*

Samuel Yu*

Zhiyi Kuang
Deepak Pathak
Carnegie Mellon University

Deva Ramanan

{zhiqiul,samuelyu,zkuang,dpathak,deva}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The ability to quickly learn a new task with minimal instruction – known as few-shot learning – is a central aspect of intelligent agents. Classical few-shot benchmarks
make use of few-shot samples from a single modality, but
such samples may not be sufficient to characterize an entire
concept class. In contrast, humans use cross-modal information to learn new concepts efficiently. In this work, we
demonstrate that one can indeed build a better visual dog
classifier by reading about dogs and listening to them bark.
To do so, we exploit the fact that recent multimodal foundation models such as CLIP are inherently cross-modal, mapping different modalities to the same representation space.
Specifically, we propose a simple cross-modal adaptation
approach that learns from few-shot examples spanning different modalities. By repurposing class names as additional
one-shot training samples, we achieve SOTA results with an
embarrassingly simple linear classifier for vision-language
adaptation. Furthermore, we show that our approach can
benefit existing methods such as prefix tuning, adapters, and
classifier ensembling. Finally, to explore other modalities
beyond vision and language, we construct the first (to our
knowledge) audiovisual few-shot benchmark and use crossmodal training to improve the performance of both image
and audio classification. Project site at link.

1. Introduction
Learning with minimal instruction is a hallmark of human intelligence [86, 91, 98], and is often studied under the
guise of few-shot learning. In the context of few-shot visual
classification [18, 20, 29, 46, 79, 82], a classifier is first pretrained on a set of base classes to learn a good feature representation and then adapted or finetuned on a small amount
of novel class data. However, such few-shot setups often
face an inherent ambiguity – if the training image contains a
golden retriever wearing a hat, how does the learner know if
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Human perception is internally cross-modal. When
we perceive from one modality (such as vision), the same neurons will be triggered in our cerebral cortex as if we are perceiving the object from other modalities (such as language and audio) [24, 67, 70]. This phenomenon grants us a strong ability to
learn from a few examples with cross-modal information [52, 67].
In this work, we propose to leverage cross-modality to adapt multimodal models (such as CLIP [81] and AudioCLIP [27]), that encode different modalities to the same representation space.

the task is to find dogs, golden retrievers, or even
hats? On the other hand, humans have little trouble understanding and even generalizing from as few as one example.
How so?
We argue that humans make use of multimodal signals and representations (Figure 1) when learning concepts.
For example, verbal language has been shown to help toddlers better recognize visual objects given just a few examples [42, 90]. Indeed, there exists ample evidence from
neuroscience suggesting that cognitive representations are
inherently multimodal. For instance, visual images of a
person evoke the same neurons as the textual strings of the
person’s name [80] and even audio clips of that person talking [70]. Even for infants as young as 1-5 months old, there
is a strong correspondence between auditory-visual [52] as
well as visual-tactile signals [67]. Such cross-modal or
inter-modal representations are fundamental to the human
perceptual-cognitive system, allowing us to understand new
concepts even with few examples [24].

19325

