This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IPCC-TP: Utilizing Incremental Pearson Correlation Coefficient
for Joint Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction
Dekai Zhu1,∗ , Guangyao Zhai1,∗ , Yan Di1,† , Fabian Manhardt2 ,
Hendrik Berkemeyer3,4 , Tuan Tran3 , Nassir Navab1 , Federico Tombari1,2 , and Benjamin Busam1,5
1

Technical University of Munich 2 Google
3
Robert Bosch GmbH 4 University of Osnabrueck 5 3Dwe.ai
{firstname.lastname,b.busam}@tum.de

-1

Abstract
Reliable multi-agent trajectory prediction is crucial for
the safe planning and control of autonomous systems. Compared with single-agent cases, the major challenge in simultaneously processing multiple agents lies in modeling
complex social interactions caused by various driving intentions and road conditions. Previous methods typically
leverage graph-based message propagation or attention
mechanism to encapsulate such interactions in the format
of marginal probabilistic distributions. However, it is inherently sub-optimal. In this paper, we propose IPCCTP, a novel relevance-aware module based on Incremental
Pearson Correlation Coefficient to improve multi-agent interaction modeling. IPCC-TP learns pairwise joint Gaussian Distributions through the tightly-coupled estimation of
the means and covariances according to interactive incremental movements. Our module can be conveniently embedded into existing multi-agent prediction methods to extend original motion distribution decoders. Extensive experiments on nuScenes and Argoverse 2 datasets demonstrate that IPCC-TP improves the performance of baselines
by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction refers to predicting the future trajectories of one or several target agents based on past trajectories and road conditions. It is an essential and emerging
subtask in autonomous driving [22,27,36,44] and industrial
robotics [20, 34, 47].
Previous methods [6, 14, 17, 32, 48] concentrate on
Single-agent Trajectory Prediction (STP), which leverages
past trajectories of other agents and surrounding road conditions as additional cues to assist ego-motion estimation. De∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

0

!

(b)

1

!

①②

④⑤

!

②③

!

③④

①
⑤
④

③

②

(a)

$

①

②

④

!#"
!!"

!

!#$

#

③

"

! Period of time $ Probability density
Means
Covariances % Displacement "! #-th distribution

$

⑤

%

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of a driving scene with five agents
①−⑤. (a) IPCC-TP models future interactions for t steps based on
joint Gaussian distribution among one-dimensional increments of
agents’ displacement d. (b) The values of IPCC represented by ρ
on the axis indicate the correlation between agents’ trajectories. In
the predicted future, ① and ② interact intensively with ① yielding
to ② (ρ12 < 0). ④’s movement does not interfere ⑤ (|ρ45 | ≈ 0).
③ is closely following ④ (ρ34 ≤ +1).

spite the significant progress made in recent years, its application is limited. The reason is that simultaneously processing all traffic participants remains unreachable, although it
is a common requirement for safe autonomous driving.
A straightforward idea to deal with this issue is to directly utilize STP methods on each agent respectively and
finally attain a joint collision-free prediction via pairwise
collision detection. Such methods are far from reliably
handling Multi-agent Trajectory Prediction (MTP) since the
search space for collision-free trajectories grows exponentially as the number of agents increases, i.e., N agents with
M modes yield M N possible combinations, making such
search strategy infeasible with numerous agents. By in-

5507

