This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-efficient Large Scale Place Recognition with Graded Similarity Supervision
María Leyva-Vallina
University of Groningen

Nicola Strisciuglio
University of Twente

Nicolai Petkov
University of Groningen

m.leyva.vallina@rug.nl

n.strisciuglio@utwente.nl

n.petkov@rug.nl

Abstract
Visual place recognition (VPR) is a fundamental task of
computer vision for visual localization. Existing methods are
trained using image pairs that either depict the same place
or not. Such a binary indication does not consider continuous relations of similarity between images of the same place
taken from different positions, determined by the continuous
nature of camera pose. The binary similarity induces a noisy
supervision signal into the training of VPR methods, which
stall in local minima and require expensive hard mining algorithms to guarantee convergence. Motivated by the fact
that two images of the same place only partially share visual
cues due to camera pose differences, we deploy an automatic
re-annotation strategy to re-label VPR datasets. We compute
graded similarity labels for image pairs based on available
localization metadata. Furthermore, we propose a new Generalized Contrastive Loss (GCL) that uses graded similarity
labels for training contrastive networks. We demonstrate
that the use of the new labels and GCL allow to dispense
from hard-pair mining, and to train image descriptors that
perform better in VPR by nearest neighbor search, obtaining
superior or comparable results than methods that require
expensive hard-pair mining and re-ranking techniques.

1. Introduction
Visual place recognition (VPR) is an important task of
computer vision, and a fundamental building block of navigation systems for autonomous vehicles [24, 48]. It is
approached either with structure-based methods, namely
Structure-from-Motion [36] and SLAM [26], or with image retrieval [2, 15, 20, 29, 30, 46]. The former focus on
precise relative camera pose estimation [34, 35]. The latter aim at learning image descriptors for effective retrieval
of similar images to a given query in a nearest search approach [28]. The goal of descriptor learning is to ensure images of the same place to be projected onto close-by points
in a latent space, and images of different places to be projected onto distant points [9, 10, 21]. Contrastive [19, 30] and
triplet [2, 22, 23, 27] loss were used for this goal and resulted

(a) reference image

(b) GPS distance 6m
positive

(c) GPS distance 25.6m
negative

Figure 1. (a) A place in the city of Amman. (b) An image taken 6m
away is labeled as positive (same place), while (c) an image taken
25.6m away is labeled as negative (not the same place) despite
sharing a lot of visual cues.

in state-of-the-art performance on several VPR benchmarks.
VPR methods are normally trained using image pairs
labelled to indicate they either depict the same place or not,
in a binary fashion. In practice, images of a certain place can
be taken from different positions, i.e. with a different camera
pose, and thus share only a part of their visual cues (or
surface in 3D). In existing datasets, two images are usually
labeled to be of the same place (positive) if they are taken
within a predefined range (usually 25m) computed using e.g.
GPS metadata. This creates ambiguous cases. For instance,
Figure 1 shows a reference image (a) of a place and two
other pictures taken 6m (b) and 25.6m (c) away from its
position. The images are respectively labeled as positive
and negative match, although they share many visual cues
(e.g. the building on the right). Binary labels are thus noisy
and interfere with the training of VPR networks, that usually
stall in local minima. To address this, resource- and timecostly hard pair mining strategies are used to compose the
training batches. For example, training NetVLAD [2] on
the Mapillary Street Level Sequences (MSLS) dataset [45]
can take more than 20 days on an Nvidia v100 gpu due
to the complexity of pair mining. We instead build on the
observation that two images depict the same place only to a
certain degree of shared cues, namely a degree of similarity,
and propose to embed this information in new continuous
labels for existing datasets that can be used to reduce the
effect of noise in the training of effective VPR methods.
In this paper we exploit camera pose metadata or 3D information associated to image pairs as a proxy to estimate an

23487

