This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Localized Semantic Feature Mixers for Efficient Pedestrian Detection in
Autonomous Driving
Abdul Hannan Khan1,2 , Mohammed Shariq Nawaz1 , Andreas Dengel1,2
Department of Computer Science, RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau1 ,
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI GmbH)2 ,
67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
Corresponding Author:

Abstract

Autonomous driving systems rely heavily on the underlying perception module which needs to be both performant
and efficient to allow precise decisions in real-time. Avoiding collisions with pedestrians is of topmost priority in any
autonomous driving system. Therefore, pedestrian detection is one of the core parts of such systems’ perception
modules. Current state-of-the-art pedestrian detectors have
two major issues. Firstly, they have long inference times
which affect the efficiency of the whole perception module,
and secondly, their performance in the case of small and
heavily occluded pedestrians is poor. We propose Localized Semantic Feature Mixers (LSFM), a novel, anchor-free
pedestrian detection architecture. It uses our novel Super
Pixel Pyramid Pooling module instead of the, computationally costly, Feature Pyramid Networks for feature encoding. Moreover, our MLPMixer-based Dense Focal Detection Network is used as a light detection head, reducing
computational effort and inference time compared to existing approaches. To boost the performance of the proposed architecture, we adapt and use mixup augmentation
which improves the performance, especially in small and
heavily occluded cases. We benchmark LSFM against the
state-of-the-art on well-established traffic scene pedestrian
datasets. The proposed LSFM achieves state-of-the-art performance in Caltech, City Persons, Euro City Persons, and
TJU-Traffic-Pedestrian datasets while reducing the inference time on average by 55%. Further, LSFM beats the
human baseline for the first time in the history of pedestrian
detection. Finally, we conducted a cross-dataset evaluation
which proved that our proposed LSFM generalizes well to
unseen data.

hannan.khan@dfki.de

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving is currently under the spotlight in
the computer vision community [3, 20]. Detecting and
avoiding collisions with pedestrians is one of the numerous challenges of autonomous driving. Pedestrian detectors
for autonomous driving not only have to be performant but
efficient as well, since rapid perception is required to make
timely decisions. Furthermore, these systems need to fulfill additional constraints such as good portability and low
computational footprint, as compute-intensive systems can
have a heavy impact on the milage of autonomous vehicles.
Pedestrian detection for autonomous driving aims to provide the autonomous vehicle with a timely perception of
all pedestrians in its surroundings. The problem becomes
more challenging as most of the pedestrians are occluded
either by other pedestrians or by other objects [5,48]. Additionally, the camera stream is introduced with motion blur
since it is coming from the camera mounted on a moving
vehicle [15]. The motion blur problem further intensifies
when the vehicle moves faster. Dealing with motion blur
and occlusion is vital for a pedestrian detector to perform
well. Another major challenge for pedestrian detectors is
the scale variance in pedestrians. Since the camera images
are subject to perspective distortion the pedestrian scales
vary from a few pixels large to almost equal to the height of
the image frame. Small-scale pedestrians (far or short) are
the bottleneck of scale variance problem [5]. The pedestrian
detector needs to sufficiently understand the core visual features of a pedestrian and use them to detect pedestrians irrespective of their scales.
Furthermore, domain generalization is critical for a
pedestrian detector as it is expected to perform in all circumstances e.g., all kinds of weather, lighting, and traffic
densities, which might or might not be part of the training
data [14, 15]. Therefore, pedestrian detectors should perform well on unseen data to be reliable under real-world
circumstances.

5476

