This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shape-Constraint Recurrent Flow for 6D Object Pose Estimation
Yang Hai 1 ,
1

Rui Song 1 ,

Jiaojiao Li 1 ,

State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian University,
Reference

3D Shape Reference

Yinlin Hu 2
2

MagicLeap
3D Shape
Reference

3D Shape

Abstract
Most recent 6D object pose methods use 2D optical flow
to refine their results. However, the general optical flow
Target
Reference
3D Shape
Target
Target Dense
Flow
Shape-unaware
Dense
Flow
Shape-unaware
methods typically do not consider the
target’s 3D Dense
shapeFlow
in-Shape-unaware Input
Initialization
Flow
Flow warp
formation during matching, making them less effective in
Figure 1. The problem of optical flow in 6D pose estimation.
6D object pose estimation. In this work, we propose a
Given an initial pose, one can estimate the dense 2D-to-2D corshape-constraint recurrent matching framework for 6D obrespondence (optical flow) between the input and the synthetic
ject pose estimation. We first compute a pose-induced flow
Target
image rendered
from the initial
pose,
dense 2D
Shape-unaware
Dense
Flowand then lift the
based on the displacement of 2D reprojection between the
matching to 3D-to-2D correspondence to obtain a new refined pose
initial pose and the currently estimated pose, which emby PnP solvers (PFA-Pose [16]). However, the flow estimation
beds the target’s 3D shape implicitly. Then we use this
does not take the target’s 3D shape into account, as illustrated by
pose-induced flow to construct the correlation map for the
the warped image based on the estimated flow in the last figure,
following matching iterations, which reduces the matching
which introduces significant matching noise to pose solvers and is
space significantly and is much easier to learn. Furthersuboptimal for 6D object pose estimation.
more, we use networks to learn the object pose based on the
current estimated flow, which facilitates the computation of
the pose-induced flow for the next iteration and yields an
networks they use are mainly built on top of two assumpend-to-end system for object pose. Finally, we optimize the
tions, i.e., the brightness consistency between two potenoptical flow and object pose simultaneously in a recurrent
tial matches and the smoothness of matches within a local
manner. We evaluate our method on three challenging 6D
neighbor [1]. These assumptions, however, are too general
object pose datasets and show that it outperforms the state
and do not have any clue about the target’s 3D shape in the
of the art significantly in both accuracy and efficiency.
context of 6D object pose estimation, making the potential
matching space of every pixel unnecessarily large in the target image. Second, the missing shape information during
1. Introduction
matching often results in flow results that do not respect the
target shape, which introduces significant matching noise,
6D object pose estimation, i.e., estimating the 3D rotaas shown in Fig. 1. Third, this multi-stage paradigm trains
tion and 3D translation of a target object with respect to the
a network that relies on a surrogate matching loss that does
camera, is a fundamental problem in 3D computer vision
not directly reflect the final 6D pose estimation task [17],
and also a crucial component in many applications, includwhich is not end-to-end trainable and suboptimal.
ing robotic manipulation [8] and augmented reality [34].
Most recent methods rely on pose refinement to obtain accurate pose results [16, 31, 52]. Typically, they first synthesize an image based on the rendering techniques [9, 38]
according to the initial pose, then estimate dense 2D-to-2D
correspondence between the rendered image and the input
based on optical flow networks [46]. After lifting the estimated 2D optical flow to 3D-to-2D correspondence based
on the target’s 3D shape, they can obtain a new refined pose
using Perspective-n-Points (PnP) solvers [27].
Although this paradigm works well in general, it suffers
from several weaknesses. First, the general optical flow

To address these problems, we propose a shapeconstraint recurrent matching framework for 6D object pose
estimation. It is built on top of the intuition that, in addition
to the brightness consistency and smoothness constraint in
classical optical flow solutions [2, 35], the dense 2D matching should comply with the 3D shape of the target. We first
build a 4D correlation volume between every pixel of the
source image and every pixel of the target image, similar to
RAFT [46]. While, instead of indexing from the correlation volume according to the current flow during the iteration, we propose indexing the correlation volume based on

4831

