This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-Guided Optimization of Radiance Fields with Multi-View Image
Super-Resolution for High-Resolution Novel View Synthesis
Youngho Yoon and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{dudgh1732,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) aims at synthesizing an image from an arbitrary viewpoint using multi-view images
and camera poses. Among the methods for NVS, Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) is capable of NVS for an arbitrary
resolution as it learns a continuous volumetric representation. However, radiance fields rely heavily on the spectral
characteristics of coordinate-based networks. Thus, there
is a limit to improving the performance of high-resolution
novel view synthesis (HRNVS). To solve this problem, we
propose a novel framework using cross-guided optimization of the single-image super-resolution (SISR) and radiance fields. We perform multi-view image super-resolution
(MVSR) on train-view images during the radiance fields optimization process. It derives the updated SR result by fusing the feature map obtained from SISR and voxel-based uncertainty fields generated by integrated errors of train-view
images. By repeating the updates during radiance fields optimization, train-view images for radiance fields optimization have multi-view consistency and high-frequency details simultaneously, ultimately improving the performance
of HRNVS. Experiments of HRNVS and MVSR on various
benchmark datasets show that the proposed method significantly surpasses existing methods.

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) is an approach to synthesizing an image from an arbitrary viewpoint using multiview images and camera poses. This is an essential task in
computer vision and graphics, and it can be actively used
in street-view navigation, AR/VR, and robotics. Recently,
Neural Radiance Fields [28] (NeRF) significantly improved
the performance of NVS by learning multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) from 5d coordinate input. Since then, many studies
have been conducted to shorten the long learning time of
NeRF [4, 10, 29, 36, 42, 43, 48], increase the performance of
NVS using depth priors [5, 8, 32, 41], and enable NVS from
few-shot views [13, 16, 31, 49].

Figure 1. Cross-guided optimization between single image superresolution and radiance fields. They complement weaknesses of
one another with their respective strengths by using the SR update
module, rendered train-view RGBs, and uncertainty maps.

Continuous scene representations such as NeRF [28] can
be rendered at arbitrary resolution. Thus, there are many
studies to improve the performance of multi-scale scene
representation. Mip-NeRF [2] proposes scale-dependent
positional encoding, which makes a network be trained on
multiple scales. In addition, BACON [22] proposes a network capable of band-limited multi-scale decomposition by
giving a constraint to the bandwidth of network outputs.
Both papers showed significant down-scaling performance
on volume rendering. On the other hand, NeRF-SR [39]
improves the performance of high-resolution novel view
synthesis (HRNVS) by learning in an unsupervised manner
through super-sampling in the radiance fields optimization
process.
Radiance fields have the ability to find scene geometry
and optimize 5D functions simultaneously. Still, radiance
fields have a low ability to perform super-resolution, and
even if they synthesize high-resolution (HR) images, they

12428

