This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hand Avatar: Free-Pose Hand Animation and Rendering from Monocular Video
Xingyu Chen

Baoyuan Wang Heung-Yeung Shum
Xiaobing.AI

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Demonstration of HandAvatar. (a) Personalized hand rendering. From left to right: hand mesh, compositional occupancy, albedo,
illumination, shaded appearance, and ground truth; (b) three groups of texture editing in terms of lighting, albedo, and shadow (by altering
the self-occlusion effect of thumb); (c) free-pose hand animation and rendering.

Abstract
We present HandAvatar, a novel representation for hand
animation and rendering, which can generate smoothly
compositional geometry and self-occlusion-aware texture.
Specifically, we first develop a MANO-HD model as a highresolution mesh topology to fit personalized hand shapes.
Sequentially, we decompose hand geometry into per-bone
rigid parts, and then re-compose paired geometry encodings to derive an across-part consistent occupancy field.
As for texture modeling, we propose a self-occlusion-aware
shading field (SelF). In SelF, drivable anchors are paved
on the MANO-HD surface to record albedo information
under a wide variety of hand poses. Moreover, directed
soft occupancy is designed to describe the ray-to-surface
relation, which is leveraged to generate an illumination
field for the disentanglement of pose-independent albedo
and pose-dependent illumination. Trained from monocular video data, our HandAvatar can perform free-pose hand
animation and rendering while at the same time achieving superior appearance fidelity. We also demonstrate that

HandAvatar provides a route for hand appearance editing.
Project website: https://seanchenxy.github.
io/HandAvatarWeb.

1. Introduction
Human avatars [5,16,19,20,27,74] have been vigorously
studied for years. However, there has been limited research
that particularly focuses on hand avatars [9]. Due to the
nature of distinctive properties (e.g., serious self-occlusion
and contact) between the hand and the rest of the human
parts (i.e., face, head, and body), it is essential to investigate
a specialized representation tailored for modeling both the
hand geometry and texture.
Traditional pipeline tends to adopt texture maps and colored mesh for hand appearance modeling [7, 11, 12, 24, 43],
but developing an elaborate personalized hand mesh and
texture map usually requires expensive scan data [54] and
artistic knowledge. Recently, the neural rendering technique has gained raising attention, where neural radiance
field (NeRF) [32] has been adapted to represent humans by
predicting geometry and texture properties for an arbitrary

8683

