This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fair Federated Medical Image Segmentation via Client Contribution Estimation
Meirui Jiang1 , Holger R. Roth2 , Wenqi Li2 , Dong Yang2 , Can Zhao2 ,
Vishwesh Nath2 , Daguang Xu2 , Qi Dou1, *, Ziyue Xu2,*
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
NVIDIA
Abstract
How to ensure fairness is an important topic in federated learning (FL). Recent studies have investigated how to
reward clients based on their contribution (collaboration
fairness), and how to achieve uniformity of performance
across clients (performance fairness). Despite achieving
progress on either one, we argue that it is critical to consider them together, in order to engage and motivate more
diverse clients joining FL to derive a high-quality global
model. In this work, we propose a novel method to optimize both types of fairness simultaneously. Specifically, we
propose to estimate client contribution in gradient and data
space. In gradient space, we monitor the gradient direction differences of each client with respect to others. And
in data space, we measure the prediction error on client
data using an auxiliary model. Based on this contribution estimation, we propose a FL method, federated training via contribution estimation (FedCE), i.e., using estimation as global model aggregation weights. We have theoretically analyzed our method and empirically evaluated it
on two real-world medical datasets. The effectiveness of
our approach has been validated with significant performance improvements, better collaboration fairness, better
performance fairness, and comprehensive analytical studies. Code is available at https://nvidia.github.
io/NVFlare/research/fed-ce

1. Introduction
Recent development of federated learning (FL) facilitates collaboration for medical applications, given that
multiple medical institutions can jointly train a consensus
model without sharing raw data [1–6]. FL provides an opportunity to leverage larger and more diverse datasets to
derive a robust and generalizable model [7, 8]. However,
it is usually difficult to pool different institutions together
* Corresponding authors: Qi Dou (qidou@cuhk.edu.hk) and Ziyue Xu
(ziyuex@nvidia.com)

to train a FL model in practice. The challenges mainly lie
in two aspects. First, it takes effort to set up and participate in federated training, medical institutions may not be
sufficiently motivated to contribute to a FL study without
a fair credit assignment and a fair reward allocation, i.e.,
collaboration fairness [9]. Second, medical data are heterogeneous in amounts and data-collection process [10–13],
which may lead to inferior performance for clients with either less data or a data distribution deviating from others,
harming performance fairness [14, 15]. It is critical to involve diverse datasets and improve individual prediction accuracy for building robust medical applications with low error tolerance [16]. Therefore, we argue that these two types
of fairness need to be considered together.
Despite recent investigations on fairness-related topics,
existing literature mostly addresses collaboration fairness
and performance fairness separately. For example, methods for collaboration fairness aim to estimate client reward,
by using the computation and communication cost of each
client [17], evaluating local validation performance [18],
and using cosine similarity between local and global updates [19]. Meanwhile, methods for performance fairness
aim to mitigate performance disparities, by using minimax optimization to improve worst-performing clients [15,
20], re-weighting clients to adjust fairness/accuracy tradeoff [14], or learning personalized models [21]. To adequately address concerns on these two fairness, we postulate
that it is desirable to consider both simultaneously, because
reward estimation and model performance could essentially
be coupled during training. Solutions on how to tackle collaboration fairness and performance fairness together are
still under-investigated, especially in medical domain.
To tackle this problem, our insight is to estimate the
contribution of each client, and further use the contribution to promote training performance. The idea is inspired
by Shapley Value (SV) [22], a classic approach to quantify the contribution of participants in cooperative game theory. SV proposes to permute all possible subsets of participants to calculate the contribution of a certain client. Some
existing works have adopted SV for estimating client re-

16302

