This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MISC210K: A Large-Scale Dataset for Multi-Instance Semantic Correspondence
Yixuan Sun1,∗ , Yiwen Huang2,∗ , Haijing Guo2 , Yuzhou Zhao2 , Runmin Wu3 ,
Yizhou Yu3 , Weifeng Ge2,† , Wenqiang Zhang1,2,†
1
Academy of Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{wfge, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Semantic correspondence have built up a new way for
object recognition. However current single-object matching schema can be hard for discovering commonalities for
a category and far from the real-world recognition tasks. To
fill this gap, we design the multi-instance semantic correspondence task which aims at constructing the correspondence between multiple objects in an image pair. To support this task, we build a multi-instance semantic correspondence (MISC) dataset from COCO Detection 2017 task
called MISC210K. We construct our dataset as three steps:
(1) category selection and data cleaning; (2) keypoint design based on 3D models and object description rules; (3)
human-machine collaborative annotation. Following these
steps, we select 34 classes of objects with 4,812 challenging
images annotated via a well designed semi-automatic workflow, and finally acquire 218,179 image pairs with instance
masks and instance-level keypoint pairs annotated. We design a dual-path collaborative learning pipeline to train
instance-level co-segmentation task and fine-grained level
correspondence task together. Benchmark evaluation and
further ablation results with detailed analysis are provided
with three future directions proposed. Our project is available on https://github.com/YXSUNMADMAX/MISC210K.

1. Introduction
Building dense visual correspondences is a sub-task of
image matching, which aims at finding semantic associations of salient parts and feature points of objects or
scenes [4,6,34,49]. This task has established a new way for
understanding commonalities among objects in a more finegrained manner and has been widely used for various computer vision tasks, including few shot learning [11, 21, 48],
∗: Contribution Equally
†: Corresponding Authors

Figure 1. An instructive overview for our multi-instance semantic
correspondence task. In this task, models are required to determine
the corresponding relationships among multiple instances, where
instance masks are introduced for grouping matching key-points.

multi-object tracking [24], and image editing [10, 15, 32].
To learn general semantic correspondence, several popular datasets, such as Caltech-101 [14], FG3DCar [37], PFWILLOW [8], PF-PASCAL [8], and SPair-71k [27], have
been proposed by researchers to train machine learning
models. These datasets were designed to capture large intraclass variations in color, scale, orientation, illumination and
non-rigid deformation. However, although these datasets
provide rich annotations, they are still far from real-world
applications because each object category is only allowed
to have at most one instance in each image. Moreover, for
most object recognition tasks and applications, multiple objects of the same category often appear at the same time.
Existing datasets only focus on one-to-one matching without considering multi-instance scenes, and thus cannot be
used as simulations of real-world applications.
In this paper, we aim to reduce the gap between oneto-one matching and many-to-many matching by building a
new multi-instance semantic correspondence dataset. Following PF-PASCAL [8] and SPair-71k [27], we label keypoints on objects to construct the dataset. There are several key challenges during data labeling. First, how to
choose the collection of raw images that contain multiple
objects in natural scenes? Second, how to choose candi-

7121

