This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-tuning Loss Functions and Data Augmentation for Few-shot Object
Detection
Berkan Demirel1,2
Orhun Buğra Baran1
1
Middle East Technical University
bdemirel@havelsan.com.tr

Ramazan Gokberk Cinbis1
2
HAVELSAN Inc.

bugra@ceng.metu.edu.tr

gcinbis@ceng.metu.edu.tr

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the computer vision problems
that has greatly benefited from the advances in supervised
deep learning approaches. However, similar to the case in
many other problems, state-of-the-art in object detection relies on the availability of large-scale fully-annotated datasets,
which is particularly problematic due to the difficulty of
collecting accurate bounding box annotations [18, 46]. This
practical burden has lead to a great interest in the approaches

Few-shot support
set

FSOD model

Loss

Query set
Precision

Few-shot object detection, the problem of modelling novel
object detection categories with few training instances, is
an emerging topic in the area of few-shot learning and object detection. Contemporary techniques can be divided
into two groups: fine-tuning based and meta-learning based
approaches. While meta-learning approaches aim to learn
dedicated meta-models for mapping samples to novel class
models, fine-tuning approaches tackle few-shot detection
in a simpler manner, by adapting the detection model to
novel classes through gradient based optimization. Despite
their simplicity, fine-tuning based approaches typically yield
competitive detection results. Based on this observation, we
focus on the role of loss functions and augmentations as the
force driving the fine-tuning process, and propose to tune
their dynamics through meta-learning principles. The proposed training scheme, therefore, allows learning inductive
biases that can boost few-shot detection, while keeping the
advantages of fine-tuning based approaches. In addition, the
proposed approach yields interpretable loss functions, as
opposed to highly parametric and complex few-shot metamodels. The experimental results highlight the merits of
the proposed scheme, with significant improvements over
the strong fine-tuning based few-shot detection baselines on
benchmark Pascal VOC and MS-COCO datasets, in terms of
both standard and generalized few-shot performance metrics.

Augmentations

Abstract

Loss function

Proxy task

Recall

Gradient descent

mAP

REINFORCE over the augmentation & loss functions

Figure 1. The overall architecture of the meta-tuning approach.

that can potentially reduce the annotation cost, such as
weakly-supervised learning [29, 57], learning from point
annotations [7], and mixed supervised learning [45]. A more
recently emerging paradigm in this direction is few-shot object detection (FSOD). In the FSOD problem, the goal is to
build detection models for the novel classes with few labeled
training images by transferring knowledge from the base
classes with a large set of training images. In the closely
related Generalized-FSOD (G-FSOD) problem, the goal is
to build few-shot detection models that perform well on both
base and novel classes.
FSOD methods can be categorized into meta-learning
and fine-tuning approaches. Although meta-learning based
methods are predominantly used in the literature in FSOD
research [8,22,31,36,52,75,76,79,81,83], several fine-tuning
based works have recently reported competitive results [6,
15, 32, 53, 61, 65, 72, 84]. The main premise of meta-learning
approaches is to design and train dedicated meta-models
that map given few train samples to novel class detection
models, e.g. [73] or learn easy-to-adapt models [30] in a
MAML [16] fashion. In contrast, however, fine-tuning based
methods tackle the problem as a typical transfer learning
problem and apply the general purpose supervised training
techniques, i.e. regularized loss minimization via gradientbased optimization, to adapt a pre-trained model to few-shot
classes. It is also worth noting that the recent results on finetuning based FSOD are aligned with related observations on
few-shot classification [9, 12, 63] and segmentation [4].
While some of the FSOD meta-learning approaches are attractive for being able to learn dedicated parametric training

7339

