This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-Avatar: Expressive Human Avatars
Kaiyue Shen∗1 Chen Guo∗1 Manuel Kaufmann1 Juan Jose Zarate1
Julien Valentin2 Jie Song†1 Otmar Hilliges 1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Microsoft

Input 1: scan

Input 2: RGB-D images

Built avatar

Animation

Zoom in

Figure 1. We propose X-Avatar, an animatible implicit human avatar model capable of capturing human body pose, hand pose, facial
expressions, and appearance. X-Avatar can be created from input 3D scans (top row) or RGB-D images (bottom row) and displays highquality geometry as well as appearance under animation. X-Avatar captures facial expressions and hand gestures (right), making it the first
implicit human avatar model to capture the richness of the human state in a unified model.

Abstract
We present X-Avatar, a novel avatar model that captures
the full expressiveness of digital humans to bring about lifelike experiences in telepresence, AR/VR and beyond. Our
method models bodies, hands, facial expressions and appearance in a holistic fashion and can be learned from either full 3D scans or RGB-D data. To achieve this, we propose a part-aware learned forward skinning module that
can be driven by the parameter space of SMPL-X, allowing for expressive animation of X-Avatars. To efficiently
learn the neural shape and deformation fields, we propose novel part-aware sampling and initialization strategies. This leads to higher fidelity results, especially for
smaller body parts while maintaining efficient training despite increased number of articulated bones. To capture the
appearance of the avatar with high-frequency details, we
extend the geometry and deformation fields with a texture
network that is conditioned on pose, facial expression, ge* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

ometry and the normals of the deformed surface. We show
experimentally that our method outperforms strong baselines both quantitatively and qualitatively on the animation
task. To facilitate future research on expressive avatars
we contribute a new dataset, called X-Humans, containing 233 sequences of high-quality textured scans from 20
participants, totalling 35,500 data frames. Project page:
https://ait.ethz.ch/X-Avatar.

1. Introduction
A significant part of human communication is nonverbal in which body pose, appearance, facial expressions,
and hand gestures play an important role. Hence, it is clear
that the quest towards immersive, life-like remote telepresence and other experiences in AR/VR, will require methods
to capture the richness of human expressiveness in its entirety. Yet, it is not clear how to achieve this. Non-verbal
communication involves an intricate interplay of several articulated body parts at different scales, which makes it difficult to capture and model algorithmically.

16911

