This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Learning Paradigm for Dynamic Facial Expression Recognition
Hanyang Wang12 ,* Bo Li3 *†, Shuang Wu3 , Siyuan Shen12 , Feng Liu412†, Shouhong Ding3 , Aimin Zhou12†
1
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education, East China Normal University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent
4
Shanghai International School of Chief Technology Officer, East China Normal University

Abstract
Dynamic Facial Expression Recognition (DFER) is a
rapidly developing field that focuses on recognizing facial
expressions in video format. Previous research has considered non-target frames as noisy frames, but we propose that it should be treated as a weakly supervised problem. We also identify the imbalance of short- and longterm temporal relationships in DFER. Therefore, we introduce the Multi-3D Dynamic Facial Expression Learning (M3DFEL) framework, which utilizes Multi-Instance
Learning (MIL) to handle inexact labels. M3DFEL generates 3D-instances to model the strong short-term temporal relationship and utilizes 3DCNNs for feature extraction. The Dynamic Long-term Instance Aggregation Module (DLIAM) is then utilized to learn the long-term temporal
relationships and dynamically aggregate the instances. Our
experiments on DFEW and FERV39K datasets show that
M3DFEL outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches
with a vanilla R3D18 backbone. The source code is available at https://github.com/faceeyes/M3DFEL.

1. Introduction
Facial expressions are essential in communication [26,
27, 45]. Understanding the emotions of others through their
facial expressions is critical during conversations. Thus,
automated recognition of facial expressions is a significant
challenge in various fields, such as human-computer interaction (HCI) [25, 34], mental health diagnosis [12], driver
fatigue monitoring [24], and metahuman [6]. While significant progress has been made in Static Facial Expression
Recognition (SFER) [23, 43, 44, 55], there is increasing attention on Dynamic Facial Expression Recognition.
* Both author contributed equally to this work. Work done during
Hanyang Wang’s internship at Tencent Youtu Lab and Bo Li is the project
lead.
† Corresponding authors.
libraboli@tencent.com, lsttoy@163.com,
amzhou@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Target Expression

Non-Target Expression

M3DFEL

Figure 1. In-the-wild Dynamic Facial Expressions. In the first row
of images, the subject appear predominantly Neutral, yet the video
is labeled as happy without specifying the exact moment when the
emotion is expressed. In the second row, the emotion is evident
from the perspective of a few figures, but any single one of them
is noisy and unclear. In the third row, all frames appear Neutral,
but a closer analysis of facial movement over time reveals a rising
of the corner of the mouth, indicating a smile.

With the availability of large-scale in-the-wild datasets
like DFEW [11] and FERV39K [46], several methods have
been proposed for DFER [21, 22, 31, 47, 54]. Previous
works [31, 54] have simply applied general video understanding methods to recognize dynamic facial expressions.
Later on, Li et al. [22] observe that DFER contains a large
number of noisy frames and propose a dynamic class token
and a snippet-based filter to suppress the impact of these
frames. Li et al. [21] propose an Intensity Aware Loss to
account for the large intra-class and small inter-class differences in DFER and force the network to pay extra attention to the most confusing class. However, we argue that
DFER requires specialized designs rather than being con-

17958

