This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupling-and-Aggregating for Image Exposure Correction
Yang Wang1 , LongPeng1 ,* Liang Li2 , Yang Cao1†, Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
{ywang120, forrest, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn,

longp2001@mail.ustc.edu.cn,

liang.li@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
The images captured under improper exposure conditions often suffer from contrast degradation and detail distortion. Contrast degradation will destroy the statistical properties of low-frequency components, while detail
distortion will disturb the structural properties of highfrequency components, leading to the low-frequency and
high-frequency components being mixed and inseparable.
This will limit the statistical and structural modeling capacity for exposure correction. To address this issue, this
paper proposes to decouple the contrast enhancement and
detail restoration within each convolution process. It is
based on the observation that, in the local regions covered
by convolution kernels, the feature response of low-/highfrequency can be decoupled by addition/difference operation. To this end, we inject the addition/difference operation
into the convolution process and devise a Contrast Aware
(CA) unit and a Detail Aware (DA) unit to facilitate the
statistical and structural regularities modeling. The proposed CA and DA can be plugged into existing CNN-based
exposure correction networks to substitute the Traditional
Convolution (TConv) to improve the performance. Furthermore, to maintain the computational costs of the network without changing, we aggregate two units into a single
TConv kernel using structural re-parameterization. Evaluations of nine methods and five benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed method can comprehensively improve the performance of existing methods without introducing extra computational costs compared with the original networks. The codes will be publicly available.

1. Introduction
Images captured under improper exposure conditions often suffer from under-exposure or over-exposure problems
[2, 14, 16]. Improper exposure will change the statistical
distribution of image brightness, resulting in contrast degra* Co-first author. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a, b) The PSNR and SSIM comparison of TConv and
our DAConv on the ME dataset. (c, d) The PSNR and SSIM comparison of TConv and our DAConv on the SICE dataset. Under
the boosting of DAConv, the performance of existing methods has
been comprehensively improved, reaching a new SOTA performance without introducing extra computational costs. Complete
results can be found in Table 2.

dation. Besides, improper exposure will also destroy the
image’s structural property and result in detail distortion.
The contrast degradation and detail distortion will cause the
low-frequency and high-frequency components to mix and
inseparable across the image, making the image exposure
correction extremely challenging [2, 4, 9, 31, 33, 39].
In practice, one solution for this problem is to design an
end-to-end architecture for learning contrast enhancement
and detail restoration in shared feature space [14,16]. However, the contrast-relevant features are primarily distributed
in low-frequency components, while the detail-relevant features are primarily distributed in high-frequency components. Since low-frequency components are statistically
dominant over high-frequency components, these methods
mainly focus on contrast enhancement and cannot guarantee
that the high-frequency details can be efficiently restored.
To achieve better contrast enhancement and detail
restoration, some researchers propose to decompose and restore the input image’s lightness and structure components,
respectively [2, 20, 41]. For example, some researchers de-

18115

