This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reducing the Label Bias for Timestamp Supervised
Temporal Action Segmentation
Shenglan Liu1†
Chenwei Tan1
Zihang Shao1
Yunheng Li1 *
Kaiyuan Liu1 *
1
School of Computer Science, Dalian University of Technology, China
{1154864382,liyunheng,liusl,tcw2000,1317588161}@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Timestamp supervised temporal action segmentation
(TSTAS) is more cost-effective than fully supervised counterparts. However, previous approaches suffer from severe
label bias due to over-reliance on sparse timestamp annotations, resulting in unsatisfactory performance. In this
paper, we propose the Debiasing-TSTAS (D-TSTAS) framework by exploiting unannotated frames to alleviate this bias
from two phases: 1) Initialization. To reduce the dependencies on annotated frames, we propose masked timestamp predictions (MTP) to ensure that initialized model
captures more contextual information. 2) Refinement. To
overcome the limitation of the expressiveness from sparsely
annotated timestamps, we propose a center-oriented timestamp expansion (CTE) approach to progressively expand
pseudo-timestamp groups which contain semantic-rich motion representation of action segments. Then, these pseudotimestamp groups and the model output are used to iteratively generate pseudo-labels for refining the model in a
fully supervised setup. We further introduce segmental confidence loss to enable the model to have high confidence
predictions within the pseudo-timestamp groups and more
accurate action boundaries. Our D-TSTAS outperforms the
state-of-the-art TSTAS method as well as achieves competitive results compared with fully supervised approaches on
three benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Analyzing and understanding human actions in videos
is very important for many applications, such as humanrobot interaction [14] and healthcare [33]. Recently, several approaches have been very successful in locating and
analyzing activities in videos, including action localization
[12,29,37,50], action segmentation [7,11,20,23], and action
recognition [9, 27, 39, 41, 47].
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a) The TSTAS task aims to segment actions in videos
by timestamp annotations. (b) An example of focus bias: existing initialization methods prefer to predict frames similar to the
annotated timestamp, leading to incorrectly identifying dissimilar
frames within the segment and similar frames outside the segment.
(c) An example of representation bias: the frames of complex
action share large semantic variance, e.g. the process of cutting
cheese includes both taking out and cutting, resulting in the models that rely on sparse timestamps to produce biased pseudo-labels.

Despite the success of previous approaches, they rely on
fully temporal supervision, where the start and end frames
of each action are annotated. As a lightweight alternative,
many researchers have started exploring timestamp supervised temporal action segmentation (TSTAS), where each
action segment is annotated with only one frame in the
untrimmed video, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
Most previous approaches follow a two-step pipeline by
initializing and then iteratively refining the model with generated pseudo-labels. However, relying only on supervised
signals of sparse single-timestamp annotations, these methods fail to learn the semantics of entire action segments,
which is referred to as label bias in this paper, including focus bias and representation bias. Specifically, to initialize
the segmentation model, the previous methods [17, 28, 32]
adopt the Naive approach proposed in [28] (referred to as
Naive), which computes the loss at the annotated frames
for training. However, utilizing only the annotated frames
leads to focus bias, where the initialized model tends to fo-

6503

