This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SelfME: Self-Supervised Motion Learning for Micro-Expression Recognition
Xinqi Fan1 , Xueli Chen1 , Mingjie Jiang1 , Ali Raza Shahid1,2 , Hong Yan1
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 COMSATS University Islamabad
{xinqi.fan, xuelichen3-c, minjiang5-c, a.raza}@my.cityu.edu.hk, h.yan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
⊝
Facial micro-expressions (MEs) refer to brief spontaneous facial movements that can reveal a person’s genuine emotion. They are valuable in lie detection, criminal analysis, and other areas. While deep learning-based
ME recognition (MER) methods achieved impressive success, these methods typically require pre-processing using
conventional optical flow-based methods to extract facial
motions as inputs. To overcome this limitation, we proposed a novel MER framework using self-supervised learning to extract facial motion for ME (SelfME). To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work using an automatically
self-learned motion technique for MER. However, the selfsupervised motion learning method might suffer from ignoring symmetrical facial actions on the left and right sides of
faces when extracting fine features. To address this issue,
we developed a symmetric contrastive vision transformer
(SCViT) to constrain the learning of similar facial action
features for the left and right parts of faces. Experiments
were conducted on two benchmark datasets showing that
our method achieved state-of-the-art performance, and ablation studies demonstrated the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Personality and emotions are crucial aspects of human
cognition and play a vital role in human understanding
and human-computer interaction [20]. Facial expressions
provide an important cue for understanding human emotions [3]. According to neuropsychological research, microexpressions (MEs) are revealed when voluntary and involuntary expressions collide [8]. As a slight leakage of expression, MEs are subtle in terms of intensities, brief in duration (occur less than 0.5 seconds), and affect small facial
areas [3]. Because MEs are hard to be controlled, they are
more likely to reflect genuine human emotions, and thus
have been implemented in various fields, such as national
security, political psychology, and medical care [41]. Despite the fact that MEs are valuable, their unique characteristics bring multifarious challenges for ME analysis.

Apex

⇒
Onset

Motion

Figure 1. MEs may be imperceptible to the naked eye, but the motion between the onset (the moment when the facial action begins
to grow stronger) and the apex (the moment when the facial action
reaches its maximum intensity) makes them readily observable.
SelfME learns this motion automatically.

The task of ME recognition (MER) is to classify MEs
by the type of emotion [3]. Due to the small sample size
of datasets, almost all methods for MER have used handcrafted features, which can be non-optical flow-based [2,
44, 50] or optical flow-based [25, 32, 42]. The extracted
features were then fed into either traditional classification
models [40, 43, 47], or deep learning-based classification
models [12, 24, 51, 52]. Although recently proposed methods claimed they are deep learning-based methods, the ones
with the highest performance often rely on traditional optical flow [10, 49] between the onset and apex frames as
inputs. These optical flow methods are computed in a complex manner, and a number of researchers even proposed
approaches for further processing the optical flow features
prior to inputting them into the networks to improve their
performance. This type of pipeline may hinder the development of MER in the deep learning era.
To overcome this limitation, we proposed a novel MER
framework using self-supervised learning to extract facial
motion for ME (SelfME) in this work. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work with an automatically
self-learned motion technique for MER. We visualized the
learned motion by SelfME in Fig. 1. The symmetry of facial actions is important in MER, as spontaneous expressions are more symmetric than posed ones, or have intensity differences between left and right faces that are negligible [9,13]. However, the learned motion may suffer from ignoring symmetrical facial actions on the left and right sides
of the face when extracting fine features. To address this
issue, we developed a symmetric contrastive vision trans-

13834

