This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Hierarchical Representation Network for Accurate and Detailed Face
Reconstruction from In-The-Wild Images
Biwen Lei, Jianqiang Ren, Mengyang Feng, Miaomiao Cui, Xuansong Xie
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{biwen.lbw, jianqiang.rjq, mengyang.fmy, miaomiao.cmm}@alibaba-inc.com,
xingtong.xxs@taobao.com

…

×

identity & expression
coefficients

deformation
map

displacement
map

Figure 1. Example of low-frequency geometry, MF, HF facial details and the hierarchical representation.

Abstract
Limited by the nature of the low-dimensional representational capacity of 3DMM, most of the 3DMM-based face
reconstruction (FR) methods fail to recover high-frequency
facial details, such as wrinkles, dimples, etc. Some attempt
to solve the problem by introducing detail maps or nonlinear operations, however, the results are still not vivid. To
this end, we in this paper present a novel hierarchical representation network (HRN) to achieve accurate and detailed
face reconstruction from a single image. Specifically, we
implement the geometry disentanglement and introduce the
hierarchical representation to fulfill detailed face modeling.
Meanwhile, 3D priors of facial details are incorporated to
enhance the accuracy and authenticity of the reconstruction
results. We also propose a de-retouching module to achieve
better decoupling of the geometry and appearance. It is
noteworthy that our framework can be extended to a multiview fashion by considering detail consistency of different
views. Extensive experiments on two single-view and two
multi-view FR benchmarks demonstrate that our method
outperforms the existing methods in both reconstruction accuracy and visual effects. Finally, we introduce a highquality 3D face dataset FaceHD-100 to boost the research
of high-fidelity face reconstruction. The project homepage
is at https://younglbw.github.io/HRN-homepage/.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity 3D face reconstruction finds a wide range
of applications in many scenarios, such as AR/VR, medical

treatment, film production, etc. While extensive works already achieved excellent reconstruction performance using
specialized hardware like LightStage [2, 11, 35], estimating
highly detailed face models from single or sparse-view images is still a challenging problem. Based on 3DMM [8],
a statistical model learned from a collection of face scans,
many works [16, 22, 23, 32] attempt to reconstruct the 3D
face from a single image and achieve impressive results.
However, limited by the nature of the low dimensional representational ability of the 3DMM, these methods can not
recover the detailed facial geometry.
Recently, some methods [13, 24, 38] devote to capturing
high-frequency facial details such as wrinkles by predicting
a displacement map. They achieve realistic results, however, fail to model the mid-frequency details, such as the
detailed contour of the jaw, cheeck, etc. To this end, some
works try to capture the overall details by introducing latent
encoding of details [19] or non-linear operations [20, 44].
Nevertheless, it is hard to make a trade-off when handling
the mid- and high-frequency details simultaneously. Another challenge is how to obtain accurate shapes and detailed 3D facial priors considering multifarious lightings
and skins for different images. [10, 13] resort to the wrinkle statistics computed from 3D face scans to fulfill realistic high-frequency details, but still fail to model the midfrequency details.
Based on the observations above, we introduce a hierarchical representation network (HRN) for accurate and detailed face reconstruction from single image, as shown in

394

