This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RIFormer: Keep Your Vision Backbone Effective But Removing Token Mixer
Jiahao Wang1,2

Songyang Zhang1∗ Yong Liu3 Taiqiang Wu3 Yujiu Yang3
Xihui Liu2 Kai Chen1∗ Ping Luo2 Dahua Lin1
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The University of HongKong
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School

wang-jh19@tsinghua.org.cn

{zhangsongyang,chenkai,lindahua}@pjlab.org.cn

yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

xihuiliu@eee.hku.hk

pluo@cs.hku.hk

3096.26ms

Abstract

3070.33ms

This paper studies how to keep a vision backbone effective while removing token mixers in its basic building
blocks. Token mixers, as self-attention for vision transformers (ViTs), are intended to perform information communication between different spatial tokens but suffer from considerable computational cost and latency. However, directly
removing them will lead to an incomplete model structure
prior, and thus brings a significant accuracy drop. To this
end, we first develop an RepIdentityFormer base on the reparameterizing idea, to study the token mixer free model
architecture. And we then explore the improved learning paradigm to break the limitation of simple token mixer
free backbone, and summarize the empirical practice into 5
guidelines. Equipped with the proposed optimization strategy, we are able to build an extremely simple vision backbone with encouraging performance, while enjoying the
high efficiency during inference. Extensive experiments and
ablative analysis also demonstrate that the inductive bias of
network architecture, can be incorporated into simple network structure with appropriate optimization strategy. We
hope this work can serve as a starting point for the exploration of optimization-driven efficient network design.

1. Introduction
The monumental advance in computer vision in the past
few years was partly brought by the revolution of vision
backbones, including convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) [13, 17, 25, 30] and vision transformers (ViTs) [14,
38]. Both of them have particular modules in their basic
building blocks that aggregate information between different spatial locations, which are called token mixer [46],
such as self-attention for ViTs. Although the effective∗ Corresponding author.

Channel MLP

Channel MLP

1874.02ms

LN

LN
1725.61ms
1666.01ms

Token Mixer
(Attention)

46.3%
Latency
232.42ms

LN

Remove
token mixer

Identity
Mapping
LN

81.57ms

Input
Embedding

Input
Embedding

Image

Image

(a) Latency analysis of ViT-B

(b) Remove token mixer with heavy latency

Figure 1. Latency analysis of different components in ViTBase [14]. (a) For token mixer (self-attention), the latency occupies about 46.3% of the backbone. (b) Our motivation was to
remove the token mixer while striving to keep the performance.

ness of token mixer has been demonstrated on many vision
tasks [5, 6, 24, 45], its computational complexity typically
takes up a significant portion of the network. In practice,
heavy token mixers make the vision backbone limited especially on the edge-side devices due to the issue of speed and
computation cost.
There have been several attempts in the literature to investigate efficient token mixers for slimming vision backbones [29, 31, 46]. Although those works have already
achieve competitive performance with light-weight design,
they do retain the token mixers, which brings non-negligible
increase in latency, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The recent
work [47] finds that removing the token mixer is possible
but leads to performance degeneration. Those explorations
in efficient token mixers inspire us to think that can we keep
the vision backbone effective but removing the token mixer?
The resulting token mixer free vision backbone is expected
to be efficient and effective for the realistic application.

14443

