This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Category Query Learning for Human-Object Interaction Classification
Chi Xie1† Fangao Zeng2‡ Yue Hu3‡ Shuang Liang1 * Yichen Wei2‡
1
Tongji University 2 MEGVII Technology 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1
2

{chixie, shuangliang}@tongji.edu.cn

zfg472988436@163.com, wei yi chen@hotmail.com

3

18671129361@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unlike most previous HOI methods that focus on learning better human-object features, we propose a novel and
complementary approach called category query learning.
Such queries are explicitly associated to interaction categories, converted to image specific category representation via a transformer decoder, and learnt via an auxiliary image-level classification task. This idea is motivated
by an earlier multi-label image classification method, but
is for the first time applied for the challenging humanobject interaction classification task. Our method is simple, general and effective. It is validated on three representative HOI baselines and achieves new state-of-theart results on two benchmarks. Code will be available at
https://github.com/charles-xie/CQL.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection has attracted
a lot of interests in recent years [3, 8–10, 21, 33]. The task
consists of two sub-tasks. The first is human and object detection. It is usually performed by common object detection
methods. The second is interaction classification of each
human-object (HO) pair. This sub-task is very challenging
due to the complex appearance variations in the interaction
categories. See Fig. 1 for examples. It is the focus of most
previous HOI methods, as well as this work.
Most previous HOI methods focus on learning better human-object features, including modeling relation
and context via GNN [7, 29, 34, 37] or attention mechanism [8, 34, 46], decoupling localization and classification
[22, 41, 48], leveraging vision-language knowledge [6, 22]
and introducing multi-scale feature to transformer [16].
However, for interaction classification they all adopt the
simple linear classifier that performs the dot product of the
* Corresponding author.
† Work done during internship at MEGVII technology.
‡ Work done while worked at MEGVII.

(a) person fly kite

person fly airplane

(b) person hold fork

person hold elephant

Figure 1. Interaction classification is inherently challenging. In
(a), “fly” is semantically polysemic, resulting in different objects,
poses and relative positions. In (b), when “hold” is associated with
different objects, the appearance, scene background, and human
poses are largely different.

human-object feature and a static weight vector, which represents an interaction category.
In this work, we propose a new approach that enhances
the above paradigm and complements most previous HOI
methods. It is motivated by the recent work Query2label
[25], a transformer-based classification network. It proposes a new concept we call category-specific query. Unlike
the queries in other transformer methods, each query is associated to a specific and fixed image category during training and inference. This one-to-one binding makes the query
learn to model each category more effectively. The queries
are converted to image specific category representations via
a transformer decoder. This method achieves excellent performance on multi-label image classification task.
We extend this approach for human-object interaction
classification. Essentially, our approach replaces traditional
category representation as a static weight vector in previous HOI methods with category queries learnt as described
above. The same linear classifier is adopted. Such cate-

15275

