This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistent-Teacher: Towards Reducing Inconsistent Pseudo-targets in
Semi-supervised Object Detection
Xinjiang Wang1∗ Xingyi Yang3∗† Shilong Zhang2 , Yijiang Li1‡
Litong Feng1 Shijie Fang4‡ Chengqi Lyu2 Kai Chen2 Wayne Zhang1
1

SenseTime Research

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

3

National University of Singapore

4

Peking University

wangxinjiang@sensetime.com, xyang@u.nus.edu

Abstract
In this study, we dive deep into the inconsistency of
pseudo targets in semi-supervised object detection (SSOD).
Our core observation is that the oscillating pseudo-targets
undermine the training of an accurate detector. It injects
noise into the student’s training, leading to severe overfitting problems. Therefore, we propose a systematic solution, termed Consistent-Teacher , to reduce the inconsistency. First, adaptive anchor assignment (ASA) substitutes the static IoU-based strategy, which enables the
student network to be resistant to noisy pseudo-bounding
boxes. Then we calibrate the subtask predictions by designing a 3D feature alignment module (FAM-3D). It allows
each classification feature to adaptively query the optimal
feature vector for the regression task at arbitrary scales
and locations. Lastly, a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
dynamically revises the score threshold of pseudo-bboxes,
which stabilizes the number of ground truths at an early
stage and remedies the unreliable supervision signal during training. Consistent-Teacher provides strong results on a large range of SSOD evaluations. It achieves
40.0 mAP with ResNet-50 backbone given only 10% of annotated MS-COCO data, which surpasses previous baselines using pseudo labels by around 3 mAP. When trained on
fully annotated MS-COCO with additional unlabeled data,
the performance further increases to 47.7 mAP. Our code
is available at https://github.com/Adamdad/
ConsistentTeacher.

1. Introduction
The goal of semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) [3,
5, 12, 12, 13, 17, 24, 25, 30, 36, 43, 44] is to facilitate the
training of object detectors with the help of a large amount

of unlabeled data. The common practice is first to train a
teacher model on the labeled data and then generate pseudo
labels and boxes on unlabeled sets, which act as the ground
truth (GT) for the student model. Student detectors, on
the other hand, are anticipated to make consistent predictions regardless of network stochasticity [35] or data augmentation [12, 30]. In addition, to improve pseudo-label
quality, the teacher model is updated as a moving average [24, 36, 44] of the student parameters.
In this study, we point out that the performance of semisupervised detectors is still largely hindered by the inconsistency in pseudo-targets. Inconsistency means that the
pseudo boxes may be highly inaccurate and vary greatly at
different stages of training. As a consequence, inconsistent
oscillating bounding boxes (bbox) bias SSOD predictions
with accumulated error. Different from semi-supervised
classification, SSOD has one extra step of assigning a set
of pseudo-bboxes to each RoI/anchor as dense supervision.
Common two-stage [24, 30, 36] and single-stage [4, 42]
SSOD networks adopt static criteria for anchor assignment,
e.g. IoU score or centerness. It is observed that the static
assignment is sensitive to noise in the bounding boxes predicted by the teacher, as a small perturbation in the pseudobboxes might greatly affect the assignment results. It thus
leads to severe overfitting on unlabeled images.
To verify this phenomenon, we train a single-stage detector with standard IoU-based assignment on MS-COCO
10% data. As shown in Fig. (1), a small change in the
teacher’s output results in strong noise in the boundaries
of pseudo-bboxes, causing erroneous targets to be associated with nearby objects under static IoU-based assignment.
This is because some inactivated anchors are falsely assigned positive in the student network. Consequently, the
network overfits as it produces inconsistent labels for neighboring objects. The overfitting is also observed in the classification loss curve on unlabeled images1 .

* Equally contributed.
‡ Work done during internship at SenseTime.
† Work done during internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

1 All GT bboxes on unlabeled data are only used to calculate the loss
value but not for updating the parameters.

3240

