This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMAE: Few-shot Learning for HDR Deghosting with Saturation-Aware
Masked Autoencoders
Qingsen Yan†1 Song Zhang†2 Weiye Chen†2 Hao Tang3 Yu Zhu1
Jinqiu Sun1 Luc Van Gool3 Yanning Zhang1 *
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Xidian University 3 CVL, ETH Zurich

Abstract
Generating a high-quality High Dynamic Range (HDR)
image from dynamic scenes has recently been extensively
studied by exploiting Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Most
DNNs-based methods require a large amount of training data with ground truth, requiring tedious and timeconsuming work. Few-shot HDR imaging aims to generate
satisfactory images with limited data. However, it is difficult for modern DNNs to avoid overfitting when trained
on only a few images. In this work, we propose a novel
semi-supervised approach to realize few-shot HDR imaging via two stages of training, called SSHDR. Unlikely previous methods, directly recovering content and removing
ghosts simultaneously, which is hard to achieve optimum,
we first generate content of saturated regions with a selfsupervised mechanism and then address ghosts via an iterative semi-supervised learning framework. Concretely, considering that saturated regions can be regarded as masking Low Dynamic Range (LDR) input regions, we design a
Saturated Mask AutoEncoder (SMAE) to learn a robust feature representation and reconstruct a non-saturated HDR
image. We also propose an adaptive pseudo-label selection
strategy to pick high-quality HDR pseudo-labels in the second stage to avoid the effect of mislabeled samples. Experiments demonstrate that SSHDR outperforms state-ofthe-art methods quantitatively and qualitatively within and
across different datasets, achieving appealing HDR visualization with few labeled samples.

1. Introduction
Standard digital photography sensors are unable to capture the wide range of illumination present in natural scenes,
resulting in Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images that often
* † The first three authors contributed equally to this work. This work
was partially supported by NSFC (U19B2037, 61901384), Natural Science
Basic Research Program of Shaanxi (2021JCW-03, 2023-JC-QN-0685),
and National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-GroundOcean Big Data Application Technology. Corresponding author: Yu Zhu.

Figure 1. The proposed method generates high-quality images
with few labeled samples when compared with several methods.

suffer from over or underexposed regions, which can damage the details of the scene. High Dynamic Range (HDR)
imaging has been developed to address these limitations.
This technique combines several LDR images with different
exposures to generate an HDR image. While HDR imaging
can effectively recover details in static scenes, it may produce ghosting artifacts when used with dynamic scenes or
hand-held camera scenarios.
Historically, various techniques have been suggested
to address such issues, such as alignment-based methods
[3,10,27,37], patch-based methods [8,15,24], and rejectionbased methods [5, 11, 19, 20, 35, 40]. Two categories of
alignment-based approaches exist: rigid alignment (e.g.,
homographies) that fail to address foreground motions, and
non-rigid alignment (e.g., optical flow) that is error-prone.
Patch-based techniques merge similar regions using patchlevel alignment and produce superior results, but suffer
from high complexity. Rejection-based methods aim to
eliminate misaligned areas before fusing images, but may
result in a loss of information in motion regions.
As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) become increasingly prevalent, the DNN-based HDR deghosting methods

5775

