This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A General Regret Bound of Preconditioned Gradient Method for DNN Training
Hongwei Yong Ying Sun Lei Zhang
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hongwei.yong@polyu.edu.hk, {csysun, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
While adaptive learning rate methods, such as Adam,
have achieved remarkable improvement in optimizing Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs), they consider only the diagonal elements of the full preconditioned matrix. Though the
full-matrix preconditioned gradient methods theoretically
have a lower regret bound, they are impractical for use to
train DNNs because of the high complexity. In this paper,
we present a general regret bound with a constrained fullmatrix preconditioned gradient, and show that the updating formula of the preconditioner can be derived by solving
a cone-constrained optimization problem. With the blockdiagonal and Kronecker-factorized constraints, a specific
guide function can be obtained. By minimizing the upper bound of the guide function, we develop a new DNN
optimizer, termed AdaBK. A series of techniques, including statistics updating, dampening, efficient matrix inverse
root computation, and gradient amplitude preservation, are
developed to make AdaBK effective and efficient to implement. The proposed AdaBK can be readily embedded into
many existing DNN optimizers, e.g., SGDM and AdamW,
and the corresponding SGDM BK and AdamW BK algorithms demonstrate significant improvements over existing
DNN optimizers on benchmark vision tasks, including image classification, object detection and segmentation. The
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
Yonghongwei/AdaBK.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [26] and its variants [21, 23], which update the parameters along the opposite of their gradient directions, have achieved great success
in optimizing deep neural networks (DNNs) [14, 24]. Instead of using a uniform learning rate for different parameters, Duchi et al. [5] proposed the AdaGrad method, which
adopts an adaptive learning rate for each parameter, and
proved that AdaGrad can achieve lower regret bound than
SGD. Following AdaGrad, a class of adaptive learning rate
gradient descent methods has been proposed. For example,

RMSProp [30] and AdaDelta [35] introduce the exponential
moving average to replace the sum of second-order statistics of the gradient for computing the adaptive learning rate.
Adam [15] further adopts the momentum into the gradient,
and AdamW [22] employs a weight-decoupled strategy to
improve the generalization performance. RAdam [18], Adabelief [38] and Ranger [19,32,37] are proposed to accelerate training and improve the generalization capability over
Adam. The adaptive learning rate methods have become the
mainstream DNN optimizers.
In addition to AdaGrad, Duchi et al. [5] provided a fullmatrix preconditioned gradient
method that
PT descent (PGD)
1
adopts the matrix HT = ( t=1 gt gt⊤ ) 2 to adjust the gradient gT , where t denotes the iteration number and T is
the number of the current iteration. It has been proved
[5] that the preconditioned gradient HT−1 gT has a lower
regret bound than the adaptive learning rate methods that
only consider the diagonal elements of HT . However,
the full-matrix preconditioned gradient is impractical to
use due to its high dimension, which limits its application to DNN optimization. Various works have been reported to solve this problem in parameter space by adding
some structural constraints on the full-matrix HT . For instances, GGT [1] stores only the gradients of recent iterations so that the matrix inverse root can be computed efficiently by fast low-rank computation tricks. Yun et al. [34]
proposed a mini-block diagonal matrix framework to reduce the cost through coordinate partitioning and grouping
strategies. Gupta et al. [9] proposed to extend AdaGrad
with Kronecker products of full-matrix preconditioners to
make it more efficient in DNN training. Besides, natural
gradient approaches [6, 7], which adopt the approximations
of the Fisher matrix to correct the descent direction, can also
be regarded as full-matrix preconditioners.
The existing constrained PGD (CPGD) methods, however, are heuristic since manually designed approximations
to the full matrix HT are employed in them, while their influence on the regret bound is unknown. By far, they lack a
general regret-bound theory that can guide us to design the
full-matrix preconditioned gradient methods. On the other
hand, the practicality and effectiveness of these precondi-

7866

