This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DATE: Domain Adaptive Product Seeker for E-commerce
Haoyuan Li1 , Hao Jiang2 ,* Tao Jin1 , Mengyan Li2 , Yan Chen2 , Zhijie Lin1 , Yang Zhao1 , Zhou Zhao1*
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group
{lihaoyuan, jint zju, linzhijie, awalk, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn
{aoshu.jh, yian.lmy, cy270543}@alibaba-inc.com

Product Gallery

Abstract
Product Retrieval (PR) and Grounding (PG), aiming to
seek image and object-level products respectively according
to a textual query, have attracted great interest recently for
better shopping experience. Owing to the lack of relevant
datasets, we collect two large-scale benchmark datasets
from Taobao Mall and Live domains with about 474k and
101k image-query pairs for PR, and manually annotate the
object bounding boxes in each image for PG. As annotating boxes is expensive and time-consuming, we attempt
to transfer knowledge from annotated domain to unannotated for PG to achieve un-supervised Domain Adaptation
(PG-DA). We propose a Domain Adaptive Product Seeker
(DATE) framework, regarding PR and PG as Product Seeking problem at different levels, to assist the query date the
product. Concretely, we first design a semantics-aggregated
feature extractor for each modality to obtain concentrated
and comprehensive features for following efficient retrieval
and fine-grained grounding tasks. Then, we present two
cooperative seekers to simultaneously search the image
for PR and localize the product for PG. Besides, we devise a domain aligner for PG-DA to alleviate uni-modal
marginal and multi-modal conditional distribution shift between source and target domains, and design a pseudo box
generator to dynamically select reliable instances and generate bounding boxes for further knowledge transfer. Extensive experiments show that our DATE achieves satisfactory
performance in fully-supervised PR, PG and un-supervised
PG-DA. Our desensitized datasets will be publicly available
here1 .

1. Introduction
Nowadays, with the rapid development of e-commerce
and livestreaming, consumers can enjoy shopping on e-mall
or various livestreaming platforms. Although the fact that
* Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/Taobao-live/Product-Seeking

Query
Title

Product Gallery

Query

Description

Feature space

Retrieval

Textual modal

Retrieval

Domain gap

Grounding

Visual modal

Grounding

Feature space

Mall domain
Source: with box annotation

Live domain
Target: w/o. box annotation

Figure 1. Illustration of Product Retrieval (PR) and Grounding
(PG) problems on two datasets collected from Taobao Mall and
Live. (1) Given a text query (i.e. Chinese title or description of
a product), PR is to seek the corresponding image-level product
from gallery while PG is to seek the object-level product from an
image. (2) We further explore PG-DA, which aims to transfer
knowledge from the annotated source domain to the unannotated
target domain under the influence of multi-modal domain gap to
achieve un-supervised PG.

diverse products can be presented and purchased on screen
brings us convenience, we are immersed in this miscellaneous product world. Therefore, cross-modal Retrieval
[1, 3, 15, 21, 41, 43, 55] for Product (PR), aiming to seek the
corresponding image based on a text query, is significant
for boosting holistic product search engine and promoting
consumers’ shopping experience.
Besides, provided that the object-level product can be
localized on the target product image or live room image according to a query, it will help consumers focus
on the desired product and also benefit the downstream
vision-to-vision retrieval. And we name this interesting
task as Product Grounding (PG) like Visual Grounding
[29, 36, 40, 45, 56]. Generally, PR and PG are seen as two
separate tasks, but we consider mining the commonalities of
PR and PG and regard them as Product Seeking at image-

19315

