This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseFusion: Distilling View-conditioned Diffusion for 3D Reconstruction
Zhizhuo Zhou
Shubham Tulsiani
Carnegie Mellon University
{zhizhuo, shubhtuls}@cmu.edu
https://sparsefusion.github.io/
2 Input Views

Synthesized Views

Geometry

2 Input Views

Synthesized Views

Geometry

Figure 1. Sparse-view Reconstruction. We present SparseFusion, an approach for 3D reconstruction given a few (e.g. just two) segmented
input images with known relative pose. SparseFusion is able to generate a 3D consistent neural scene representation, enabling us to render
novel views and extract the underlying geometry, while being able to generate detailed and plausible structures in uncertain or unobserved
regions (e.g. front of hydrant, teddy’s face, back of laptop, or left side of toybus). Please see project page for 360-degree visualizations.

Abstract
We propose SparseFusion, a sparse view 3D reconstruction approach that unifies recent advances in neural
rendering and probabilistic image generation. Existing
approaches typically build on neural rendering with reprojected features but fail to generate unseen regions or
handle uncertainty under large viewpoint changes. Alternate methods treat this as a (probabilistic) 2D synthesis
task, and while they can generate plausible 2D images, they
do not infer a consistent underlying 3D. However, we find
that this trade-off between 3D consistency and probabilistic
image generation does not need to exist. In fact, we show
that geometric consistency and generative inference can be
complementary in a mode-seeking behavior. By distilling a
3D consistent scene representation from a view-conditioned
latent diffusion model, we are able to recover a plausible
3D representation whose renderings are both accurate and
realistic. We evaluate our approach across 51 categories
in the CO3D dataset and show that it outperforms existing methods, in both distortion and perception metrics, for
sparse-view novel view synthesis.

1. Introduction
Consider the two images of the teddybear shown in Figure 1 and try to imagine the underlying 3D object. Relying
on the direct visual evidence in these images, you can easily
infer that the teddybear is white, has a large head, and has
small arms. Even more remarkably, you can imagine beyond the directly visible to estimate a complete 3D model
of this object e.g. forming a mental model of the teddy’s
face with (likely black) eyes even though these were not
observed. In this work, we build a computational approach
that can similarly predict 3D from just a few images – by
integrating visual measurements and priors via probabilistic modeling and then seeking likely 3D modes.
A growing number of recent works have studied the related tasks of sparse-view 3D reconstruction and novel view
synthesis, i.e. inferring 3D representations and/or synthesizing novel views of an object given just a few (typically
2-3) images with known relative camera poses. By leveraging data-driven priors, these approaches can learn to efficiently leverage multi-view cues and infer 3D from sparse
views. However, they still yield blurry predictions under

12588

