This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniDAformer: Unified Domain Adaptive Panoptic Segmentation Transformer
via Hierarchical Mask Calibration

1

Jingyi Zhang1, * Jiaxing Huang1,∗ Xiaoqin Zhang2 Shijian Lu1,†
S-lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Wenzhou University

Abstract
Domain adaptive panoptic segmentation aims to mitigate data annotation challenge by leveraging off-the-shelf
annotated data in one or multiple related source domains.
However, existing studies employ two separate networks
for instance segmentation and semantic segmentation which
lead to excessive network parameters as well as complicated and computationally intensive training and inference
processes. We design UniDAformer, a unified domain adaptive panoptic segmentation transformer that is simple but
can achieve domain adaptive instance segmentation and
semantic segmentation simultaneously within a single network. UniDAformer introduces Hierarchical Mask Calibration (HMC) that rectifies inaccurate predictions at the level
of regions, superpixels and pixels via online self-training
on the fly. It has three unique features: 1) it enables unified domain adaptive panoptic adaptation; 2) it mitigates
false predictions and improves domain adaptive panoptic
segmentation effectively; 3) it is end-to-end trainable with
a much simpler training and inference pipeline. Extensive experiments over multiple public benchmarks show that
UniDAformer achieves superior domain adaptive panoptic
segmentation as compared with the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [30] performs instance segmentation for things and semantic segmentation for stuff, which
assigns each image pixel with a semantic category and
a unique identity simultaneously. With the advance of
deep neural networks [5, 17–19, 31, 43], panoptic segmentation [4, 7–9, 29, 30, 33, 35, 54, 55] has achieved very
impressive performance under the supervision of plenty
of densely-annotated training data. However, collecting
densely-annotated panoptic data is prohibitively laborious
and time-consuming [10,11,37] which has become one major constraint along this line of research. One alternative is
* Equal contribution, {jingyi.zhang, jiaxing.huang}@ntu.edu.sg.
† Corresponding author, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg.

Figure 1. Existing domain adaptive panoptic segmentation [20]
adapts things and stuff separately with two isolated networks
(for instance segmentation and semantic segmentation) and fuses
their outputs to produce the final panoptic segmentation as in (a),
leading to excessive network parameters as well as complicated
and computationally intensive training and inference. Differently,
UniDAformer employs a single unified network to jointly adapt
things and stuff as in (b), which involves much less parameters
and simplifies the training and inference pipeline greatly.

to leverage off-the-shelf labeled data from one or multiple
source domains. Nevertheless, the source-trained models
often experience clear performance drop while applied to
various target domains that usually have different data distributions as compared with the source domains [20].
Domain adaptive panoptic segmentation can mitigate the
inter-domain discrepancy by aligning one or multiple labeled source domains and an unlabeled target domain [20].
To the best of our knowledge, CVRN [20] is the only work
that tackles domain adaptive panoptic segmentation challenges by exploiting the distinct natures of instance segmentation and semantic segmentation. Specifically, CVRN introduces cross-view regularization to guide the two segmentation tasks to complement and regularize each other and
achieves very impressive performance. However, CVRN re-

11227

