This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GANmouflage: 3D Object Nondetection with Texture Fields
Jasmine Collins2

Oscar de Lima1

Andrew Owens1

University of Michigan1

UC Berkeley2

XMotors.ai3

Rui Guo1,3 *

3D
(b) Object(a)
inserted
in aged
sceneobject
(a)Textured
Camou
object

3D of
object
(b) Object inserted in
(c)
Viewpoints
(c)Textured
Viewpoints
camouflaged
(b)
object
Objectwithout
inserted
in scene
(b)scene
Viewpoints of
of camouflaged
camou agedobject
object (a)
(c)
Object
camou
age

Figure 1. We learn to camouflage 3D objects within scenes. Given an object’s shape, position, and a distribution of possible viewpoints it
will be seen from, we estimate a texture field that will conceal it. We show example outputs from our model, with two viewpoints for each
camouflaged object. Please see the videos on our webpage (https://rrrrrguo.github.io/ganmouflage) for more examples.

Abstract
We propose a method that learns to camouflage 3D objects within scenes. Given an object’s shape and a distribution of viewpoints from which it will be seen, we estimate a
texture that will make it difficult to detect. Successfully solving this task requires a model that can accurately reproduce
textures from the scene, while simultaneously dealing with
the highly conflicting constraints imposed by each viewpoint. We address these challenges with a model based on
texture fields and adversarial learning. Our model learns to
camouflage a variety of object shapes from randomly sampled locations and viewpoints within the input scene, and
is the first to address the problem of hiding complex object
shapes. Using a human visual search study, we find that our
estimated textures conceal objects significantly better than
previous methods.
fl

flfl

* Work done while at University of Michigan

1. Introduction
Using fur, feathers, spots, and stripes, camouflaged animals show a remarkable ability to stay hidden within their
environment. These capabilities developed as part of an
evolutionary arms race, with advances in camouflage leading to advances in visual perception, and vice versa.
Inspired by these challenges, previous work [33] proposed the object nondetection problem: to create an appearance for an object that makes it undetectable. Given an object’s shape and a sample of photos from a scene, the goal is
to produce a texture that hides the object from every viewpoint that it is likely to be observed from. This problem
has applications in hiding unsightly objects, such as utility boxes [7], solar panels [29, 49], and radio towers, and in
concealing objects from humans or animals, such as surveillance cameras and hunting platforms. Moreover, since camouflage models must ultimately thwart highly effective visual systems, they may provide a better scientific understanding of the cues that these systems use. Animal camouflage, for instance, has developed strategies for avoiding
perceptual grouping and boundary detection cues [30, 52].

4702

