This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SadTalker: Learning Realistic 3D Motion Coefficients for Stylized Audio-Driven
Single Image Talking Face Animation
Wenxuan Zhang* , 1, 2

Xiaodong Cun* , 3
Xuan Wang4
Yong Zhang3
Xi Shen3
2, 5
3
† , 2, 5
Yu Guo
Ying Shan
Fei Wang
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
154
27 5
45
65
133
3
Tencent AI Lab
Ant Group
IAIR, Xi’an Jiaotong University

Input Audio

Style 1
Style 2

Input Image

Style 3

Figure 1. The proposed SadTalker produces diverse, realistic, synchronized talking videos from input audio and a single reference image.

Abstract
Generating talking head videos through a face image
and a piece of speech audio still contains many challenges.
i.e., unnatural head movement, distorted expression, and
identity modification. We argue that these issues are mainly
caused by learning from the coupled 2D motion fields. On
the other hand, explicitly using 3D information also suffers
problems of stiff expression and incoherent video. We present
SadTalker, which generates 3D motion coefficients (head
pose, expression) of the 3DMM from audio and implicitly
modulates a novel 3D-aware face render for talking head
generation. To learn the realistic motion coefficients, we
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

explicitly model the connections between audio and different types of motion coefficients individually. Precisely, we
present ExpNet to learn the accurate facial expression from
audio by distilling both coefficients and 3D-rendered faces.
As for the head pose, we design PoseVAE via a conditional
VAE to synthesize head motion in different styles. Finally,
the generated 3D motion coefficients are mapped to the unsupervised 3D keypoints space of the proposed face render
to synthesize the final video. We conducted extensive experiments to demonstrate the superiority of our method in terms
of motion and video quality. 1

1 The code and demo videos are available at https://sadtalker.

github.io.

8652

