This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Modal Representation Learning with Text-Driven Soft Masks
Jaeyoo Park1
Bohyung Han1,2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ECE1 & IPAI2 , Seoul National University
{bellos1203, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a visual-linguistic representation learning
approach within a self-supervised learning framework by
introducing a new operation, loss, and data augmentation
strategy. First, we generate diverse features for the imagetext matching (ITM) task via soft-masking the regions in an
image, which are most relevant to a certain word in the corresponding caption, instead of completely removing them.
Since our framework relies only on image-caption pairs
with no fine-grained annotations, we identify the relevant
regions to each word by computing the word-conditional visual attention using multi-modal encoder. Second, we encourage the model to focus more on hard but diverse examples by proposing a focal loss for the image-text contrastive
learning (ITC) objective, which alleviates the inherent limitations of overfitting and bias issues. Last, we perform
multi-modal data augmentations for self-supervised learning via mining various examples by masking texts and rendering distortions on images. We show that the combination of these three innovations is effective for learning a
pretrained model, leading to outstanding performance on
multiple vision-language downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Vision-language representation learning aims at optimizing a joint embedding model for the data in both the
image and text domains, where the learned representations are transferred to solve various vision-language downstream tasks including image-text retrieval [20, 27, 32], visual question answering [1, 3, 29, 44], visual reasoning [37,
41], etc. With the introduction of large-scale image-text
datasets [18, 27, 31, 36] and the recent advances in language
models [2, 7, 40], research for vision-language representation learning [4, 17, 21, 24, 28] has been actively exploring
self-supervision tasks such as image-text matching (ITM),
masked language modeling (MLM), and image-text contrastive learning (ITC).
During the pretraining stage, the model solves the tasks
based only on image-caption pairs with no fine-grained annotations, i.e., annotations of region-word relations. Thus,

Text : A zebra next to a deer

(a) Our soft mask

(b) Random hard mask

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between the proposed soft
feature masking and the random hard feature masking. The random hard feature masking has a risk of completely removing the
important regions while our soft feature masking strategy still preserves the regions.

the model focuses on the most discriminative regions in images, which typically correspond to the primary objects in
the scenes. Hence, the model lacks a comprehensive understanding of various attributes observed in images despite detailed descriptions in captions. To alleviate this limitation,
we propose the following three techniques for diversifying
observations, eventually resulting in performance improvement of learned representations.
First, we devise a soft masking technique on visual features for training, which suppresses activations at the discriminative parts in an input image with respect to a certain word in its caption. The proposed soft feature masking makes a model focus on the regions that are initially
paid less attention to and synthesizes diverse samples during the training procedure. To be specific, we first utilize
the cross-attention map of image and text features derived
by the multi-modal fusion encoder and identify salient regions in the image by computing the word-specific GradCAM [35] of the image-text matching score. Then we feed
a softly-masked image feature to the fusion encoder for
learning to match the features of both modalities. While the
most straightforward way to augment diverse visual features
is to employ discrete hard masks as recent trends [12, 42],
which aim to reconstruct images, our approach suppresses
information in images using the soft masks with real-valued

2798

