This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Handy: Towards a high fidelity 3D hand shape and appearance model
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias1
Stylianos Ploumpis1
Stylianos Moschoglou1
Vasileios Triantafyllou2
Stefanos Zafeiriou1
1
2
Imperial College London
Cosmos Designs Ltd
{r.potamias,s.ploumpis,s.moschoglou,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. Our proposed hand model is able to generalise and accurately reconstruct the 3D hand shape and appearance from a single
in-the-wild image. High frequency details are visible in our reconstructions such as wrinkles, veins, nail polish etc.

Abstract
Over the last few years, with the advent of virtual and
augmented reality, an enormous amount of research has
been focused on modeling, tracking and reconstructing human hands. Given their power to express human behavior,
hands have been a very important, but challenging component of the human body. Currently, most of the state-ofthe-art reconstruction and pose estimation methods rely on
the low polygon MANO model. Apart from its low polygon
count, MANO model was trained with only 31 adult subjects, which not only limits its expressive power but also
imposes unnecessary shape reconstruction constraints on
pose estimation methods. Moreover, hand appearance remains almost unexplored and neglected from the majority
of hand reconstruction methods. In this work, we propose
“Handy”, a large-scale model of the human hand, modeling both shape and appearance composed of over 1200
subjects which we make publicly available for the benefit
of the research community. In contrast to current models,
our proposed hand model was trained on a dataset with
large diversity in age, gender, and ethnicity, which tackles
the limitations of MANO and accurately reconstructs outof-distribution samples. In order to create a high quality

texture model, we trained a powerful GAN, which preserves
high frequency details and is able to generate high resolution hand textures. To showcase the capabilities of the proposed model, we built a synthetic dataset of textured hands
and trained a hand pose estimation network to reconstruct
both the shape and appearance from single images. As it is
demonstrated in an extensive series of quantitative as well
as qualitative experiments, our model proves to be robust
against the state-of-the-art and realistically captures the 3D
hand shape and pose along with a high frequency detailed
texture even in adverse “in-the-wild” conditions.

1. Introduction
Humans express their emotions mainly using their facial expressions and hands. Hand movements and poses are
strong indicators of body language and can convey meaningful messages which can be key factors in human behavioral analysis. For this, hands have been widely studied in regard to their biometric applications [11, 40]. 3D
hand models lead the technological developments of crucial tasks for virtual reality such as human hand tracking
Project page: https://github.com/rolpotamias/handy.

4670

