This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Autoencoding Does Not Help Natural Language Supervision at Scale
Floris Weers

Vaishaal Shankar

Angelos Katharopoulos

Yinfei Yang

Tom Gunter

{fweers,vaishaal shankar,a katharopoulos,yinfeiy,tom gunter}@apple.com

Abstract
Self supervision and natural language supervision have
emerged as two exciting ways to train general purpose image encoders which excel at a variety of downstream tasks.
Recent works such as M3AE [31] and SLIP [63] have suggested that these approaches can be effectively combined,
but most notably their results use small (<20M examples)
pre-training datasets and don’t effectively reflect the largescale regime (>100M samples) that is commonly used for
these approaches. Here we investigate whether a similar
approach can be effective when trained with a much larger
amount of data. We find that a combination of two state
of the art approaches: masked auto-encoders, MAE [37]
and contrastive language image pre-training, CLIP [68]
provides a benefit over CLIP when trained on a corpus of
11.3M image-text pairs, but little to no benefit (as evaluated
on a suite of common vision tasks) over CLIP when trained
on a large corpus of 1.4B images. Our work provides some
much needed clarity into the effectiveness (or lack thereof)
of self supervision for large-scale image-text training.

1. Introduction
Large scale pretraining has become a powerful tool in the
arsenal of computer vision researchers to produce state of
the art results across a wider variety of tasks [39,88,95,98].
However, when pre-training on tens of millions to billions
of images it is difficult to rely on standard supervised methods to train models, as datasets of this size often lack reliable labels. In the presence of these massive but largely
under-curated datasets, two general classes of methods to
train general purpose image encoders have emerged:
1. Self Supervised techniques that learn visual representations from the image data alone [11, 36]
2. Natural Language Supervised methods that utilize
paired free-form text data to learn visual representations [43, 69]
Due to the unique strengths and weaknesses of each ap-

proach1 , a recent flurry of work has introduced methods that
combine both forms of supervision [31, 56, 64, 78] to varying degrees of success. While each of these methods establishes some regime where the additional supervision helps,
none of these “joint-supervision” methods advance state of
the art in any meaningful way. Additionally, to our knowledge none of these methods have shown comparative results
at the scale many large scale vision models are currently
trained at (>100M examples) [43,66,69,73,80,82,98]. Furthermore, methods that use both forms of supervision start
with the presumption that the additional supervision is helpful and either often lack clean ablations or lack evaluations
in a “high accuracy” regime—leading to further confusion
regarding whether a combination of these methods can actually improve the state of the art. To clarify this issue, in
this work, we investigate a simple question:
Does a combination of self supervision and natural language supervision actually lead to higher
quality visual representations?
In order to answer this, we first introduce a straightforward baseline approach that combines standard self supervision and language supervision techniques. We combine masked auto-encoders (MAE) and contrastive language image-pretraining (CLIP) to make MAE-CLIP. We
then present a careful study of the performance of MAE,
M3AE, CLIP and MAE-CLIP across a wide variety of tasks
in two distinct regimes: a “low-sample” 2 11.3 million
example regime and a “high-sample” 1.4 billion example
regime. We train self-supervised and language-supervised
methods using the same pre-training datasets under the assumption that we have no knowledge about downstream
tasks. Our experiments show:
1. In the low sample size regime, without changing the
final pooling operation in the network, we observe a
large performance improvement, namely 6% on ImageNet [18] and 4% on VTAB [105]. However, when
1 Self supervised methods can learn representations without labels, but
natural language supervision learns better representations. Natural language supervised methods rely on quality of captions
2 We note that what low sample means has changed substantially over
the last few years

1
23432

