This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GALIP: Generative Adversarial CLIPs for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Ming Tao1,2 Bing-Kun Bao1,2 * Hao Tang3 Changsheng Xu2,4,5
1
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
CVL, ETH Zürich 4 MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Synthesizing high-fidelity complex images from text is
challenging. Based on large pretraining, the autoregressive and diffusion models can synthesize photo-realistic images. Although these large models have shown notable
progress, there remain three flaws. 1) These models require tremendous training data and parameters to achieve
good performance. 2) The multi-step generation design
slows the image synthesis process heavily. 3) The synthesized visual features are challenging to control and require
delicately designed prompts. To enable high-quality, efficient, fast, and controllable text-to-image synthesis, we propose Generative Adversarial CLIPs, namely GALIP. GALIP
leverages the powerful pretrained CLIP model both in the
discriminator and generator. Specifically, we propose a
CLIP-based discriminator. The complex scene understanding ability of CLIP enables the discriminator to accurately
assess the image quality. Furthermore, we propose a CLIPempowered generator that induces the visual concepts from
CLIP through bridge features and prompts. The CLIPintegrated generator and discriminator boost training efficiency, and as a result, our model only requires about 3%
training data and 6% learnable parameters, achieving comparable results to large pretrained autoregressive and diffusion models. Moreover, our model achieves ∼120×faster
synthesis speed and inherits the smooth latent space from
GAN. The extensive experimental results demonstrate the
excellent performance of our GALIP. Code is available at
https://github.com/tobran/GALIP.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, we have witnessed the great success of generative models for various applications [4, 47].
Among them, text-to-image synthesis [3, 5, 16, 19–22, 26,
29, 30, 34, 43, 48, 50–53, 60] is one of the most appealing
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. (a) Existing text-to-image GANs conduct adversarial
training from scratch. (b) Our proposed GALIP conducts adversarial training based on the integrated CLIP model.

applications. It generates high-fidelity images according to
given language guidance. Owing to the convenience of language for users, text-to-image synthesis has attracted many
researchers and has become an active research area.
Based on a large scale of data collections, model size,
and pretraining, recently proposed large pretrained autoregressive and diffusion models, e.g., DALL-E [34] and
LDM [36], show the impressive generative ability to synthesize complex scenes and outperform the previous text-toimage GANs significantly. Although these large pretrained
generative models have achieved significant advances, they
still suffer from three flaws. First, these models require
tremendous training data and parameters for pretraining.
The large data and model size brings an extremely high
computing budget and hardware requirements, making it
inaccessible to many researchers and users. Second, the
generation of large models is much slower than GANs.
The token-by-token generation and progressive denoising
require hundreds of inference steps and make the generated
results lag the language inputs seriously. Third, there is no
intuitive smooth latent space as GANs, which maps meaningful visual attributes to the latent vector. The multi-step
generation design breaks the synthesis process and scatters
the meaningful latent space. It makes the synthesis process
require delicately designed prompts to control.

14214

