This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Phase-Shifting Coder: Predicting Accurate Orientation
in Oriented Object Detection
Yi Yu1,2 , Feipeng Da1,2, *
School of Automation, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Measurement and Control of Complex Systems of Engineering,
Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
1

{yuyi, dafp}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the vigorous development of computer vision, oriented object detection has gradually been featured. In this
paper, a novel differentiable angle coder named phaseshifting coder (PSC) is proposed to accurately predict the
orientation of objects, along with a dual-frequency version
(PSCD). By mapping the rotational periodicity of different cycles into the phase of different frequencies, we provide a unified framework for various periodic fuzzy problems caused by rotational symmetry in oriented object detection. Upon such a framework, common problems in
oriented object detection such as boundary discontinuity
and square-like problems are elegantly solved in a unified
form. Visual analysis and experiments on three datasets
prove the effectiveness and the potentiality of our approach.
When facing scenarios requiring high-quality bounding
boxes, the proposed methods are expected to give a competitive performance. The codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmrotate.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, object detection has been extensively studied. Early researches are
mainly focused on horizontal object detection [33], on the
ground that objects in natural scenes are usually oriented
upward due to gravity. However, in other domains such as
aerial images [2, 12, 20, 23, 25], scene text [7, 10, 13, 14, 34],
and industrial inspection [11, 19], oriented bounding boxes
are considered more preferable. Upon requirements in these
scenarios, oriented object detection has gradually been featured.
At present, several solutions around oriented object de* Corresponding author is Feipeng Da. This work is supported by Special Project on Basic Research of Frontier Leading Technology of Jiangsu
Province of China (BK20192004C).

tection have been developed, among which the most intuitive way is to modify horizontal object detectors by adding
an output channel to predict the orientation angle. Such a
solution faces two problems:
1) Boundary problem [24]: Boundary discontinuity
problem is often caused by angular periodicity. Assuming
orientation −π/2 is equivalent to π/2, the network output is
sometimes expected to be −π/2 and sometimes π/2 when
facing the same input. Such a situation makes the network
confused about in which way it should perform regression.
2) Square-like problem [27]: Square-like problem usually occurs when a square bounding box cannot be uniquely
defined. Specifically, a square box should be equivalent to
a 90◦ rotated one, but the regression loss between them is
high due to the inconsistency of angle parameters. Such
ambiguity can also seriously confuse the network.
A more comprehensive introduction to these problems
can be found in previous researches [25, 27]. Also, several methods have been proposed to address these problems,
which will be reviewed in Sec. 2.
Through rethinking the above problems, we find that
they can inherently be unified as rotationally symmetric
problems (boundary under 180◦ and square-like under 90◦
rotation), which is quite similar to the periodic fuzzy problem of the absolute phase acquisition [37] in optical measurement. Inspired by this, we come up with an idea to
utilize phase-shifting coding, a technique widely used in
optical measurement [36], for angle prediction in oriented
object detection. The technique has the potential to solve
both boundary discontinuity and square-like problems:
1) Phase-shifting encodes the measured distance (or parallax) into the periodic phase in optical measurement. The
orientation angle can also be encoded into the periodic
phase, and boundary discontinuity is thus inherently solved.
2) Phase-shifting also has the periodic fuzzy problem,
which is similar to the square-like problem, and many solutions exist. For example, the dual-frequency phase-shifting

13354

