This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeAR: Debiasing Vision-Language Models with Additive Residuals
Ashish Seth*
IIT Madras, India

Mayur Hemani*
Adobe Inc.

Chirag Agarwal
Adobe Inc.

cs20s030@smail.iitm.ac.in

mayur@adobe.com

cagarwal@adobe.com

Bias in VLMs

(A) CLIP Attribution Maps

(B) Zero-shot Object Detection with CLIP

Before Debiasing After Debiasing

Object Detection: “Nurse”

Object Detection: “Doctor”

Debiased with DeAR

Debiased with DeAR

“Nurse”

CLIP Image Encoder

“photo
of a
doctor”

CLIP Text
Encoder

cos
w/o Debiasing
0.237 < 0.244

cos
“Doctor”

With DeAR
0.241 ≈ 0.239

Figure 1. We present D E AR – a framework to de-bias large Vision-Language models (VLM) like CLIP [45], exhibited in the skewed
similarity between specific language concepts and images of people of certain visual characteristics. (A) Attribution maps from the
D E AR-augmented CLIP model indicate how the attribution for a text concept shifts from the person’s facial characteristics to objective
cues in the image. (B) Results for zero-shot object detection with CLIP-ODS [48] that uses CLIP before and after debiasing show a clear
improvement in the fairness of its detection results.

Abstract
Large pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) reduce the time for developing predictive models for various
vision-grounded language downstream tasks by providing
rich, adaptable image and text representations. However,
these models suffer from societal biases owing to the skewed
distribution of various identity groups in the training data.
These biases manifest as the skewed similarity between the
representations for specific text concepts and images of people of different identity groups and, therefore, limit the usefulness of such models in real-world high-stakes applications. In this work, we present D E AR (Debiasing with
Additive Residuals), a novel debiasing method that learns
additive residual image representations to offset the original representations, ensuring fair output representations.
In doing so, it reduces the ability of the representations to
distinguish between the different identity groups. Further,
we observe that the current fairness tests are performed
* Equal Contribution

on limited face image datasets that fail to indicate why a
specific text concept should/should not apply to them. To
bridge this gap and better evaluate D E AR, we introduce
the P ROTECTED ATTRIBUTE TAG A SSOCIATION (PATA)
dataset – a new context-based bias benchmarking dataset
for evaluating the fairness of large pre-trained VLMs. Additionally, PATA provides visual context for a diverse human
population in different scenarios with both positive and negative connotations. Experimental results for fairness and
zero-shot performance preservation using multiple datasets
demonstrate the efficacy of our framework. The dataset is
released here.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based vision-language models (VLMs) [45]
unify text and visual data into a common representation and
reduce the computing cost of training for specific computer
vision [19] and visually-grounded linguistic tasks [12, 47].
VLMs are trained with a large amount of data with the

6820

