This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Learning for Multimodal Non-Rigid 3D Shape Matching
Dongliang Cao
Florian Bernard
University of Bonn

The matching of 3D shapes has been extensively studied for shapes represented as surface meshes, as well as
for shapes represented as point clouds. While point clouds
are a common representation of raw real-world 3D data
(e.g. from laser scanners), meshes encode rich and expressive topological information, but their creation typically requires some form of (often manual) curation. In turn, methods that purely rely on point clouds are unable to meet the
matching quality of mesh-based methods that utilise the additional topological structure. In this work we close this
gap by introducing a self-supervised multimodal learning
strategy that combines mesh-based functional map regularisation with a contrastive loss that couples mesh and point
cloud data. Our shape matching approach allows to obtain intramodal correspondences for triangle meshes, complete point clouds, and partially observed point clouds, as
well as correspondences across these data modalities. We
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art results on several challenging benchmark datasets even in
comparison to recent supervised methods, and that our
method reaches previously unseen cross-dataset generalisation ability. Our code is available at https://github.com/
dongliangcao/Self-Supervised-Multimodal-Shape-Matching.

1. Introduction
Matching 3D shapes, i.e. finding correspondences between their parts, is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and computer graphics that has a wide range of applications [11, 16, 31]. Even though it has been studied for
decades [56, 57], the non-rigid shape matching problem remains highly challenging. One often faces a large variability in terms of shape deformations, or input data with severe
noise and topological changes.
With the recent success of deep learning, many learningbased approaches were proposed for 3D shape matching [17, 19, 28, 33]. While recent approaches demonstrate
near-perfect matching accuracy without requiring ground
truth annotations [8, 17], they are limited to 3D shapes represented as triangle meshes and strongly rely on clean data.

Proportion of correct matchings

Abstract

1.0

SHREC19

0.8
0.6

Deep Shells: 0.075
Deep Shells (PC): 0.117
DPC (PC): 0.176
0.2
Ours: 0.040
Ours (PC): 0.045
0.0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
Geodesic error threshold
Figure 1. Left: Our method obtains accurate correspondences
for triangle meshes, point clouds and even partially observed
point clouds. Right: Proportion of correct keypoints (PCK)
curves and mean geodesic errors (scores in the legend) on the
SHREC’19 dataset [34] for meshes (solid lines) and point clouds
(dashed lines). Existing point cloud matching methods (DPC [26],
green line), or mesh-based methods applied to point clouds (Deep
Shells [17], red dashed line) are unable to meet the matching performance of mesh-based methods (solid lines). In contrast, our
method is multimodal and can process both meshes and point
clouds, while enabling accurate shape matching with comparable
performance for both modalities (blue lines).
0.4

Since point clouds are a common representation for realworld 3D data, many unsupervised learning approaches
were specifically designed for point cloud matching [20,
26, 63]. These methods are often based on learning perpoint features, so that point-wise correspondences are obtained by comparing feature similarities. The learned features were shown to be robust under large shape deformations and severe noise. However, although point clouds
commonly represent samples of a surface, respective topological relations are not explicitly available and thus cannot effectively be used during training. In turn, existing
point cloud correspondence methods are unable to meet
the matching performance of mesh-based methods, as can
be seen in Fig. 1. Moreover, when applying state-of-theart unsupervised methods designed for meshes (e.g. Deep
Shells [17]) to point clouds, one can observe a significant
drop in matching performance.
In this work, we propose a self-supervised learning
framework to address these shortcomings. Our method uses

17735

