This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collecting Cross-Modal Presence-Absence Evidence for Weakly-Supervised
Audio-Visual Event Perception
Junyu Gao1,2 , Mengyuan Chen1,2 , and Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
{junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; chenmengyuan2021@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Only audible event

Video-level Annotations漣 Dog, Speech, Singing

Only visible event
Audi-visible event

With only video-level event labels, this paper targets at
the task of weakly-supervised audio-visual event perception
(WS-AVEP), which aims to temporally localize and categorize events belonging to each modality. Despite the recent
progress, most existing approaches either ignore the unsynchronized property of audio-visual tracks or discount the
complementary modality for explicit enhancement. We argue that, for an event residing in one modality, the modality
itself should provide ample presence evidence of this event,
while the other complementary modality is encouraged to
afford the absence evidence as a reference signal. To this
end, we propose to collect Cross-Modal Presence-Absence
Evidence (CMPAE) in a uniﬁed framework. Speciﬁcally,
by leveraging uni-modal and cross-modal representations,
a presence-absence evidence collector (PAEC) is designed
under Subjective Logic theory. To learn the evidence in a
reliable range, we propose a joint-modal mutual learning
(JML) process, which calibrates the evidence of diverse audible, visible, and audi-visible events adaptively and dynamically. Extensive experiments show that our method
surpasses state-of-the-arts (e.g., absolute gains of 3.6%
and 6.1% in terms of event-level visual and audio metrics).
Code is available in github.com/MengyuanChen21/
CVPR2023-CMPAE.

1. Introduction
Research in computer vision places a signiﬁcant emphasis on the visual aspects of event perception; nevertheless, in
the real world with multisensory modalities, natural events
are distinguished by a great deal more than just their appearance [11, 30, 52, 53, 56, 66]. For instance, think of playing a
speciﬁc musical instrument in a concert hall, a barking dog,
or starting a car with the engine sound. To properly compre18827

Visual
Track
Dog

Speech

Audio
Track

Speech

Singing

Figure 1. With only video-level annotations, weakly-supervised
audio-visual event perception (WS-AVEP) aims to predict the temporal boundaries of various only audible (in orange), only visible
(in green), or audi-visible (in blue) events in a video.

hend an event, it is necessary to take acoustics into account
and engage in joint audio-visual perception.
The target of audio-visual event perception (AVEP) is
to temporally categorize video events. However, collecting
precisely temporal audio-visual annotations is a bottleneck
and consequently limits the scalability of a fully-supervised
learning framework. As a result, Tian et al. [52,53] propose
to perceive audio-visual events in an weakly-supervised
manner, where only easily available video-level labels are
needed during model training. As depicted in Figure 1,
given videos which may have various audible, visible,
or audi-visible events, the weakly-supervised audio-visual
event perception (WS-AVEP) is commonly optimized by
utilizing the video-level annotations.
To date in the literature, current WS-AVEP approaches
mainly embrace two types of pipelines: (1) To comprehensively incorporate both modalities, some pioneering methods [53] assume that each event in a video is simultaneously audible and visible. Based on this characteristic,
numerous cross-modal fusion strategies are proposed, including cross attention [60, 61, 63] and modality interaction [47, 62]. Although achieving promising performance,
the rigorous assumption may not always hold in practice

