This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guided Depth Super-Resolution by Deep Anisotropic Diffusion
Nando Metzger* Rodrigo Caye Daudt∗ Konrad Schindler
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zurich
{metzgern,rcayedaudt,schindler}@ethz.ch

1. Introduction
It is a primordial need for visual data analysis to increase the resolution of images after they have been captured. In many fields one is faced with images that, for
technical reasons, have too low resolutions for the intended
purposes, e.g., MRI scans in medical imaging [48], multispectral satellite images in Earth observation [22], thermal
surveillance images [1] and depth images in robotics [9]. In
some cases, an image of much higher resolution is available
in a different imaging modality, which can act as a guide
for super-resolving the low-resolution source image, by injecting the missing high-frequency content. For instance,
in Earth observation, the guide is often a panchromatic image (hence the term ”pan-sharpening”), whereas in robotics
a conventional RGB image is often attached to the same
* Equal contribution.
1 https://github.com/prs- eth/Diffusion- Super-

Resolution

CNN

Diffusion coefficients

Diffusion

Performing super-resolution of a depth image using
the guidance from an RGB image is a problem that concerns several fields, such as robotics, medical imaging,
and remote sensing. While deep learning methods have
achieved good results in this problem, recent work highlighted the value of combining modern methods with more
formal frameworks. In this work, we propose a novel approach which combines guided anisotropic diffusion with a
deep convolutional network and advances the state of the
art for guided depth super-resolution. The edge transferring/enhancing properties of the diffusion are boosted by
the contextual reasoning capabilities of modern networks,
and a strict adjustment step guarantees perfect adherence
to the source image. We achieve unprecedented results in
three commonly used benchmarks for guided depth superresolution. The performance gain compared to other methods is the largest at larger scales, such as ×32 scaling.
Code1 for the proposed method is available to promote reproducibility of our results.

Guide

Initialization

Source

Adjustment

Abstract

Diffused result

Adjusted result

Diffusion-adjustment loop

Figure 1. We super-resolve a low-resolution depth image by finding the equilibrium state of a constrained anisotropic diffusion process. Learned diffusion coefficients favor smooth depth within objects and suppress diffusion across discontinuities. They are derived from the guide with a neural feature extractor that is trained
by back-propagating through the diffusion process.

platform as a TOF camera or laser scanner. In this paper,
we focus on super-resolving depth images guided by RGB
images, but the proposed framework is generic and can be
adapted to other sensor combinations, too.
Research into guided super-resolution has a long history [16, 29]. The proposed solutions range from classical,
entirely hand-crafted schemes [10] to fully learning-based
methods [15], while some recent works have combined
the two schools of thought, with promising results [5, 32].
Many classical methods boil down to an image-specific optimization problem that must be solved at inference time,
which often makes them slow and memory-hungry. Moreover, they are limited to low-level image properties of the
guide, such as color and contrast, and lack the high-level
image understanding and contextual reasoning of modern
neural networks. On the positive side, by design, they can
not overfit the peculiarities of a training set and tend to generalize better. Recent work on guided super-resolution has
focused on deep neural networks. Their superior ability to
capture latent image structure has greatly advanced the state
of the art over traditional, learning-free approaches. Still,
these learning-based methods tend to struggle with sharp

18237

