This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobileOne: An Improved One millisecond Mobile Backbone
Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu

James Gabriel

Jeff Zhu

Oncel Tuzel

Anurag Ranjan

Apple

Abstract
Efficient neural network backbones for mobile devices
are often optimized for metrics such as FLOPs or parameter count. However, these metrics may not correlate well
with latency of the network when deployed on a mobile device. Therefore, we perform extensive analysis of different
metrics by deploying several mobile-friendly networks on a
mobile device. We identify and analyze architectural and
optimization bottlenecks in recent efficient neural networks
and provide ways to mitigate these bottlenecks. To this end,
we design an efficient backbone MobileOne, with variants
achieving an inference time under 1 ms on an iPhone12
with 75.9% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet. We show that MobileOne achieves state-of-the-art performance within the efficient architectures while being many times faster on mobile. Our best model obtains similar performance on ImageNet as MobileFormer while being 38× faster. Our model
obtains 2.3% better top-1 accuracy on ImageNet than EfficientNet at similar latency. Furthermore, we show that
our model generalizes to multiple tasks – image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation with
significant improvements in latency and accuracy as compared to existing efficient architectures when deployed on a
mobile device. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/apple/ml-mobileone

1. Introduction
Design and deployment of efficient deep learning architectures for mobile devices has seen a lot of progress [5,
30,31,42,44,46] with consistently decreasing floating-point
operations (FLOPs) and parameter count while improving
accuracy. However, these metrics may not correlate well
with the efficiency [9] of the models in terms of latency. Efficiency metric like FLOPs do not account for memory access cost and degree of parallelism, which can have a nontrivial effect on latency during inference [42]. Parameter
count is also not well correlated with latency. For example, sharing parameters leads to higher FLOPS but smaller
model size. Furthermore, parameter-less operations like

skip-connections [24] or branching [33,49] can incur significant memory access costs. This disconnect can get exacerbated when custom accelerators are available in the regime
of efficient architectures.
Our goal is to improve the latency cost of efficient architectures while improving their accuracy by identifying key
architectural and optimization bottlenecks that affect ondevice latency. To identify architectural bottlenecks, we deploy neural networks on an iPhone12 by using CoreML [56]
and benchmark their latency costs. To alleviate optimization bottlenecks, we decouple train-time and inferencetime architectures, i.e. using a linearly over-parameterized
model at train-time and re-parameterizing the linear structures at inference [11–13]. We further alleviate optimization
bottleneck by dynamically relaxing regularization throughout training to prevent the already small models from being
over-regularized.
Based on our findings on the key bottlenecks, we design a novel architecture MobileOne, variants of which run
under 1 ms on an iPhone12 achieving state-of-the-art accuracy within efficient architecture family while being significantly faster on the device. Like prior works on structural
re-parameterization [11–13], MobileOne introduces linear
branches at train-time which get re-parameterized at inference. However, a key difference between our model and
prior structural re-parameterization works is the introduction of trivial over-parameterization branches, which provides further improvements in low parameter regime and
model scaling strategy. At inference, our model has simple feed-forward structure without any branches or skipconnections. Since this structure incurs lower memory
access cost, we can incorporate wider layers in our network which boosts representation capacity as demonstrated
empirically in Table 9. For example, MobileOne-S1 has
4.8M parameters and incurs a latency of 0.89ms, while
MobileNet-V2 [46] has 3.4M (29.2% less than MobileOneS1) parameters and incurs a latency of 0.98ms. At this operating point, MobileOne attains 3.9% better top-1 accuracy
than MobileNet-V2.
MobileOne achieves significant improvements in latency
compared to efficient models in literature while maintain-

7907

