This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GFIE: A Dataset and Baseline for Gaze-Following from 2D to 3D in Indoor
Environments
Zhengxi Hu1,2,3 , Yuxue Yang1 , Xiaolin Zhai1,2,3 , Dingye Yang1,2,3 , Bohan Zhou1 , Jingtai Liu1,2,3 
1
IRAIS, College of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nankai University
2
tjKLIR, Nankai University 3 TBI center, Nankai University
{hzx,yyx,zhaixiaolin,abandon,zhoubohan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn liujt@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Gaze-following is a kind of research that requires locating where the person in the scene is looking automatically
under the topic of gaze estimation. It is an important clue
for understanding human intention, such as identifying objects or regions of interest to humans. However, a survey
of datasets used for gaze-following tasks reveals defects in
the way they collect gaze point labels. Manual labeling may
introduce subjective bias and is labor-intensive, while automatic labeling with an eye-tracking device would alter the
person’s appearance. In this work, we introduce GFIE, a
novel dataset recorded by a gaze data collection system we
developed. The system is constructed with two devices, an
Azure Kinect and a laser rangeﬁnder, which generate the
laser spot to steer the subject’s attention as they perform in front of the camera. And an algorithm is developed
to locate laser spots in images for annotating 2D/3D gaze
targets and removing ground truth introduced by the spots. The whole procedure of collecting gaze behavior allows
us to obtain unbiased labels in unconstrained environments
semi-automatically. We also propose a baseline method
with stereo ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) perception for establishing
a 2D/3D gaze-following benchmark on the GFIE dataset.
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/
gfie.

a) Manual annotation
Recording System

b)Automatic annotation with
eye-tracking device

do
CY

d

CZ
CX
Laser Rangefinder
Azure Kinect

Laser Spot

c) Our system for recording gaze behavior to build GFIE dataset

Figure 1. The way of collecting gaze data in the existing gazefollowing dataset and our proposed scheme. a) is a sample from
the GazeFollow [28] dataset, the blue dots indicate the gaze targets
annotated by the different annotators. b) indicate the case where
annotations are collected with an eye-tracking device. c) is the
system designed in this paper.

such as locating items of interest to a person in the retail environment [35] and judging the risk of driving by detecting
whether the driver is distracted [9, 16]. In addition, gaze
target detection can assist in action recognition [40], social relationship analysis [11, 41], autism diagnosis [7] and
human-aware robot navigation [25].
As a device for monitoring gaze behavior, a wearable eye-tracking device was explored for gaze-following
[23, 30]. [14, 23, 27] designed a custom system for tracking gaze. These methods are only applicable to constrained
scenes due to extra burdens they bring, such as complex
calibration and additional expense. This challenge has also
attracted the attention of researchers in the computer vision
community, and recent works [7, 22, 28, 38] have made an
effort to establish datasets for inferring a person’s gaze target from third-view image based on deep-learning methods.

1. Introduction
Gaze-following is a human skill that emerges in infancy [36] to learn about visual focus of other people, which
helps to understand their personal thoughts and intentions [32]. For these reasons, detecting gaze targets automatically as humans do has great potential in some applications,
Corresponding author
* This work is supported in part by National Key Research and Development Project of China under Grant 2019YFB1310604, in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62173189.

8907

