This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Semantic Contrast for Scene-aware Video Anomaly Detection
Shengyang Sun
Xiaojin Gong*
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{sunshy,gongxj}@zju.edu.cn

Scene

Abstract

Appearance/Motion

Hierarchical Semantic Contrast
Push
Pull

+

Increasing scene-awareness is a key challenge in video
anomaly detection (VAD). In this work, we propose a hierarchical semantic contrast (HSC) method to learn a sceneaware VAD model from normal videos. We first incorporate
foreground object and background scene features with highlevel semantics by taking advantage of pre-trained video
parsing models. Then, building upon the autoencoderbased reconstruction framework, we introduce both scenelevel and object-level contrastive learning to enforce the encoded latent features to be compact within the same semantic classes while being separable across different classes.
This hierarchical semantic contrast strategy helps to deal
with the diversity of normal patterns and also increases
their discrimination ability. Moreover, for the sake of tackling rare normal activities, we design a skeleton-based motion augmentation to increase samples and refine the model
further. Extensive experiments on three public datasets and
scene-dependent mixture datasets validate the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
With the prevalence of surveillance cameras deployed
in public places, video anomaly detection (VAD) has attracted considerable attention from both academia and industry. It aims to automatically detect abnormal events
so that the workload of human monitors can be greatly
reduced. By now, numerous VAD methods have been
developed under different supervision settings, including
weakly supervised [13, 50, 55, 58, 64, 76], purely unsupervised [69, 72], and ones learning from normal videos
only [20, 24, 33, 44, 45]. However, it is extremely difficult or even impossible to collect sufficient and comprehensive abnormal data due to the rare occurrence of anomalies,
whereas collecting abundant normal data is relatively easy.
Therefore, the setting of learning from normal data is more
* Corresponding author.

+
Push

+

Figure 1. An illustration of hierarchical semantic contrast. The
encoded scene-appearance/motion features are gathered together
with respect to their semantic classes. Best viewed in color.

practical and plays the dominant role in past studies.
Although a majority of previous techniques learn their
VAD models from normal data, this task has still not
been well addressed due to the following reasons. First,
some anomalies are scene-dependent [46, 51], implying
that an appearance or motion may be anomalous in one
scene but normal in other scenes. How to detect scenedependent anomalies while preventing background bias (i.e.
learning the background noise rather than the essence of
anomaly [31]) is a challenging problem. Second, normal
patterns are diverse. How to enable a deep VAD model
to represent the diverse normality well but not generalize
to anomalous data is also a challenge [18, 44]. Last but
not least, samples collected from different normal patterns
are imbalanced because some normal activities may appear
very sparsely [46]. How to deal with rare but normal activities is challenging as well.
Previous VAD methods mainly perform learning at
frame-level [20, 47, 75] or in an object-centric [17, 24, 78]
way. The former is prone to suffer from the background
bias [31] while most of the latter methods are backgroundagnostic. There are some attempts to address the abovementioned challenges in one or another aspect. For instance, a spatio-temporal context graph [51] and a hierarchical scene normality-binding model [1] are constructed to
discover scene-dependent anomalies. Memory-augmented
autoencoders (AE) [18,44] are designed to represent diverse
normal patterns while lessening the powerful capacity of

22846

