This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boundary-enhanced Co-training for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Shenghai Rong Bohai Tu Zilei Wang* Junjie Li
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{rongsh, tbh3223, hnljj}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Performance comparison on VOC12
74

1. Introduction
Acquiring precise pixel-wise annotations for semantic
segmentation is quite laborious. To alleviate the high reliance on per-pixel labeling, weakly supervised semantic
segmentation (WSSS) has been proposed that only utilizes
image-level class labels to perform pixel-level classiﬁcation. Such a task usually involves two training stages. In
the ﬁrst stage, a classiﬁcation model is trained with image labels and then used to generate class activation maps
(CAMs) [72], which as seed regions are further expanded
to the pseudo-labels. In the second stage, the generated
* Corresponding author
1 The code and models are available at https://github.com/

ShenghaiRong/BECO.

72
70

mIoU

The existing weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) methods pay much attention to generating accurate and complete class activation maps (CAMs) as pseudolabels, while ignoring the importance of training the segmentation networks. In this work, we observe that there is
an inconsistency between the quality of the pseudo-labels
in CAMs and the performance of the ﬁnal segmentation
model, and the mislabeled pixels mainly lie on the boundary areas. Inspired by these ﬁndings, we argue that the
focus of WSSS should be shifted to robust learning given
the noisy pseudo-labels, and further propose a boundaryenhanced co-training (BECO) method for training the segmentation model. To be speciﬁc, we ﬁrst propose to use a
co-training paradigm with two interactive networks to improve the learning of uncertain pixels. Then we propose a
boundary-enhanced strategy to boost the prediction of difﬁcult boundary areas, which utilizes reliable predictions to
construct artiﬁcial boundaries. Beneﬁting from the design
of co-training and boundary enhancement, our method can
achieve promising segmentation performance for different
CAMs. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 and
MS COCO 2014 validate the superiority of our BECO over
other state-of-the-art methods. 1

68
66
64

train set: pseudo-labels quality
62

val set: deeplabv2 performance

60
SEAM

IRN

EDAM

RIB

EPS

AMN

PPC

Method

Figure 1. Pseudo label quality and deeplabv2 performance of
different WSSS methods, evaluated on the PASCAL VOC 2012
train set and val set, respectively. The red circles indicate that the
quality of pseudo-labels and the performance of the segmentation
model is inconsistent. Best viewed in color.

pseudo-labels serve as pixel-wise ground truths (GTs) to
train a segmentation model. Current mainstream methods [6, 27, 29, 69] believe that more accurate and complete
pseudo-labels tend to train a better semantic segmentation
model, and thus they are mainly dedicated to improving
CAMs in the ﬁrst stage, where the mean Intersection-overUnion (mIoU) is used to evaluate the quality of generated
pseudo-labels.
There is a natural question that needs to be asked, i.e.,
Can better pseudo-labels guarantee to train a better segmentation model? To explore the effect of the pseudo-labels
on the second-stage segmentation model, we choose several representative WSSS methods and report their mIoUs
of the pseudo-labels on train set and the predictions of
the segmentation models on val set.
Figure 1 shows
the results, where the PASCAL VOC2012 dataset [9] is
used and the same segmentation network Deeplab [4] is
adopted. The red circles indicate the inconsistency between
the mIoU of pseudo-labels and the performance of segmentation models. Evidently, the pseudo-labels with a higher
mIoU do not mean a better segmentation model. In fact,
the WSSS approaches inevitably yield noisy pseudo-labels.

19574

