This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boundary Unlearning: Rapid Forgetting of Deep Networks via Shifting the
Decision Boundary
Min Chen, Weizhuo Gao, Gaoyang Liu, Kai Peng, Chen Wang
Hubei Key Laboratoryof Smart Internet Technology, School of EIC,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
{chenmin7,wzgao,liugaoyang,pkhust,chenwang}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The practical needs of the “right to be forgotten” and
poisoned data removal call for efficient machine unlearning techniques, which enable machine learning models to
unlearn, or to forget a fraction of training data and its lineage. Recent studies on machine unlearning for deep neural
networks (DNNs) attempt to destroy the influence of the forgetting data by scrubbing the model parameters. However,
it is prohibitively expensive due to the large dimension of
the parameter space. In this paper, we refocus our attention
from the parameter space to the decision space of the DNN
model, and propose Boundary Unlearning, a rapid yet effective way to unlearn an entire class from a trained DNN
model. The key idea is to shift the decision boundary of the
original DNN model to imitate the decision behavior of the
model retrained from scratch. We develop two novel boundary shift methods, namely Boundary Shrink and Boundary
Expanding, both of which can rapidly achieve the utility and
privacy guarantees. We extensively evaluate Boundary Unlearning on CIFAR-10 and Vggface2 datasets, and the results show that Boundary Unlearning can effectively forget
the forgetting class on image classification and face recognition tasks, with an expected speed-up of 17× and 19×,
respectively, compared with retraining from the scratch.

1. Introduction
Suppose a company trains a face recognition model with
your photos and deploys it as an opened API. Your photos
could be stolen or inferenced by attackers via model inversion attack [6,18]. With the increasing awareness of protecting user’s privacy, a lot of privacy regulations take effect to
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62272183 and 62171189; by the Key
R&D Program of Hubei Province under Grant 2021BAA026; and by the
special fund for Wuhan Yellow Crane Talents (Excellent Young Scholar).
The corresponding author of this paper is Chen Wang.

provide you the control over your personal data. For examples, the General Data Protect Regulation (GDPR) established by the European Union gives individuals “the right
to be forgotten” and mandates that companies have to erase
personal data once it is requested [35].
Beyond the “right to be forgotten”, data forgetting from
machine learning (ML) models is also beneficial when certain training data becomes no longer valid, e.g., some training data is manipulated by data poisoning attacks [10, 26],
or outdated over time, or even identified to be mistakes after
training. These practical needs call for efficient machine unlearning techniques, which enable ML models to unlearn,
or to forget a fraction of training data and its lineage.
In this paper, we focus on unlearning an entire class from
deep neural networks (DNNs), which is useful in realistic scenarios like face recognition: unlearning one’s data
needs to forget the entire class of one’s face images. As
the DNN model retrained from scratch is the optimal unlearned model, early studies try to accelerate the retraining process of deep networks [1, 11, 38], but have to intervene the original training process, which degenerates the
model utility and increases the training time. A branch of
recent researches [8, 9, 23, 27] attempt to destroy the influence of the forgetting data by scrubbing the model parameters. For example, the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) is
used to locate the influence of forgetting data at the parameter space [8, 9]. However, it is prohibitively expensive due
to the large dimension of the parameter space.
In order to find an efficient unlearning approach to forget
an entire class, we visualize the decision space of the retrained DNN model and discover two key observations (c.f.
Figure 1). First, the forgetting samples spread around the
decision space of the retrained DNN model, indicating that
the decision boundary of the forgetting samples has been
broken. Second, most of the forgetting samples move to the
border of other clusters; this helps us recall the closest-toboundary criterion [24] that samples at the border of cluster
in the decision space will probably be predicted with huge
uncertainty.

7766

