This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grid-guided Neural Radiance Fields for Large Urban Scenes
Linning Xu⋆1 , Yuanbo Xiangli⋆1 , Sida Peng4 , Xingang Pan3 ,
Nanxuan Zhao5 , Christian Theobalt3 , Bo Dai2 , Dahua Lin1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory,
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 4 Zhejiang University, 5 Adobe Research
{xl020,xy019,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, {xpan,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de,
pengsida@zju.edu.cn, nanxuanzhao@gmail.com, daibo@pjlab.org.cn
NeRF-based
PSNR:20.508

Y

Feature Grid-based
PSNR:21.511

Ours (Grid branch & NeRF branch)
PSNR:24.893
PSNR:24.970

Ground Truth

Z

3D Urban Scene

X

Figure 1. We perform large urban scene rendering with a novel grid-guided neural radiance fields. An example of our target large urban
scene is shown on the left, which spans over 2.7km2 ground areas captured by over 5k drone images. We show that the rendering results
from NeRF-based methods [34, 62] are blurry and overly smoothed with limited model capacity, while feature grid-based methods [9, 36]
tend to display noisy artifacts when adapting to large-scale scenes with high-resolution feature grids. Our proposed two-branch model combines the merits from both approaches and achieves photorealistic novel view renderings with remarkable improvements over existing methods. Both two branches gain significant enhancements over their individual baselines. (Project page: https://city-super.github.io/gridnerf)

Abstract
Purely MLP-based neural radiance fields (NeRF-based
methods) often suffer from underfitting with blurred renderings on large-scale scenes due to limited model capacity. Recent approaches propose to geographically divide the
scene and adopt multiple sub-NeRFs to model each region
individually, leading to linear scale-up in training costs and
the number of sub-NeRFs as the scene expands. An alternative solution is to use a feature grid representation, which is
computationally efficient and can naturally scale to a large
scene with increased grid resolutions. However, the feature
grid tends to be less constrained and often reaches suboptimal solutions, producing noisy artifacts in renderings, especially in regions with complex geometry and texture. In
this work, we present a new framework that realizes highfidelity rendering on large urban scenes while being computationally efficient. We propose to use a compact multiresolution ground feature plane representation to coarsely
capture the scene, and complement it with positional encoding inputs through another NeRF branch for rendering in a
joint learning fashion. We show that such an integration

can utilize the advantages of two alternative solutions: a
light-weighted NeRF is sufficient, under the guidance of the
feature grid representation, to render photorealistic novel
views with fine details; and the jointly optimized ground feature planes, can meanwhile gain further refinements, forming a more accurate and compact feature space and output
much more natural rendering results.

1. Introduction
Large urban scene modeling has been drawing lots of
research attention with the recent emergence of neural radiance fields (NeRF) due to its photorealistic rendering and
model compactness [3, 34, 56, 59, 62, 64]. Such modeling can enable a variety of practical applications, including
autonomous vehicle simulation [23, 39, 67], aerial surveying [6,15], and embodied AI [35,61]. NeRF-based methods
have shown impressive results on object-level scenes with
their continuity prior benefited from the MLP architecture
and high-frequency details with the globally shared positional encodings. However, they often fail to model large
and complex scenes. These methods suffer from underfit-

8296

