This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeneCIS: A Benchmark for General Conditional Image Similarity
Sagar Vaze1,2 *
Nicolas Carion1
Ishan Misra1
1
2
FAIR, Meta AI
VGG, University of Oxford
Project Page: sgvaze.github.io/genecis

Abstract
We argue that there are many notions of ‘similarity’ and
that models, like humans, should be able to adapt to these
dynamically. This contrasts with most representation learning methods, supervised or self-supervised, which learn a
fixed embedding function and hence implicitly assume a single notion of similarity. For instance, models trained on ImageNet are biased towards object categories, while a user
might prefer the model to focus on colors, textures or specific elements in the scene. In this paper, we propose the
GeneCIS (‘genesis’) benchmark, which measures models’
ability to adapt to a range of similarity conditions. Extending prior work, our benchmark is designed for zeroshot evaluation only, and hence considers an open-set of
similarity conditions. We find that baselines from powerful
CLIP models struggle on GeneCIS and that performance on
the benchmark is only weakly correlated with ImageNet accuracy, suggesting that simply scaling existing methods is
not fruitful. We further propose a simple, scalable solution
based on automatically mining information from existing
image-caption datasets. We find our method offers a substantial boost over the baselines on GeneCIS, and further
improves zero-shot performance on related image retrieval
benchmarks. In fact, though evaluated zero-shot, our model
surpasses state-of-the-art supervised models on MIT-States.
We, the architects of the machine, must decide a-priori
what constitutes its ‘world’; what things are to be taken
as ‘similar’ or ‘equal’ — Karl Popper, 1963

1. Introduction
Humans understand many notions of similarity and
choose specific ones depending on the task at hand [21, 58].
Consider the task of finding ‘similar’ images illustrated
in Figure 1. Which of the rightmost images should be considered ‘most similar’ to the reference? Given different conditions, each image could be a valid answer. For instance,
we may be interested in a specific object in the scene, focusing on either the ‘car’ or ‘bridge’. One could even indicate
* Work done during an internship at Meta AI Research.

With the same car

With the same bridge

With a black car

Figure 1. Given different conditions (shown as blue text), different images on the right can be considered most ‘similar’ to the
reference on the left. We present a general way to train and evaluate models which can adapt to different notions of similarity.

a ‘negative’ similarity condition, specifying a change in the
image to identify the bottom image as most similar.
Learning such similarity functions is a central goal in
discriminative deep learning [11–13, 34, 63, 68, 75]. Discriminative models, either supervised [30, 75] or selfsupervised [9, 10], learn embedding functions such that
‘similar’ images are closer in feature space than ‘dissimilar’
images. However, since there are infinitely many notions of
image similarity, how do we allow our models to choose?
Almost all current approaches assume a single notion of
similarity, either by explicitly training on a specific concept
[68,75] or through an implicit assumption in the underlying
data distribution [9, 12]. Meanwhile, prior works tackling
the conditional problem have focused on constrained domains such as fashion [69,73] or birds [46], with a restricted
set of similarity conditions. This is because developing and
evaluating models that can adapt to generic notions of similarity is extremely challenging. Specifically, curating data
to train and evaluate such models is difficult, as collecting
annotations for all concepts of similarity is impossible.

6862

