This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoDAR: Using Motion Forecasting for 3D Object Detection
in Point Cloud Sequences
Yingwei Li∗ Charles R. Qi∗

Yin Zhou Chenxi Liu
Waymo LLC

Dragomir Anguelov

Abstract
OOM

Occluded and long-range objects are ubiquitous and
challenging for 3D object detection. Point cloud sequence
data provide unique opportunities to improve such cases, as
an occluded or distant object can be observed from different viewpoints or gets better visibility over time. However,
the efficiency and effectiveness in encoding long-term sequence data can still be improved. In this work, we propose
MoDAR, using motion forecasting outputs as a type of virtual modality, to augment LiDAR point clouds. The MoDAR
modality propagates object information from temporal contexts to a target frame, represented as a set of virtual points,
one for each object from a waypoint on a forecasted trajectory. A fused point cloud of both raw sensor points and
the virtual points can then be fed to any off-the-shelf pointcloud based 3D object detector. Evaluated on the Waymo
Open Dataset, our method significantly improves prior art
detectors by using motion forecasting from extra-long sequences (e.g. 18 seconds), achieving new state of the arts,
while not adding much computation overhead.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental task for many applications such as autonomous driving. While there has been
tremendous progress in architecture design and LiDARcamera sensor fusion, occluded and long-range object detection remains a challenge. Point cloud sequence data provide unique opportunities to improve such cases. In a dynamic scene, as the ego-agent and other objects move, the
sequence data can capture different viewpoints of objects
or improve their visibility over time. The key challenge
though, is how to efficiently and effectively leverage sequence data for 3D object detection.
Existing multi-frame 3D object detection methods often
fuse sequence data at two different levels. At scene level,
the most straightforward approach is to transform point
clouds of different frames to a target frame using known
∗ equal contributions

saturate

Figure 1. 3D detection model performance vs. number of input
frames. Naively adding more frames to existing methods, such as
CenterPoint [59] and SWFormer [40], quickly plateaus the gains
while our method, MoDAR, scales up to many more frames and
gets much larger gains. L2 3D mAPH is computed by averaging
vehicle and pedestrian L2 3D APH.

ego motion poses [3, 40, 55, 59]. Each point can be decorated with an extra time channel to indicate which frame
it is from. However, according to previous studies [7, 33]
and our experiments shown in Fig. 1, it is difficult to further improve the detection model by including more input
frames due to its large computation overhead as well as ineffective temporal data fusion at scene level (especially for
moving objects). On the other side, 3D Auto Labeling [33]
and MPPNet [7] propose to aggregate longer temporal contexts at object level, which is more tractable as there are
much less points from objects than those from the entire
scenes. However, they also fail to scale up temporal context aggregation to long sequences due to efficiency issues
or alignment challenges.
In our paper, we propose to use motion forecasting to
propagate object information from the past (and the future)
to a target frame. The output of the forecasting model can be
considered another (virtual) sensor modality to the detector
model. Inspired by the naming of the LiDAR sensor, we
name this new modality MoDAR, Motion forecasting based
Detection And Ranging (see Fig. 2 for an example).
Traditionally 3D object detection is a pre-processing step
for a motion forecasting model, where the detector boxes
are either used as input (for past frames) or learning targets
(for future frames). In contrast, we use motion forecasting
outputs as input to LiDAR-MoDAR multi-modal 3D object

9329

