This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two-way Multi-Label Loss
Takumi Kobayashi†‡
†
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan
‡
University of Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
A natural image frequently contains multiple classification targets, accordingly providing multiple class labels
rather than a single label per image. While the single-label
classification is effectively addressed by applying a softmax
cross-entropy loss, the multi-label task is tackled mainly in
a binary cross-entropy (BCE) framework. In contrast to the
softmax loss, the BCE loss involves issues regarding imbalance as multiple classes are decomposed into a bunch of
binary classifications; recent works improve the BCE loss
to cope with the issue by means of weighting. In this paper, we propose a multi-label loss by bridging a gap between the softmax loss and the multi-label scenario. The
proposed loss function is formulated on the basis of relative
comparison among classes which also enables us to further improve discriminative power of features by enhancing classification margin. The loss function is so flexible
as to be applicable to a multi-label setting in two ways for
discriminating classes as well as samples. In the experiments on multi-label classification, the proposed method
exhibits competitive performance to the other multi-label
losses, and it also provides transferrable features on singlelabel ImageNet training. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/tk1980/TwowayMultiLabelLoss.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are successfully applied to supervised learning [12, 26, 38] through back-propagation based
on a loss function exploiting plenty of annotated samples.
In the supervised learning, classification is one of primary
tasks to utilize as annotation a class label to which an image
sample belongs. As in ImageNet [7], most of image datasets
provide a single class label per image, and a softmax loss is
widely employed to deal with the single-label annotation,
producing promising performance on various tasks.
The single-label setting, however, is a limited scenario
from practical viewpoints. An image frequently contains
multiple classification targets [39], such as objects, requir-

ing laborious cropping to construct single-label annotations.
There are also targets, such as visual attributes [25], which
are hard to be disentangled and thereby incapable of producing single-label instances. Those realistic situations pose
so-called multi-label classification where an image sample
is equipped with multiple labels beyond a single label.
While a softmax loss works well in a single-label learning, the multi-label tasks are addressed mainly by applying
a binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss. Considering multiple
labels are drawn from C class categories, the multi-label
classification can be decomposed into C binary classification tasks, each of which focuses on discriminating samples
in a target class category [28]; the BCE loss is well coupled
with the decomposition approach. Such a decomposition,
however, involves an imbalance issue. Even in a case of
balanced class distribution, the number of positive samples
is much smaller than that of negatives, as small portion of
whole C-class categories are assigned to each sample as annotation (positive) labels. The biased distribution is problematic in a naive BCE loss. To cope with the imbalance
issue in BCE, a simple weighting approach based on class
frequencies [25] is commonly applied and in recent years it
is further sophisticated by incorporating adaptive weighting
scheme such as in Focal loss [18] and its variant [2]. On
the other hand, the softmax loss naturally copes with multiple classes without decomposition nor bringing the abovementioned imbalance issue; it actually works well in the
balanced (single-label) class distribution. The softmax loss
is intrinsically based on relative comparison among classes
(3) which is missed in the BCE-based losses, though being
less applicable to multi-label classification.
In this paper, we propose a multi-label loss to effectively deal with multiple labels in a manner similar to the
softmax loss. Through analyzing the intrinsic loss function of the softmax loss, we formulate an efficient multilabel loss function to exploit relative comparison between
positive and negative classes. The relative comparison is
related to classification margin between positive and negative classes, and we propose an approach to enlarge the
margin by simply introducing temperature on logits for fur-

7476

