This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Removing Objects From Neural Radiance Fields
Silvan Weder1,2
1

Guillermo Garcia-Hernando1 Áron Monszpart1 Marc Pollefeys2
Gabriel Brostow1,3 Michael Firman1 Sara Vicente1

Niantic

2

3

ETH Zurich

University College London

http://nianticlabs.github.io/nerf-object-removal

put images

Abstract

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) are emerging as a ubiquitous scene representation that allows for novel view synthesis. Increasingly, NeRFs will be shareable with other
people. Before sharing a NeRF, though, it might be desirable to remove personal information or unsightly objects.
Such removal is not easily achieved with the current NeRF
editing frameworks. We propose a framework to remove
objects from a NeRF representation created from an RGBOurs
D sequence. Our NeRF inpainting method leverages recent work in 2D image inpainting and is guided by a userprovided mask. Our algorithm is underpinned by a confidence based view selection procedure. It chooses which of
the individual 2D inpainted images to use in the creation of
the NeRF, so that the resulting inpainted NeRF is 3D consistent. We show that our method for NeRF editing is effective
for synthesizing plausible inpaintings in a multi-view coherent manner, outperforming competing methods. We valiNovel view
the
datewith
our approach
by proposing a new and still-challenging
objectdataset
removed
for the task of NeRF inpainting.

Input images

NeRF

Ours

Novel views
without the object
Figure 1. Removal of unsightly objects. Our method allows for
objects to be plausibly removed from NeRF reconstructions, inpainting missing regions whilst preserving multi-view coherence.
Novel views

1. Introduction
Since the initial publication of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [42], there has been an explosion of extensions
to the original framework, e.g., [3, 4, 8, 12, 25, 35, 39, 42].
NeRFs are being used beyond the initial task of novel view
synthesis. It is already appealing to get them into the hands
of non-expert users for novel applications, e.g., for NeRF
editing [80] or live capture and training [47], and these more
casual use cases are driving interesting new technical issues.
One of those issues is how to seamlessly remove parts
of the rendered scene. Removing parts of the scene can
be desirable for a variety of reasons. For example, a
house scan being shared on a property selling website may
need unappealing or personally identifiable objects to be removed [68]. Similarly, objects could be removed so they
can be replaced in an augmented reality application, e.g.,
removing a chair from a scan to see how a new chair fits

in the environment [51]. Removing objects might also be
desirable when a NeRF is part of a traditional computer vision pipeline, e.g., removing parked cars from scans that are
going to be used for relocalization [44].
Some editing of NeRFs has already been explored. For
example, object-centric representations disentangle labeled
objects from the background, which allows editing of the
trained scene with user-guided transformations [74, 77],
while semantic decomposition allows selective editing and
transparency for certain semantic parts of the scene [26].
However, these previous approaches only augment information from the input scan, limiting their generative capabilities, i.e., the hallucination of elements that have not been
observed from any view.

16528

