This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2Scene: Text-driven Indoor Scene Stylization with Part-aware Details
Inwoo Hwang1 , Hyeonwoo Kim1 , and Young Min Kim1,2
1
2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University

Figure 1. Stylization results of diverse objects. Text2Scene creates more realistic and part-aware textures for various categories of 3D
objects without any dedicated datasets for training, which can constitute high-quality virtual scenes.

Abstract
We propose Text2Scene, a method to automatically create realistic textures for virtual scenes composed of multiple
objects. Guided by a reference image and text descriptions,
our pipeline adds detailed texture on labeled 3D geometries in the room such that the generated colors respect the
hierarchical structure or semantic parts that are often composed of similar materials. Instead of applying flat stylization on the entire scene at a single step, we obtain weak
semantic cues from geometric segmentation, which are further clarified by assigning initial colors to segmented parts.
Then we add texture details for individual objects such that
their projections on image space exhibit feature embedding
aligned with the embedding of the input. The decomposition
makes the entire pipeline tractable to a moderate amount of
computation resources and memory. As our framework utilizes the existing resources of image and text embedding, it
does not require dedicated datasets with high-quality textures designed by skillful artists. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first practical and scalable approach that can

create detailed and realistic textures of the desired style that
maintain structural context for scenes with multiple objects.

1. Introduction
Virtual spaces provide an immersive experience for
metaverse, films, or games. With increasing demands for
virtual environments, various applications seek practical
methods to create realistic 3D scenes with high-quality textures. Currently, skillful artists need to manually create 3D
assets and accompanying textures with careful parameterization, which is not scalable enough to account for the diverse content the industry is heading for. Scenes can also
be populated with existing 3D database models or created
with recent shape-generation approaches using data-driven
methods [33, 54]. However, most of them lack texture information or are limited to simple coloring.
To build realistic content, we need fine details containing
the artistic nuances of styles that obey the implicit correlations with geometric shapes and semantic structure. Recent
works provide methods to color a single object with the help

1890

