This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MIME: Human-Aware 3D Scene Generation
Hongwei Yi1 Chun-Hao P. Huang2∗ Shashank Tripathi1 Lea Hering1 Justus Thies1 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Adobe Inc.
{firstname.lastname}@tuebingen.mpg.de chunhaoh@adobe.com

Figure 1. Estimating 3D scenes from human movement. Given 3D human motion (left), e.g. from motion capture or body-worn sensors,
we reconstruct plausible 3D scenes in which the motion could have taken place. Our generative model is able to produce multiple realistic
scenes (right) that take into account the locations and poses of the person, with appropriate human-scene contact.

Abstract
Generating realistic 3D worlds occupied by moving humans has many applications in games, architecture, and
synthetic data creation. But generating such scenes is expensive and labor intensive. Recent work generates human
poses and motions given a 3D scene. Here, we take the
opposite approach and generate 3D indoor scenes given
3D human motion. Such motions can come from archival
motion capture or from IMU sensors worn on the body, effectively turning human movement into a “scanner” of the 3D
world. Intuitively, human movement indicates the free-space
in a room and human contact indicates surfaces or objects
that support activities such as sitting, lying or touching. We
propose MIME (Mining Interaction and Movement to infer
3D Environments), which is a generative model of indoor
scenes that produces furniture layouts that are consistent
with the human movement. MIME uses an auto-regressive
transformer architecture that takes the already generated
objects in the scene as well as the human motion as input,
and outputs the next plausible object. To train MIME, we
build a dataset by populating the 3D FRONT scene dataset
with 3D humans. Our experiments show that MIME produces more diverse and plausible 3D scenes than a recent
generative scene method that does not know about human
movement. Code and data are available for research at
https://mime.is.tue.mpg.de.
* This work was performed when C.P. H. was at the MPI-IS.

1. Introduction
Humans constantly interact with their environment. They
walk through a room, touch objects, rest on a chair, or sleep
in a bed. All these interactions contain information about
the scene layout and object placement. In fact, a mime is a
performer who uses our understanding of such interactions
to convey a rich, imaginary, 3D world using only their body
motion. Can we train a computer to take human motion
and, similarly, conjure the 3D scene in which it belongs?
Such a method would have many applications in synthetic
data generation, architecture, games, and virtual reality. For
example, there exist large datasets of 3D human motion
like AMASS [38] and such data rarely contains information
about the 3D scene in which it was captured. Could we
take AMASS and generate plausible 3D scenes for all the
motions? If so, we could use AMASS to generate training
data containing realistic human-scene interaction.
To answer such questions, we train a new method called
MIME (Mining Interaction and Movement to infer 3D Environments) that generates plausible indoor 3D scenes based
on 3D human motion. Why is this possible? The key intuitions are that (1) A human’s motion through free space
indicates the lack of objects, effectively carving out regions
of the scene that are free of furniture. And (2), when they
are in contact with the scene, this constrains both the type
and placement of 3D objects; e.g., a sitting human must be
sitting on something, such as a chair, a sofa, a bed, etc.
To make these intuitions concrete, we develop MIME,

12965

