This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-Grained Face Swapping via Regional GAN Inversion
Zhian Liu1† Maomao Li2† Yong Zhang2† Cairong Wang3 Qi Zhang2 Jue Wang2 Yongwei Nie1⇤
1
2
South China University of Technology
Tencent AI Lab
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School

Source / Target

MegaFS [48]

StyleFusion [15]

HiRes [41]

Ours

Figure 1. Compared with the existing StyleGAN-based face swapping approaches [15, 41, 48], our proposed method can achieve highfidelity results that show better identity keeping from the source while keeping the similar pose and expression as the target. Note that skin
color preservation and proper occlusion handling are our advantages over others. All the facial images are at 1024⇥1024.

Abstract
We present a novel paradigm for high-fidelity face swapping that faithfully preserves the desired subtle geometry
and texture details. We rethink face swapping from the perspective of fine-grained face editing, i.e., “editing for swapping” (E4S), and propose a framework that is based on the
explicit disentanglement of the shape and texture of facial
components. Following the E4S principle, our framework
enables both global and local swapping of facial features,
as well as controlling the amount of partial swapping specified by the user. Furthermore, the E4S paradigm is inherently capable of handling facial occlusions by means of
facial masks. At the core of our system lies a novel Regional GAN Inversion (RGI) method, which allows the explicit disentanglement of shape and texture. It also allows
face swapping to be performed in the latent space of StyleGAN. Specifically, we design a multi-scale mask-guided encoder to project the texture of each facial component into
regional style codes. We also design a mask-guided injection module to manipulate the feature maps with the style
Work done when Zhian Liu was an intern at Tencent AI Lab
† Equal contribution.
⇤ Corresponding author: nieyongwei@scut.edu.cn

codes. Based on the disentanglement, face swapping is reformulated as a simplified problem of style and mask swapping. Extensive experiments and comparisons with current
state-of-the-art methods demonstrate the superiority of our
approach in preserving texture and shape details, as well as
working with high resolution images. The project page is
https://e4s2022.github.io

1. Introduction
Face swapping aims at transferring the identity information (e.g., shape and texture of facial components) of
a source face to a given target face, while retaining the
identity-irrelevant attribute information of the target (e.g.,
expression, head pose, background, etc.). It has immense
potential applications in the entertainment and film production industry, and thus has drawn considerable attention in
the field of computer vision and graphics.
The first and foremost challenge in face swapping is
identity preservation, i.e., how to faithfully preserve the
unique facial characteristics of the source image. Most
existing methods [9, 24, 38] rely on a pre-trained 2D face
recognition network [12] or a 3D morphable face model
(3DMM) [7, 13] to extract the global identity-related fea-

8578

