This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionRig: Learning Personalized Priors for Facial Appearance Editing
Zheng Ding1† , Xuaner Zhang2 , Zhihao Xia2 , Lars Jebe2 , Zhuowen Tu1 , Xiuming Zhang2
1
2
UC San Diego
Adobe

Condition

Input

Output

Condition

Rigging Expression

Output

Rigging Lighting

Condition

Output

Rigging Pose

Figure 1. DiffusionRig takes in coarse physical rendering as the condition to “rig” the input image with learned personal priors. The edited
images respect the rendering conditions, preserve the identity, and exhibit high-frequency facial details.

Abstract
We address the problem of learning person-specific facial
priors from a small number (e.g., 20) of portrait photos of the
same person. This enables us to edit this specific person’s facial appearance, such as expression and lighting, while preserving their identity and high-frequency facial details. Key
to our approach, which we dub DiffusionRig, is a diffusion
model conditioned on, or “rigged by,” crude 3D face models
estimated from single in-the-wild images by an off-the-shelf
estimator. On a high level, DiffusionRig learns to map simplistic renderings of 3D face models to realistic photos of
a given person. Specifically, DiffusionRig is trained in two
stages: It first learns generic facial priors from a large-scale
face dataset and then person-specific priors from a small
portrait photo collection of the person of interest. By learning the CGI-to-photo mapping with such personalized priors,
† Work done during an internship at Adobe.

DiffusionRig can “rig” the lighting, facial expression, head
pose, etc. of a portrait photo, conditioned only on coarse
3D models while preserving this person’s identity and other
high-frequency characteristics. Qualitative and quantitative
experiments show that DiffusionRig outperforms existing
approaches in both identity preservation and photorealism.
Please see the project website: https://diffusionrig.github.io
for the supplemental material, video, code, and data.

1. Introduction
It is a longstanding problem in computer vision and graphics to photorealistically change the lighting, expression, head
pose, etc. of a portrait photo while preserving the person’s
identity and high-frequency facial characteristics. The difficulty of this problem stems from its fundamentally underconstrained nature, and prior work typically addresses this
with zero-shot learning, where neural networks were trained
on a large-scale dataset of different identities and tested on
a new identity. These methods ignore the fact that such

12736

