This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Vector Fields: Implicit Representation by Explicit Learning
Xianghui Yang1 , Guosheng Lin2 , Zhenghao Chen1 , Luping Zhou1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Nanyang Technological University
{xianghui.yang,zhenghao.chen,luping.zhou}@sydney.edu.au, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely applied for
nowadays 3D surface reconstruction tasks and such methods can be further divided into two categories, which respectively warp templates explicitly by moving vertices or
represent 3D surfaces implicitly as signed or unsigned distance functions. Taking advantage of both advanced explicit learning process and powerful representation ability of implicit functions, we propose a novel 3D representation method, Neural Vector Fields (NVF). It not only
adopts the explicit learning process to manipulate meshes
directly, but also leverages the implicit representation of
unsigned distance functions (UDFs) to break the barriers in resolution and topology. Specifically, our method
first predicts the displacements from queries towards the
surface and models the shapes as Vector Fields. Rather
than relying on network differentiation to obtain direction
fields as most existing UDF-based methods, the produced
vector fields encode the distance and direction fields both
and mitigate the ambiguity at “ridge” points, such that
the calculation of direction fields is straightforward and
differentiation-free. The differentiation-free characteristic
enables us to further learn a shape codebook via Vector
Quantization, which encodes the cross-object priors, accelerates the training procedure, and boosts model generalization on cross-category reconstruction. The extensive experiments on surface reconstruction benchmarks indicate that
our method outperforms those state-of-the-art methods in
different evaluation scenarios including watertight vs nonwatertight shapes, category-specific vs category-agnostic
reconstruction, category-unseen reconstruction, and crossdomain reconstruction. Our code is released at https:
//github.com/Wi-sc/NVF.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing continuous surfaces from unstructured,
discrete and sparse point clouds is an emergent but nontrivial task in nowadays robotics, vision and graphics applications, since the point clouds are hard to be deployed into

(a) Point Cloud

(b) Mesh

(c) Voxel/Occupancy

(d) Signed Distance

(e) Unsigned Distance

(f) Vector Fields

(g) Mesh Deformation via Vector Fields

Figure 1. Common 3D representations. Explicit representations:
(a) point clouds, (b) meshes, (c) voxels. Implicit representations: (c) occupancy, (d) reconstruction from the signed distance
functions, and (e) reconstruction from unsigned distance functions. Our method represents continuous surfaces through (f) vector fields. (g) Vector fields can deform meshes (red) as explicit
representation methods.

the downstream applications without recovering to highresolution surfaces [5, 7, 38, 42].
With the tremendous success of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs), a few DNN-based surface reconstruction methods have already achieved promising reconstruction performance. These methods can be roughly divided into two categories according to whether their output representations
are explicit or implicit. As shown in Fig. 1, explicit representation methods including mesh and voxel based ones
denote the exact location of a surface, which learn to warp
templates [3, 4, 19, 26, 29, 68] or predict voxel grids [10, 30,
59]. Explicit representations are friendly to downstream applications, but they are usually limited by resolution and
topology. On the other hand, implicit representations such

16727

