This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HDR Imaging with Spatially Varying Signal-to-Noise Ratios
Yiheng Chi
Xingguang Zhang
Stanley H. Chan
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
chi14@purdue.edu

zhan3275@purdue.edu

stanchan@purdue.edu

Abstract
While today’s high dynamic range (HDR) image fusion
algorithms are capable of blending multiple exposures, the
acquisition is often controlled so that the dynamic range
within one exposure is narrow. For HDR imaging in photonlimited situations, the dynamic range can be enormous and
the noise within one exposure is spatially varying. Existing image denoising algorithms and HDR fusion algorithms
both fail to handle this situation, leading to severe limitations in low-light HDR imaging.
This paper presents two contributions. Firstly, we identify the source of the problem. We find that the issue is associated with the co-existence of (1) spatially varying signalto-noise ratio, especially the excessive noise due to very
dark regions, and (2) a wide luminance range within each
exposure. We show that while the issue can be handled by
a bank of denoisers, the complexity is high. Secondly, we
propose a new method called the spatially varying high dynamic range (SV-HDR) fusion network to simultaneously
denoise and fuse images. We introduce a new exposureshared block within our custom-designed multi-scale transformer framework. In a variety of testing conditions, the
performance of the proposed SV-HDR is better than the existing methods.

1. Introduction
Today’s high dynamic range (HDR) image fusion algorithms have demonstrated remarkable performances in
blending images across a wide range of luminance levels.
Many algorithms are able to handle an interior room with
a sunlit view, of which the overall dynamic range is in the
order of 100000:1 or more. However, most of these algorithms are designed for well-illuminated scenes. Even in the
shortest exposure frame, the noise is maintained at a modest
level so that the algorithm can focus on the blending task.
The question we ask in this paper is: What if we push the
shortest exposure to a photon-starving condition?
Such an extreme HDR problem arises in many low-light

Kalantari [17]

Wu [36]

NHDRRNet [39]

Proposed

Figure 1. [Top] Real captures using a Sony ILCE-7M2 camera.
Three low-dynamic range (LDR) images are captured. [Bottom]
Image denoising and HDR fusion results.

scenarios. Figure 1 is a real image captured by a Sony
ILCE-7M2 camera. The imaging condition is a night-time
scenario in front of a building. The challenge of the problem is the co-existence of heavy noise in the darkest spots
of the image and the high dynamic range. We refer to this
as the spatially varying signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) problem
where brighter pixels have higher SNR and darker pixels
have lower SNR.
The goal of this paper is to articulate the spatially varying SNR problem. We emphasize the difficulty of the problem by referring to the performance of three state-of-the-art
HDR fusion algorithms, namely, Kalantari and Ramamoorthi [17], Wu et al. [36], and NHDRRNet [39]. As we can
see from Figure 1, these methods produce disappointing results, mostly failing in denoising the dark regions.
The position of the paper can be visualized in Figure 2.
While existing HDR fusion methods can handle the blending task, the individual exposures are sufficiently high so
that the amount of noise is limited. Single image denoisers today seldom handle the dynamic range problem. They
are mostly focusing on a tonemapped image normalized to
[0, 1]. Therefore, when facing a wide dynamic range scene,

5724

