This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Disentangled Representation Learning for Fine-Grained
Controllable Talking Head Synthesis
Duomin Wang

Yu Deng

Zixin Yin Heung-Yeung Shum
Xiaobing.AI

Baoyuan Wang

{wangduomin, dengyu, yinzixin, harryshum, wangbaoyuan}@xiaobing.ai

Audio
Frames
Appearance
Reference

Audio
Source

Pose
Source

Eye
Blink & Gaze
Source
Expression Source

Figure 1. Our method takes an appearance reference as input and generates its talking head with disentangled control over lip motion, head
pose, eye gaze&blink, and emotional expression, where the driving signal of lip motion comes from speech audio, and all other motions
are controlled by different videos. As shown, it well disentangles all motion factors and achieves precise control over individual motion.

Abstract
We present a novel one-shot talking head synthesis
method that achieves disentangled and fine-grained control
over lip motion, eye gaze&blink, head pose, and emotional
expression. We represent different motions via disentangled
latent representations and leverage an image generator to
synthesize talking heads from them. To effectively disentangle each motion factor, we propose a progressive disentangled representation learning strategy by separating the
factors in a coarse-to-fine manner, where we first extract
unified motion feature from the driving signal, and then isolate each fine-grained motion from the unified feature. We
leverage motion-specific contrastive learning and regressing for non-emotional motions, and introduce feature-level
decorrelation and self-reconstruction for emotional expres-

sion, to fully utilize the inherent properties of each motion
factor in unstructured video data to achieve disentanglement. Experiments show that our method provides high
quality speech&lip-motion synchronization along with precise and disentangled control over multiple extra facial motions, which can hardly be achieved by previous methods.

1. Introduction
Talking head synthesis is an indispensable task for creating realistic video avatars and enables multiple applications such as visual dubbing, interactive live streaming, and
online meeting. In recent years, researchers have made
great progress in one-shot generation of vivid talking heads
by leveraging deep learning techniques. Corresponding
methods can be mainly divided into audio-driven talking

17979

