This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding Imbalanced Semantic Segmentation Through Neural Collapse
Zhisheng Zhong1,∗ Jiequan Cui1,∗ Yibo Yang2,∗ Xiaoyang Wu3 Xiaojuan Qi3 Xiangyu Zhang4 Jiaya Jia1,5
CUHK1

JD Explore Academy2

HKU3

MEGVII4

SmartMore5

Code: https://github.com/dvlab-research/Imbalanced-Learning

A recent study has shown a phenomenon called neural
collapse in that the within-class means of features and the
classifier weight vectors converge to the vertices of a simplex equiangular tight frame at the terminal phase of training for classification. In this paper, we explore the corresponding structures of the last-layer feature centers and
classifiers in semantic segmentation. Based on our empirical and theoretical analysis, we point out that semantic
segmentation naturally brings contextual correlation and
imbalanced distribution among classes, which breaks the
equiangular and maximally separated structure of neural
collapse for both feature centers and classifiers. However,
such a symmetric structure is beneficial to discrimination
for the minor classes. To preserve these advantages, we introduce a regularizer on feature centers to encourage the
network to learn features closer to the appealing structure in imbalanced semantic segmentation. Experimental
results show that our method can bring significant improvements on both 2D and 3D semantic segmentation benchmarks. Moreover, our method ranks 1st and sets a new
record (+6.8% mIoU) on the ScanNet200 test leaderboard.

1. Introduction
The solution structures of the last-layer representation
and classifier provide a geometric perspective to delve into
the learning behaviors in a deep neural network. The neural collapse phenomenon discovered by Papyan et al. [49]
reveals that as a classification model is trained towards convergence on a balanced dataset, the last-layer feature centers
of all classes will be located on a hyper-sphere with maximal equiangular separation, as known as a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF), which means that any two centers
have an equal cosine similarity, as shown in Fig. 1a. The
final classifiers will be formed as the same structure and
aligned with the feature centers. The following studies try
to theoretically explain this elegant phenomenon, showing
* Equal contribution.

Part of the work was done in MEGVII.

◆◆◆◆◆
◆◆
◆◆

◆◆◆◆◆
◆

Abstract

▘
▘▘
▘▘
▘

＋ ＋＋
＋＋＋
(a)

▲
▲
▲ ▲▲
▲

▲ ▲
▲
▲

▘

＋＋
(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of equiangular separation (a) and nonequiangular separation (b) in a 3D space. Neural collapse reveals
the structure in (a), where features are collapsed into their withinclass centers with maximal equiangular separation as a simplex
ETF, and classifiers are aligned with the same structure. We observe that in semantic segmentation the feature centers and classifiers do not satisfy such a structure, as illustrated in (b) for an
example. As some minor class features and classifier vectors lie in
a close position, the discriminate ability of the network degrades.

that neural collapse is the global optimality under the crossentropy (CE) and mean squared error (MSE) loss functions
in an approximated model [21, 22, 27, 32, 44, 47, 51, 64, 66,
80]. However, all the current studies on neural collapse focus on the training in image recognition, which performs
classification for each image. Semantic segmentation as an
important pixel-wise classification problem receives no attention from the neural collapse perspective yet.
In this paper, we explore the solution structures of feature centers and classifiers in semantic segmentation. Surprisingly, it is observed that the symmetric equiangular separation as instructed by the neural collapse phenomenon in
image recognition does not hold in semantic segmentation
for both feature centers and classifiers. An example of nonequiangular separation is illustrated in Fig. 1b. We point out
two reasons that may explain the difference.
First, classification benchmark datasets usually have low
correlation among classes. In contrast, different classes in
the semantic segmentation task are contextually related. In
this case, the classifier needs to be adaptable to class correlation, so does not necessarily equally separate the label
space. We conduct a simple experiment to verify it:

19550

