This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Features with Increased Crop-related Diversity
for Few-Shot Object Detection
Jingyi Xu
Stony Brook University

Hieu Le
EPFL

Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University

jingyixu@cs.stonybrook.edu

minh.le@epfl.ch

samaras@cs.stonybrook.edu

1. Introduction
Object detection plays a vital role in many computer vision systems. However, training a robust object detector
often requires a large amount of training data with accurate
bounding box annotations. Thus, there has been increasing attention on few-shot object detection (FSOD), which
learns to detect novel object categories from just a few annotated training samples. It is particularly useful for problems where annotated data can be hard and costly to obtain such as rare medical conditions [31, 41], rare animal
species [20, 44], satellite images [2, 19], or failure cases in

Hard Crop

Two-stage object detectors generate object proposals
and classify them to detect objects in images. These proposals often do not contain the objects perfectly but overlap
with them in many possible ways, exhibiting great variability in the difficulty levels of the proposals. Training a robust classifier against this crop-related variability requires
abundant training data, which is not available in few-shot
settings. To mitigate this issue, we propose a novel variational autoencoder (VAE) based data generation model,
which is capable of generating data with increased croprelated diversity. The main idea is to transform the latent
space such latent codes with different norms represent different crop-related variations. This allows us to generate
features with increased crop-related diversity in difficulty
levels by simply varying the latent norm. In particular, each
latent code is rescaled such that its norm linearly correlates
with the IoU score of the input crop w.r.t. the ground-truth
box. Here the IoU score is a proxy that represents the difficulty level of the crop. We train this VAE model on base
classes conditioned on the semantic code of each class and
then use the trained model to generate features for novel
classes. In our experiments our generated features consistently improve state-of-the-art few-shot object detection
methods on the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets.

Easy Crop

Abstract
bird 57%

cow 22%

(a) DeFRCN [33]

bird 54%

bird 55%

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Robustness to different object crops of the same object instance. (a) The classifier head of the state-of-the-art FSOD
method [33] classifies correctly a simple crop of the bird but misclassifies a hard crop where some parts are missing. (b) Our
method can handle this case since it is trained with additional generated features with increased crop-related diversity. We show the
class with the highest confidence score.

autonomous driving systems [27, 28, 36].
For the most part, state-of-the-art FSOD methods are
built on top of a two-stage framework [35], which includes
a region proposal network that generates multiple image
crops from the input image and a classifier that labels these
proposals. While the region proposal network generalizes
well to novel classes, the classifier is more error-prone due
to the lack of training data diversity [40]. To mitigate this issue, a natural approach is to generate additional features for
novel classes [12, 55, 57]. For example, Zhang et al. [55]
propose a feature hallucination network to use the variation from base classes to diversify training data for novel
classes. For zero-shot detection (ZSD), Zhu et al. [57] propose to synthesize visual features for unseen objects based
on a conditional variational auto-encoder. Although much
progress has been made, the lack of data diversity is still a
challenging issue for FSOD methods.

19713

