This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TINC: Tree-structured Implicit Neural Compression
Runzhao Yang
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, China
yangrz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Implicit neural representation (INR) can describe the target
scenes with high fidelity using a small number of parameters, and is emerging as a promising data compression
technique. However, limited spectrum coverage is intrinsic
to INR, and it is non-trivial to remove redundancy in diverse
complex data effectively. Preliminary studies can only
exploit either global or local correlation in the target data
and thus of limited performance. In this paper, we propose
a Tree-structured Implicit Neural Compression (TINC)
to conduct compact representation for local regions and
extract the shared features of these local representations
in a hierarchical manner. Specifically, we use Multi-Layer
Perceptrons (MLPs) to fit the partitioned local regions, and
these MLPs are organized in tree structure to share parameters according to the spatial distance. The parameter
sharing scheme not only ensures the continuity between
adjacent regions, but also jointly removes the local and
non-local redundancy. Extensive experiments show that
TINC improves the compression fidelity of INR, and has
shown impressive compression capabilities over commercial tools and other deep learning based methods. Besides,
the approach is of high flexibility and can be tailored for
different data and parameter settings. The source code can
be found at https://github.com/RichealYoung/TINC.

1. Introduction
In the big data era, there exist massive and continuously
growing amount of visual data from different fields, from
surveillance, entertainment, to biology and medical diagnosis. The urgent need for efficient data storage, sharing and
transmission all requires effective compression techniques.
Although image and video compression have been studied
for decades and there are a number of widely used commercial tools, the compression of medical and biological data
This work was done in collaboration with Tingxiong Xiao and Yuxiao Cheng, under supervision of Prof. Jinli Suo and Prof. Qionghai Dai
affiliated with Department of Automation, Tsinghua Univ.

are not readily available.
Implicit neural representation (INR) is becoming
widely-used for scene rendering [19, 21, 23, 31, 44], shape
estimation [8, 11, 25, 29], and dynamics modeling [15, 26,
28]. Due to its powerful representation capability, INR can
describe nature scenes at high fidelity with a much smaller
number of parameters than raw discrete grid representation,
and thus serves as a promising data compression technique.
In spite of the big potential, INR based compression is
quite limited confronted with large sized data [20], since
INR is intrinsically of limited spectrum coverage and cannot envelop the spectrum of the target data, as analyzed
in [41]. Two pioneering works using INR for data compression, including NeRV [7] and SCI [41], have attempted
to handle this issue in their respective ways. Specifically,
NeRV introduces the convolution operation into INR, which
can reduce the required number of parameters using the
weight sharing mechanism. However, convolution is spatially invariant and thus limits NeRV’s representation accuracy on complex data with spatial varying feature distribution. Differently, to obtain high fidelity on complex data,
SCI adopts divide-and-conquer strategy and partitions the
data into blocks within INR’s concentrated spectrum envelop. This improves the local fidelity, but cannot remove
non-local redundancies for higher compression ratio and
tend to cause blocking artifacts.
To compress large and complex data with INR, in this paper we propose to build a tree-structured Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs), which consists of a set of INRs to represent local regions in a compact manner and organizes
them under a hierarchical architecture for parameter sharing
and higher compression ratio. Specifically, we first draw
on the idea of ensemble learning [12] and use a divideand-conquer strategy [20, 41] to compress different regions
with multiple MLPs separately. Then we incorporate these
MLPs with a tree structure to extract their shared parameters hierarchically, following the rule that spatially closer
regions are of higher similarity and share more parameters.
Such a joint representation strategy can remove the redundancy both within each local region and among non-local

18517

