This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Freestyle Layout-to-Image Synthesis
Han Xue1,2 Zhiwu Huang2,3 Qianru Sun2 Li Song1,4 * Wenjun Zhang1
1
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Singapore Management University 3 University of Southampton
4
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xue han, song li, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn

qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

zhiwu.huang@soton.ac.uk

Layout

"train bush grass railroad"

"lego train bush grass
railroad"

"an ink painting of
train bush grass railroad"

"warehouse bush grass
railroad"

Layout

"bench cat building bush
furniture grass ground
pavement roof sky tree
window"

"bench tabby cat building
bush furniture grass
ground pavement roof sky
tree window"

"a sketch of bench
cat building bush furniture
grass ground pavement
roof sky tree window"

"bench unicorn building
bush furniture grass
ground pavement roof
sky tree window"

Figure 1. Freestyle Layout-to-Image Synthesis (FLIS) results generated by using our model. Each has two kinds of inputs: a layout of
semantic masks (on the 1st column), and a text (on the top of each result). For each layout, we show three example results with edited texts
(3rd-5th columns). They validate that our model is able to introduce new attributes (3rd column), styles (4th column), and objects (5th
column), which are all unseen during training, in the synthesized images. The generated hornless unicorn is due to the layout constraint.

Abstract
Typical layout-to-image synthesis (LIS) models generate images for a closed set of semantic classes, e.g., 182
common objects in COCO-Stuff. In this work, we explore
the freestyle capability of the model, i.e., how far can it
generate unseen semantics (e.g., classes, attributes, and
styles) onto a given layout, and call the task Freestyle
LIS (FLIS). Thanks to the development of large-scale pretrained language-image models, a number of discriminative models (e.g., image classification and object detection)
trained on limited base classes are empowered with the
* Corresponding author. Part of this work was done when Han Xue
served as a visiting Ph.D. student at Singapore Management University.

ability of unseen class prediction. Inspired by this, we opt
to leverage large-scale pre-trained text-to-image diffusion
models to achieve the generation of unseen semantics. The
key challenge of FLIS is how to enable the diffusion model
to synthesize images from a specific layout which very likely
violates its pre-learned knowledge, e.g., the model never
sees “a unicorn sitting on a bench” during its pre-training.
To this end, we introduce a new module called Rectified
Cross-Attention (RCA) that can be conveniently plugged
in the diffusion model to integrate semantic masks. This
“plug-in” is applied in each cross-attention layer of the
model to rectify the attention maps between image and text
tokens. The key idea of RCA is to enforce each text token to
act on the pixels in a specified region, allowing us to freely

14256

