This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Unique Perspectives: User-aware Saliency Modeling
Shi Chen*
University of Minnesota

Nachiappan Valliappan
Google Research

Shaolei Shen
Google

chen4595@umn.edu

nac@google.com

shaoleis@google.com

Xinyu Ye
Google

Kai Kohlhoff
Google Research

Junfeng He†
Google Research

yexinyu@google.com

kohlhoff@google.com

junfenghe@google.com

Abstract
Everyone is unique. Given the same visual stimuli, people’s attention is driven by both salient visual cues and their
own inherent preferences. Knowledge of visual preferences
not only facilitates understanding of fine-grained attention
patterns of diverse users, but also has the potential of benefiting the development of customized applications. Nevertheless, existing saliency models typically limit their scope
to attention as it applies to the general population and ignore the variability between users’ behaviors. In this paper,
we identify the critical roles of visual preferences in attention modeling, and for the first time study the problem of
user-aware saliency modeling. Our work aims to advance
attention research from three distinct perspectives: (1) We
present a new model with the flexibility to capture attention patterns of various combinations of users, so that we
can adaptively predict personalized attention, user group
attention, and general saliency at the same time with one
single model; (2) To augment models with knowledge about
the composition of attention from different users, we further
propose a principled learning method to understand visual
attention in a progressive manner; and (3) We carry out extensive analyses on publicly available saliency datasets to
shed light on the roles of visual preferences. Experimental results on diverse stimuli, including naturalistic images
and web pages, demonstrate the advantages of our method
in capturing the distinct visual behaviors of different users
and the general saliency of visual stimuli.

1. Introduction
With the pervasiveness of a visual attention network in
the brain, attention has become an important interface for
understanding people’s behavioral patterns. A collection
* Work done during an internship at Google Research.
† Corresponding author

...

...

...

...
General Saliency
User-group Attention
Personalized Attention

Visual Stimulus

Figure 1. A hierarchy for user-aware saliency modeling, where
each level focuses on a different perspective of attention.

of studies focus on leveraging human attention to optimize
graphical designs [7, 16, 36], web page layouts [8, 37, 45],
and user experience in immersive environments [22,38,44].
They demonstrate its usefulness for a broad range of applications, and more importantly, highlight the intertwined
nature between attention and users’ preferences [11]. As
shown in Figure 1, attention modeling can be formulated as
a hierarchy of tasks, i.e., from a sophisticated understanding
of individuals’ behaviors (personalized attention), to modeling the visual behaviors of larger groups (user-group attention), and the saliency of visual stimuli (general saliency).
With the great diversity in attentional behaviors among different groups (e.g., attention of users with diverse characteristics, children vs elderly, male vs female, etc.), knowledge
of visual preferences can play an essential role in enabling
a more fine-grained understanding of attention.
To accurately capture human attention on visual stimuli,
considerable efforts have been placed on building saliency
prediction models [10, 19, 21, 29, 30]. While achieving optimistic results for modeling attention of the general popu-

2701

