This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScaleFL: Resource-Adaptive Federated Learning with Heterogeneous Clients
Fatih Ilhan
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA

Gong Su
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY

Ling Liu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA

filhan@gatech.edu

gongsu@us.ibm.com

ling.liu@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is an attractive distributed
learning paradigm supporting real-time continuous learning and client privacy by default. In most FL approaches,
all edge clients are assumed to have sufficient computation
capabilities to participate in the learning of a deep neural
network (DNN) model. However, in real-life applications,
some clients may have severely limited resources and can
only train a much smaller local model. This paper presents
ScaleFL, a novel FL approach with two distinctive mechanisms to handle resource heterogeneity and provide an equitable FL framework for all clients. First, ScaleFL adaptively
scales down the DNN model along width and depth dimensions by leveraging early exits to find the best-fit models for
resource-aware local training on distributed clients. In this
way, ScaleFL provides an efficient balance of preserving
basic and complex features in local model splits with various sizes for joint training while enabling fast inference for
model deployment. Second, ScaleFL utilizes self-distillation
among exit predictions during training to improve aggregation through knowledge transfer among subnetworks. We
conduct extensive experiments on benchmark CV (CIFAR10/100, ImageNet) and NLP datasets (SST-2, AgNews). We
demonstrate that ScaleFL outperforms existing representative heterogeneous FL approaches in terms of global/local
model performance and provides inference efficiency, with
up to 2x latency and 4x model size reduction with negligible
performance drop below 2%.

1. Introduction
Mobile and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices are the primary computing sources for most daily life tasks and they
are becoming increasingly essential for billions of users
worldwide (12; 18). These devices generate an unprecedented amount of data, which can be used to optimize services and improve user experience. Since the data is huge
and mostly private, communicating, storing and organizing
it in a central server poses serious privacy risks and brings

logistic concerns (12). Federated learning (FL) emerged as
a machine learning paradigm for this scenario, where storing the data and training the model in a central server is not
feasible. In FL, instead of centralizing the data, the model is
distributed to clients for local training and the central server
aggregates the local updates received from clients (22).
Existing FL algorithms such as FedAVG (22), SCAFFOLD (13) and FedOpt (26) rely on the assumption that
every participating client has similar resources and can locally execute the same model. However, in most real-life
applications, the computation resources tend to differ significantly across clients (5; 19). This heterogeneity prevents
clients with insufficient resources to participate in certain
FL tasks that require large models. Although existing gradient compression (8) or model pruning techniques (7) may
be applied to reduce the cost at the expense of small accuracy loss, these methods are not flexible enough to meet diverse constraint scenarios (computational, storage, network
etc.) based on the heterogeneous resources of edge clients.
We argue that FL should promote equitable AI practice by
supporting a resource-adaptive learning framework that can
scale to heterogeneous clients with limited capacity.
To this end, we present ScaleFL, a scalable and equitable
FL framework. By design, ScaleFL has two novel features.
First, ScaleFL can adaptively scale down the global model
along the width and depth dimensions based on the computational resources of participating clients. The downscaling procedure in ScaleFL is inspired by EfficientNet (28),
which demonstrates the importance of balancing the size
of different dimensions while scaling a neural network.
Since a deeper model is more capable of extracting higherorder, complex features while a wider model has access to
a larger variety of lower-order, basic features, performing
model size reduction across one dimension causes unbalance in terms of the learning capabilities of the resulting
model. This motivates the design of ScaleFL that uniformly
scales down the global model on both dimensions to provide the balance of preserving access to both complex and
basic features as efficiently as possible. To perform splitting along the depth dimension, ScaleFL injects early exit

24532

