This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HairStep: Transfer Synthetic to Real Using Strand and Depth Maps
for Single-View 3D Hair Modeling
Yujian Zheng1,2 Zirong Jin2 Moran Li3 Haibin Huang3
Chongyang Ma3 Shuguang Cui2,1 Xiaoguang Han2,1*
1
FNii, CUHKSZ 2 SSE, CUHKSZ 3 Kuaishou Technology

Figure 1. Given a single portrait image, we first convert it to an intermediate representation HairStep consisting of a strand map and a
depth map (shown in the bottom left and right for each example), and then recover the corresponding 3D hair model at the strand level.
Our HairStep is capable to bridge the domain gap between synthetic and real data and achieves high-fidelity hair modeling results.

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the challenging problem of
learning-based single-view 3D hair modeling. Due to the
great difficulty of collecting paired real image and 3D hair
data, using synthetic data to provide prior knowledge for
real domain becomes a leading solution. This unfortunately
introduces the challenge of domain gap. Due to the inherent
difficulty of realistic hair rendering, existing methods typically use orientation maps instead of hair images as input
to bridge the gap. We firmly think an intermediate representation is essential, but we argue that orientation map using
the dominant filtering-based methods is sensitive to uncertain noise and far from a competent representation. Thus,
we first raise this issue up and propose a novel intermediate representation, termed as HairStep, which consists of a
strand map and a depth map. It is found that HairStep not
only provides sufficient information for accurate 3D hair
modeling, but also is feasible to be inferred from real images. Specifically, we collect a dataset of 1,250 portrait images with two types of annotations. A learning framework
is further designed to transfer real images to the strand map
and depth map. It is noted that, an extra bonus of our new
dataset is the first quantitative metric for 3D hair modeling.
* Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

Our experiments show that HairStep narrows the domain
gap between synthetic and real and achieves state-of-theart performance on single-view 3D hair reconstruction.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity 3D hair modeling is a critical part in the
creation of digital human. A hairstyle of a person typically
consists of about 100,000 strands [1]. Due to the complexity, high-quality 3D hair model is expensive to obtain. Although high-end capture systems [9, 18] are relatively mature, it is still difficult to reconstruct satisfactory 3D hair
with complex geometries.
Chai et al. [3,4] first present simple hair modeling methods from single-view images, which enable the acquisition
of 3D hair more user-friendly. But these early systems require extra input such as user strokes. Moreover, they only
work for visible parts of the hair and fail to recover invisible geometries faithfully. Recently, retrieval-based approaches [2, 10] reduce the dependency of user input and
improve the quality of reconstructed 3D hair model. However, the accuracy and efficiency of these approaches are
directly influenced by the size and diversity of the 3D hair
database.
Inspired by the advances of learning-based shape recon-

12726

