This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ARCTIC: A Dataset for Dexterous Bimanual Hand-Object Manipulation
Zicong Fan1,3 Omid Taheri3
Manuel Kaufmann1
1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland

2

Dimitrios Tzionas2 Muhammed Kocabas1,3
Michael J. Black3 Otmar Hilliges1

University of Amsterdam

3

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Figure 1. ARCTIC is a dataset of hands dexterously manipulating articulated objects. The dataset contains videos from both eight
3rd -person allocentric views (a) and one 1st -person egocentric view (b), together with accurate ground-truth 3D hand and object meshes,
captured with a high-quality motion capture system. ARCTIC goes beyond existing datasets to enable the study of dexterous bimanual
manipulation of articulated objects (c) and provides detailed contact information between the hands and objects during manipulation (d-e).

Abstract
Humans intuitively understand that inanimate objects do
not move by themselves, but that state changes are typically caused by human manipulation (e.g., the opening of
a book). This is not yet the case for machines. In part this
is because there exist no datasets with ground-truth 3D annotations for the study of physically consistent and synchronised motion of hands and articulated objects. To this end,
we introduce ARCTIC – a dataset of two hands that dexterously manipulate objects, containing 2.1M video frames
paired with accurate 3D hand and object meshes and detailed, dynamic contact information. It contains bi-manual
articulation of objects such as scissors or laptops, where
hand poses and object states evolve jointly in time. We propose two novel articulated hand-object interaction tasks:
(1) Consistent motion reconstruction: Given a monocular
video, the goal is to reconstruct two hands and articulated
objects in 3D, so that their motions are spatio-temporally
consistent. (2) Interaction field estimation: Dense relative hand-object distances must be estimated from images.
We introduce two baselines ArcticNet and InterField, respectively and evaluate them qualitatively and quantitatively on ARCTIC. Our code and data are available at
https://arctic.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Humans constantly manipulate complex objects: we
open our laptop’s cover to work, we apply spray to clean, we
carefully control our fingers to cut with scissors – rigid and
articulated parts of objects move together with our hands.
Inanimate objects only move or deform if external forces
are applied to them. The study of the physically consistent dynamics of hands and objects during manipulation
has so far been under-researched in the hand pose estimation literature. This is partly because existing hand-object
datasets [8, 18, 19, 21, 30, 34] are mostly limited to grasping
of rigid objects and contain few if any examples of rich and
dexterous manipulation of articulated objects.
To enable the study of dexterous articulated hand-object
manipulation, we collect a novel dataset called ARCTIC
(ARticulated objeCTs in InteraCtion). ARCTIC consists
of video sequences of multi-view RGB frames, and each
frame is paired with accurate 3D hand and object meshes.
ARCTIC contains data from 10 subjects interacting with 11
articulated objects, resulting in a total of 2.1M RGB images. Images are captured from multiple synchronized and
calibrated views, including 8 static allocentric views and 1
moving egocentric view. To capture accurate 3D meshes

12943

