This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hidden Gems: 4D Radar Scene Flow Learning Using
Cross-Modal Supervision
Fangqiang Ding1
Andras Palffy2
1
University of Edinburgh
{fding, xiaoxuan.lu}@ed.ac.uk

Dariu M. Gavrila2
Chris Xiaoxuan Lu1, *
2
Delft University of Technology
{a.palffy, d.m.gavrila}@tudelft.nl

Abstract
This work proposes a novel approach to 4D radar-based
scene flow estimation via cross-modal learning. Our approach is motivated by the co-located sensing redundancy
in modern autonomous vehicles. Such redundancy implicitly provides various forms of supervision cues to the radar
scene flow estimation. Specifically, we introduce a multitask model architecture for the identified cross-modal learning problem and propose loss functions to opportunistically
engage scene flow estimation using multiple cross-modal
constraints for effective model training. Extensive experiments show the state-of-the-art performance of our method
and demonstrate the effectiveness of cross-modal supervised learning to infer more accurate 4D radar scene flow.
We also show its usefulness to two subtasks - motion segmentation and ego-motion estimation. Our source code will
be available on https://github.com/Toytiny/CMFlow.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation is to obtain a 3D motion vector
field of the static and dynamic environment relative to an
ego-agent. In the context of self-driving, scene flow is a key
enabler to navigational safety in dynamic environments by
providing holistic motion cues to multiple subtasks, such as
ego-motion estimation, motion segmentation, point cloud
accumulation, multi-object tracking, etc.
Driven by the recent successes of deep neural networks
in point cloud processing [22, 35, 36, 40, 51, 54], predominant approaches to scene flow estimation from point clouds
adopt either fully- [12, 27, 34, 49, 52] or weakly- [10, 11]
supervised learning, or only rely on self-supervised signals [2, 9, 21, 24, 31]. For supervised ones, the acquisition of scene flow annotations is costly and requires tedious
and intensive human labour. In contrast, self-supervised
learning methods require no annotations and can exploit
the inherent spatio-temporal relationship and constraints in
the input data to bootstrap scene flow learning. Neverthe* Corresponding author: Chris Xiaoxuan Lu (xiaoxuan.lu@ed.ac.uk)

Cross-Modal
Supervision
Retrieving

Automotive
4D Radar

Scene Flow Estimator

LiDAR

Input

Warped

Camera

Odometer

Figure 1. Cross-modal supervision cues are retrieved from colocated odometer, LiDAR and camera sensors to benefit 4D radar
scene flow learning. The source point cloud (red) is warped with
our estimated scene flow and gets closer to the target one (blue).

less, due to the implicit supervision signals, self-supervised
learning performance is often secondary to the supervised
ones [10,23,49], and they fail to provide sufficiently reliable
results for safety-critical autonomous driving scenarios.
These challenges become more prominent when it comes
to 4D radar scene flow learning. 4D automotive radars
receive increasing attention recently due to their robustness against adverse weather and poor lighting conditions
(vs. camera), availability of object velocity measurements
(vs. camera and LiDAR) and relatively low cost (vs. LiDAR) [5, 30, 32, 41]. However, 4D radar point clouds are
significantly sparser than LiDARs’ and suffer from nonnegligible multi-path noise. Such low-fidelity data significantly complicates the point-level scene flow annotation
for supervised learning and makes it difficult to rely exclusively on self-supervised training-based methods [9] for
performance and safety reasons.
To find a more effective framework for 4D radar scene
flow learning, this work aims to exploit cross-modal supervision signals in autonomous vehicles. Our motivation is based on the fact that autonomous vehicles today
are equipped with multiple heterogeneous sensors, e.g., LiDARs, cameras and GPS/INS, which can provide complementary sensing and redundant perception results for each
other, jointly safeguarding the vehicle operation in complex urban traffic. This co-located perception redundancy

9340

