This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Super-Resolution Using T-Tetromino Pixels
Simon Grosche, Andy Regensky, Jürgen Seiler, and André Kaup
Chair of Multimedia Communications and Signal Processing,
Friedrich-Alexander-Univeristät Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Cauerstr. 7, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
simon.grosche@fau.de, andy.regensky@fau.de, juergen.seiler@fau.de, andre.kaup@fau.de

Abstract

1. Introduction
Conventional imaging sensors acquire image data using
square pixels that are regularly placed on the sensor surface. Due to the everlasting pursuit for higher resolution,
smaller and smaller pixels are packed onto the sensor surface. Such sensors can acquire single images of extremely
high-resolution in case of good lighting conditions. However, there are two major issues with decreasing the pixel
size. Firstly, fewer photons arrive at each pixel such that
photometric limits are approaching [5,35] resulting in worse
signal to noise ratios. Secondly, the required bandwidth increases with the number of measured pixels such that enor-

Low-resolution
Tetromino
sensor binning sensor binning

For modern high-resolution imaging sensors, pixel binning is performed in low-lighting conditions and in case
high frame rates are required. To recover the original spatial resolution, single-image super-resolution techniques
can be applied for upscaling. To achieve a higher image
quality after upscaling, we propose a novel binning concept using tetromino-shaped pixels. It is embedded into
the field of compressed sensing and the coherence is calculated to motivate the sensor layouts used. Next, we investigate the reconstruction quality using tetromino pixels for
the first time in literature. Instead of using different types
of tetrominoes as proposed elsewhere, we show that using
a small repeating cell consisting of only four T-tetrominoes
is sufficient. For reconstruction, we use a locally fully connected reconstruction (LFCR) network as well as two classical reconstruction methods from the field of compressed
sensing. Using the LFCR network in combination with the
proposed tetromino layout, we achieve superior image quality in terms of PSNR, SSIM, and visually compared to conventional single-image super-resolution using the very deep
super-resolution (VDSR) network. For PSNR, a gain of up
to +1.92 dB is achieved.

Reference

Binned

Target

Conventional
binning

Upscaling
BIC, VDSR

Tetromino
binning

Reconstruction
L-JSDE, LFCR

Figure 1. Illustration of a conventional low-resolution binning process and the proposed tetromino binning. In both cases, less noise
and higher frame rates are possible.

mous amounts of data need to be processed and stored, especially when recording high frame rate raw videos. In order to achieve higher signal-to-noise ratios and higher frame
rates, pixel binning is typically applied on the hardware
level [14, 24] to the disadvantage of spatial resolution. This
is shown in Figure 1.
To increase the spatial resolution of a low-resolution image, single-image super-resolution can be applied in postprocessing. In this field, a vast amount of research has been
investigating classical upscaling algorithms, e.g., [15,33,44,
45, 47], and recently neural networks, e.g., [8, 25, 48]. More
generally speaking, the aim is to achieve the best possible
image quality for a limited number of measurements.
Single-image super-resolution, however, is intrinsically
limited by the regularity of the underlying measurement
process which introduces aliasing whenever too high frequencies are present in the scene. One solution to circumvent artifacts from aliasing is to employ a non-regular placement of pixels [1, 7, 21, 28, 31, 36]. This allows for higher
image quality after reconstructing the image on a higher resolution grid without increasing the number of pixels compared to a (binned) low-resolution sensor. Unfortunately,
implementations of non-regular sampling such as quarter

9989

