This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HARP: Personalized Hand Reconstruction from a Monocular RGB Video
Korrawe Karunratanakul

Sergey Prokudin Otmar Hilliges
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Siyu Tang

{korrawe.karunratanakul,sergey.prokudin,otmar.hilliges,siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch
https://korrawe.github.io/harp-project/

Figure 1. Given a short monocular video of a hand and a coarse hand pose and shape estimation for initialization, we reconstruct a photorealistic hand avatar exhibiting faithful personalized appearance and geometry using standard explicit representations and a differentiable
renderer without any neural networks. Compared to the baselines, our hand avatar demonstrates better-reconstructed geometry and appearance. The hand avatar can be used to render high-fidelity hand images in novel views and poses in real-time, which serves as a foundation
for many AR/VR applications.

Abstract
We present HARP (HAnd Reconstruction and Personalization), a personalized hand avatar creation approach that
takes a short monocular RGB video of a human hand as
input and reconstructs a faithful hand avatar exhibiting a
high-fidelity appearance and geometry. In contrast to the
major trend of neural implicit representations, HARP models a hand with a mesh-based parametric hand model, a
vertex displacement map, a normal map, and an albedo
without any neural components. The explicit nature of our
representation enables a truly scalable, robust, and efficient
approach to hand avatar creation as validated by our experiments. HARP is optimized via gradient descent from
a short sequence captured by a hand-held mobile phone
and can be directly used in AR/VR applications with realtime rendering capability. To enable this, we carefully design and implement a shadow-aware differentiable rendering scheme that is robust to high degree articulations and
self-shadowing regularly present in hand motions, as well

as challenging lighting conditions. It also generalizes to unseen poses and novel viewpoints, producing photo-realistic
renderings of hand animations. Furthermore, the learned
HARP representation can be used for improving 3D hand
pose estimation quality in challenging viewpoints. The key
advantages of HARP are validated by the in-depth analyses
on appearance reconstruction, novel view and novel pose
synthesis, and 3D hand pose refinement. It is an AR/VRready personalized hand representation that shows superior
fidelity and scalability.

1. Introduction
Advancements in AR/VR devices are introducing a new
reality in which the physical and digital worlds merge. The
human hand is a crucial element for an intimate and interactive experience in these environments, serving as the
primary interface between humans and the digital world.
Therefore, it is essential to capture, reconstruct, and animate
life-like digital hands for AR and VR applications. Without

12802

