This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BlackVIP: Black-Box Visual Prompting for Robust Transfer Learning
Changdae Oh1 Hyeji Hwang1 Hee-young Lee2† YongTaek Lim1 Geunyoung Jung1
Jiyoung Jung1 Hosik Choi1 Kyungwoo Song3‡
1
University of Seoul 2 Sungkyunkwan University 3 Yonsei University
changdae.oh@uos.ac.kr

kyungwoo.song@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
With the surge of large-scale pre-trained models (PTMs),
fine-tuning these models to numerous downstream tasks becomes a crucial problem. Consequently, parameter efficient transfer learning (PETL) of large models has grasped
huge attention. While recent PETL methods showcase impressive performance, they rely on optimistic assumptions:
1) the entire parameter set of a PTM is available, and 2)
a sufficiently large memory capacity for the fine-tuning is
equipped. However, in most real-world applications, PTMs
are served as a black-box API or proprietary software without explicit parameter accessibility. Besides, it is hard to
meet a large memory requirement for modern PTMs. In
this work, we propose black-box visual prompting (BlackVIP), which efficiently adapts the PTMs without knowledge about model architectures and parameters. BlackVIP has two components; 1) Coordinator and 2) simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation with gradient correction (SPSA-GC). The Coordinator designs inputdependent image-shaped visual prompts, which improves
few-shot adaptation and robustness on distribution/location
shift. SPSA-GC efficiently estimates the gradient of a target model to update Coordinator. Extensive experiments
on 16 datasets demonstrate that BlackVIP enables robust
adaptation to diverse domains without accessing PTMs’
parameters, with minimal memory requirements. Code:
https://github.com/changdaeoh/BlackVIP

1. Introduction
Based on their excellent transferability, large-scale pretrained models (PTMs) [7, 17, 54] have shown remarkable
success on tasks from diverse domains and absorbed increasing attention in machine learning communities. By
witnessing PTMs’ success, Parameter-Efficient Transfer
Learning (PETL) methods that efficiently utilize the PTMs
† Work done at University of Seoul
‡ Corresponding author; Work partly done at University of Seoul

Figure 1. While FT updates the entire model, VP has a small number of parameters in the input pixel space. However, VP still requires a large memory capacity to optimize the parameters through
backpropagation. Moreover, FT and VP are only feasible if the
PTM’s parameters are accessible. Meanwhile, BlackVIP does not
assume the parameter-accessibility by adopting a black-box optimization (SPSA-GC) algorithm rather than relying on backpropagation. Besides, BlackVIP reparameterizes the visual prompt with
a neural network and optimizes tiny parameters with SPSA-GC.
Based on the above properties, BlackVIP can be widely adopted
in realistic and resource-limited transfer learning scenarios.

are recently emerging. While the standard fine-tuning (FT)
and its advanced variants [38, 73] update the entire or large
portion of a PTM [16], PETL methods aim to achieve comparable performance to FT by optimizing a small number of
learnable parameters.
Among them, prompt-based approaches [3, 5, 33, 40, 41]
have been widely investigated from diverse research areas.
For vision PTMs, Visual Prompt Tuning [33] injects a few
additional learnable prompt tokens inside of ViT’s [17] layers or embedding layer and only optimizes them. Bahng
et al. [3] investigate visual prompting (VP), which adopts
the learnable parameters on input pixel space as a visual
prompt, while no additional modules are inserted into the
pre-trained visual model. Besides, prompt learning methods for VLM are also actively studied [35, 78, 81, 83].
While existing PETL methods show impressive performance with few learnable parameters, they rely on two

24224

