This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rate Gradient Approximation Attack Threats Deep Spiking Neural Networks
Tong Bu, Jianhao Ding, Zecheng Hao, Zhaofei Yu*
Peking University
putong30@pku.edu.cn, djh01998@stu.pku.edu.cn, {zechenghao, yuzf12}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have attracted significant attention due to their energy-efficient properties
and potential application on neuromorphic hardware.
State-of-the-art SNNs are typically composed of simple
Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neurons and have become
comparable to ANNs in image classification tasks on largescale datasets. However, the robustness of these deep SNNs
has not yet been fully uncovered. In this paper, we first
experimentally observe that layers in these SNNs mostly
communicate by rate coding. Based on this rate coding
property, we develop a novel rate coding SNN-specified
attack method, Rate Gradient Approximation Attack (RGA).
We generalize the RGA attack to SNNs composed of LIF
neurons with different leaky parameters and input encoding
by designing surrogate gradients. In addition, we develop
the time-extended enhancement to generate more effective
adversarial examples. The experiment results indicate that
our proposed RGA attack is more effective than the previous
attack and is less sensitive to neuron hyperparameters. We
also conclude from the experiment that rate-coded SNN
composed of LIF neurons is not secure, which calls for
exploring training methods for SNNs composed of complex
neurons and other neuronal codings. Code is available at
https://github.com/putshua/SNN attack RGA

1. Introduction
As the third generation of artificial neural networks [47],
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have gained more attraction due to their spatio-temporal, discrete representation,
and event-driven properties. These bio-inspired neural networks borrow the characteristics of spiking representations
and neuronal dynamics from biological brains [23, 75]. Unlike traditional Analog Neural Networks (ANNs), SNNs
utilize spiking neurons as their essential components, which
accumulate current over time, emit spikes when the membrane potential exceeds the threshold, and pass on informa* Corresponding author

tion through spike trains. The natural sparsity of the spike
trains leads to the low power consumption of SNNs [59,69].
SNNs are competitive in real-world vision applications.
The development of neuromorphic computing [10, 11, 20,
54, 56, 76] has further magnified the advantages of lowpower consumption properties of SNNs, so that they can be
deployed in power-limited scenarios [8, 64], such as edge
computing or mobile application. However, the training algorithms of SNNs are also improving. The most practical
training methods are ANN-SNN conversion [7], supervised
training [72], and hybrid training [57, 58].
When SNNs are applied to safety-critical systems, the
reliability of SNNs should be a major concern. The adversarial attack is one of the most significant categories that
threatens model security [24, 68]. Similar to ANNs, SNNs
can also be fooled by crafting adversarial examples that
are imperceptible to human eyes from gradient-based backpropagation [62], which may lead to catastrophic consequences when SNNs are deployed in safety-related scenarios. Nevertheless, SNNs are still considered to be more robust than ANNs. This robustness comes from inherent neural dynamics, such as forgetting historical information and
discrete spikes [63]. Besides, the robustness of SNNs can
be improved through special structural enhancements [9] or
training techniques [37, 45, 71].
Effective attack examples of ANNs can be crafted from
well-defined gradients on the activation functions [68]. For
SNNs, a common way to construct gradient-based attacks
is by backpropagating through a surrogate function over
discrete spikes. In this way, the gradient may suffer from
explosion and vanishment in temporal and layer-by-layer
communication [72]; at the same time, the membrane potential of all historical time steps needs to be saved when
backpropagation, which requires a large amount of memory.
Currently, high-performance SNNs typically combine leaky
integrate-and-fire models and rate-encoded inputs. While
the rate coding scheme brings excellent performance to
SNN, it also exposes shortcomings. If the rate coding nature
in SNN is considered, can we construct a more powerful attack? After all, the activation functions of many ANNs are
inspired by the firing rate of biological neurons [52].

7896

