This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Photo Pre-Training, But for Sketch
Ke Li1,2
1

Kaiyue Pang2

Yi-Zhe Song2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom

? Convention: pre-training = one-time parameter initialisation

Abstract

1. Introduction
People sketch, from prehistoric times in caves, to nowadays on phones and tablets. The sketch community has

"#

!!! ""#$%&'(

"#()

Pre-Train

Fine-Tune

We: pre-training provides enduring supervision
!!! ")*

"#
!!! ""#$%&'(

The sketch community has faced up to its unique challenges over the years, that of data scarcity however still
remains the most significant to date. This lack of sketch
data has imposed on the community a few “peculiar” design choices – the most representative of them all is perhaps
the coerced utilisation of photo-based pre-training (i.e., no
sketch), for many core tasks that otherwise dictates specific
sketch understanding. In this paper, we ask just the one
question – can we make such photo-based pre-training, to
actually benefit sketch?
Our answer lies in cultivating the topology of photo data
learned at pre-training, and use that as a “free” source of
supervision for downstream sketch tasks. In particular, we
use fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR),
one of the most studied and data-hungry sketch tasks, to
showcase our new perspective on pre-training. In this context, the topology-informed supervision learned from photos act as a constraint that take effect at every fine-tuning
step – neighbouring photos in the pre-trained model remain
neighbours under each FG-SBIR updates. We further portray this neighbourhood consistency constraint as a photo
ranking problem and formulate it into a neat cross-modal
triplet loss. We also show how this target is better leveraged as a meta objective rather than optimised in parallel
with the main FG-SBIR objective.
With just this change on pre-training, we beat all previously published results on all five product-level FG-SBIR
benchmarks with significant margins (sometimes >10%).
And the most beautiful thing, as we note, is such gigantic leap is made possible within just a few extra lines
of code! Our implementation is available at https:
/ / github . com / KeLi - SketchX / Photo - Pre Training-But-for-Sketch

"#()

Supervision

Q: “How far has my finetuning step compromised
the photo neighbourhood
formed in pre-training?”

A: “!!" tells you just that!”

"$%&'

!!"

Pre-Train

Fine-Tune
Enquiry

Figure 1. We rejuvenate the role of pre-training in FG-SBIR. We
envisage a scenario where pre-training not only provides parameter initialisation as what the community is accustomed to, but also
interacts with each FG-SBIR fine-tuning step as a crucial source
of supervision. LFG-SBIR : FG-SBIR task loss. LNT : neighbourhood
topology compliance loss sourced from a pre-train model.

consequently witnessed significant progress over the past
decade, on fundamental tasks such as classification [19,
40, 74, 80], synthesis [15, 21, 26, 48, 65], to those more
application-oriented such as fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR) [8,63,64,78]. Despite great strides
made, the main barrier ironically lies with the very task itself – people do sketch, but not as much as they take photos!
As a result, the “largest” sketch datasets [11, 19, 21, 31,
37, 38, 64, 78] are still on a scale of few hundreds/thousands
per-category compared with its easily million-level photo
counterparts [13, 43, 61, 77, 88].This means instead of performing sketch-specific pre-training, common practice in
the community has been coerced to a two-stage process of
pre-training on large-scale photo datasets, and later finetuning on sketch (or sketch-photo pairs for sketch to photo
retrieval). Indeed, on the most studied problem of FGSBIR, while we are seeing tremendous research efforts
[6–8, 48–51, 57, 62–64, 67, 78, 79], none of them, to our best
knowledge, gets away from the gravity of such a coerced
pre-training strategy.
Just as how pre-training was shown to be instrumental

2754

