This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding and Constructing Latent Modality Structures
in Multi-Modal Representation Learning
Qian Jiang1 , Changyou Chen2,3 , Han Zhao1,3 , Liqun Chen*, Qing Ping3 ,
Son Dinh Tran3 , Yi Xu3 , Belinda Zeng3 , Trishul Chilimbi3
1
2
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University at Buffalo
Amazon
qianj3@illinois.edu

lqchen06@outlook.com

{vchencha, uhanzhao, pingqing, sontran, yxaamzn, zengb, trishulc}@amazon.com

Abstract
Contrastive loss has been increasingly used in learning
representations from multiple modalities. In the limit, the
nature of the contrastive loss encourages modalities to exactly match each other in the latent space. Yet it remains
an open question how the modality alignment affects the
downstream task performance. In this paper, based on
an information-theoretic argument, we first prove that exact modality alignment is sub-optimal in general for downstream prediction tasks. Hence we advocate that the key of
better performance lies in meaningful latent modality structures instead of perfect modality alignment. To this end,
we propose three general approaches to construct latent
modality structures. Specifically, we design 1) a deep feature separation loss for intra-modality regularization; 2) a
Brownian-bridge loss for inter-modality regularization; and
3) a geometric consistency loss for both intra- and intermodality regularization. Extensive experiments are conducted on two popular multi-modal representation learning frameworks: the CLIP-based two-tower model and the
ALBEF-based fusion model. We test our model on a variety of tasks including zero/few-shot image classification,
image-text retrieval, visual question answering, visual reasoning, and visual entailment. Our method achieves consistent improvements over existing methods, demonstrating the
effectiveness and generalizability of our proposed approach
on latent modality structure regularization.

1. Introduction
Vision-language representation learning aims to learn
generic representations from images and texts that could
benefit multimodal downstream applications. As the two
modalities are essentially from different data sources and
distributions, how to effectively fuse the two modalities has
* Work done while at Amazon.

In-Modality
Regularization
1.Deep Feature Separation

Cross-Modality
Regularization
2.Brownian Bridges

In-Modality
Regularization
1.Deep Feature Separation

Augmented
image space

Image
Encoder

Text
Encoder

The trail climbs
steadily uphill
most of the way.

3.Geometric Consistency

Figure 1. Constructing latent modality structures to improve multimodal representation learning.

become an important question. Some work aims to unify
the representations of two modalities in one encoder, where
the image and text are usually tokenized into sequences
[60, 61, 65, 66]. Another line of research represents the image and text modality separately with modality-specific encoders and utilizes contrastive learning to align the modalities, achieving state-of-the-art performance on multiple
downstream applications [13, 26, 31, 32, 41, 49, 53, 54, 70].
Despite the successful empirical practice of contrastive
loss in multi-modal representation learning, it remains
an open question whether bridging and aligning the two
modalities always brings benefits to downstream tasks.
One concept closely related to this question is the modality gap [35, 49, 68, 72], where it is defined as the distance between the feature distributions of the two modalities. Modality alignment can be considered as reducing the
modality gap. At a first glance, one would conjecture that
contrastive loss would reduce the modality gap by pulling
positive (paired) image and text data together for better representation. However, a recent study [35] shows evidence
that contrastive learning does not always reduce the modality gap. Furthermore, we also show in our empirical analysis that a reduced modality gap does not always guaran-

7661

