This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature Alignment and Uniformity for Test Time Adaptation
Shuai Wang1
Daoan Zhang2
Zipei Yan3
Jianguo Zhang2
Rui Li1
1
2
Tsinghua University
Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Hongkong Polytechnic University
s-wang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dawn change@126.com, zipei.yan@connect.polyu.hk
zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn, leerui@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Test time adaptation (TTA) aims to adapt deep neural
networks when receiving out of distribution test domain
samples. In this setting, the model can only access online
unlabeled test samples and pre-trained models on the training domains. We first address TTA as a feature revision
problem due to the domain gap between source domains
and target domains. After that, we follow the two measurements alignment and uniformity to discuss the test time feature revision. For test time feature uniformity, we propose
a test time self-distillation strategy to guarantee the consistency of uniformity between representations of the current
batch and all the previous batches. For test time feature
alignment, we propose a memorized spatial local clustering strategy to align the representations among the neighborhood samples for the upcoming batch. To deal with the
common noisy label problem, we propound the entropy and
consistency filters to select and drop the possible noisy labels. To prove the scalability and efficacy of our method, we
conduct experiments on four domain generalization benchmarks and four medical image segmentation tasks with various backbones. Experiment results show that our method
not only improves baseline stably but also outperforms existing state-of-the-art test time adaptation methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in computer
vision tasks when training and test data are sampled from
the same distribution [17, 26, 37]. However, in real-world
applications, performance degradation usually occurs when
training (source) data and test (target) data are collected
from different distributions, i.e. domain shift. In practice,
test samples may encounter different types of variations
or corruptions. Deep learning models will be sensitive to
these variations or corruptions, which can cause performance degradation.
To tackle this challenging but practical problem, various

works have been proposed to adapt the model at test time [5,
8,21,36,43,55,64,65,74]. Test time training (TTT) [36,55]
adapts model using self-supervised tasks, such as rotation
classification [15] during both training and test phases. This
paradigm relies on additional model modifications in both
training and test phases, which is not feasible and scalable
in the real world.
Similar to TTT, test time adaptation [64] (TTA) also
adapts the model i.e., updates the parameters in the test
phase. But TTA does not require any specific modifications
in training and requires only the pre-trained source model
and unlabeled target data during the test phase, which is
more practical and generalizable. In TTA, the model could
be adapted with only online unlabeled data. Hence, the
model trained on source data is incompatible with the target
data due to the possible domain gap between source data
and target data.
To deal with the above-mentioned problem, we address
TTA as a representation revision problem in this paper.
In the test phase of TTA, the accessed model has already
learned the feature representations specialized to source domains and may generate inaccurate representations for the
target domain due to the large domain gap. It is necessary
to rectify the feature representations for the target domain.
To achieve better representations for the target domain, we
utilize the commonly used measurements for representation
quality that can be summarized to feature alignment and
uniformity [66, 71]. Alignment refers that the similar images should have the similar representations, while uniformity means that images of different classes should be distributed as uniform as possible in the latent space. Hence,
we propose to address the TTA problem from the abovementioned properties.
Most of the previous works about TTA can be inducted from the proposed representation revision perspective. Some methods adapt the source model by conducting a feature alignment process, such as feature matching
[25, 36] and predictions adjustment [5]. One of the representative methods is LAME [5], which encourages neigh-

20050

