This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diverse 3D Hand Gesture Prediction from Body Dynamics by
Bilateral Hand Disentanglement
Xingqun Qi1,4 , Chen Liu2 , Muyi Sun3 , Lincheng Li4 , Changjie Fan4 , Xin Yu1,2 *
1
AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 The University of Queensland
3
CRIPAC, NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Netease Fuxi AI Lab
{xingqunqi, yenanliu36}@gmail.com, muyi.sun@cripac.ia.ac.cn
{lilincheng, fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com, xin.yu@uq.edu.au

Sampling1

Sampling2

t=n

t=0

Figure 1. Diverse exemplary clips sampled by our method from our newly collected TED Hands Dataset. The vital frames are visualized
to demonstrate that the hand gestures change with the upper body dynamics, synchronously. Best view on screen.

Abstract
Predicting natural and diverse 3D hand gestures from
the upper body dynamics is a practical yet challenging task
in virtual avatar creation. Previous works usually overlook
the asymmetric motions between two hands and generate
two hands in a holistic manner, leading to unnatural results.
In this work, we introduce a novel bilateral hand disentanglement based two-stage 3D hand generation method to
achieve natural and diverse 3D hand prediction from body
dynamics. In the first stage, we intend to generate natural
hand gestures by two hand-disentanglement branches. Considering the asymmetric gestures and motions of two hands,
we introduce a Spatial-Residual Memory (SRM) module to
model spatial interaction between the body and each hand
by residual learning. To enhance the coordination of two
hand motions wrt. body dynamics holistically, we then
present a Temporal-Motion Memory (TMM) module. TMM
can effectively model the temporal association between
body dynamics and two hand motions. The second stage
is built upon the insight that 3D hand predictions should
be non-deterministic given the sequential body postures.
Thus, we further diversify our 3D hand predictions based
on the initial output from the stage one. Concretely, we
propose a Prototypical-Memory Sampling Strategy (PSS) to
generate the non-deterministic hand gestures by gradient* Corresponding author.

based Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art models on the B2H dataset and
our newly collected TED Hands dataset. The dataset
and code are available at: https://github.com/XingqunQilab/Diverse-3D-Hand-Gesture-Prediction.

1. Introduction
Given a sequence of upper body skeletons, our task aims
at predicting natural and diverse 3D hand gestures. Such
non-verbal body-hand coordination plays an important role
in various virtual avatar scenarios, including human-agent
interface [13, 17, 35, 40, 41], co-speech gesture synthesis [5,
20, 24, 46, 47], holoportation [29].
However, it is quite difficult to predict the natural and
diverse 3D hand gestures due to three major challenges:
(1) Spatially asymmetric motions: Asymmetric motions
of two hands have been overlooked by previous works [28],
e.g., when one hand moves, the other could be static or moving slowly. (2) Temporal consistency wrt. body dynamics: Predicted sequential hand gestures should be temporally consistent with respect to the body dynamics. (3) Nondeterministic hand prediction: Given the upper body dynamics, various 3D hand gestures can match the body postures rather than a deterministic result. Since the existing
dataset has only a few avatar identities, the generated hands

4616

