This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CelebV-Text: A Large-Scale Facial Text-Video Dataset
Jianhui Yu1∗
1

Hao Zhu2∗

Liming Jiang3

2

Chen Change Loy3

Weidong Cai1

3

Wayne Wu4

4

University of Sydney
SenseTime Research
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
jianhui.yu@sydney.edu.au
haozhu96@gmail.com
{liming002,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
tom.cai@sydney.edu.au
wuwenyan0503@gmail.com

Dynamic description:
(Action / Emotion / Light directions)

This man begins to gaze for a
shot time.

..

At the beginning, the man
seems happy.

..

The light direction is firstly
side lighting with 45 degrees
to the left of the face.
He then smiles for a bit.
Then, he turns to be contempt.

..
In the end, he wags his head
and frowns at the same time.

time

..

Finally, this man is surprised.
The light direction then
changes to back lighting.

Static description:
(General Appearance / Detailed Appearance / Light conditions)
The man has a short black hair with a receding hairline. He has arched
eyebrows and bags under eyes. He gets a freckle on the left cheek.
The light intensity of this video is dark with a day light color temperature.

(a) Video Samples (left: general appearance, middle: detailed appearance, right: light conditions)

(b) Text Descriptions

Figure 1. Overview of CelebV-Text. CelebV-Text contains (a) 70, 000 video samples and (b) 1, 400, 000 text descriptions. Each video
sample is annotated with general appearance, detailed appearance, light conditions, action, emotion, and light directions.

Abstract
Text-driven generation models are flourishing in video
generation and editing. However, face-centric text-to-video
generation remains a challenge due to the lack of a suitable
dataset containing high-quality videos and highly relevant
texts. This paper presents CelebV-Text, a large-scale, diverse, and high-quality dataset of facial text-video pairs, to
facilitate research on facial text-to-video generation tasks.
CelebV-Text comprises 70,000 in-the-wild face video clips
with diverse visual content, each paired with 20 texts generated using the proposed semi-automatic text generation
strategy. The provided texts are of high quality, describing both static and dynamic attributes precisely. The superiority of CelebV-Text over other datasets is demonstrated
via comprehensive statistical analysis of the videos, texts,
and text-video relevance. The effectiveness and potential
of CelebV-Text are further shown through extensive selfevaluation. A benchmark is constructed with representative methods to standardize the evaluation of the facial textto-video generation task. All data and models are publicly
available1 .
* Equal contribution.
1 Project page: https://celebv-text.github.io

1. Introduction
Text-driven video generation has recently garnered significant attention in the fields of computer vision and computer graphics. By using text as input, video content can be
generated and controlled, inspiring numerous applications
in both academia and industry [5,34,43,47]. However, textto-video generation still faces many challenges, particularly
in the face-centric scenario where generated video frames
often lack quality [18, 34, 37] or have weak relevance to input texts [2,4,39,67]. We believe that one of the main issues
is the absence of a well-suited facial text-video dataset containing high-quality video samples and text descriptions of
various attributes highly relevant to videos.
Constructing a high-quality facial text-video dataset
poses several challenges, mainly in three aspects. 1) Data
collection. The quality and quantity of video samples
largely determine the quality of generated videos [11, 45,
48, 60]. However, obtaining such a large-scale dataset with
high-quality samples while maintaining a natural distribution and smooth video motion is challenging. 2) Data annotation. The relevance of text-video pairs needs to be ensured. This requires a comprehensive coverage of text for
describing the content and motion appearing in the video,
such as light conditions and head movements. 3) Text gen-

14805

