This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Intermediate Token Learning with Implicit Motion Manifold for
Keyframe Based Motion Interpolation

1

Clinton A. Mo1 , Kun Hu1, *, Chengjiang Long2 , Zhiyong Wang1
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
2
Meta Reality Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA

clmo6615@uni.sydney.edu.au, {kun.hu, zhiyong.wang}@sydney.edu.au, clong1@meta.com

Abstract
Deriving sophisticated 3D motions from sparse
keyframes is a particularly challenging problem, due to
continuity and exceptionally skeletal precision. The action
features are often derivable accurately from the full series
of keyframes, and thus, leveraging the global context with
transformers has been a promising data-driven embedding
approach. However, existing methods are often with inputs
of interpolated intermediate frame for continuity using
basic interpolation methods with keyframes, which result
in a trivial local minimum during training. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework to formulate latent motion
manifolds with keyframe-based constraints, from which the
continuous nature of intermediate token representations is
considered. Particularly, our proposed framework consists
of two stages for identifying a latent motion subspace,
i.e., a keyframe encoding stage and an intermediate token
generation stage, and a subsequent motion synthesis stage
to extrapolate and compose motion data from manifolds.
Through our extensive experiments conducted on both the
LaFAN1 and CMU Mocap datasets, our proposed method
demonstrates both superior interpolation accuracy and
high visual similarity to ground truth motions.

1. Introduction
Pose-to-pose keyframing is a fundamental principle of
character animation, and animation processes often rely
on key pose definitions to efficiently construct motions
[6, 11, 30]. In computer animation, keyframes are temporally connected via interpolation algorithms, which derive
intermediate pose attributes to produce smooth transitions
between key poses. However, human motion is often complex and difficult to be effectively represented by sparse
keyframe sequences alone. While this can be addressed
* Corresponding author.

Code available at: https://github.com/MiniEval/CITL

Figure 1. An example of motion interpolation by our method (first
row), given the keyframes of a hopping motion (in blue), compared
with the ground truth (second row).

by producing denser sequences of key poses, this approach
is laborious for animators, thereby increasing the cost of
keyframed animation processes. Even with Motion Capture
(MoCap) workflows, artists must often resort to keyframing in order to clean artifacts, impose motion constraints,
or introduce motion features irreplicable by motion capture
performers.
Learning-based motion interpolation methods have recently been proposed as an acceleration of the keyframed
animation process, by automatically deriving details within
keyframe transitions as shown in Figure 1. Various machine learning methods have been explored to enable more
realistic interpolation solutions from high quality MoCap
databases, e.g. by using recurrent networks [14, 15, 40] or
transformer-based approaches [10, 26, 31]. Guiding datadriven interpolation with real motions is particularly attractive for keyframe animation workflows, as realistic motions
often require the greatest amount of keyframing, by virtue
of their subtle motion details and physical constraints.
Naturally, as a sequence in-painting problem, motion
interpolation can be formulated as a masked sequence-tosequence task, which the recent popular transformer approach is expected to learn effectively [4, 38, 42, 43]. However, sequential learning of masked continuous attributes
with transformers is largely impaired by the conventional
masked tokens for intermediate data. A token is defined
as an individual data element on the extendable axis of a
sequence, namely the temporal axis for motions. In cur-

13894

