This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Mode Online Knowledge Distillation for Self-Supervised Visual
Representation Learning
Kaiyou Song* Jin Xie Shan Zhang Zimeng Luo
Megvii Technology
{songkaiyou, xiejin, zhangshan, luozimeng}@megvii.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has made remarkable
progress in visual representation learning. Some studies
combine SSL with knowledge distillation (SSL-KD) to boost
the representation learning performance of small models. In
this study, we propose a Multi-mode Online Knowledge Distillation method (MOKD) to boost self-supervised visual representation learning. Different from existing SSL-KD methods that transfer knowledge from a static pre-trained teacher
to a student, in MOKD, two different models learn collaboratively in a self-supervised manner. Specifically, MOKD
consists of two distillation modes: self-distillation and crossdistillation modes. Among them, self-distillation performs
self-supervised learning for each model independently, while
cross-distillation realizes knowledge interaction between different models. In cross-distillation, a cross-attention feature
search strategy is proposed to enhance the semantic feature
alignment between different models. As a result, the two
models can absorb knowledge from each other to boost their
representation learning performance. Extensive experimental results on different backbones and datasets demonstrate
that two heterogeneous models can benefit from MOKD and
outperform their independently trained baseline. In addition,
MOKD also outperforms existing SSL-KD methods for both
the student and teacher models.

1. Introduction
Due to the promising performance of unsupervised visual
representation learning in many computer vision tasks, selfsupervised learning (SSL) has attracted widespread attention
from the computer vision community. SSL aims to learn
general representations that can be transferred to downstream
tasks by utilizing massive unlabeled data.
Among various SSL methods, contrastive learning [8, 21]
has shown significant progress in closing the performance

CrossDistillation

CrossDistillation
SelfDistillation

SelfDistillation

f1¢
Teacher1

EMA

f1

f2

Student1

Student2

EMA

f 2¢
Teacher2

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed Multi-mode Online Knowledge
Distillation (MOKD). In MOKD, two different models are trained
collaboratively through two types of knowledge distillation modes,
i.e., a self-distillation mode and a cross-distillation mode. EMA
denotes exponential-moving-average.

gap with supervised methods in recent years. It aims at maximizing the similarity between views from the same instance
(positive pairs) while minimizing the similarity among views
from different instances (negative pairs). MoCo [10, 21] and
SimCLR [8, 9] use both positive and negative pairs for contrast. They significantly improve the performance compared
to previous methods [45, 51]. After that, many methods are
proposed to solve the limitations in contrastive learning, such
as the false negative problem [14, 20, 29, 32, 43], the limitation of large batch size [31, 54], and the problem of hard
augmented samples [27, 49]. At the same time, other studies [2,4,5,11,17,18,55] abandon the negative samples during
contrastive learning. With relatively large models, such as
ResNet50 [23] or larger, these methods achieve comparable
performance on different tasks than their supervised counterparts. However, as revealed in previous studies [15, 16],
they do not perform well on small models [26, 42] and have
a large gap from their supervised counterparts.
To address this challenge in contrastive learning, some

* Corresponding author.

11848

