This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Stable Human Pose Estimation via Cross-View Fusion and Foot
Stabilization
Li’an Zhuo*, Jian Cao*, Qi Wang, Bang Zhang, Liefeng Bo
Alibaba Group
{lianzhuo.zla, tanfeng.cj, wilson.wq, zhangbang.zb, liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Towards stable human pose estimation from monocular
images, there remain two main dilemmas. On the one hand,
the different perspectives, i.e., front view, side view, and
top view, appear the inconsistent performances due to the
depth ambiguity. On the other hand, foot posture plays
a significant role in complicated human pose estimation,
i.e., dance and sports, and foot-ground interaction, but unfortunately, it is omitted in most general approaches and
datasets. In this paper, we first propose the Cross-View Fusion (CVF) module to catch up with better 3D intermediate
representation and alleviate the view inconsistency based
on the vision transformer encoder. Then the optimizationbased method is introduced to reconstruct the foot pose and
foot-ground contact for the general multi-view datasets including AIST++ and Human3.6M. Besides, the reversible
kinematic topology strategy is innovated to utilize the contact information into the full-body with foot pose regressor.
Extensive experiments on the popular benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches by achieving 40.1mm PA-MPJPE on the 3DPW
test set and 43.8mm on the AIST++ test set.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D poses from a monocular RGB camera is
significant in computer vision and artificial intelligence, as
it is fundamental in many applications, e.g. robotics, action
recognition, animation, human-object interaction, etc. Benefiting from the dense representation of SMPL models [18],
SMPL-based methods [9–12] have recently dominated the
3D pose estimation and achieved state-of-the-art results.
Although these methods have considerably decreased the
reconstruction error, they still suffer from two main challenges in pose stability. Thus, in this paper, we focus on
SMPL-based 3D pose estimation and present a method for
reducing the instability in estimation.
* indicates the equal contributions.

(a) Inconsistent performance (b) Inaccurate foot posture and
from different perspectives.
foot-ground interaction.

Figure 1. Two main challenges towards stable human pose estimation.

The first challenge is the inconsistency performance of
poses from different perspectives. An example is shown
in Figure 1a that the front view projection of the 3D poses
predicted by the model can be well aligned with the picture,
but from its side view, the human poses are oblique. The
difficulty mainly stems from the fact that estimating 3D human poses requires a model to extract good 3D intermediate representation from monocular images, which is difficult due to the lack of depth input. The second challenge
is the stability of the foot posture. As shown in Figure 1b,
the estimated foot posture is inaccurate and does not match
the foot-ground contact. The main reason is that the contact between the foot and the ground and the posture of foot
joints i.e. heels, foot toes, ankles, etc. are omitted in most
work.
In the literature, most SMPL-based methods directly extract the holistic features from the image and then feed
them to the subsequent regression networks to calculate the
SMPL parameters [9–12]. These holistic methods do not
explicitly model the pose-related 3D features. In addition,
it is also challenging to directly predict the SMPL param-

650

