This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Target-referenced Reactive Grasping for Dynamic Objects
Jirong Liu1,2 , Ruo Zhang2 , Hao-Shu Fang2 , Minghao Gou2 , Hongjie Fang2 ,
Chenxi Wang2,3 , Sheng Xu2 , Hengxu Yan2 , Cewu Lu1,2 †
1
Shanghai Qi Zhi institute, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 Flexiv Robotics, LTD
jirong@sjtu.edu.cn, {ruozhang0608, fhaoshu}@gmail.com,
{gmh2015, galaxies, wcx1997, xs1020, hengxuyan, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reactive grasping, which enables the robot to successfully grasp dynamic moving objects, is of great interest in
robotics. Current methods mainly focus on the temporal
smoothness of the predicted grasp poses but few consider
their semantic consistency. Consequently, the predicted
grasps are not guaranteed to fall on the same part of the
same object, especially in cluttered scenes. In this paper,
we propose to solve reactive grasping in a target-referenced
setting by tracking through generated grasp spaces. Given
a targeted grasp pose on an object and detected grasp
poses in a new observation, our method is composed of two
stages: 1) discovering grasp pose correspondences through
an attentional graph neural network and selecting the one
with the highest similarity with respect to the target pose; 2)
refining the selected grasp poses based on target and historical information. We evaluate our method on a large-scale
benchmark GraspNet-1Billion. We also collect 30 scenes
of dynamic objects for testing. The results suggest that our
method outperforms other representative methods. Furthermore, our real robot experiments achieve an average success rate of over 80 percent. Code and demos are available
at: https://graspnet.net/reactive.

1. Introduction
Reactive grasping is in great demand in the industry.
For instance, in places where human-robot collaboration is
heavily required like factories, stress on laborers will be significantly relieved if robots can receive tools from humans
and complete the harder work for laborers. Such a vision is
based on reactive grasping.
On the contrary to static environments, in reactive grasping, dynamic task setting poses new challenges for algorithm design. Previous research in this area mainly focuses
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, a member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Classic reactive grasping guarantees the smoothness
of the grasp poses but cannot predicts grasps on the same part of
the hammer. (b) Our target-referenced reactive grasping takes semantic consistency into consideration. The generated grasp poses
across frames are illustrated with blue grippers.

on planning temporally smooth grasps [22, 42] to avoid
wavy and jerky robot motion. Few of them pay attention
to its semantic consistency. In short, given a targeted grasp
at the first frame, we want the robot to grasp the same part
of the object in the following frames. Additionally, it is not
guaranteed that grasp predictions made by classical methods fall on the same object in cluttered scenes. Hence, most
of their experiments are conducted on single-object scenes.
Unlike previous works, this work is aimed at achieving temporally smooth and semantically consistent reactive grasping in clutter given a targeted grasp. We refer to such a task
setting as target-referenced reactive grasping as shown in
Fig.1. Note that despite robot handover is a major application scenario of reactive grasping, this work focuses on a
more general task setting - dynamic object grasping.

8824

