This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Jedi: Entropy-based Localization and Removal of Adversarial Patches
Bilel Tarchoun ∗ , Anouar Ben Khalifa ∗, ⊥ , Mohamed Ali Mahjoub ∗ , Nael Abu-Ghazaleh †
Ihsen Alouani ‡, Υ
‡
CSIT, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
∗
Université de Sousse, Ecole Nationale d’Ingénieurs de Sousse, LATIS, Sousse, Tunisia;
Υ
IEMN CNRS 8520, Université Polytechnique Hauts-de-France
⊥
Université de Jendouba, Institut National des Technologies et des Sciences du Kef, Tunisia;
†
University of California Riverside, CA, USA
bilel.tarchoun@eniso.u-sousse.tn,i.alouani@qub.ac.uk

Abstract
Real-world adversarial physical patches were shown to
be successful in compromising state-of-the-art models in a
variety of computer vision applications. Existing defenses
that are based on either input gradient or features analysis have been compromised by recent GAN-based attacks
that generate naturalistic patches. In this paper, we propose Jedi, a new defense against adversarial patches that
is resilient to realistic patch attacks. Jedi tackles the patch
localization problem from an information theory perspective; leverages two new ideas: (1) it improves the identification of potential patch regions using entropy analysis:
we show that the entropy of adversarial patches is high,
even in naturalistic patches; and (2) it improves the localization of adversarial patches, using an autoencoder that
is able to complete patch regions from high entropy kernels. Jedi achieves high-precision adversarial patch localization, which we show is critical to successfully repair the
images. Since Jedi relies on an input entropy analysis, it is
model-agnostic, and can be applied on pre-trained off-theshelf models without changes to the training or inference of
the protected models. Jedi detects on average 90% of adversarial patches across different benchmarks and recovers
up to 94% of successful patch attacks (Compared to 75%
and 65% for LGS and Jujutsu, respectively).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [20] where an adversary adds carefully crafted
imperceptible perturbations to an input (e.g., by lp -norm
bounded noise magnitude), forcing the models to misclassify. Several adversarial noise generation methods have

been proposed [4, 10], often as part of a cat and mouse
game where new defenses emerge [1, 18] only to be shown
vulnerable to new adaptive attacks. Under real-world conditions, an attacker creates a physical patch (thus, spatially
constrained) that contains an adversarial pattern. Such a
patch can be placed as a sticker on traffic signs [9], worn
as part of an item of clothing [13, 21], or introduced using a display monitor [12], providing a practical approach
for attackers to carry out adversarial attacks. First proposed
by Brown et al. [3], these patches are different from traditional adversarial attacks in two primary ways: (1) they occupy a constrained space within an image; and (2) they may
not be noise budget-constrained within the patch. Several
adversarial patch generation methods have been demonstrated [13, 14, 16, 21], many of which showcasing real-life
implementation, making them an ongoing threat to visual
ML systems.
Several approaches aiming to detect adversarial patches
and defuse their impact have been proposed [5, 11, 15, 17,
22, 24, 25]. One category of defenses attempts to locate
patches by detecting anomalies caused by the presence of
the patch. These anomalies can be identified in the input
pixel data such as in the case of Localized Gradient Smoothing [17] where the patch is located using high pixel gradient values. Alternatively, they can be identified in the feature space where the adversarial patch can create irregular
saliency maps with regards to its targeted class that can be
exploited by defenses such as in Digital Watermarking [11]
and Jujutsu [5]. These defenses have two primary limitations: (1) They are only moderately successful against baseline attacks enabling recovery from many attacks (e.g., 75%
for LGS and 65% for Jujutsu); and (2) they are vulnerable to adaptive attacks that generate naturalistic adversarial
patches that are meant to use patterns similar to natural images. Hu et al. [13] train a GAN to generate naturalistic

4087

