This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plateau-reduced Differentiable Path Tracing
Michael Fischer
University College London

Tobias Ritschel
University College London

m.fischer@cs.ucl.ac.uk

t.ritschel@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Current differentiable renderers provide light transport
gradients with respect to arbitrary scene parameters. However, the mere existence of these gradients does not guarantee useful update steps in an optimization. Instead, inverse
rendering might not converge due to inherent plateaus, i.e.,
regions of zero gradient, in the objective function. We propose to alleviate this by convolving the high-dimensional
rendering function, that maps scene parameters to images, with an additional kernel that blurs the parameter
space. We describe two Monte Carlo estimators to compute
plateau-reduced gradients efficiently, i.e., with low variance, and show that these translate into net-gains in optimization error and runtime performance. Our approach
is a straightforward extension to both black-box and differentiable renderers and enables optimization of problems
with intricate light transport, such as caustics or global
illumination, that existing differentiable renderers do not
converge on. Our code is at github.com/mfischerucl/prdpt.

1. Introduction
Regressing scene parameters like object position, materials or lighting from 2D observations is a task of significant
importance in graphics and vision, but also a hard, ill-posed
problem. When all rendering steps are differentiable, we
can derive gradients of the final image w.r.t. the scene parameters. However, differentiating through the discontinuous rendering operator is not straightforward due to, e.g.,
occlusion. The two main approaches to (differentiable) rendering are path tracing and rasterization.
Physically-based path-tracing solves the rendering equation by computing a Monte Carlo (MC) estimate for each
pixel. Unfortunately, MC is only compatible with modern
Automatic Differentiation (AD) frameworks for the case of
continuous integrands, e.g., color, but not for spatial derivatives, i.e., gradients w.r.t. an object’s position. To alleviate
this, Li et al. [18] present re-sampling of silhouette edges
and Loubet et al. [23] propose re-parametrizing the integrand, enabling the optimization of primitive- or light posi-

Initial

Reference

Path Tracer

Our Method

Figure 1. Optimization results with a differentiable path tracer (we
use Mitsuba 3 [28]) and our proposed method. The task is to rotate
the coffee cup around its z-axis, so that the handle moves to the
right side. Due to a plateau in the objective function (when the
handle is occluded by the cup), regular methods do not converge.

tions. For rasterization, differentiability is achieved by replacing discontinuous edge- and z-tests with hand-crafted
derivatives [17, 21, 22, 34]. The problem here is that rasterization, by design, does not capture complex light transport
effects, e.g., global illumination, scattering or caustics.
Importantly, the mere existence of gradients is no guarantee that descending along them will make an optimization
converge [25]. There are surprisingly many cases where
they do not lead to a successful optimization, due to a
plateau in the objective function. An example is finding
the orientation of the mug in Fig. 1: As soon as the handle
disappears behind the cup, no infinitesimally small rotation
change will result in a reduced loss. We have hence reached
a plateau in the objective function, i.e., a region of zero gradients. We propose a method to remove these plateaus while
still having complete, complex light transport.
We take inspiration from differentiable rasterization literature [17, 21, 32, 34], where smoothing techniques are
used to model the influence of faraway triangles to the pixel
at hand. For rasterization, this simple change has two effects: First, it makes the edge- and z-tests continuous and
hence differentiable, and second, in passing (and, to our
knowledge, much less studied), it also removes plateaus.
In this work, we hence aim to find a way to apply the same
concept to complex light transport. Therefore, instead of
making the somewhat arbitrary choice of a fixed smoothing
function for edge- and depth-tests in differentiable rasterizers, we path-trace an alternative, smooth version of the
entire Rendering Equation (RE), which we achieve by convolving the original RE with a smoothing kernel. This leads
to our proposed method, a lightweight extension to (differ-

4285

