This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DistilPose: Tokenized Pose Regression with Heatmap Distillation
Suhang Ye1∗
Yingyi Zhang2∗
Jie Hu1∗
Liujuan Cao1
1†
2
3
Shengchuan Zhang
Lei Shen
Jun Wang
Shouhong Ding2
Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efﬁcient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 2 Tencent Youtu Lab, 3 Tencent WeChat Pay Lab33
78

Abstract

RLE-HRNet-W48[7]

DistilPose-L(ours)
76

PRTR-HRNet-W32[8]

In the ﬁeld of human pose estimation, regression-based
methods have been dominated in terms of speed, while
heatmap-based methods are far ahead in terms of performance. How to take advantage of both schemes remains a challenging problem. In this paper, we propose
a novel human pose estimation framework termed DistilPose, which bridges the gaps between heatmap-based and
regression-based methods. Speciﬁcally, DistilPose maximizes the transfer of knowledge from the teacher model
(heatmap-based) to the student model (regression-based)
through Token-distilling Encoder (TDE) and Simulated
Heatmaps. TDE aligns the feature spaces of heatmapbased and regression-based models by introducing tokenization, while Simulated Heatmaps transfer explicit guidance (distribution and conﬁdence) from teacher heatmaps
into student models. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed DistilPose can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of the regression-based models while maintaining efﬁciency. Speciﬁcally, on the MSCOCO validation dataset,
DistilPose-S obtains 71.6% mAP with 5.36M parameters,
2.38 GFLOPs, and 40.2 FPS, which saves 12.95×, 7.16×
computational cost and is 4.9× faster than its teacher
model with only 0.9 points performance drop. Furthermore,
DistilPose-L obtains 74.4% mAP on MSCOCO validation
dataset, achieving a new state-of-the-art among predominant regression-based models. Code will be available at
https://github.com/yshMars/DistilPose.

74

DistilPose-S(ours)

AP(%)

72

SimpleBaseline-Res50[28]
RLE-Res50[7]

70

SimpleBaseline-Res152[28]

68

66

PRTR-Res50[8]

64
Diameter
62

0

5

10 15
GFLOPs

20

70

80

60
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

90

Parameter

Figure 1. Comparisons between the SOTA methods and the
proposed DistilPose on MSCOCO val dataset. Red circles at the
upper left corner denote DistilPose. DistilPose outperforms SOTA
models in terms of accuracy (AP), Parameter and computational
cost (GFLOPs).

tion capture [16], etc. Previous studies on 2D HPE can
be mainly divided into two mainstreams: heatmap-based
and regression-based methods. Regression-based methods
have signiﬁcant advantages in speed and are well-suited for
mobile devices. However, the insufﬁcient accuracy of regression models will affect the performance of downstream
tasks. In contrast, heatmap-based methods can explicitly
learn spatial information by estimating likelihood heatmaps,
resulting in high accuracy on HPE tasks. But the estimation
of likelihood heatmaps requires exceptionally high computational cost, which leads to slow preprocessing operations.
Thus, how to take advantages of both heatmap-based and
regression-based methods remains a challenging problem.
One possible way to solve the above problem is to transfer the knowledge from heatmap-based to regression-based
models [8, 23]. However, due to the different output spaces
of regression models and heatmap models (the former is
a vector, and the latter is a heatmap), transferring knowledge between heatmaps and vectors faces the following two
problems: (1) The regression head usually vectorizes the
feature map output by the backbone. And much spatial
information will be lost through Global Average Pooling

1. Introduction
2D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) aims to detect the
anatomical joints of a human in a given image to estimate
the poses. HPE is typically used as a preprocessing module that participates in many downstream tasks, such as activity recognition [28, 31], human motion analysis [1], mo∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when Suhang Ye was an
intern at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author: zsc_2016@xmu.edu.cn

2163

