This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Human Parsing via Scalable Semantic Transfer
over Multiple Label Domains
Jie Yang1 , Chaoqun Wang1 , Zhen Li1 , Junle Wang2 , Ruimao Zhang1 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 2 Tencent
{jieyang5@link,chaoqunwang@link,lizhen@,zhangruimao@}cuhk.edu.cn
{wangjunle@}gmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents Scalable Semantic Transfer (SST),
a novel training paradigm, to explore how to leverage the
mutual benefits of the data from different label domains (i.e.
various levels of label granularity) to train a powerful human parsing network. In practice, two common application scenarios are addressed, termed universal parsing and
dedicated parsing, where the former aims to learn homogeneous human representations from multiple label domains
and switch predictions by only using different segmentation
heads, and the latter aims to learn a specific domain prediction while distilling the semantic knowledge from other
domains. The proposed SST has the following appealing
benefits: (1) it can capably serve as an effective training scheme to embed semantic associations of human body
parts from multiple label domains into the human representation learning process; (2) it is an extensible semantic
transfer framework without predetermining the overall relations of multiple label domains, which allows continuously
adding human parsing datasets to promote the training. (3)
the relevant modules are only used for auxiliary training
and can be removed during inference, eliminating the extra
reasoning cost. Experimental results demonstrate SST can
effectively achieve promising universal human parsing performance as well as impressive improvements compared to
its counterparts on three human parsing benchmarks (i.e.,
PASCAL-Person-Part, ATR, and CIHP). Code is available
at https://github.com/yangjie-cv/SST.

1. Introduction
Human parsing, which aims to assign pixel-wise category predictions for human body parts, has played a critical role in human-oriented visual content analysis, editing,
and generation, e.g., virtual try-on [7], human motion transfer [14], and human activity recognition [8]. Prior methods
* Corresponding author.

have chronically been dominated by developing powerful
network architectures [11, 18, 24, 25, 32]. However, these
network designs usually serve as general components for
human parsing in a specific labeling system, and how to use
the data from multiple label domains to further improve the
accuracy of the parsing network is still an open issue.
Recent studies [12, 20] have proposed using multiple label domains to train a universal parsing network by constructing graph neural networks that learn semantic associations from different label domains. Graphonomy [10, 20]
investigates cross-domain semantic coherence through semantic aggregation and transfer on explicit graph structures.
Grapy-ML [12] extends this method by stacking three levels
of human part graph structures, from coarse to fine granularity. Despite these graph-based methods consider prior
human body structures, such as the spatial associations of
human parts and the semantic associations of different label domains as in Fig. 1-(a), they have limitations in their
ability to dynamically add new label domains due to their
dependence on pre-determined graph structures. Additionally, explicit graph reasoning incurs extra inference costs,
making it impractical in some scenarios. Therefore, there
is a need for a more general, scalable, and simpler manner
to harness the mutual benefits of data from multiple label
domains to enhance given human parsing networks.
In this work, we propose Scalable Semantic Transfer
(SST), a novel training paradigm that builds plug-and-play
modules to effectively embed semantic associations of human body parts from multiple label domains into the given
parsing network. The proposed SST scheme can be easily applied to two common scenarios, i.e., universal parsing and dedicated parsing. Similar to [12, 20], universal
parsing aims to enforce the parsing network to learn homogeneous human representation from multiple label domains
with the help of the SST scheme in the training phase. It
achieves different levels of human parsing prediction for an
arbitrary image in the inference phase, as illustrated in Figure 1-(b). In contrast, dedicated parsing aims to optimize
a parsing network for a specific label domain by employ-

19424

