This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Soft-Landing Strategy for Alleviating the Task Discrepancy Problem
in Temporal Action Localization Tasks
Hyolim Kang1

Hanjung Kim1 Joungbin An1 Minsu Cho2 Seon Joo Kim1
1
Yonsei University 2 POSTECH
{hyolimkang, hanjungkim, joungbinan, seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr
mscho@postech.ac.kr

Abstract


 







 
 


 

 

Our world is full of untrimmed videos, including a
plethora of Youtube videos, security camera recordings, and
online streaming services. Analyzing never-ending video
streams is thus one of the most promising directions of computer vision research in this era [29]. Amongst many longform video understanding tasks, the task of ﬁnding action
instances in time and classifying their categories, known as
Temporal Action Localization (TAL), has received intense
attention from both the academia and the industry in recent
years; TAL is considered to be the fundamental building
block for more sophisticated video understanding tasks since
it plays the basic role of distinguishing frame-of-interest
from irrelevant background frames [19, 34, 40].





1. Introduction



Temporal Action Localization (TAL) methods typically
operate on top of feature sequences from a frozen snippet
encoder that is pretrained with the Trimmed Action Classiﬁcation (TAC) tasks, resulting in a task discrepancy problem.
While existing TAL methods mitigate this issue either by retraining the encoder with a pretext task or by end-to-end ﬁnetuning, they commonly require an overload of high memory
and computation. In this work, we introduce Soft-Landing
(SoLa) strategy, an efﬁcient yet effective framework to bridge
the transferability gap between the pretrained encoder and
the downstream tasks by incorporating a light-weight neural
network, i.e., a SoLa module, on top of the frozen encoder.
We also propose an unsupervised training scheme for the
SoLa module; it learns with inter-frame Similarity Matching that uses the frame interval as its supervisory signal,
eliminating the need for temporal annotations. Experimental evaluation on various benchmarks for downstream TAL
tasks shows that our method effectively alleviates the task
discrepancy problem with remarkable computational efﬁciency.


 
 

   

 !
 

 

Figure 1. (a-i) Standard TAL framework assumes a “frozen snippet encoder” and only focuses on designing a good TAL head,
causing the task discrepancy problem. Straightforward approaches
to alleviating the issue include devising (a-ii) a temporally sensitive pretext task [1, 32, 41], and (a-iii) an end-to-end TAL training
procedure [20, 33]. However, both approaches break the aforementioned frozen snippet encoder assumption. On the other hand, (b)
our SoLa strategy shares the “frozen snippet encoder assumption”
with the standard TAL framework by providing a smooth linkage
between the frozen encoder and the downstream head. It offers general applicability and more importantly, exceptional computational
efﬁciency.

Despite its importance, training a TAL model has a unique
computational challenge that hinders the naive extension of
conventional image processing models, mainly due to the
large size of the model input. For instance, videos in the
wild can be several minutes or even hours long, implying
that loading the whole video to a device for processing is
often infeasible. In this context, the prevailing convention
in processing a long-form video for TAL is to divide the
video into non-overlapping short snippets and deal with the
snippet-wise feature sequences. Speciﬁcally, a standard train-

6514

