This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-causal Learning for Single Domain Generalization
Jin Chen1* , Zhi Gao1* , Xinxiao Wu1,2† , Jiebo Luo3
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing,
Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester NY 14627, USA
{chen jin,gaozhi 2017,wuxinxiao}@bit.edu.cn,jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Single domain generalization aims to learn a model from
a single training domain (source domain) and apply it to
multiple unseen test domains (target domains). Existing
methods focus on expanding the distribution of the training
domain to cover the target domains, but without estimating
the domain shift between the source and target domains. In
this paper, we propose a new learning paradigm, namely
simulate-analyze-reduce, which first simulates the domain
shift by building an auxiliary domain as the target domain,
then learns to analyze the causes of domain shift, and finally
learns to reduce the domain shift for model adaptation.
Under this paradigm, we propose a meta-causal learning
method to learn meta-knowledge, that is, how to infer the
causes of domain shift between the auxiliary and source domains during training. We use the meta-knowledge to analyze the shift between the target and source domains during
testing. Specifically, we perform multiple transformations
on source data to generate the auxiliary domain, perform
counterfactual inference to learn to discover the causal factors of the shift between the auxiliary and source domains,
and incorporate the inferred causality into factor-aware domain alignments. Extensive experiments on several benchmarks of image classification show the effectiveness of our
method.

1. Introduction
Single domain generalization [28] aims to generalize a
model trained using one training domain (source domain)
into multiple unseen test domains (target domains). Since
only one source domain is given and the target domains are
out-of-distribution and unavailable during training, single
∗ Jin Chen and Zhi Gao are co-first authors.
† Corresponding author: Xinxiao Wu.

Analyze

Simulate

Abstract

Source domain

What causes
domain shift?

Learn to analyze
Data
transformation

Auxiliary domain

Causes of
domain shift

Reduce

Learn to reduce

Adapted Auxiliary
domain

Figure 1. Illustration of the simulate-analyze-reduce paradigm. In
this paradigm, we first simulate the domain shift by constructing
an auxiliary domain as the unseen target domain, then learn to
analyze the domain shift, and finally learn to reduce the domain
shift based on inferred causes.

domain generalization is a challenging task and attracts increasing interests. Existing works have made considerable
successes through expanding the distribution of the source
domain by data augmentation [19, 28, 34] or learning adaptive data normalization [8] typically. However, such successes have been achieved without explicitly considering
the domain shift between the source and target domains,
which limits the generalization performance of model in
real-world scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a new learning paradigm,
namely simulate-analyze-reduce, to address single domain
generalization by enabling the model to analyze the real
domain shift between the source domain and unseen target domain. This new paradigm is shown in Figure 1. We
first build an auxiliary domain as the target domain to simulate the real domain shift between the source and target
domains, since the target data is unavailable during training. We then learn to analyze the intrinsic causal factors of
the domain shift to facilitate the subsequent model adapta-

7683

