This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L-CoIns: Language-based Colorization with Instance Awareness
Zheng Chang#1
1
2

Shuchen Weng#2,3

Peixuan Zhang1

Yu Li4

Si Li∗1

Boxin Shi2,3

School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4

International Digital Economy Academy

{zhengchang98,pxzhang,lisi}@bupt.edu.cn, {shuchenweng,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, liyu@idea.edu.cn

ML2018

L-CoDe

L-CoDer

Ours

ML2018

Three women are dressed in pink.

The right woman is dressed in shirt of violet color.

ML2018

L-CoDe

L-CoDe

L-CoDer

Ours

The middle woman is dressed in yellow, the left woman in blue, the right woman in red.

L-CoDer

Grayscale

Ours

The middle woman is dressed in orange and the right woman in yellow.

ML2018

L-CoDe

L-CoDer

Ours

Figure 1. Language-based colorization results given four different language descriptions, compared with ML2018 [29], L-CoDe [42], and
L-CoDer [6]. Top left: For the description that has clear correspondences between color words and object words, our method correctly
colorizes all corresponding regions. Top right: For the description that assigns distinct colors for every instance corresponding to the
same object words, our model predicts the exact correspondence between the instance region and the color word. Botton left: For
the description that includes unobserved correspondences between color words and object words, our method could adaptively parse the
sentence and determine the correct semantics for colorization. Bottom right: For the description that is against the statistical correlation
between luminance and color words, our method shows the robustness and colorize description-consistent results.

Abstract
Language-based colorization produces plausible colors consistent with the language description provided by
the user. Recent studies introduce additional annotation
to prevent color-object coupling and mismatch issues, but
they still have difﬁculty in distinguishing instances corresponding to the same object words. In this paper, we propose a transformer-based framework to automatically aggregate similar image patches and achieve instance awareness without any additional knowledge. By applying our
presented luminance augmentation and counter-color loss
to break down the statistical correlation between luminance
and color words, our model is driven to synthesize colors
with better descriptive consistency. We further collect a
dataset to provide distinctive visual characteristics and detailed language descriptions for multiple instances in the
# Equal contributions. * Corresponding author.

19221

same image. Extensive experiments demonstrate our advantages of synthesizing visually pleasing and descriptionconsistent results of instance-aware colorization.

1. Introduction
Image colorization aims to predict missing chromatic
channels from a given grayscale image, which has been
widely used in black-and-white image restoration, artistic
creation, and image compression. Since there are multiple
reasonable choices for the colorization result, an increasing
amount of effort has focused on introducing user-friendly
interactions to determine a unique solution, e.g., user scribble [33, 51], and reference example [2, 16, 47]. In contrast to these visually-concrete conditions, the language descriptions have higher information density to ﬂexibly represent high-level semantics, which empowers the colorization
model to concrete visually-abstract user intention.
Language-based colorization aims to produce visually

