This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Catch Missing Details: Image Reconstruction with Frequency Augmented
Variational Autoencoder
Xinmiao Lin
Rochester Institute of Technology

Yikang Li
OPPO US Research

Jenhao Hsiao
OPPO US Research

xl3439@rit.edu

yikang.li1@oppo.com

mark@oppo.com

Chiuman Ho
OPPO US Research

Yu Kong
Michigan State University

chiuman@oppo.com

yukong@msu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
VQ-VAE models [6,11,25,29,39,46] reconstruct images
through learning a discrete codebook of latent embeddings.
They gained wide popularity due to the scalable and versatile codebook, which can be broadly applied to many visual
tasks such as image synthesis [11,49] and inpainting [4,31].
A higher compression rate is typically preferable in VQ-

FA-VAE (Ours) 𝑓: 16
lpips: 0.21, rFID: 5.90

FA-VAE (Ours) 𝑓: 4
lpips: 0.07, rFID: 2.25

image

VQ-GAN [11] 𝑓: 16
lpips: 0.30, rFID: 9.49

image spectrum

The popular VQ-VAE models reconstruct images
through learning a discrete codebook but suffer from a significant issue in the rapid quality degradation of image reconstruction as the compression rate rises. One major reason is that a higher compression rate induces more loss of
visual signals on the higher frequency spectrum which reflect the details on pixel space. In this paper, a Frequency
Complement Module (FCM) architecture is proposed to
capture the missing frequency information for enhancing
reconstruction quality. The FCM can be easily incorporated into the VQ-VAE structure, and we refer to the new
model as Frequancy Augmented VAE (FA-VAE). In addition, a Dynamic Spectrum Loss (DSL) is introduced to
guide the FCMs to balance between various frequencies
dynamically for optimal reconstruction. FA-VAE is further
extended to the text-to-image synthesis task, and a Crossattention Autoregressive Transformer (CAT) is proposed to
obtain more precise semantic attributes in texts. Extensive
reconstruction experiments with different compression rates
are conducted on several benchmark datasets, and the results demonstrate that the proposed FA-VAE is able to restore more faithfully the details compared to SOTA methods. CAT also shows improved generation quality with better image-text semantic alignment.

original

Figure 1. Images and their frequency maps. Row 1: original and
reconstructed images. Row 2: the frequency maps of images, frequency increases in any direction away from the center. f is the
compression rate. With a greater compression rate, more details
are lost during reconstruction, i.e. eyes and mouth shape, and
hair texture (pointed with red arrows) which align with the loss
of high-frequency features. All frequency figures in this paper use
the same colormap. rFID [14] and lpips [16] are lower the better, and frequency values increase from red to green, zoom in for
better visualization.

VAE models since it provides memory efficiency and better
learning of coherent semantics structures [11, 40].
One main challenge quickly arises for a higher compression rate, which severely compromises reconstruction
accuracy. Figure 1 row 1 shows that although the reconstructed images at higher compression rates appear consistent with the original image, details inconsistencies such
as the color and contour of the lips become apparent upon
closer scrutiny. Figure 1 row 2 reveals that similar degradation also manifests on the frequency domains where features towards the middle and higher frequency spectrum are
the least recoverable with greater compression rate.
Several causes stand behind this gap between pixel and
frequency space. The convolutional nature of autoencoders is prone to spectral bias, which favors learning lowfrequency features [22, 36]. This challenge is further ag-

1736

