This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning a Depth Covariance Function
Eric Dexheimer and Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
{e.dexheimer21, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose learning a depth covariance function with
applications to geometric vision tasks. Given RGB images
as input, the covariance function can be flexibly used to
define priors over depth functions, predictive distributions
given observations, and methods for active point selection.
We leverage these techniques for a selection of downstream
tasks: depth completion, bundle adjustment, and monocular
dense visual odometry.

1. Introduction
Inferring the 3D structure of the world from 2D images
is an essential computer vision task. In recent years, there
has been significant interest in combining principled multiple view geometry with data-driven priors. Learning-based
methods that predict geometry provide a prior directly over
the latent variables, which avoids the ill-posed configurations of traditional methods. However, direct, overconfident
priors may prevent realization of the true 3D structure when
multi-view geometry is well-defined. For example, datadriven methods have shown tremendous promise in monocular depth estimation, but often lack consistency when fusing information into 3D space.
Thus far, designing a unified framework that combines
the best of learning and optimization methods has proven
challenging. Recent data-driven methods have attempted
to relax rigid geometric constraints by also predicting lowdimensional subspaces or per-pixel uncertainties. Fixing
capacity during training is often wasteful or inflexible at test
time, while per-pixel residual distributions typically explain
away the limitations of the model instead of the relationship
between errors. In reality, the 3D world is anywhere from
simple to complex, and an ideal system should explicitly
adapt its capacity and correlation based on the scene.
In this paper, rather than directly predicting geometry
from images, we propose learning a depth covariance function. Given an RGB image, our method predicts how the
depths of any two pixels relate. To achieve this, a neural network transforms color information to a feature space, and

Figure 1. Example monocular reconstruction using the depth covariance for bundle adjustment and dense depth prediction from
three seconds (100 frames) of TUM data. Three representative
images and the mesh from TSDF fusion of the depth predictions
are shown. Each frame leverages the learned covariance function
to model geometric correlation between pairs of scene points.

a Gaussian process (GP) models a prior distribution given
these features and a base kernel function. The distinction
between image processing and the prior enables promoting
locality and granting flexible capacity at test time. Locality
avoids over-correlating pixels on distinct structures, while
adaptive capacity permits tuning the complexity of our subspace to the content of the viewed scene.
Learning this flexible, high-level prior allows for balancing data-driven methods with test-time optimization that
can be applied to a variety of geometric vision tasks. Furthermore, the covariance function is agnostic to the 3D representation as it does not directly learn a geometric output.
Depth maps may be requested by conditioning on observations, but the prior may also be leveraged for inferring the
desired latent 3D representation. In Figure 1, we illustrate
depth covariance along with an example of bundle adjustment, dense depth prediction, and multi-view fusion.

13122

