This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-basin via implicit Sinkhorn differentiation
Fidel A. Guerrero Peña

Heitor Rapela Medeiros

fidel-alejandro.guerrero-pena@etsmtl.ca

heitor.rapela-medeiros.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

Thomas Dubail

Masih Aminbeidokhti

thomas.dubail.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

masih.aminbeidokhti.1@ens.etsmtl.ca

Eric Granger

Marco Pedersoli

eric.granger@etsmtl.ca

marco.pedersoli@etsmtl.ca

LIVIA, Dept. of Systems Engineering
ETS Montreal, Canada

Abstract
The recent emergence of new algorithms for permuting
models into functionally equivalent regions of the solution
space has shed some light on the complexity of error surfaces and some promising properties like mode connectivity.
However, finding the permutation that minimizes some objectives is challenging, and current optimization techniques
are not differentiable, which makes it difficult to integrate
into a gradient-based optimization, and often leads to suboptimal solutions. In this paper, we propose a Sinkhorn rebasin network with the ability to obtain the transportation
plan that better suits a given objective. Unlike the current state-of-art, our method is differentiable and, therefore, easy to adapt to any task within the deep learning domain. Furthermore, we show the advantage of our re-basin
method by proposing a new cost function that allows performing incremental learning by exploiting the linear mode
connectivity property. The benefit of our method is compared against similar approaches from the literature under several conditions for both optimal transport and linear
mode connectivity. The effectiveness of our continual learning method based on re-basin is also shown for several common benchmark datasets, providing experimental results
that are competitive with the state-of-art. The source code
is provided at https://github.com/fagp/sinkhorn-rebasin.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of deep learning (DL) across many
application domains, the loss surfaces of neural networks
(NNs) are not well understood. Even for shallow NNs, the
number of saddle points and local optima can increase exponentially with the number of parameters [4,13]. The permu-

θB

θA

πP (θB )

(a)
Naive

C(θ)

WM [2]
Sinkhorn

λ
(b)

Figure 1. (a) Loss landscape for the polynomial approximation
task [27]. θA and θB are models found by SGD. LMC suggests
that re-basin the model θB would result in a functionally equivalent model πP (θB ), with no barrier on its linear interpolation
(1 − λ)θA + λπP (θB ). (b) Comparison of the cost in the linear path along λ before and after re-basin using weight matching
(WM) [2] and our Sinkhorn. The dashed line in the figures corresponds with the naive path, and the solid line is the path after the
proposed Sinkhorn re-basin. The blue line represents WM path.

20237

