This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

K3DN: Disparity-aware Kernel Estimation for Dual-Pixel Defocus Deblurring
Yan Yang1 ⇤ Liyuan Pan2 † ⇤
1
ANU 2 BITSZ & CSAT, BIT
Yan.Yang@anu.edu.au

liyuan.pan@bit.edu.cn

Liu Liu3 MiaoMiao Liu1
3
Cyberverse Dept., Huawei

liuliu33@huawei.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Dual-pixel (DP) sensors are widely employed in digital
single-lens reflex cameras (DSLR) and smartphone cameras. Each pixel of a DP sensor is divided into two photodiodes to provide two sub-views of a scene, namely, left and
right views, to assist in auto-focusing. Recently, researchers
have used the two-view DP pair to benefit several computer
vision tasks, especially defocus deblurring [1,2,24]. Specifically, blurred pixels in the left and right view of the DP pair
exhibit an amount of shift, termed DP disparity, which provides information for the blur kernel estimation (the key for
defocus deblurring [14, 16, 19]).
† Corresponding author.

⇤ Equal contribution.

Ours
Ours

Restormer(22)

Ours
Ours

26

IFAN(21)

IFAN(21)
DeepRFT(21)
DDDNet(21)

Restormer(22)

BAMBNet(22)

BAMBNet(22)

PSNR (dB)

The dual-pixel (DP) sensor captures a two-view image
pair in a single snapshot by splitting each pixel in half.
The disparity occurs in defocus blurred regions between
the two views of the DP pair, while the in-focus sharp
regions have zero disparity. This motivates us to propose a
K3DN framework for DP pair deblurring, and it has three
modules: i) a disparity-aware deblur module. It estimates
a disparity feature map, which is used to query a trainable
kernel set to estimate a blur kernel that best describes
the spatially-varying blur. The kernel is constrained to
be symmetrical per the DP formulation. A simple Fourier
transform is performed for deblurring that follows the blur
model; ii) a reblurring regularization module. It reuses the
blur kernel, performs a simple convolution for reblurring,
and regularizes the estimated kernel and disparity feature
unsupervisedly, in the training stage; iii) a sharp region
preservation module. It identifies in-focus regions that
correspond to areas with zero disparity between DP
images, aims to avoid the introduction of noises during
the deblurring process, and improves image restoration
performance. Experiments on four standard DP datasets
show that the proposed K3DN outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, with fewer parameters and flops at the same time.

27

miaomiao.liu@anu.edu.au

DRBNet (22)

DRBNet (22)
RDPD(21)

DeepRFT(21)

RDPD(21)

KPAC(21)

KPAC(21)

DDDNet(21)

DPDNet(20)

25

DPDNet(20)

24

DEMENet(19)

0

10

20

Params (M)

30

DEMENet(19)

0

1K

2K

3K

4K

5K

Flops (G)

Figure 1. Comparison of our method and state-of-the-art methods
on the real DPD-blur dataset [1]. The Blue and red cycles separately denote our tiny and lightweight models. We show PSNRs
(dB) with respect to model parameters (M) and Flops (G). The
numbers in the brackets beside methods denote publication years.
Best viewed in color on the screen.

Existing DP-based defocus deblurring methods are generally divided into two categories: end-to-end-based and
disparity (defocus map)-based methods. End-to-end based
methods [1, 2, 11, 17, 19, 24] directly restore an all-in-focus
image from a defocus blurred DP pair without considering DP domain knowledge for network design. Therefore, it
is challenging for these methods to tackle spatially-varying
and large blur. Disparity-based methods [10,11,15,23] estimate the DP disparity (or defocus map) to aid the restoration
of an all-in-focus image. However, these methods either require extra data (ground-truth DP disparity as supervision)
[15], neglect DP disparity knowledge when warping [10],
heavily depend on the number of network branches [11], or
rely on pre-calibrated kernel sets and additional priors [23]
for training.
Our method, K3DN, belongs to the disparity-based
group, and it has high performance on real DP datasets (see
Fig. 1 for an example). K3DN follows the mathematic indications of DP and blur models, while not requiring precalibrated kernel sets and extra data. K3DN consists of
three modules: i) a disparity-aware deblur module; ii) a reblurring regularization module; iii) a sharp region preservation module.

13263

