This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Learning with Visual Distribution Calibration and Cross-Modal
Distribution Alignment
Runqi Wang1,2∗ , Hao Zheng2,3∗ , Xiaoyue Duan1 *, Jianzhuang Liu2 ,
Yuning Lu2,4 , Tian Wang1 , Songcen Xu2 , Baochang Zhang1,5†
1
Beihang University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Tokyo Institute of Technology
4
University of Science and Technology of China 5 Zhongguancun Laboratory

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models have inspired much
research on few-shot learning. However, with only a
few training images, there exist two crucial problems:
(1) the visual feature distributions are easily distracted
by class-irrelevant information in images, and (2) the
alignment between the visual and language feature distributions is difficult. To deal with the distraction problem,
we propose a Selective Attack module, which consists of
trainable adapters that generate spatial attention maps
of images to guide the attacks on class-irrelevant image
areas. By messing up these areas, the critical features are
captured and the visual distributions of image features are
calibrated. To better align the visual and language feature
distributions that describe the same object class, we propose a cross-modal distribution alignment module, in which
we introduce a vision-language prototype for each class
to align the distributions, and adopt the Earth Mover’s
Distance (EMD) to optimize the prototypes. For efficient
computation, the upper bound of EMD is derived. In
addition, we propose an augmentation strategy to increase
the diversity of the images and the text prompts, which
can reduce overfitting to the few-shot training images.
Extensive experiments on 11 datasets demonstrate that
our method consistently outperforms prior arts in few-shot
learning. The implementation code will be available at
https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv
/SADA.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the availability of large-scale datasets and
well-designed training strategies, the performances of many
computer vision tasks have been greatly improved. Recent progress in vision-language models (VLMs), such as
* Co-first author.
† Corresponding author.

CLIP [29] and ALIGN [17], provides a promising way
towards utilizing human language to address downstream
recognition tasks efficiently. As vision and language usually
contain complementary information, joint learning of image
and text representations has proven quite effective. Although CLIP has demonstrated impressive zero-shot learning capability, it is still challenging to better adapt it to
downstream tasks. Naively fine-tuning CLIP on downstream datasets has limited effect, since it may destroy the
prior learned from the massive data during pre-training.
Therefore, effective transfer methods are needed to boost
the downstream performances of CLIP. In order to maintain the capability of pre-trained VLMs and further boost
downstream performances, different approaches have been
proposed to fine-tune a small proportion of additional parameters while keeping the pre-trained parameters frozen.
Among these approaches, prompt learning [42, 43] and visual adapters [13, 41] are two common approaches. However, the lack of training samples in few-shot settings
increases the risk of overfitting the trained prompts or
adapters. The class-irrelevant features (e.g., the cluttered
image backgrounds) drive the image features far away from
their true distributions of the same category. Besides, VLMs
such as CLIP have such a problem that the distributions of
the image and text features are not really aligned [30], and
the problem becomes more challenging in few-shot settings.
Therefore, the visual distributions should be calibrated by
reducing class-irrelevant image contents, and the distributions of image and text features should be further aligned,
so as to promote the model’s learning of class-relevant critical features. The purpose of this paper is to develop an effective VLM transfer strategy for few-shot learning to solve
the above problems with Selective Attack (SA) and CrossModal Distribution Alignment (CMDA).
Images often contain class-irrelevant information, which
is also embedded into the image representations. With only
a few samples, the model can easily learn these cluttered
representations, resulting in overfitting. This seriously hinders the learning of critical features that help the model rec-

23445

