This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make-A-Story: Visual Memory Conditioned Consistent Story Generation
Tanzila Rahman1,3

Hsin-Ying Lee2
Jian Ren2
Sergey Tulyakov2
Shweta Mahajan1,3
Leonid Sigal1,3,4
1
2
University of British Columbia
Snap Inc.
3
4
Vector Institute for AI
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Text without
references

Text with
references

Fred and Barney are
laughing at a robot in the
quarry.

Fred is running while
Fred and Barney lean
Fred and Barney are
pushing Barney through a against a doorway breathing leaning against a doorway.
room.
heavy.
Barney talks to Fred. They
both look scared.

Lisa runs from lane left to Lisa walks right on a ledge, Lisa runs left from right and She jumps over a frog and
right and jump to collect collects two coins and turns
jumps over the gear to
goes left. It gets a couple of
coin and kill for snail and
around and walks off a
collect the coin.
coins.
again jump but bee killing ledge. It drops to a lower
for me in Dirt.
ledge and is killed by a gear.

Fred and Barney are
laughing at a robot in the
quarry.

Fred is running while
pushing Barney through a
room.

Lisa runs from lane left to She walks right on a ledge, She runs left from right and She jumps over a frog and
right and jump to collect collects two coins and turns
jumps over the gear to
goes left. It gets a couple of
coin and kill for snail and
around and walks off a
collect the coin.
coins.
again jump but bee killing ledge. It drops to a lower
for me in Dirt.
ledge and is killed by a gear.

They lean against a
doorway breathing heavy.

They are leaning against a
doorway. Barney talks to
Fred. They both look
scared.

Figure 1. Referential and consistent story visualization. Examples of more natural stories with references for the FlintstonesSV [16]
and MUGEN [19] datasets (bottom text) compared to more typical but less natural story text (top). We extend the MUGEN dataset by
introducing additional two characters (e.g. Lisa and Jhon) and four backgrounds (e.g. Sand, Grass, Stone and Dirt).

Abstract
There has been a recent explosion of impressive generative models that can produce high quality images (or
videos) conditioned on text descriptions. However, all such
approaches rely on conditional sentences that contain unambiguous descriptions of scenes and main actors in them.
Therefore employing such models for more complex task
of story visualization, where naturally references and coreferences exist, and one requires to reason about when
to maintain consistency of actors and backgrounds across
frames/scenes, and when not to, based on story progression,
remains a challenge. In this work, we address the aforementioned challenges and propose a novel autoregressive
diffusion-based framework with a visual memory module
that implicitly captures the actor and background context
across the generated frames. Sentence-conditioned soft attention over the memories enables effective reference resolution and learns to maintain scene and actor consistency
when needed. To validate the effectiveness of our approach,
we extend the MUGEN dataset [19] and introduce additional characters, backgrounds and referencing in multisentence storylines. Our experiments for story generation
on the MUGEN, the PororoSV [30] and the FlintstonesSV
[16] dataset show that our method not only outperforms
prior state-of-the-art in generating frames with high visual
quality, which are consistent with the story, but also models
appropriate correspondences between the characters and
the background.

1. Introduction
Multimodal deep learning approaches have pushed the
quality and the breadth of conditional generation tasks such
as image captioning [23, 33, 37, 54, 57] and text-to-image
synthesis [25, 44, 59, 61–63]. Owing to the technical leaps
made in generative models, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [14], variational autoencoders (VAEs)
[27] and the more recent diffusion models [21], approaches
for text-to-image synthesis can now generate images with
high visual fidelity representative of the textual descriptions. The captions, however, in such cases, are generally short self-contained sentences representing the highlevel semantics of a scene. This is rather restrictive in the
real-world applications [8, 30, 31] where fine-grained understanding of object interactions, motion and background
information described by multiple sentences becomes necessary. One such task is that of story generation or visualization – the goal of which is to generate a sequence of
illustrative image frames with coherent semantics given a
sequence of sentences [30, 35, 36, 60].
Characteristic features of a good visual story is high visual quality over multiple frames; this includes rendering of
discernible objects, actors, poses and realistic interactions
of those actors with objects and within the scene. Moreover, for text-based story generation it is crucial to maintain
consistency between the generated frames and the multisentence descriptions. Not only the actor context, but also
the background of the generated story should be in-line with
the description demonstrating effortless transition and adaptation to the changing environments within the story [34].

2493

