This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniDexGrasp: Universal Robotic Dexterous Grasping
via Learning Diverse Proposal Generation and Goal-Conditioned Policy
Yinzhen Xu* 1,2,3 , Weikang Wan* 1,2 , Jialiang Zhang* 1,2 , Haoran Liu* 1,2 , Zikang Shan1 ,
Hao Shen1 , Ruicheng Wang1 , Haoran Geng1,2 , Yijia Weng4 , Jiayi Chen1 ,
Tengyu Liu3 , Li Yi5 , He Wang† 1,2
1
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University 2 School of EECS, Peking University
3
Beijing Institute for General AI 4 Stanford University 5 Tsinghua University
https://pku-epic.github.io/UniDexGrasp/

Figure 1. UniDexGrasp via grasp proposal generation and goal-conditioned execution. Left (grasp proposals): each figure demonstrates two or three diverse and high-quality grasp proposals that vary greatly in rotation, translation, and joint angles; right (grasp execution): given a grasp goal pose, our highly generalizable goal-conditioned grasping policy can grasp the object in the way specified by the
goal, as shown in the green and blue trajectories and their corresponding goals.

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of learning universal
robotic dexterous grasping from a point cloud observation
under a table-top setting. The goal is to grasp and lift up objects in high-quality and diverse ways and generalize across
hundreds of categories and even the unseen. Inspired by
successful pipelines used in parallel gripper grasping, we
split the task into two stages: 1) grasp proposal (pose) generation and 2) goal-conditioned grasp execution. For the
first stage, we propose a novel probabilistic model of grasp
pose conditioned on the point cloud observation that factorizes rotation from translation and articulation. Trained
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

on our synthesized large-scale dexterous grasp dataset, this
model enables us to sample diverse and high-quality dexterous grasp poses for the object point cloud. For the second stage, we propose to replace the motion planning used
in parallel gripper grasping with a goal-conditioned grasp
policy, due to the complexity involved in dexterous grasping execution. Note that it is very challenging to learn
this highly generalizable grasp policy that only takes realistic inputs without oracle states. We thus propose several important innovations, including state canonicalization, object curriculum, and teacher-student distillation. Integrating the two stages, our final pipeline becomes the first
to achieve universal generalization for dexterous grasping,
demonstrating an average success rate of more than 60%
on thousands of object instances, which significantly out-

4737

