This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PCR: Proxy-based Contrastive Replay
for Online Class-Incremental Continual Learning
Huiwei Lin, Baoquan Zhang, Shanshan Feng*, Xutao Li, Yunming Ye
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{linhuiwei, zhangbaoquan}@stu.hit.edu.cn, {victor fengss, lixutao, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

: Positive sample
: Positive proxy

Online class-incremental continual learning is a specific
task of continual learning. It aims to continuously learn new
classes from data stream and the samples of data stream
are seen only once, which suffers from the catastrophic forgetting issue, i.e., forgetting historical knowledge of old
classes. Existing replay-based methods effectively alleviate this issue by saving and replaying part of old data in a
proxy-based or contrastive-based replay manner. Although
these two replay manners are effective, the former would
incline to new classes due to class imbalance issues, and
the latter is unstable and hard to converge because of the
limited number of samples. In this paper, we conduct a
comprehensive analysis of these two replay manners and
find that they can be complementary. Inspired by this finding, we propose a novel replay-based method called proxybased contrastive replay (PCR). The key operation is to replace the contrastive samples of anchors with corresponding proxies in the contrastive-based way. It alleviates the
phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting by effectively addressing the imbalance issue, as well as keeps a faster convergence of the model. We conduct extensive experiments
on three real-world benchmark datasets, and empirical results consistently demonstrate the superiority of PCR over
various state-of-the-art methods 1 .

1. Introduction
Online class-incremental continual learning (online
CICL) is a special scenario of continual learning [12]. Its
goal is to learn a deep model that can achieve knowledge
accumulation of new classes and not forget information
learned from old classes. In the meantime, the samples of a
continuously non-stationary data stream are accessed only
once during the learning process. At present, catastrophic
forgetting (CF) is the main problem of online CICL. It is as* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/FelixHuiweiLin/PCR

: Negative samples
: Negative proxies

: Number of samples in a batch
: Number of classes to learn
: Anchor sample

Softmax function

Positive pair

Negative pairs
(a) Proxy-based
Softmax function

Positive pair

Negative pairs

(b) Contrastive-based
Softmax function

Positive pair

Negative pairs

(c) Proxy-based Contrastive Replay (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of our work. (a) The example of proxy-based
replay manner. For each anchor sample, it calculates similarities
of all anchor-to-proxy pairs. (b) The example of contrastive-based
replay manner. For each anchor sample, it calculates similarities
of all anchor-to-sample pairs in the same batch. (c) The example
of our method. It calculates similarities of anchor-to-proxy pairs,
which is similar to the proxy-based method. However, the anchorto-proxy pairs are selected by the anchor-to-sample pairs in the
same batch, which performs in the contrastive-based manner.

sociated with the phenomenon that the model has a significant performance drop for old classes when learning new
classes. The main reason is historical knowledge of old data
would be overwritten by novel information of new data.
Among all types of methods proposed in continual learning, the replay-based methods have shown superior performance for online CICL [25]. In this family of methods,
part of previous samples are saved in an episodic memory
buffer and then used to learn together with current samples.
In general, there are two ways to replay. The first is the
proxy-based replay manner, which is to replay by using the
proxy-based loss and softmax classifier. As shown in Figure 1(a), it calculates similarities between each anchor with

24246

