This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Affordance Diffusion: Synthesizing Hand-Object Interactions
Yufei Ye1 *
Xueting Li2
Abhinav Gupta1
Shalini De Mello2
2
2
Stan Birchfield
Jiaming Song
Shubham Tulsiani1
Sifei Liu2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
NVIDIA
https://judyye.github.io/affordiffusion-www
Input

Sample 1

Sample 2

Sample 3

Figure 1. Given a single RGB image of an object (first column), we synthesize plausible images of hand-object interactions from which
feasible 3D hand poses can be directly extracted (remaining columns).

Abstract
Recent successes in image synthesis are powered by
large-scale diffusion models. However, most methods are
currently limited to either text- or image-conditioned generation for synthesizing an entire image, texture transfer or
inserting objects into a user-specified region. In contrast,
in this work we focus on synthesizing complex interactions
(i.e., an articulated hand) with a given object. Given an
RGB image of an object, we aim to hallucinate plausible
images of a human hand interacting with it. We propose a
two-step generative approach: a LayoutNet that samples an
articulation-agnostic hand-object-interaction layout, and a
ContentNet that synthesizes images of a hand grasping the
object given the predicted layout. Both are built on top of
a large-scale pretrained diffusion model to make use of its
latent representation. Compared to baselines, the proposed
method is shown to generalize better to novel objects and
perform surprisingly well on out-of-distribution in-the-wild
scenes of portable-sized objects. The resulting system allows us to predict descriptive affordance information, such
as hand articulation and approaching orientation.
* Yufei was an intern at NVIDIA during the project.

1. Introduction
Consider the bottles, bowls and cups shown in the left
column of Figure 1. How might a human hand interact
with such objects? Not only is it easy to imagine, from
a single image, the types of interactions that might occur
(e.g., ‘grab/hold’), and the interaction locations that might
happen (e.g. ‘handle/body’), but it is also quite natural to
hallucinate—in vivid detail— several ways in which a hand
might contact and use the objects. This ability to predict
and hallucinate hand-object-interactions (HOI) is critical to
functional understanding of a scene, as well as to visual imitation and manipulation.
Can current computer vision algorithms do the same? On
the one hand, there has been a lot of progress in image generation, such as synthesizing realistic high-resolution images spanning a wide range of object categories [43, 73]
from human faces to ImageNet classes. Newer diffusion
models such as Dall-E 2 [65] and Stable Diffusion [66] can
generate remarkably novel images in diverse styles. In fact,
highly-realistic HOI images can be synthesized from simple
text inputs such as “a hand holding a cup” [65, 66].
On the other hand, however, such models fail when conditioned on an image of a particular object instance. Given

22479

