This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Situation Hyper-Graphs for Video Question Answering
Aisha Urooj Khan1,3 , Hilde Kuehne2,4 , Bo Wu2 , Kim Chheu5 ,
Walid Bousselham4 , Chuang Gan2,6 , Niels Lobo1 , Mubarak Shah1
1

4

CRCV, University of Central Florida , 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 Mayo Clinic, AZ
Goethe University Frankfurt Germany, 5 Western Michigan University, 6 UMass Amherst

Abstract
Answering questions about complex situations in videos
requires not only capturing the presence of actors, objects,
and their relations but also the evolution of these relationships over time. A situation hyper-graph is a representation that describes situations as scene sub-graphs for video
frames and hyper-edges for connected sub-graphs and has
been proposed to capture all such information in a compact
structured form. In this work, we propose an architecture for
Video Question Answering (VQA) that enables answering
questions related to video content by predicting situation
hyper-graphs, coined Situation Hyper-Graph based Video
Question Answering (SHG-VQA). To this end, we train a
situation hyper-graph decoder to implicitly identify graph
representations with actions and object/human-object relationships from the input video clip. and to use cross-attention
between the predicted situation hyper-graphs and the question embedding to predict the correct answer. The proposed
method is trained in an end-to-end manner and optimized by
a VQA loss with the cross-entropy function and a Hungarian
matching loss for the situation graph prediction. The effectiveness of the proposed architecture is extensively evaluated
on two challenging benchmarks: AGQA and STAR. Our
results show that learning the underlying situation hypergraphs helps the system to significantly improve its performance for novel challenges of video question-answering
tasks1 .

1. Introduction
Video question answering in real-world scenarios is a
challenging task as it requires focusing on several factors
including the perception of the current scene, language understanding, situated reasoning, and future prediction. Visual
perception in the reasoning task requires capturing various
aspects of visual understanding, e.g., detecting a diverse set
1 Code will be available at https://github.com/aurooj/SHG-

VQA

Figure 1. The situation hyper-graph for a video is composed of
situations with entities and their relationships (shown as subgraphs
in the pink box). These situations may evolve over time. Temporal
actions act as hyper-edges connecting these situations into one situation hyper-graph. Learning situation graphs, as well as temporal
actions, is vital for reasoning-based video question answering.

of entities, recognizing their interactions, as well as understanding the changing dynamics between these entities over
time. Similarly, linguistic understanding has its challenges
as some question or answer concepts may not be present in
the input text or video.
Visual question answering, as well as its extension over
time, video question answering, have both benefited from
representing knowledge in graph structures, e.g., scene
graphs [20, 35], spatio-temporal graphs [4, 55], and knowledge graphs [36, 45]. Another approach in this direction is
the re-introduction of the concept of “situation cognition”
embodied in “situation hyper-graphs” [47]. This adds the
computation of actions to the graphs that capture the interaction between entities. In this case, situations are represented
by hyper-graphs that join atomic entities and relations (e.g.,
agents, objects, and relationships) with their actions (Fig.
1). This is an ambitious task for existing systems as it is
impractical to encapsulate all possible interactions in the
real-world context.
Recent work [23] shows that transformers are capable

14879

