This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mapping Degeneration Meets Label Evolution: Learning Infrared Small Target
Detection with Single Point Supervision
Xinyi Ying1 , Li Liu1 , Yingqian Wang1 , Ruojing Li1 , Nuo Chen1 , Zaiping Lin1B ,
Weidong Sheng1 , Shilin Zhou1
1
National University of Defense Technology
{yingxinyi18, wangyingqian16, liruojing, chennuo97, linzaiping, slzhou}@nudt.edu.cn,
dreamliu2010@gmail.com, shengweidong1111@sohu.com *

Abstract
Training a convolutional neural network (CNN) to detect
infrared small targets in a fully supervised manner has
gained remarkable research interests in recent years, but
is highly labor expensive since a large number of per-pixel
annotations are required. To handle this problem, in this
paper, we make the first attempt to achieve infrared small
target detection with point-level supervision. Interestingly,
during the training phase supervised by point labels,
we discover that CNNs first learn to segment a cluster
of pixels near the targets, and then gradually converge
to predict groundtruth point labels. Motivated by this
“mapping degeneration” phenomenon, we propose a label
evolution framework named label evolution with single
point supervision (LESPS) to progressively expand the
point label by leveraging the intermediate predictions of
CNNs. In this way, the network predictions can finally
approximate the updated pseudo labels, and a pixel-level
target mask can be obtained to train CNNs in an end-to-end
manner. We conduct extensive experiments with insightful
visualizations to validate the effectiveness of our method.
Experimental results show that CNNs equipped with LESPS
can well recover the target masks from corresponding
point labels, and can achieve over 70% and 95% of
their fully supervised performance in terms of pixel-level
intersection over union (IoU ) and object-level probability
of detection (Pd ), respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/XinyiYing/LESPS.

1. Introduction
Infrared small target detection has been a longstanding,
fundamental yet challenging task in infrared search and
tracking systems, and has various important applications in
civil and military fields [49,57], including traffic monitoring
This work was supported by National Key Research and
Development Program of China No. 2021YFB3100800.

loss
Prediction

Image

Label

Training Epochs
0.16

0.20

0.26

1.00

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Figure 1. An illustration of mapping degeneration under point
supervision. CNNs always tend to segment a cluster of pixels
near the targets with low confidence at the early stage, and then
gradually learn to predict GT point labels with high confidence.

[24, 54], maritime rescue [52, 53] and military surveillance
[7, 47]. Due to the rapid response and robustness to
fast-moving scenes, single-frame infrared small target
(SIRST) detection methods have always attracted much
more attention, and numerous methods have been proposed.
Early methods, including filtering-based [9, 40], local
contrast-based [3, 16] and low rank-based [11, 43] methods,
require complex handcrafted features with carefully tuned
hyper-parameters. Recently, compact deep learning has
been introduced in solving the problem of SIRST detection
[24, 45, 54]. However, there are only a few attempts, and its
potential remains locked, unlike the extensive explorations
of deep learning for natural images. This is mainly due to
potential reasons, including lack of large-scale, accurately
annotated datasets and high stake application scenarios.
Infrared small targets are usually of very small size,
weak, shapeless and textureless, and are easily submerged
in diverse complex background clutters. As a result,
directly adopting existing popular generic object detectors
like RCNN series [13, 14, 19, 39], YOLO series [25, 37,
38] and SSD [29] to SIRST detection cannot produce
satisfactory performance. Realizing this, researchers have
been focusing on developing deep networks tailored for

15528

