This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vita-CLIP: Video and text adaptive CLIP via Multimodal Prompting
Syed Talal Wasim1
Muzammal Naseer1
Salman Khan1,2
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3 Mubarak Shah4
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Australian National University
3
Linköping University 4 University of Central Florida

Abstract
Adopting contrastive image-text pretrained models like
CLIP towards video classification has gained attention due
to its cost-effectiveness and competitive performance. However, recent works in this area face a trade-off. Finetuning the pretrained model to achieve strong supervised
performance results in low zero-shot generalization. Similarly, freezing the backbone to retain zero-shot capability causes significant drop in supervised accuracy. Because of this, recent works in literature typically train separate models for supervised and zero-shot action recognition. In this work, we propose a multimodal prompt
learning scheme that works to balance the supervised
and zero-shot performance under a single unified training. Our prompting approach on the vision side caters for
three aspects: 1) Global video-level prompts to model the
data distribution; 2) Local frame-level prompts to provide
per-frame discriminative conditioning; and 3) a summary
prompt to extract a condensed video representation. Additionally, we define a prompting scheme on the text side
to augment the textual context. Through this prompting
scheme, we can achieve state-of-the-art zero-shot performance on Kinetics-600, HMDB51 and UCF101 while remaining competitive in the supervised setting. By keeping the pretrained backbone frozen, we optimize a much
lower number of parameters and retain the existing general representation which helps achieve the strong zeroshot performance. Our codes/models will be released at
https://github.com/TalalWasim/Vita-CLIP..

1. Introduction
In the image classification domain, multimodal imagetext pretrained models such as CLIP [58], ALIGN [31] and
Florence [75] have shown the capability of learning generalized representations. These models, trained on large-scale
language-image pairs in a contrastive manner, have remarkable zero-shot capabilities and transfer well to a variety of

downstream tasks. However, training a similar model for
the task of video recognition is not feasible both in terms
of gathering large-scale video-text pairs, which can suffer
from alignment problems [30], and is also exponentially
more computationally expensive due to multiple frames being processed per video. Therefore, there has been a recent
push in the research community to effectively adopt the pretrained image-text models for the task of video recognition,
while maintaining their zero-shot capabilities. In this regard, existing methods can be divided into two categories.
Some take inspiration from recent prompt learning methods
[25, 32, 77, 81, 82] and propose a prompt learning scheme
either on the text [36] or vision [55, 70] side, along with
additional transformer layers for improved temporal learning. Others prefer an end-to-end CLIP finetuning scheme
for video tasks [51, 55, 70]. However, the problem with
these methods is that they either fail to effectively leverage
learning on both the text and vision sides [36, 55] or end
up losing the zero-shot generalization of CLIP by finetuning the vision decoder [47] or the backbone [51, 55, 70]. In
summary, the existing approaches can steer the model either
towards good zero-shot generalization or better supervised
learning on video tasks. Since real-world tasks require both
supervised and zero-shot capabilities, our work investigates
the following question: Can we develop a unified model for
videos that performs well for both supervised learning and
zero-shot generalization tasks?
In pursuit of the aforementioned question, we propose a
multimodal prompting-based Video and text adaptive CLIP.
To effectively adapt the pretrained image-text CLIP model
to videos, we consider two important aspects. Firstly, one
needs to preserve the generalization capabilities of the original pretrained CLIP backbone and secondly, it must be able
to effectively adapt to the video domain. In this regard, we
propose to keep the entire backbone frozen and learn additional lightweight modules to adapt the model for videos.
On this point, for the vision side, we aim to explicitly exploit the temporal information in videos which is lacking in
the frozen image model. Our approach models video information at three levels: first via global video-level prompts

23034

