This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exact-NeRF: An Exploration of a Precise Volumetric
Parameterization for Neural Radiance Fields
Brian K. S. Isaac-Medina1 , Chris G. Willcocks1 , Toby P. Breckon1, 2
Department of {1 Computer Science, 2 Engineering}, Durham University, UK
{brian.k.isaac-medina, christopher.g.willcocks, toby.breckon}@durham.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have attracted significant
attention due to their ability to synthesize novel scene views
with great accuracy. However, inherent to their underlying formulation, the sampling of points along a ray with
zero width may result in ambiguous representations that
lead to further rendering artifacts such as aliasing in the
final scene. To address this issue, the recent variant mipNeRF proposes an Integrated Positional Encoding (IPE)
based on a conical view frustum. Although this is expressed
with an integral formulation, mip-NeRF instead approximates this integral as the expected value of a multivariate
Gaussian distribution. This approximation is reliable for
short frustums but degrades with highly elongated regions,
which arises when dealing with distant scene objects under a larger depth of field. In this paper, we explore the
use of an exact approach for calculating the IPE by using
a pyramid-based integral formulation instead of an approximated conical-based one. We denote this formulation as
Exact-NeRF and contribute the first approach to offer a precise analytical solution to the IPE within the NeRF domain.
Our exploratory work illustrates that such an exact formulation (Exact-NeRF) matches the accuracy of mip-NeRF and
furthermore provides a natural extension to more challenging scenarios without further modification, such as in the
case of unbounded scenes. Our contribution aims to both
address the hitherto unexplored issues of frustum approximation in earlier NeRF work and additionally provide insight into the potential future consideration of analytical solutions in future NeRF extensions.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is a classical and long-standing task
in computer vision that has been thoroughly re-investigated
via recent work on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [20].
NeRF learns an implicit representation of a 3D scene from
a set of 2D images via a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) that

Figure 1. Comparison of Exact-NeRF (ours) with mip-NeRF 360
[2]. Our method is able to both match the performance and obtain
superior depth estimation over a larger depth of field.

predicts the visual properties of 3D points uniformly sampled along the viewing ray given its coordinates and viewing direction. This parameterization gives NeRF the dual
ability to both represent 3D scenes and synthesize unseen
views. In its original formulation, NeRF illustrates strong
reconstruction performance for synthetic datasets comprising object-centric scenes and no background (bounded)
and forward-facing real-world scenes. Among its applications, NeRF has been used for urban scene representation [25, 27, 29], human body reconstruction [3, 16], image
processing [12, 17, 19] and physics [9, 14].
Nonetheless, the underlying sparse representation of 3D
points learnt by the MLP may cause ambiguities that can
lead to aliasing and blurring. To overcome these issues,
Barron et al. proposed mip-NeRF [1], an architecture that
uses cone tracing instead of rays. This architecture encodes conical frustums as the inputs of the MLP by approximating the integral of a sine/cosine function over a
region in the space with a multivariate Gaussian. This reparameterization notably increases the reconstruction quality of multi-scale datasets. However, this approximation is
only really valid for bounded scenes, where the conic frustums do not suffer from large elongations attributable to a
large depth of field within the scene.

66

