This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Computationally Budgeted Continual Learning: What Does Matter?
Ameya Prabhu1 *
1

University of Oxford

Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud2∗
Puneet Dokania1
Philip H.S. Torr1
3
2
1
Ser-Nam Lim
Bernard Ghanem
Adel Bibi
2
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Meta AI

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) aims to sequentially train models on streams of incoming data that vary in distribution
by preserving previous knowledge while adapting to new
data. Current CL literature focuses on restricted access to
previously seen data, while imposing no constraints on the
computational budget for training. This is unreasonable
for applications in-the-wild, where systems are primarily
constrained by computational and time budgets, not storage. We revisit this problem with a large-scale benchmark
and analyze the performance of traditional CL approaches
in a compute-constrained setting, where effective memory
samples used in training can be implicitly restricted as a
consequence of limited computation. We conduct experiments evaluating various CL sampling strategies, distillation
losses, and partial fine-tuning on two large-scale datasets,
namely ImageNet2K and Continual Google Landmarks V2
in data incremental, class incremental, and time incremental settings. Through extensive experiments amounting to a
total of over 1500 GPU-hours, we find that, under computeconstrained setting, traditional CL approaches, with no exception, fail to outperform a simple minimal baseline that
samples uniformly from memory. Our conclusions are consistent in a different number of stream time steps, e.g., 20
to 200, and under several computational budgets. This
suggests that most existing CL methods are particularly
too computationally expensive for realistic budgeted deployment. Code for this project is available at: https:
//github.com/drimpossible/BudgetCL.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has excelled in various computer vision
tasks [8,21,25,43] by performing hundreds of shuffled passes
through well-curated offline static labeled datasets. However,
modern real-world systems, e.g., Instagram, TikTok, and
Flickr, experience high throughput of a constantly changing
stream of data, which poses a challenge for deep learning
to cope with such a setting. Continual learning (CL) aims
to go beyond static datasets and develop learning strategies
that can adapt and learn from streams where data is pre* authors contributed equally; order decided by a coin flip.

Figure 1. Main Findings. Under per time step computationally
budgeted continual learning, classical continual learning methods,
e.g., sampling strategies, distillation losses, and fully connected
(FC) layer correction based methods such as calibration, struggle
to cope with such a setting. Most proposed continual algorithms
are particularly useful only when large computation is available,
where, otherwise, minimalistic algorithms (ERM) are superior.

sented incrementally over time, often referred to as time
steps. However, the current CL literature overlooks a key
necessity for practical real deployment of such algorithms.
In particular, most prior art is focused on offline continual
learning [22, 23, 41] where, despite limited access to previous stream data, training algorithms do not have restrictions
on the computational training budget per time step.
High-throughput streams, e.g., Instagram, where every
stream sample at every time step needs to be classified for,
say, misinformation or hate speech, are time-sensitive in
which long training times before deployment are simply not
an option. Otherwise, new stream data will accumulate until
training is completed, causing server delays and worsening
user experience.
Moreover, limiting the computational budget is necessary
towards reducing the overall cost. This is because computational costs are higher compared to any storage associated
costs. For example, on Google Cloud Standard Storage
(2¢ per GB per month), it costs no more than 6¢ to store
the entire CLEAR benchmark [26], a recent large-scale CL
dataset. On the contrary, one run of a CL algorithm on
CLEAR performing ∼ 300K iterations costs around 100$
on an A100 Google instance (3$ per hour for 1 GPU). Therefore, it is prudent to have computationally budgeted methods
where the memory size, as a consequence, is implicitly restricted. This is because, under a computational budget, it
is no longer possible to revisit all previous data even if they

3698

