This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Object Localization:
Observing the Background to Discover Objects
Oriane Siméoni 1 , Chloé Sekkat1 , Gilles Puy1 , Antonin Vobecky1,2 , Éloi Zablocki1 , Patrick Pérez1
1
valeo.ai, Paris, France
2
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, CTU, Prague, Czech Republic

Figure 1. Examples of object localization results obtained with our method FOUND on images from diverse datasets. We propose
a simple framework in which we train a single conv1 × 1 layer, and achieve state-of-the-art results in unsupervised object discovery and
saliency detection. We train for only 2 epochs over the 10k dataset DUTS-TR [54] and inference runs at 80 FPS. Note that the results
presented here are without post-processing refinement.

Abstract
Recent advances in self-supervised visual representation learning have paved the way for unsupervised methods
tackling tasks such as object discovery and instance segmentation. However, discovering objects in an image with
no supervision is a very hard task; what are the desired objects, when to separate them into parts, how many are there,
and of what classes? The answers to these questions depend on the tasks and datasets of evaluation. In this work,
we take a different approach and propose to look for the
background instead. This way, the salient objects emerge
as a by-product without any strong assumption on what
an object should be. We propose FOUND, a simple model
made of a single conv1 × 1 initialized with coarse background masks extracted from self-supervised patch-based
representations. After fast training and refining these seed
masks, the model reaches state-of-the-art results on unsupervised saliency detection and object discovery bench-

marks. Moreover, we show that our approach yields good
results in the unsupervised semantic segmentation retrieval
task. The code to reproduce our results is available at
https://github.com/valeoai/FOUND.

1. Introduction
The task of object localization — either performed by
detecting [4, 39] or segmenting [7] objects — is required in
many safety-critical systems such as self-driving cars. Today’s best methods train large deep models [4, 7] on large
sets of labeled data [13, 30]. To mitigate such needs in
annotation, it is possible to use strategies such as semisupervised [10, 31], weakly-supervised [10, 61] and active
learning [37, 50, 65].
In this work, we consider the unsupervised object localization task, which consists in discovering objects in an image with no human-made annotation. This task has recently
received a lot of attention [40,41,43] as it is a solution to de-

3176

