This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth Estimation from Indoor Panoramas with Neural Scene Representation
Wenjie Chang, Yueyi Zhang† , Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China
changwj@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn
MSE (Less is better)
0.5

0.4

Method
NeRF
ADfSM
Ours-fast
Ours

(Time, MSE )
(6.71h, 0.5240)
(2.72mins, 0.2154)
(10.68mins, 0.1680)
(1.78h, 0.0532)

0.3

MSE: 0.0056

MSE: 0.1663

MSE: 0.0692

MSE: 0.0210

MSE: 0.1264

MSE: 0.0768

0.2

0.1

Time
0.0

10 mins 20 mins

1h

2h

Panorama

Ground Truth

Ours

ADfSM

NeRF

6h

Figure 1. Our work aims to implicitly represent a scene with a neural network through fewer panoramas and thus obtain the relative depth
measurements. The left diagram illustrates the efficiency and accuracy of our method against NeRF [18] and a traditional geometric-based
Structure from Motion approach [12]. All methods adopt 3 panoramas with camera positions as inputs and are evaluated over 10 scenes
from Matterport3D [4]. The right shows aerial views of point clouds that are transferred from depth estimations for better visualization.
Compared with state-of-the-art methods, measurements from ours have clearer edges and more accurate geometry.

Abstract
Depth estimation from indoor panoramas is challenging
due to the equirectangular distortions of panoramas and
inaccurate matching. In this paper, we propose a practical framework to improve the accuracy and efficiency of
depth estimation from multi-view indoor panoramic images
with the Neural Radiance Field technology. Specifically,
we develop two networks to implicitly learn the Signed
Distance Function for depth measurements and the radiance field from panoramas. We also introduce a novel
spherical position embedding scheme to achieve high accuracy. For better convergence, we propose an initialization method for the network weights based on the Manhattan World Assumption. Furthermore, we devise a geometric consistency loss, leveraging the surface normal, to further refine the depth estimation. The experimental results
demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms stateof-the-art works by a large margin in both quantitative and
qualitative evaluations. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/WJ-Chang-42/IndoorPanoDepth.

1. Introduction
Panoramic imaging has emerged as an attractive imaging technique in many fields, such as computer vision

and robotics. Different from traditional imaging devices,
panoramic cameras capture a holistic scene and present it as
a 2D image with equirectangular projection. Indoor panoramas, captured in the interior scenes by panoramic cameras,
have been widely used in interior design and decoration.
Recovering depth information aligned with RGB panoramic
images benefits a line of down-streaming applications, such
as augmented reality and indoor mapping.
Recent works on depth estimation from panoramas employ Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) structures with
prior knowledge learned from depth labels and achieve excellent performance. Most of these works adopt a single panoramic image to predict the relative depth map
[7, 23, 29, 31, 37, 39]. These methods require lots of RGB
and depth pairs while training and encounter the problem
of domain adaptation in practice. There are a few works
attempting to employ multiview panoramic images in the
depth estimation task [32, 38]. They recover depth information by finding the correspondence of different views.
However, strict vertical or horizontal position relations are
required for input images in these methods.
Panoramas show great distortions when presented as 2D
images. Prior works adopt various technologies to overcome this problem, such as processing panoramas [7,26,27,
† Corresponding Author

899

