This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-aware Alignment and Mutual Masking for 3D-Language Pre-training
Zhao Jin1 Munawar Hayat2 Yuwei Yang1
1
Sichuan University 2 Monash University
jinzhao@stu.scu.edu.cn

munawar.hayat@monash.edu

guoyulan@sysu.edu.cn

yuwei@stu.scu.edu.cn

yinjie@scu.edu.cn

3D-Language Pre-training

3D point cloud

There is a white
table. It is in front
of a couch.

Yulan Guo3 Yinjie Lei1,
3
Sun Yat-sen University

Multi-modal
Encoder

Textual description

3D-Language
Features
Alignment

3D-Language
Features
Enhancement

CSA

M3LM

Context aware Spatialsemantic Alignment (Sec 3.2)

Mutual 3D-Language
Masked modeling (Sec 3.3)

:
Features belong to
different semantics

Blue :
Language
feature

:
Enhanced features

Red :
3D feature

Pre-trained Downstream
Task
Multi-modal
Encoder
Decoders
Fine-tuning

Figure 1. Illustration of our 3D-Language Pre-training framework. We ﬁrst semantically align 3D-language features (Sec. 3.2), and then
further enhance their granularity using mutual masked learning (Sec. 3.3). Our learned multi-modal features generalize well across various
downstream tasks, including 3D visual grounding, 3D dense captioning and 3D question answering.

Abstract
3D visual language reasoning plays an important role
in effective human-computer interaction. The current approaches for 3D visual reasoning are task-speciﬁc, and lack
pre-training methods to learn generic representations that
can transfer across various tasks. Despite the encouraging progress in vision-language pre-training for image-text
data, 3D-language pre-training is still an open issue due
to limited 3D-language paired data, highly sparse and irregular structure of point clouds and ambiguities in spatial relations of 3D objects with viewpoint changes. In this
paper, we present a generic 3D-language pre-training approach, that tackles multiple facets of 3D-language reasoning by learning universal representations. Our learning objective constitutes two main parts. 1) Context aware
spatial-semantic alignment to establish ﬁne-grained correspondence between point clouds and texts. It reduces relational ambiguities by aligning 3D spatial relationships with
textual semantic context. 2) Mutual 3D-Language Masked
modeling to enable cross-modality information exchange.
Instead of reconstructing sparse 3D points for which language can hardly provide cues, we propose masked proposal reasoning to learn semantic class and mask-invariant
Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn)

representations. Our proposed 3D-language pre-training
method achieves promising results once adapted to various downstream tasks, including 3D visual grounding, 3D
dense captioning and 3D question answering. Our codes
are available at https://github.com/leolyj/3D-VLP

1. Introduction
3D Vision and Language (3D V+L) reasoning aims to
jointly understand 3D point clouds and their textual descriptions. It lies at the intersection of 3D visual understanding and natural language processing, and plays an important role in applications e.g., Metaverse, AR/VR and autonomous robots. 3D V+L reasoning has recently gained
signiﬁcant research interest, with multiple works tackling
3D visual grounding [1, 8, 33, 59], 3D dense captioning
[11, 23, 58] and 3D question answering [3, 51, 54].
Despite promising progress made towards solving 3D visual reasoning tasks, the existing approaches are highly specialized and task speciﬁc. This is in contrast to multi-modal
reasoning from RGB images, where the dominant approach
is to pre-train a generic model on large scale image-text
paired data, and then adapt this model for multiple downstream tasks. The pre-training step enables learning highly
transferable and generic cross-modality representations via

10984

