This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Block Selection Method for Using Feature Norm in Out-of-Distribution Detection
Yeonguk Yu, Sungho Shin, Seongju Lee, Changhyun Jun, and Kyoobin Lee
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
{yeon guk, hogili89, lsj2121, junch9634}@gm.gist.ac.kr, kyoobinlee@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs during the
inference stage is crucial for deploying neural networks in
the real world. Previous methods typically relied on the
highly activated feature map outputted by the network. In
this study, we revealed that the norm of the feature map
obtained from a block other than the last block can serve
as a better indicator for OOD detection. To leverage this
insight, we propose a simple framework that comprises
two metrics: FeatureNorm, which computes the norm of
the feature map, and NormRatio, which calculates the ratio of FeatureNorm for ID and OOD samples to evaluate
the OOD detection performance of each block. To identify the block that provides the largest difference between
FeatureNorm of ID and FeatureNorm of OOD, we create jigsaw puzzles as pseudo OOD from ID training samples and compute NormRatio, selecting the block with the
highest value. After identifying the suitable block, OOD
detection using FeatureNorm outperforms other methods
by reducing FPR95 by up to 52.77% on CIFAR10 benchmark and up to 48.53% on ImageNet benchmark. We
demonstrate that our framework can generalize to various architectures and highlight the significance of block selection, which can also improve previous OOD detection
methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/gistailab/block-selection-for-OOD-detection.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have widely been utilized in the real
world, such as in autonomous cars [9, 21] and medical diagnoses [7, 38]. In the real world, neural networks often encounter previously unseen input that are different from the
training data. If the system fails to recognize those input as
unknown input, there can be a dangerous consequence. For
example, a medical diagnosis system may recognize an unseen disease image as one of the known diseases. This gives
rise to the importance of the out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, which makes users operate a neural network system
more safely in the real world.

Figure 1. Histogram of norm of the feature map produced by convolutional blocks of ResNet18. In last block (a), the norm of ID
(black) is hard to separate from OOD (blue, orange) compared to
the one from the penultimate block (b).

In practice, various outputs of the network can be used
as an indicator to separate the in-distribution (ID) and outof-distribution (OOD) data. For instance, output probability [15], calibrated output probability [28], and output energy [30] are used as an indicator. The output of a neural
network is commonly calculated using a feature vector of
the feature extractor and a weight vector of the classification layer. It is known that the norm of the feature vector
can be an indicator of input image quality [23, 37, 40] or
level of awareness [46]. Thus, we ask the following question: Can we use the norm of the feature as an indicator to
separate ID and OOD?
In this paper, we first reveal the key observation concerning the last block of neural networks sometimes deteriorating owing to the overconfidence issue [10, 11]. Empirically, we show that OOD images highly activate filters of
the last block (i.e., large norm; see Figure 1, left) on a network trained with CIFAR10 while lowly activate filters of
the penultimate block (i.e., small norm; see Figure 1, right).
As a result, OOD detection methods that consider overactivated feature [42] and overconfident output [28] have been
successful. However, we find that the norm of the feature
map for the OOD and ID is quite separable in the penultimate block compared to the last block.
This motivates a simple and effective OOD detection

15701

