This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SunStage: Portrait Reconstruction and Relighting using the Sun as a Light Stage
Yifan Wang1

Aleksander Holynski1
1

(a) Reconstruction

Xiuming Zhang2

Xuaner Zhang2

2
University of Washington
Adobe Inc.
sunstage.cs.washington.edu

(b) Edit lighting

(c) Soften shadows

(d) Swap lighting

(e) Edit texture

Figure 1. Given a selfie video rotating under the sun, SunStage reconstructs geometry, material, camera pose, and lighting information.
This recovered information can be used to (a) realistically re-render the input images, (b) modify the lighting conditions by adding /
removing lights, (c) soften harsh shadows by changing the size of the reconstructed light sources (d) render the person in an entirely new
environment, and (e) edit the albedo or material properties to add freckles, makeup, or stickers that realistically interact with scene lighting.

Abstract
A light stage uses a series of calibrated cameras and
lights to capture a subject’s facial appearance under varying illumination and viewpoint. This captured information
is crucial for facial reconstruction and relighting. Unfortunately, light stages are often inaccessible: they are expensive and require significant technical expertise for construction and operation. In this paper, we present SunStage: a
lightweight alternative to a light stage that captures comparable data using only a smartphone camera and the sun.
Our method only requires the user to capture a selfie video
outdoors, rotating in place, and uses the varying angles
between the sun and the face as guidance in joint reconstruction of facial geometry, reflectance, camera pose, and
lighting parameters. Despite the in-the-wild un-calibrated
setting, our approach is able to reconstruct detailed facial
appearance and geometry, enabling compelling effects such
as relighting, novel view synthesis, and reflectance editing.

1. Introduction
A light stage [11] acquires the shape and material properties of a face in high detail using a series of images captured under synchronized cameras and lights. This captured
information can be used to synthesize novel images of the
subject under arbitrary lighting conditions or from arbitrary
viewpoints. This process enables a number of visual effects,
such as creating digital replicas of actors that can be used in
movies [1] or high-quality postproduction relighting [46].
In many cases, however, it is often infeasible to get access to a light stage for capturing a particular subject, because light stages are not easy to find: they are expensive
and require significant technical expertise (often teams of
people) to build and operate. In these cases, hope is not
lost — one can turn to methods that are trained on light
stage data, with the intention of generalizing to new subjects. These methods do not require the subject to be captured by a light stage but instead use a machine learning

20792

