This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Human Pose Estimation via Intuitive Physics
Shashank Tripathi1 Lea Müller1 Chun-Hao P. Huang1
Michael J. Black1 Dimitrios Tzionas2 *
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

{stripathi, lmueller2, chuang2, otaheri, black}@tue.mpg.de

Floor Penetration

d.tzionas@uva.nl

Floating Bodies

LOW

IPMAN (ours)

SOTA

HIGH

Unstable Poses

Omid Taheri1

Figure 1. Estimating a 3D body from an image is ill-posed. A recent, representative, optimization method [59] produces bodies that are in
unstable poses, penetrate the floor, or hover above it. In contrast, IPMAN estimates a 3D body that is physically plausible. To achieve this,
IPMAN uses novel intuitive-physics (IP) terms that exploit inferred pressure heatmaps on the body, the Center of Pressure (CoP), and the
body’s Center of Mass (CoM). Body heatmap colors encode per-vertex pressure.

Abstract
Estimating 3D humans from images often produces implausible bodies that lean, float, or penetrate the floor. Such
methods ignore the fact that bodies are typically supported
by the scene. A physics engine can be used to enforce physical plausibility, but these are not differentiable, rely on
unrealistic proxy bodies, and are difficult to integrate into existing optimization and learning frameworks. In contrast, we
exploit novel intuitive-physics (IP) terms that can be inferred
from a 3D SMPL body interacting with the scene. Inspired
by biomechanics, we infer the pressure heatmap on the body,
the Center of Pressure (CoP) from the heatmap, and the
SMPL body’s Center of Mass (CoM). With these, we develop
IPMAN, to estimate a 3D body from a color image in a “stable” configuration by encouraging plausible floor contact
and overlapping CoP and CoM. Our IP terms are intuitive,
easy to implement, fast to compute, differentiable, and can be
integrated into existing optimization and regression methods.
We evaluate IPMAN on standard datasets and MoYo, a new
dataset with synchronized multi-view images, ground-truth
3D bodies with complex poses, body-floor contact, CoM and
pressure. IPMAN produces more plausible results than the
state of the art, improving accuracy for static poses, while
not hurting dynamic ones. Code and data are available for
research at https://ipman.is.tue.mpg.de.
*

1. Introduction
To understand humans and their actions, computers need
automatic methods to reconstruct the body in 3D. Typically, the problem entails estimating the 3D human pose
and shape (HPS) from one or more color images. State-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods [46, 51, 75, 102] have made rapid
progress, estimating 3D humans that align well with image
features in the camera view. Unfortunately, the camera view
can be deceiving. When viewed from other directions, or
when placed in a 3D scene, the estimated bodies are often
physically implausible: they lean, hover, or penetrate the
ground (see Fig. 1 top). This is because most SOTA methods
reason about humans in isolation; they ignore that people
move in a scene, interact with it, and receive physical support by contacting it. This is a deal-breaker for inherently
3D applications, such as biomechanics, augmented/virtual
reality (AR/VR) and the “metaverse”; these need humans to
be reconstructed faithfully and physically plausibly with respect to the scene. For this, we need a method that estimates
the 3D human on a ground plane from a color image in a
configuration that is physically “stable”.
This is naturally related to reasoning about physics and
support. There exist many physics simulators [10, 30, 60] for
games, movies, or industrial simulations, and using these for
plausible HPS estimation is increasingly popular [66, 74, 96].
However, existing simulators come with two significant

This work was mostly performed at MPI-IS.

4713

