This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MarginMatch: Improving Semi-Supervised Learning with Pseudo-Margins
Tiberiu Sosea
Cornelia Caragea
University of Illinois Chicago
tsosea2@uic.edu

Abstract
We introduce MarginMatch, a new SSL approach combining consistency regularization and pseudo-labeling, with its
main novelty arising from the use of unlabeled data training dynamics to measure pseudo-label quality. Instead of
using only the model’s confidence on an unlabeled example
at an arbitrary iteration to decide if the example should be
masked or not, MarginMatch also analyzes the behavior of
the model on the pseudo-labeled examples as the training
progresses, to ensure low quality predictions are masked out.
MarginMatch brings substantial improvements on four vision benchmarks in low data regimes and on two large-scale
datasets, emphasizing the importance of enforcing highquality pseudo-labels. Notably, we obtain an improvement in
error rate over the state-of-the-art of 3.25% on CIFAR-100
with only 25 labels per class and of 3.78% on STL-10 using
as few as 4 labels per class. We make our code available at
https://github.com/tsosea2/MarginMatch.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have seen tremendous success in
many vision tasks [14, 22, 27, 42, 43]. This success can be
attributed to their scalability, being able to produce better results when they are trained on large datasets in a supervised
fashion [15, 27, 34, 35, 43, 47]. Unfortunately, large labeled
datasets annotated for various tasks and domains are difficult to acquire and demand considerable annotation effort
or domain expertise. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a
powerful approach that mitigates the requirement for large
labeled datasets by effectively making use of information
from unlabeled data, and thus, has been studied extensively
in vision [4, 5, 23, 25, 30, 36, 38, 39, 44–46].
Recent SSL approaches integrate two important components: consistency regularization [46, 49] and pseudolabeling [25]. Consistency regularization works on the assumption that a model should output similar predictions
when fed perturbed versions of the same image, whereas
pseudo-labeling uses the model’s predictions of unlabeled
examples as labels to train against. For example, Sohn et
al. [41] introduced FixMatch that combines consistency reg-

cornelia@uic.edu

ularization on weak and strong augmentations with pseudolabeling. FixMatch relies heavily on a high-confidence
threshold to compute the unsupervised loss, disregarding any
pseudo-labels whose confidence falls below this threshold.
While training using only high-confidence pseudo-labels has
shown to consistently reduce the confirmation bias [1], this
rigid threshold allows access only to a small amount of unlabeled data for training, and thus, ignores a considerable
amount of unlabeled examples for which the model’s predictions do not exceed the confidence threshold. More recently,
Zhang et al. [49] introduced FlexMatch that relaxes the rigid
confidence threshold in FixMatch to account for the model’s
learning status of each class in that it adaptively scales down
the threshold for a class to encourage the model to learn
from more examples from that class. The flexible thresholds in FlexMatch allow the model to have access to a much
larger and diverse set of unlabeled data to learn from, but
lowering the thresholds can lead to the introduction of wrong
pseudo-labels, which are extremely harmful for generalization. Interestingly, even when the high-confidence threshold
is used in FixMatch can result in wrong pseudo-labels. See
Figure 1 for incorrect pseudo-labels detected in the training
set after we apply FixMatch and FlexMatch on ImageNet.
We posit that a drawback of FixMatch and FlexMatch and
in general of any pseudo-labeling approach is that they use
the confidence of the model only at the current iteration
to enforce quality of pseudo-labels and completely ignore
model’s predictions at prior iterations.
In this paper, we propose MarginMatch, a new SSL approach that monitors the behavior of the model on the unlabeled examples as the training progresses, from the beginning of training until the current iteration, instead of using
only the model’s current belief about an unlabeled example
(i.e., its confidence at the current iteration) to decide if the example should be masked or not. We estimate a pseudo-label’s
contribution to learning and generalization by introducing
pseudo-margins of unlabeled examples averaged across training iterations. Pseudo-margins of unlabeled examples extend
the margins from machine learning [3, 11, 18, 33] which provide a measure of confidence of the outputs of the model
and capture the difference between the output for the correct

15773

