This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language Adaptive Weight Generation for Multi-task Visual Grounding
Wei Su1

Peihan Miao1 Huanzhang Dou1 Gaoang Wang4
Liang Qiao1,3 Zheyang Li1,3 Xi Li1,2,5*
1
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Hikvision Research Institute
4
Zhejiang University-University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Institute, Zhejiang University
5
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
{weisuzju, peihan.miao, hzdou, qiaoliang, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn
gaoangwang@intl.zju.edu.cn, lizheyang@hikvision.com

Visual Backbone F(I;W,A)

Abstract

Cross-modal
Interaction

Task-specific
Head

Cross-modal
Interaction

Task-specific
Head

stage 4

stage 3

stage 2

(a)

Visual Backbone F(I;W,A)
stage 4

“white cake with
cherries”

stage 3

Stage 2

Linguistic Backbone

(b)

Visual Backbone F(I;W,A)

weights

“white cake with
cherries”

Linguistic Backbone

Multi-task
Head

layer N

layer N-1

layer 2

* corresponding author.

Linguistic Backbone

layer 1

Visual grounding (such as referring expression comprehension [4, 23, 42, 45, 46, 48, 50], referring expression segmentation [6, 14, 17, 23, 32, 33, 44], and phrase grounding
[4, 23, 50]) aims to detect or segment the specific object

“white cake with
cherries”

stage 1

1. Introduction

stage 1

Although the impressive performance in visual grounding, the prevailing approaches usually exploit the visual
backbone in a passive way, i.e., the visual backbone extracts features with fixed weights without expression-related
hints. The passive perception may lead to mismatches (e.g.,
redundant and missing), limiting further performance improvement. Ideally, the visual backbone should actively
extract visual features since the expressions already provide the blueprint of desired visual features. The active
perception can take expressions as priors to extract relevant visual features, which can effectively alleviate the
mismatches. Inspired by this, we propose an active perception Visual Grounding framework based on Language
Adaptive Weights, called VG-LAW. The visual backbone
serves as an expression-specific feature extractor through
dynamic weights generated for various expressions. Benefiting from the specific and relevant visual features extracted from the language-aware visual backbone, VG-LAW
does not require additional modules for cross-modal interaction. Along with a neat multi-task head, VG-LAW can be
competent in referring expression comprehension and segmentation jointly. Extensive experiments on four representative datasets, i.e., RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, RefCOCOg,
and ReferItGame, validate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance.

(c)

A: architecture
I: image W: weights

Figure 1. The comparison of visual grounding frameworks. (a)
The visual and linguistic backbone independently extracts features, which are fused through cross-modal interaction. (b) Additional designed modules are inserted into the visual backbone to
modulate visual features using linguistic features. (c) VG-LAW
can generate language-adaptive weights for the visual backbone
and directly output referred objects through our designed multitask head without additional cross-modal interaction modules.

based on a given natural language description. Compared to
general object detection [38] or instance segmentation [11],
which can only locate objects within a predefined and fixed
category set, visual grounding is more flexible and purposeful. Free-formed language descriptions can specify specific
visual properties of the target object, such as categories, attributes, relationships with other objects, relative/absolute
positions, and etc.
Due to the similarity with detection tasks, previous visual grounding approaches [23, 33, 46, 50] usually follow
the general object detection frameworks [1, 11, 37], and pay

10857

