This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Deep 3D Shape Prior via Part-Discretized Diffusion Process
Yuhan Li1 Yishun Dou2 Xuanhong Chen1 Bingbing Ni1, 2† Yilin Sun1 Yutian Liu1 Fuzhen Wang1
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Huawei
{melodious, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/colorful-liyu/3DQD

Abstract
We develop a generalized 3D shape generation prior
model, tailored for multiple 3D tasks including unconditional shape generation, point cloud completion, and crossmodality shape generation, etc. On one hand, to precisely capture local fine detailed shape information, a vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE) is utilized
to index local geometry from a compactly learned codebook based on a broad set of task training data. On the
other hand, a discrete diffusion generator is introduced to
model the inherent structural dependencies among different
tokens. In the meantime, a multi-frequency fusion module
(MFM) is developed to suppress high-frequency shape feature fluctuations, guided by multi-frequency contextual information. The above designs jointly equip our proposed
3D shape prior model with high-fidelity, diverse features
as well as the capability of cross-modality alignment, and
extensive experiments have demonstrated superior performances on various 3D shape generation tasks.

1. Introduction
While pre-trained 2D prior models [24, 43] have shown
great power in various downstream vision tasks such as image classification, editing and cross-modality generation,
etc., their counterpart 3D prior models which are generally beneficial for three-dimensional shape generation tasks
have NOT been well developed, unfortunately. On the
contrary, the graphics community has developed a number of task-specific pre-trained models, tailored for unary
tasks such as 3D shape generation [22, 31, 60], points
cloud completion [62, 66, 67] and conditional shape prediction [14, 30, 34, 54]. Since above individual 3D generative representations do NOT share common knowledge
among tasks, to migrate a trained 3D shape network from
one task to another related one requires troublesome end-toend model re-work and training resources are also wasted.
For instance, a good shape encoding of “chairs” based on a
general prior 3D model could benefit shape completion of a
given partial chair and text-guided novel chair generation.
† Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

Figure 1. Our shape generation model is a unified and efficient
prior model to produce high-fidelity, diverse results on multiple
tasks, while most previous approaches are task-specific.

This work aims at designing a unified 3D shape generative prior model, which serves as a generalized backbone
for multiple downstream tasks, i.e., with few requirements
for painstaking adaptation of the prior model itself. Such a
general 3D prior model should possess the following good
properties. On one hand, it should be expressive enough
to generate high-fidelity shape generation results with finegrained local details. On the other hand, this general prior
should cover a large probabilistic support region so that it
could sample diverse shape prototypes in both conditional
and unconditional generation tasks. Moreover, to well support cross-modal generation, e.g., text-to-shape, the sampled representation from the prior model should achieve
good semantic consistency between different modalities,
making it easy to encode and match partial shapes, images
and text prompts.
The above criteria, however, are rarely satisfied by existing 3D shape modeling approaches. Encoder-decoder based
structures [62, 66] usually focus on dedicated tasks and fail
to capture diverse shape samples because the generation
process mostly relies on features sampled from deterministic encoders. On the contrary, probabilistic models such as
GAN [29, 48], Flow [60] and diffusion models [22, 31, 67],

16784

