This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent-NeRF for Shape-Guided Generation of 3D Shapes and Textures
Gal Metzer*

Elad Richardson*

Or Patashnik

Raja Giryes

Daniel Cohen-Or

Tel Aviv University

“A stack of
pancakes covered
in maple syrup”

“A German
Shepherd”

“A highly detailed
sandcastle”

Latent-NeRF

Sketch-Shape

“A fish with
leopard spots”

Latent-Paint

Figure 1. Our three text-guided models: a purely text-guided Latent-NeRF, Latent-NeRF with Sketch-Shape guidance for more exact
control over the generated shape, and Latent-Paint for texture generation for explicit shapes. The top row represents the models’ inputs.

Abstract
Text-guided image generation has progressed rapidly in
recent years, inspiring major breakthroughs in text-guided
shape generation. Recently, it has been shown that using
score distillation, one can successfully text-guide a NeRF
model to generate a 3D object. We adapt the score distillation to the publicly available, and computationally efficient,
Latent Diffusion Models, which apply the entire diffusion
process in a compact latent space of a pretrained autoencoder. As NeRFs operate in image space, a naı̈ve solution
for guiding them with latent score distillation would require
encoding to the latent space at each guidance step. Instead,
we propose to bring the NeRF to the latent space, resulting in a Latent-NeRF. Analyzing our Latent-NeRF, we show
that while Text-to-3D models can generate impressive results, they are inherently unconstrained and may lack the
ability to guide or enforce a specific 3D structure. To assist and direct the 3D generation, we propose to guide our
Latent-NeRF using a Sketch-Shape: an abstract geometry
that defines the coarse structure of the desired object. Then,
we present means to integrate such a constraint directly into
a Latent-NeRF. This unique combination of text and shape
guidance allows for increased control over the generation
process. We also show that latent score distillation can be
successfully applied directly on 3D meshes. This allows
for generating high-quality textures on a given geometry.
Our experiments validate the power of our different forms
of guidance and the efficiency of using latent rendering.

1. Introduction
Text-guided image generation has seen tremendous success in recent years, primarily due to the breathtaking development in Language-Image models [25, 28, 36] and diffusion models [14, 21, 37–40]. These breakthroughs have
also resulted in fast progression for text-guided shape generation [9,29,53]. Most recently, it has been shown [35] that
one can directly use score distillation from a 2D diffusion
model to guide the generation of a 3D object represented as
a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [30].
While Text-to-3D can generate impressive results, it is
inherently unconstrained and may lack the ability to guide
or enforce a 3D structure. In this paper, we show how to introduce shape-guidance to the generation process to guide
it toward a specific shape, thus allowing increased control
over the generation process. Our method builds upon two
models, a NeRF model [30], and a Latent Diffusion Model
(LDM) [39]. Latent Models, which apply the entire diffusion process in a compact latent space, have recently gained
popularity due to their efficiency and publicly available pretrained checkpoints. As score distillation was previously
applied only on RGB diffusion models, we first present two
key modifications to the NeRF model that are better paired
with guidance from a latent model. First, instead of representing our NeRF in the standard RGB space, we propose
a Latent-NeRF which operates directly in the latent space
of the LDM, thus avoiding the burden of encoding a rendered RGB image to a latent space for each and every guid-

12663

