This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-Pruner: eXplainable Pruning for Vision Transformers
Lu Yu
James Cook University

Wei Xiang*
La Trobe University

lu.yu@my.jcu.edu.au

w.xiang@latrobe.edu.au

Abstract
Recently vision transformer models have become prominent models for a range of tasks. These models, however, usually suffer from intensive computational costs and
heavy memory requirements, making them impractical for
deployment on edge platforms. Recent studies have proposed to prune transformers in an unexplainable manner,
which overlook the relationship between internal units of
the model and the target class, thereby leading to inferior performance. To alleviate this problem, we propose
a novel explainable pruning framework dubbed X-Pruner,
which is designed by considering the explainability of the
pruning criterion. Specifically, to measure each prunable
unit’s contribution to predicting each target class, a novel
explainability-aware mask is proposed and learned in an
end-to-end manner. Then, to preserve the most informative
units and learn the layer-wise pruning rate, we adaptively
search the layer-wise threshold that differentiates between
unpruned and pruned units based on their explainabilityaware mask values. To verify and evaluate our method,
we apply the X-Pruner on representative transformer models including the DeiT and Swin Transformer. Comprehensive simulation results demonstrate that the proposed XPruner outperforms the state-of-the-art black-box methods
with significantly reduced computational costs and slight
performance degradation. Code is available at https:
//github.com/vickyyu90/XPruner.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, transformers have attracted increasing attention in various challenging domains, such as
natural language processing, vision, or graphs [3, 9]. It is
composed of two key modules, namely the Multi-Head Attention (MHA) and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). However, similar to CNNs, the major limitations of transformers include the gigantic model sizes with intensive computational costs. Which severely restricts their deployment
* Corresponding author.

in resource-constrained devices like edge platforms. To
compress and accelerate transformer models, a variety of
techniques naturally emerge. Popular approaches include
weight quantization [30], knowledge distillation [28], filter
compression [24], and model pruning [21]. Among them,
model pruning especially structured pruning has gained
considerable interest that removes the least important parameters in pre-trained models in a hardware-friendly manner, which is thus the focus of our paper.
Due to the significant structural differences between
CNNs and transformers, although there is prevailing success in CNN pruning methods, the research on pruning
transformers is still in the early stage. Existing studies
could empirically be classified into three categories. (1)
Criterion-based pruning resorts to preserving the most important weights/attentions by employing pre-defined criteria, e.g., the L1/L2 norm [20], or activation values [6]. (2)
Training-based pruning retrains models with hand-crafted
sparse regularizations [31] or resource constraints [28, 29].
(3) Architecture-search pruning methods directly search for
an optimal sub-architecture based on pre-defined policies
[3, 10]. Although these studies have made considerable
progress, two fundamental issues have not been fully addressed, i.e., the optimal layer-wise pruning ratio and the
weight importance measurement.
For the first issue, the final performance is notably affected by the selection of pruning rates for different layers.
To this end, some relevant works have proposed a series of
methods for determining the optimal per-layer rate [7, 11].
For instance, Michel et al. [18] investigate the effectiveness
of attention heads in transformers for NLP tasks and propose to prune attention heads with a greedy algorithm. Yu et
al. [28] develop a pruning algorithm that removes attention
scores below a learned per-layer threshold while preserving
the overall structure of the attention mechanism. However,
the proposed methods do not take into account the interdependencies between weight. Recently, Zhu et al. [31] introduce the method VTP with a sparsity regularization to
identify and remove unimportant patches and heads from
the vision transformers. However, VTP needs to try the
thresholds manually for all layers.
1
24355

