This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QPGesture: Quantization-Based and Phase-Guided Motion Matching for
Natural Speech-Driven Gesture Generation
Sicheng Yang1 Zhiyong WuB,1,4 Minglei Li2 Zhensong Zhang3
Lei Hao3 Weihong Bao1 Haolin Zhuang1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yangsc21, bwh21, zhuanghl21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

{liminglei29, zhangzhensong, haolei5}@huawei.com

Abstract
Speech-driven gesture generation is highly challenging
due to the random jitters of human motion. In addition,
there is an inherent asynchronous relationship between human speech and gestures. To tackle these challenges, we introduce a novel quantization-based and phase-guided motion matching framework. Specifically, we first present a
gesture VQ-VAE module to learn a codebook to summarize meaningful gesture units. With each code representing
a unique gesture, random jittering problems are alleviated
effectively. We then use Levenshtein distance to align diverse gestures with different speech. Levenshtein distance
based on audio quantization as a similarity metric of corresponding speech of gestures helps match more appropriate gestures with speech, and solves the alignment problem of speech and gestures well. Moreover, we introduce
phase to guide the optimal gesture matching based on the
semantics of context or rhythm of audio. Phase guides when
text-based or speech-based gestures should be performed
to make the generated gestures more natural. Extensive
experiments show that our method outperforms recent approaches on speech-driven gesture generation. Our code,
database, pre-trained models and demos are available at
https://github.com/YoungSeng/QPGesture.

1. Introduction
Nonverbal behavior plays a key role in conveying messages in human communication [26], including facial expressions, hand gestures and body gestures. Co-speech gesture helps better self-expression [45]. However, producing
human-like and speech-appropriate gestures is still very difficult due to two main challenges: 1) Random jittering:
People make many small jitters and movements when they
speak, which can lead to a decrease in the quality of the gen-

Most people just laughed

at

my

face

Suddenly

two men came up to me

Figure 1. Gesture examples generated by our proposed method
on various types of speech. The character is from Mixamo [2].

erated gestures. 2) Inherent asynchronicity with speech:
Unlike speech with face or lips, there is an inherent asynchronous relationship between human speech and gestures.
Most existing gesture generation studies intend to solve
the two challenges in a single ingeniously designed neural
network that directly maps speech to 3D joint sequence in
high-dimensional continuous space [18, 24, 27, 31] using a
sliding window with a fixed step size [17, 46, 47]. However, such methods are limited by the representation power
of proposed neural networks, like the GENEA gesturegeneration challenge results. No system in GENEA challenge 2020 [26] rated above a bottom line that paired the input speech audio with mismatched excerpts of training data
motion. In GENEA challenge 2022 [48], a motion matching based method [50] ranked first in the human-likeness
evaluation and upper-body appropriateness evaluation, and
outperformed all other neural network-based models. These
results indicate that motion matching based models, if designed properly, are more effective than neural network
based models.
Inspired by this observation, in this work, we propose
a novel quantization-based motion matching framework for
audio-driven gesture generation. Our framework includes
two main components aiming at solving the two above challenges, respectively. First, to address the random jittering

2321

