This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PMatch: Paired Masked Image Modeling for Dense Geometric Matching
Shengjie Zhu and Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824
zhusheng@msu.edu, liuxm@cse.msu.edu

Abstract
Dense geometric matching determines the dense pixelwise correspondence between a source and support image
corresponding to the same 3D structure. Prior works employ an encoder of transformer blocks to correlate the twoframe features. However, existing monocular pretraining
tasks, e.g., image classification, and masked image modeling (MIM), can not pretrain the cross-frame module, yielding less optimal performance. To resolve this, we reformulate the MIM from reconstructing a single masked image to
reconstructing a pair of masked images, enabling the pretraining of transformer module. Additionally, we incorporate a decoder into pretraining for improved upsampling
results. Further, to be robust to the textureless area, we propose a novel cross-frame global matching module (CFGM).
Since the most textureless area is planar surfaces, we propose a homography loss to further regularize its learning.
Combined together, we achieve the State-of-The-Art (SoTA)
performance on geometric matching. Codes and models are
available at https://github.com/ShngJZ/PMatch.

1. Introduction
When a 3D structure is viewed in both a source and a
support image, for a pixel (or keypoint) in the source image,
the task of geometric matching identifies its corresponding
pixel in the support image. This task is a cornerstone for
many downstream vision applications, e.g. homography estimation [18], structure-from-motion [45], visual odometry
estimation [21] and visual camera localization [7].
There exist both sparse and dense methods for geometric matching. The sparse methods [16, 19, 32, 33, 40, 42,
48, 48, 56] only yield correspondence on sparse or semidense locations while the dense methods [20, 54, 55] estimate pixel-wise correspondence. They primarily differ
in that the sparse methods embed a keypoint detection or
a global matching on discrete coordinates, which underlyingly assumes a unique mapping between source and support frames. Yet, the existence of textureless surfaces in-

Figure 1. Most vision tasks start with a pretrained network. In geometric matching, the unique network components processing twoview features cannot benefit from the monocular pretraining task,
e.g., image classification, and masked image modeling (MIM). As
in the figure, this work enables the pretraining of a matching model
via reformulating MIM from reconstructing a single masked image to reconstructing a pair of masked images.

troduces multiple similar local patches, disabling keypoint
detection or causing ambiguous matching results. Dense
methods, though facing similar challenges at the coarse
level, alleviate it with the additional fine-level local context
and smoothness constraint. Until recently, the dense methods demonstrate a comparable or better geometric matching
performance over the sparse methods [20, 54, 55].
A relevant task to dense geometric matching is the optical flow estimation [50]. Both tasks estimate dense correspondences, whereas the optical flow is applied over consecutive frames with the constant brightness assumption.
In geometric matching [9, 48], apart from the encoder
encodes source and support frames into feature maps, there
exist transformer blocks which correlate two-frame features, e.g., the LoFTR module [48]. Since these network
components consume two-frame inputs, the monocular pretraining task, e.g., the image classification and masked image modeling (MIM) defined on ImageNet dataset, is unable to benefit the network. This limits both the geometric
matching performance and its generalization capability.
To address this, we reformulate the MIM from single
masked image reconstruction to paired masked images reconstruction, i.e., pMIM. Paired MIM benefits the geometric matching as both tasks rely on the cross-frame module
to correlate two frames inputs for prediction.

21909

