This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeaThru-NeRF: Neural Radiance Fields in Scattering Media
Deborah Levy1 , Amit Peleg1 , Naama Pearl1 , Dan Rosenbaum1 , Derya Akkaynak1,2 ,
Simon Korman1 , Tali Treibitz1
1
University of Haifa , 2 The Inter-University Institute for Marine Sciences in Eilat
sea-thru-nerf.github.io

Figure 1. NeRFs have not yet tackled scenes in which the medium strongly influences the appearances of objects, as in the case of
underwater imagery. By incorporating a scattering image formation model into the NeRF rendering equations, we are able to separate the
scene into ‘clean’ and backscatter components. Consequently, we can render photorealistic novel-views with or without the participating
medium, in the latter case recovering colors as if the image was taken in clear air. Results on the Curaçao scene: A RAW image (left)
is brightened and white balanced (WB) for visualization, showing more detail, while areas further from the camera (top-right corner) are
occluded and attenuated by severe backscatter - which is effectively removed in our restored image. Please zoom-in to observe the details.

Abstract
Research on neural radiance fields (NeRFs) for novel
view generation is exploding with new models and extensions. However, a question that remains unanswered is what
happens in underwater or foggy scenes where the medium
strongly influences the appearance of objects. Thus far,
NeRF and its variants have ignored these cases. However,
since the NeRF framework is based on volumetric rendering, it has inherent capability to account for the medium’s
effects, once modeled appropriately. We develop a new rendering model for NeRFs in scattering media, which is based
on the SeaThru image formation model, and suggest a suitable architecture for learning both scene information and
medium parameters. We demonstrate the strength of our
method using simulated and real-world scenes, correctly
rendering novel photorealistic views underwater. Even
more excitingly, we can render clear views of these scenes,
removing the medium between the camera and the scene
and reconstructing the appearance and depth of far objects,
which are severely occluded by the medium. Our code and
unique datasets are available on the project’s website.

1. Introduction
The pioneering work of Mildenhall et al. [25] on Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRFs) has tremendously advanced the
field of Neural Rendering, due to its flexibility and unprecedented quality of synthesized images. Yet, the formulations
of the original NeRF [25] and its followup variants assume

that images were acquired in clear air, i.e., in a medium
that does not scatter or absorb light in a significant manner and that the acquired image is composed solely of the
object radiance. The NeRF formulation is based on volumetric rendering equations that take into account sampled
points along 3D rays. Assuming a clear air environment, an
implicit assumption, which is often enforced explicitly with
dedicated loss components [5], is that a single opaque (high
density) object is encountered per ray, with zero density between the camera and the object.
In stark contrast to clear air case, when the medium is
absorbing and / or scattering (e.g., haze, fog, smog, and all
aquatic habitats), the volume rendering equation has a true
volumetric meaning, as the entire volume, and not only the
object, contributes to image intensity. As the NeRF model
estimates color and density at every point of a scene, it lends
itself perfectly to general volumetric rendering, given that
the appropriate rendering model is used. Here, we bridge
this gap with SeaThru-NeRF, a framework that incorporates
a rendering model that takes into account scattering media.
This is achieved by assigning separate color and density
parameters to the object (scene) and the medium, within the
NeRF framework. Our approach adopts the SeaThru underwater image formation model [1, 3] to account for scattering media. SeaThru is a generalization of the standard
wavelength-independent attenuation (e.g., fog) image formation model, where two different wideband coefficients
are used to represent the medium, which is more accurate
when attenuation is wavelength-dependent (as in all wa-

56

