This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object Pose Estimation with Statistical Guarantees:
Conformal Keypoint Detection and Geometric Uncertainty Propagation
Heng Yang and Marco Pavone
NVIDIA Research
Conformal Keypoint Detection

Geometric Uncertainty Propagation

reproject
Inductive
Conformal
Prediction

OR

(a) Input image & heatmaps (b) Circular/elliptical prediction sets

Constraint
Propagation

Semidefinite
Relaxation

RANSAG

reproject

(c) Pose UnceRtainty SEt (PURSE)

(d) Average pose

(e) Worst-case error bounds

Figure 1. Probabilistically correct object pose estimation. Given (a) an input image and heatmap detections of the object semantic
keypoints, our method first conformalizes the heatmaps into (b) circular or elliptical prediction sets that guarantee probabilistic coverage
of the groundtruth keypoints (e.g., 90%). Our method then propagates the uncertainty in the keypoints to the object pose, forming (c) a
Pose UnceRtainty SEt (PURSE) that contains the groundtruth pose with the same probability. We develop RANdom SAmple averaGing
(RANSAG) to sample from PURSE and generate (d) an average pose, and apply semidefinite relaxation to compute (e) worst-case error
bounds: the blue duck attains the worst rotation error w.r.t. the (average pose) yellow duck; the red duck attains the worst translation error.
Code available: https://github.com/NVlabs/ConformalKeypoint.

Abstract
The two-stage object pose estimation paradigm first detects semantic keypoints on the image and then estimates
the 6D pose by minimizing reprojection errors. Despite performing well on standard benchmarks, existing techniques
offer no provable guarantees on the quality and uncertainty
of the estimation. In this paper, we inject two fundamental
changes, namely conformal keypoint detection and geometric uncertainty propagation, into the two-stage paradigm
and propose the first pose estimator that endows an estimation with provable and computable worst-case error bounds.
On one hand, conformal keypoint detection applies the statistical machinery of inductive conformal prediction to convert heuristic keypoint detections into circular or elliptical
prediction sets that cover the groundtruth keypoints with a
user-specified marginal probability (e.g., 90%). Geometric
uncertainty propagation, on the other, propagates the geometric constraints on the keypoints to the 6D object pose,
leading to a Pose UnceRtainty SEt (PURSE) that guarantees
coverage of the groundtruth pose with the same probability. The PURSE, however, is a nonconvex set that does not
directly lead to estimated poses and uncertainties. Therefore, we develop RANdom SAmple averaGing (RANSAG)
to compute an average pose and apply semidefinite relaxation to upper bound the worst-case errors between the
average pose and the groundtruth. On the LineMOD Occlusion dataset we demonstrate: (i) the PURSE covers the
groundtruth with valid probabilities; (ii) the worst-case error bounds provide correct uncertainty quantification; and
(iii) the average pose achieves better or similar accuracy as
representative methods based on sparse keypoints.

1. Introduction
Estimating object poses from images is a fundamental
problem in computer vision and finds extensive applications
in augmented reality [42], autonomous driving [80], robotic
manipulation [60], and space robotics [19]. One of the most
popular paradigms for object pose estimation is a two-stage
pipeline [20, 71, 72, 79, 81, 85, 89, 101], where the first stage
detects (semantic) keypoints of the objects on the image,
and the second stage computes the object pose by solving
an optimization known as Perspective-n-Points (PnP) that
minimizes reprojection errors of the detected keypoints.
Safety-critical applications call for provably correct
computer vision algorithms. Existing algorithms in the twostage paradigm (reviewed in Section 2), however, provide
few performance guarantees on the quality of the estimated
poses, due to three challenges. (C1) It is difficult to ensure the detected keypoints (typically from neural networks)
are close to the groundtruth keypoints. In practice, the
first stage often outputs keypoints that are arbitrarily wrong,
known as outliers. (C2) Robust estimation is employed in
the second stage to reject outliers, leading to nonconvex optimizations. Fast heuristics such as RANSAC [26] are widely
adopted to find an approximate solution but they cannot
guarantee global optimality and often fail without notice.
(C3) There is no provably correct uncertainty quantification
of the estimation, notably, a formal worst-case error bound
between the estimation and the groundtruth. Though recent
work [98] proposed convex relaxations to certify global optimality of RANSAC and addressed (C2), it cannot ensure
correct estimation as the optimal pose may be far away from

8947

