This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Incremental Semantic Segmentation
Jiahua Dong1, 2, 3 *, Duzhen Zhang4 *, Yang Cong1, 2†, Wei Cong1, 2, 3 , Henghui Ding4 , Dengxin Dai4
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110016, China.‡
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang, 110169, China.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
4
ETH Zürich, Zürich, 8092, Switzerland.
{dongjiahua1995, congyang81, congwei45, henghui.ding}@gmail.com, dai@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Federated learning-based semantic segmentation (FSS)
has drawn widespread attention via decentralized training
on local clients. However, most FSS models assume categories are fixed in advance, thus heavily undergoing forgetting on old categories in practical applications where local
clients receive new categories incrementally while have no
memory storage to access old classes. Moreover, new clients
collecting novel classes may join in the global training of
FSS, which further exacerbates catastrophic forgetting. To
surmount the above challenges, we propose a ForgettingBalanced Learning (FBL) model to address heterogeneous
forgetting on old classes from both intra-client and interclient aspects. Specifically, under the guidance of pseudo
labels generated via adaptive class-balanced pseudo labeling, we develop a forgetting-balanced semantic compensation loss and a forgetting-balanced relation consistency loss
to rectify intra-client heterogeneous forgetting of old categories with background shift. It performs balanced gradient
propagation and relation consistency distillation within local clients. Moreover, to tackle heterogeneous forgetting
from inter-client aspect, we propose a task transition monitor. It can identify new classes under privacy protection
and store the latest old global model for relation distillation.
Qualitative experiments reveal large improvement of our
model against comparison methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/JiahuaDong/FISS.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [13,20,22,44] is a remarkable decentralized training paradigm to learn a global model across
* Equal contributions. † The corresponding author is Prof. Yang Cong.
‡ This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science Foun-

dation of China under Grant 62127807, 62225310 and 62133005.

Local Model

…

Local Model

Task t
Task t+1
Task t-1
Consecutive Segmentation Tasks
of Medical Lesions

Task t
Task t+1
Task t-1
Consecutive Segmentation Tasks
of Medical Lesions

The Lth Local Hospital

The 1st Local Hospital

Distribute

Upload

Distribute
Local Model

Upload
Task t
Task t+1
Task t-1
Consecutive Segmentation Tasks
of Medical Lesions

Global Server

The Newly-Joined Local Hospital

Figure 1. Exemplary FISS setting for medical diagnosis. Hundreds
of hospitals including newly-joined ones receive new classes incrementally according to their own preference. FISS aims to segment
new diseases consecutively via collaboratively learning a global
segmentation model on private medical data of different hospitals.

distributed local clients without accessing their private data.
Under privacy preservation, it has achieved rapid development in semantic segmentation [4, 8, 30] by training on multiple decentralized local clients to alleviate the constraint
of data island that requires enormous finely-labeled pixel
annotations [25]. As a result, federated learning-based semantic segmentation (FSS) [28,29] significantly economizes
annotation costs in data-scarce scenarios via training a global
segmentation model on private data of different clients [29].
However, existing FSS methods [16, 25, 28, 29] unrealistically assume that the learned foreground classes are static
and fixed over time, which is impractical in real-world dynamic applications where local clients receive streaming data
of new categories consecutively. To tackle this issue, existing

3934

