This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Texture Synthesis with Guided Correspondence
Yang Zhou
Kaijian Chen
Rongjun Xiao
Hui Huang*
Visual Computing Research Center, Shenzhen University
{zhouyangvcc, szchenkaijian, xiaorongjun000, hhzhiyan}@gmail.com

Figure 1. We propose an improved CNNMRF model. It can be used for example-based texture optimization with or without guidance maps
(left). The newly defined loss function can also be applied to train generative networks, enabling real-time controlled synthesis (right).

Abstract
Markov random fields (MRFs) are the cornerstone of
classical approaches to example- based texture synthesis.
Yet, it is not fully valued in the deep learning era. This paper aims to re- promote the combination of MRFs and neural
networks, i.e., the CNNMRF model, for texture synthesis,
with two key observations made. We first propose to compute the Guided Correspondence Distance in the nearest
neighbor search, based on which a Guided Correspondence
loss is defined to measure the similarity of the output texture
to the example. Experiments show that our approach surpasses existing neural approaches in uncontrolled and controlled texture synthesis. More importantly, the Guided Correspondence loss can function as a general textural loss in,
e.g., training generative networks for real- time controlled
synthesis and inversion- based single- image editing. In contrast, existing textural losses, such as the Sliced Wasserstein
loss, cannot work on these challenging tasks.

1. Introduction
Example-based texture synthesis has been a longstanding topic in vision and graphics. It aims to synthesize
*Corresponding author

new textures of any resolution that retain the patterns of a
given exemplar, with no apparent visual flaws and having
realism. Classical approaches formulate the synthesis as a
Markov Random Field (MRF) problem and solve it by iteratively optimizing the output patches to be similar to their
nearest neighbor in the input. This MRF-based optimization
framework is not only widely used both in texture synthesis [18–20, 25, 39], but also adopted in more general tasks
such as image synthesis and editing [1, 7].
Despite the success of MRF optimization, recent attention has been devoted to utilizing deep neural networks, either matching the statistics of deep features [12,16] or training generative adversarial networks (GANs) [5, 30, 33, 40].
In this paper, we retake the MRF optimization framework,
given its versatility and flexibility in texture synthesis, and
combine it with deep neural networks. We first search the
nearest neighbor for each output patch according to Guided
Correspondence Distance over multi-layer deep features.
Then, unlike traditional methods that copy and paste source
patches, we define a Guided Correspondence loss that measures the overall similarity based on all the corresponding
patches, and update the output pixels via back-propagation.
Actually, Li et al. [22] used to explore a CNNMRF
model in 2016, which combines MRF and neural networks
for style transfer. Champandard [6] applied it to texture synthesis later. Comparing to traditional texture optimization,

18095

