This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PermutoSDF: Fast Multi-View Reconstruction with
Implicit Surfaces using Permutohedral Lattices
Radu Alexandru Rosu
Sven Behnke
University of Bonn, Germany
{rosu, behnke}@ais.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Neural radiance-density field methods have become increasingly popular for the task of novel-view rendering.
Their recent extension to hash-based positional encoding
ensures fast training and inference with visually pleasing
results. However, density-based methods struggle with recovering accurate surface geometry. Hybrid methods alleviate this issue by optimizing the density based on an underlying SDF. However, current SDF methods are overly
smooth and miss fine geometric details. In this work, we
combine the strengths of these two lines of work in a novel
hash-based implicit surface representation. We propose improvements to the two areas by replacing the voxel hash encoding with a permutohedral lattice which optimizes faster,
especially for higher dimensions. We additionally propose
a regularization scheme which is crucial for recovering
high-frequency geometric detail. We evaluate our method
on multiple datasets and show that we can recover geometric detail at the level of pores and wrinkles while using only RGB images for supervision. Furthermore, using sphere tracing we can render novel views at 30 fps
on an RTX 3090. Code is publicly available at https:
//radualexandru.github.io/permuto_sdf

1. Introduction
Accurate reconstruction geometry and appearance of
scenes is an important component of many computer vision
tasks [16,19,25,31]. Recent Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)like models [3, 16, 18, 28] represent the scene as a density
and radiance field and, when supervised with enough input
images, can render photorealistic novel views.
Works like INGP [18] further improve on NeRF by using a hash-based positional encoding which results in fast
training and visually pleasing results. However, despite the
photorealistic renderings, the reconstructed scene geometry
can deviate severally from the ground-truth. For example,
objects with high specularity or view-dependent effects are

Train 30 min

Multi-view images

Rendered novel view
35 ms

Geometry (SDF)

Figure 1. Given multi-view images, we recover both high quality
geometry as an implicit SDF and appearance which can be rendered in real-time.

often reconstructed as a cloud of low density; untextured
regions can have arbitrary density in the reconstruction.
Another line of recent methods tackles the issue of incorrect geometry by representing the surfaces of objects
as binary occupancy [22] or Signed Distance Function
(SDF) [30, 33]. This representation can also be optimized
with volumetric rendering techniques that are supervised
with RGB images. However, parametrization of the SDF
as a single fully-connected Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
often leads to overly smooth geometry and color.
In this work, we propose PermutoSDF, a method that
combines the strengths of hash-based encodings and implicit surfaces. We represent the scene as an SDF and a
color field, which we render using unbiased volumetric integration [30]. A naive combination of these two methods
would fail to reconstruct accurate surfaces however, since it
lacks any inductive bias for the ambiguous cases like specular or untextured surfaces. Attempting to regularize the SDF
with a total variation loss or a curvature loss will produce a
smoother geometry at the expense of losing smaller details.
In this work, we propose a regularization scheme that ensures both smooth geometry where needed and also reconstruction of fine details like pores and wrinkles. Furthermore, we improve upon the voxel hashing method of INGP

8466

