This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-guided Unsupervised Latent Transformation for Multi-attribute
Image Manipulation

1

Xiwen Wei1 , Zhen Xu1 , Cheng Liu2 , Si Wu1,3∗, Zhiwen Yu1 , and Hau San Wong4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, Shantou University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

{202021044777, csxuzhen}@mail.scut.edu.cn, cliu@stu.edu.cn, {cswusi, zhwyu}@scut.edu.cn,
cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Great progress has been made in StyleGAN-based image editing. To associate with preset attributes, most existing approaches focus on supervised learning for semantically meaningful latent space traversal directions, and
each manipulation step is typically determined for an individual attribute. To address this limitation, we propose a
Text-guided Unsupervised StyleGAN Latent Transformation
(TUSLT) model, which adaptively infers a single transformation step in the latent space of StyleGAN to simultaneously manipulate multiple attributes on a given input image.
Specifically, we adopt a two-stage architecture for a latent
mapping network to break down the transformation process
into two manageable steps. Our network first learns a diverse set of semantic directions tailored to an input image,
and later nonlinearly fuses the ones associated with the target attributes to infer a residual vector. The resulting tightly
interlinked two-stage architecture delivers the flexibility to
handle diverse attribute combinations. By leveraging the
cross-modal text-image representation of CLIP, we can perform pseudo annotations based on the semantic similarity
between preset attribute text descriptions and training images, and further jointly train an auxiliary attribute classifier with the latent mapping network to provide semantic
guidance. We perform extensive experiments to demonstrate
that the adopted strategies contribute to the superior performance of TUSLT.

1. Introduction
Visual attributes represent semantically meaningful features inherent in images, and attribute manipulation has ex∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visually comparing TUSLT with StyleFlow (supervised)
and StyleCLIP (text-driven) in precisely manipulating multiple attributes and preserving irrelevant attributes.

perienced great improvements, due to the advent of Generative Adversarial Network [13] (GAN)-based generative
models, e.g. StyleGAN [21, 22] and StarGAN [7, 8]. Recent works [15, 37, 43] have discovered that the latent space
of StyleGAN possesses semantic disentanglement properties, enabling a variety of image editing operations via latent transformations.
StyleGAN-based methods for image attribute manipulation typically involve a large number of manual annotations
or well-trained attribute classifiers. Furthermore, the discovered semantic latent directions are associated with individual attributes. The editing on a target attribute is carried out by moving the latent code of an input image along
one of the directions. For K target attributes, these models require K transformation steps to handle the translation.
As a result, they are not scalable to the increasing number
of target attributes in multi-attribute transformation tasks.
As shown in Figure 1, we test a state-of-the-art supervised

19285

