This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Constrained Evolutionary Diffusion Filter for Monocular Endoscope Tracking
Xiongbiao Luo*
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China
National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China
xiongbiao.luo@gmail.com

Abstract
Stochastic filtering is widely used to deal with nonlinear optimization problems such as 3-D and visual tracking in various computer vision and augmented reality applications. Many current methods suffer from an imbalance between exploration and exploitation due to their particle degeneracy and impoverishment, resulting in local optimums. To address this imbalance, this work proposes a
new constrained evolutionary diffusion filter for nonlinear
optimization. Specifically, this filter develops spatial state
constraints and adaptive history-recall differential evolution embedded evolutionary stochastic diffusion instead of
sequential resampling to resolve the degeneracy and impoverishment problem. With application to monocular endoscope 3-D tracking, the experimental results show that
the proposed filtering significantly improves the balance between exploration and exploitation and certainly works better than recent 3-D tracking methods. Particularly, the surgical tracking error was reduced from 4.03 mm to 2.59 mm.

1. Introduction
Tracking a camera’s 3-D motion is vital in various computer vision applications, e.g., augmented reality, 3-D reconstruction, computer assisted surgery, navigation and
mapping, and robotics. Recent advances in 3-D tracking
are widely discussed in the literature [9, 11, 13, 20, 21, 33].
Different from commonly used cameras in daily life, endoscopic cameras are typical hand-held devices (called endoscopes) used to inspect interior surfaces or inaccessible
regions of tubular or hollow structures where the human
visual system can hardly observe. While industrial endoscopes are powerful for examining unreachable areas of
* The author would like to give his special thanks to Professor Raymond
Honfu Chan who is with Hong Kong Centre for Cerebro-cardiovascular
Health Engineering and City University of Hong Kong. This work was
supported in part by the National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grants 82272133 and 61971367, in part by the Fujian Provincial Technology Innovation Joint Funds under Grant 2019Y9091, and in part by the
Fujian Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2020J01004.

buildings or parts of machines, surgical endoscopes are useful to intuitively inspect cavities in the body. Monocular
endoscopic 3-D tracking plays an essential role in precise
industrial inspection, clinical diagnosis and treatment.
Unfortunately, surgical endoscopic cameras only provide
2-D video images without any depth information and cannot
localize themselves and targets of interest like tumors in the
surgical field. To this end, surgical 3-D tracking methods
are widely developed to accurately localize surgical tools
and targets and reduce inadvertent hurts in endoscopic or
robotic surgery [16, 19, 26]. Such 3-D tracking is a nonlinear optimization problem as well as a multisensor or multisource information fusion procedure, which is commonly
solved by stochastic optimization methods [4].
Stochastic filtering is widely used for 3-D tracking [23],
and usually generates a population of particles (initial solutions) and propagates them to approximate the optimal solution. But it still limits itself to local optimums or premature
convergence due to an imbalance between exploration and
exploitation. Specifically, this imbalance results from the
particle degeneracy and impoverishment after sequential resampling, leading to ineffective filtering. Theoretically, this
work aims to solve the particle degeneracy-impoverishment
problem to balance exploring and exploiting and create a
new effective and powerful filtering strategy with robust optimization performance. Technically, this work also strives
for addressing several challenges in current surgical 3-D
tracking methods: (1) endoscopic image uncertainty or artifacts in vision-based 3-D tracking, (2) inaccurate and jitter
measurements in sensor-based 3-D tracking, and (3) tissue
deformation and patient movement in surgical procedures.
Technical contributions of this work are clarified as follows. First of all, two new spatial state constraints are introduced for nonlinear optimization problems, improving
the optimization performance. More interestingly, a new
strategy of evolutionary stochastic diffusion with adaptive
history-recall differential evolution instead of sequential resampling can successfully resolve the particle degeneracyimpoverishment problem, effectively balancing between exploration and exploitation. We then propose constrained

4747

