This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unbiased Multiple Instance Learning for Weakly Supervised
Video Anomaly Detection
Hui Lv1,3,4 , Zhongqi Yue4 , Qianru Sun3 , Bin Luo2 , Zhen Cui1 *, Hanwang Zhang4
1
PCAlab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Alibaba Group
3
Singapore Management University 4 Nanyang Technological University
1

{hubrthui, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn, 2 luwu.lb@alibaba-inc.com

3

qianrusun@smu.edu.sg, 4 {yuez0003, hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg

Weakly Supervised Video Anomaly Detection (WSVAD)
is challenging because the binary anomaly label is only
given on the video level, but the output requires snippetlevel predictions. So, Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is
prevailing in WSVAD. However, MIL is notoriously known
to suffer from many false alarms because the snippet-level
detector is easily biased towards the abnormal snippets with
simple context, confused by the normality with the same
bias, and missing the anomaly with a different pattern. To
this end, we propose a new MIL framework: Unbiased MIL
(UMIL), to learn unbiased anomaly features that improve
WSVAD. At each MIL training iteration, we use the current detector to divide the samples into two groups with different context biases: the most confident abnormal/normal
snippets and the rest ambiguous ones. Then, by seeking
the invariant features across the two sample groups, we
can remove the variant context biases. Extensive experiments on benchmarks UCF-Crime and TAD demonstrate
the effectiveness of our UMIL. Our code is provided at
https://github.com/ktr-hubrt/UMIL.

1. Introduction
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to detect events
among video sequences that deviate from expectation,
which is widely applied in real-world tasks such as intelligent manufacturing [8], TAD surveillance [9, 22] and public security [25, 30]. To learn such a detector, conventional
fully-supervised VAD [1] is impractical as the scattered
but diverse anomalies require extremely expensive labeling
cost. On the other hand, unsupervised VAD [3, 11, 13, 35,
42] by only learning on normal videos to detect open-set
anomalies often triggers false alarms, as it is essentially illposed to define what is normal and abnormal by giving only
* Corresponding author

Explosion
Explosion

Vandalism
Vandalism

11

11

Score
Score

Abstract

00

Time
Time

(a)

00

Time
Time

(b)

Figure 1. Two anomalies of Explosion and Vandalism are illustrated. Among each video sequence, we use red boxes to highlight
the ground-truth anomaly regions as in the first row. The corresponding anomaly curves of an MIL-based model are depicted below. False alarms and real anomalies are linked to the curves with
blue arrows and green arrows respectively. Best viewed in color.

normal videos without any prior knowledge. Hence, we are
interested in a more practical setting: Weakly Supervised
VAD (WSVAD) [12, 43], where only video-level binary labels (i.e., normal vs. abnormal) are available.
In WSVAD, each video sequence is partitioned into
multiple snippets. Hence, all the snippets are normal
in a normal video, and at least one snippet contains the
anomaly in an abnormal one. The goal of WSVAD is to
train a snippet-level anomaly detector using video-level labels. The mainstream method is Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [22, 30]—multiple instances refer to the snippets in each video, and learning is conducted by decreasing the predicted anomaly score for each snippet in a normal video, and increasing that only for the snippet with the
largest anomaly score in an abnormal video. For example,
Figure 1a shows an abnormal video containing an explosion scene, and the detector is trained by MIL to increase
the anomaly score for the most anomalous explosion snippet (green link).
However, MIL is easily biased towards the simplest context shortcut in a video. We observe in Figure 1a that the de-

8022

