This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Domain Generalization for
Multi-view 3D Object Detection in Bird-Eye-View
Shuo Wang1*

Xinhai Zhao2* Hai-Ming Xu3 Zehui Chen1 Dameng Yu2 ,
Jiahao Chang 1 , Zhen Yang2 , Feng Zhao1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 University of Adelaide
{shuowang2323,lovesnow,changjh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhaoxinhai1,yudameng,yang.zhen}@huawei.com

hai-ming.xu@adelaide.edu.au
fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view 3D object detection (MV3D-Det) in BirdEye-View (BEV) has drawn extensive attention due to its
low cost and high efficiency. Although new algorithms
for camera-only 3D object detection have been continuously proposed, most of them may risk drastic performance
degradation when the domain of input images differs from
that of training. In this paper, we first analyze the causes
of the domain gap for the MV3D-Det task. Based on the
covariate shift assumption, we find that the gap mainly attributes to the feature distribution of BEV, which is determined by the quality of both depth estimation and 2D image’s feature representation. To acquire a robust depth prediction, we propose to decouple the depth estimation from
the intrinsic parameters of the camera (i.e. the focal length)
through converting the prediction of metric depth to that
of scale-invariant depth and perform dynamic perspective
augmentation to increase the diversity of the extrinsic parameters (i.e. the camera poses) by utilizing homography.
Moreover, we modify the focal length values to create multiple pseudo-domains and construct an adversarial training loss to encourage the feature representation to be more
domain-agnostic. Without bells and whistles, our approach,
namely DG-BEV, successfully alleviates the performance
drop on the unseen target domain without impairing the
accuracy of the source domain. Extensive experiments on
Waymo, nuScenes, and Lyft, demonstrate the generalization
and effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
3D object detection, aiming at localizing objects in the
3D space, is critical for various applications such as au* Shuo Wang and Xinhai Zhao contributed equally. This work was done
when Shuo Wang was an intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Baseline

(b) DG-BEV

Figure 1. Qualitative comparisons between BEVDepth and the
proposed DG-BEV. The red and blue bounding boxes represent
ground truth and detected results on the target domain respectively.
Depth-shift is shown in green arrows. Our approach can detect
correct 3D results on unknown domains.

tonomous driving [6, 38], robotic navigation [2], and virtual reality [32], etc. Despite the remarkable progress of
LiDAR-based methods [17,30,33], camera-based 3D object
detection in Bird-Eye-View (BEV) [14, 19, 21] has drawn
increasing attention in recent years due to its rich semantic
information and low cost for deployment.
However, most of the detectors assume that the training
and testing data are obtained in the same domain which may
be hardly guaranteed in realistic scenarios. Thus, tremendous performance degradation will appear when the domain
of the input image shifts. For example, nuScenes [3] and

13333

