This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CUDA: Convolution-based Unlearnable Datasets
Vinu Sankar Sadasivan
University of Maryland

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
University of Southern California

Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland

vinu@umd.edu

soltanol@usc.edu

sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction

This encourages deep learning practitioners to scrape data
from the web for data collection [8, 31, 38, 41]. Since a lot
of the data is publicly available online, sometime this scrapping of data is unauthorized. For instance, a recent article [15] discloses that a private company trained a commercial face recognition system using over three billion facial
images collected from the internet without any user consent.
Although such massive data can significantly boost the performance of deep learning models, it raises serious concerns
about data privacy and security.
To prevent the unauthorized usage of personal data, a series of recent papers [10,17,53] propose to poison data with
additive noise. The idea is to make datasets unlearnable for
deep learning models by ensuring that they learn the correspondence between noises and labels. Thereby, they do
not learn much useful information about the clean data, significantly degrading their clean test accuracy. However, in
recent works [11, 17, 47], these unlearnability methods are
shown to be vulnerable to adversarial training (AT) frameworks [34]. Motivated by this problem, Fu et al. [11] developed Robust Error-Minimization (REM) noises to make unlearnable data that is protected from AT. While the authors
show the effectiveness of REM in multiple scenarios, we
demonstrate that these methods are still not robust against
different data augmentations or training settings (see Section 3.2). Furthermore, current unlearnability frameworks
[10, 11, 17, 53] are model-dependent and require expensive
optimization steps on deep learning models to obtain the
additive noises. They also need to train the deep learning
models from scratch to obtain noises for each new data set.
In this paper, we propose a novel Convolution-based
Unlearnable DAtaset (CUDA) generation technique. We
address limitations of existing unlearnable data generation
techniques in Section 3.2 and motivate our CUDA technique in Section 3.3. For generating CUDA, an attacker
randomly generates different convolutional filters for each
class in the dataset using a private key or seed value. These
filters are used to perform controlled class-wise convolutions on the clean training dataset to obtain CUDA. As we

Modern deep learning training frameworks heavily depend on large-scale datasets for achieving high accuracy.

Code available here: https://github.com/vinusankars/
Convolution-based-Unlearnability

Large-scale training of modern deep learning models
heavily relies on publicly available data on the web. This
potentially unauthorized usage of online data leads to concerns regarding data privacy. Recent works aim to make
unlearnable data for deep learning models by adding small,
specially designed noises to tackle this issue. However,
these methods are vulnerable to adversarial training (AT)
and/or are computationally heavy. In this work, we propose a novel, model-free, Convolution-based Unlearnable
DAtaset (CUDA) generation technique. CUDA is generated
using controlled class-wise convolutions with filters that are
randomly generated via a private key. CUDA encourages
the network to learn the relation between filters and labels
rather than informative features for classifying the clean
data. We develop some theoretical analysis demonstrating that CUDA can successfully poison Gaussian mixture
data by reducing the clean data performance of the optimal
Bayes classifier. We also empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of CUDA with various datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, ImageNet-100, and Tiny-ImageNet), and architectures
(ResNet-18, VGG-16, Wide ResNet-34-10, DenseNet-121,
DeIT, EfficientNetV2-S, and MobileNetV2). Our experiments show that CUDA is robust to various data augmentations and training approaches such as smoothing, AT with
different budgets, transfer learning, and fine-tuning. For
instance, training a ResNet-18 on ImageNet-100 CUDA
achieves only 8.96%, 40.08%, and 20.58% clean test accuracies with empirical risk minimization (ERM), L∞ AT, and
L2 AT, respectively. Here, ERM on the clean training data
achieves a clean test accuracy of 80.66%. CUDA exhibits
unlearnability effect with ERM even when only a fraction
of the training dataset is perturbed. Furthermore, we also
show that CUDA is robust to adaptive defenses designed
specifically to break it.

3862

