This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Recognizing Rigid Patterns of Unlabeled Point Clouds by Complete and
Continuous Isometry Invariants with no False Negatives and no False Positives
Daniel Widdowson
Computer Science department
University of Liverpool, UK

Vitaliy Kurlin
Computer Science department
University of Liverpool, UK

d.e.widdowson@liverpool.ac.uk

vitaliy.kurlin@gmail.com

Abstract
Rigid structures such as cars or any other solid objects
are often represented by finite clouds of unlabeled points.
The most natural equivalence on these point clouds is rigid
motion or isometry maintaining all inter-point distances.
Rigid patterns of point clouds can be reliably compared
only by complete isometry invariants that can also be called
equivariant descriptors without false negatives (isometric
clouds having different descriptions) and without false positives (non-isometric clouds with the same description).

The only reliable tool for distinguishing clouds up to
isometry is an invariant defined as a function or property
preserved by any isometry. Since any isometry is bijective,
the number of points is an isometry invariant, but the coordinates of points are not invariants even under translation.
This simple invariant is incomplete (non-injective) because
non-isometric clouds can have different numbers of points.
Any invariant I maps all isometric clouds to the same
value. There are no isometric clouds C ∼
= C ′ with I(C) ̸=
′
I(C ), meaning that I has no false negatives. Isometry invariants are also called equivariant descriptors [55].

Noise and motion in data motivate a search for invariants that are continuous under perturbations of points in a
suitable metric. We propose the first continuous and complete invariant of unlabeled clouds in any Euclidean space.
For a fixed dimension, the new metric for this invariant is
computable in a polynomial time in the number of points.

A complete invariant I should distinguish all nonisometric clouds, so if C ∼
̸= C ′ then I(C) ̸= I(C ′ ). Equiv′
alently, if I(C) = I(C ) then C ∼
= C ′ , so I has no false
positives. Then I can be considered as a DNA-style code or
genome that identifies any cloud uniquely up to isometry.

1. Strong motivations for complete invariants

A complete and continuous invariant for m = 3 points
consists of three pairwise distances (sides of a triangle) and
is known in school as the SSS theorem [68]. But all pairwise
distances are incomplete for m ≥ 4 [9], see Fig. 1.

In Computer Vision, real objects such as cars and solid
obstacles are considered rigid and often represented by a
finite set C ⊂ Rn (called a cloud) of m unlabeled (or unordered) points, usually in low dimensions n = 2, 3, 4.
The rigidity of many real objects motivates the most fundamental equivalence of rigid motion [67], a composition
of translations and rotations in Rn . In a general metric
space M , the most relevant equivalence is isometry: any
map M → M maintaining all inter-point distances in M .
Any isometry in Rn is a composition of a mirror reflection with some rigid motion. Any orientation-preserving
isometry can be realized as a continuous rigid motion.
There is no sense in distinguishing rigid objects that are
related by isometry or having the same shape. Formally, the
shape of a cloud C is its isometry class [48] defined as a
collection of all infinitely many clouds isometric to C.

Since real data is always noisy and motions of rigid objects are important to track, a useful complete invariant must
be also continuous under the movement of points.

Problem 1.1 (complete isometry invariants with computable continuous metrics). For any cloud of m unlabeled
points in Rn , find an invariant I satisfying the properties
(a) completeness : C, C ′ are isometric ⇔ I(C) = I(C ′ );
(b) Lipschitz continuity : if any point of C is perturbed
within its ε-neighborhood then I(C) changes by at most λε
for a constant λ and a metric d satisfying these axioms:
1) d(I(C), I(C ′ )) = 0 if and only if C ∼
= C ′ are isometric,
2) symmetry : d(I(C), I(C ′ )) = d(I(C ′ ), I(C)),
3) d(I(C), I(C ′ )) + d(I(C ′ ), I(C ′′ )) ≥ d(I(C), I(C ′′ ));
(c) computability : I and d are computed in a polynomial
time in the number m of points for a fixed dimension n.

1275

