This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Vision-and-Language Navigation by Generating
Future-View Image Semantics
Jialu Li
Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{jialuli, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu
&DOFXODWH,PDJH6HPDQWLFV

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) is the task that
requires an agent to navigate through the environment
based on natural language instructions. At each step, the
agent takes the next action by selecting from a set of navigable locations. In this paper, we aim to take one step further
and explore whether the agent can benefit from generating
the potential future view during navigation. Intuitively, humans will have an expectation of how the future environment will look like, based on the natural language instructions and surrounding views, which will aid correct navigation. Hence, to equip the agent with this ability to generate
the semantics of future navigation views, we first propose
three proxy tasks during the agent’s in-domain pre-training:
Masked Panorama Modeling (MPM), Masked Trajectory
Modeling (MTM), and Action Prediction with Image Generation (APIG). These three objectives teach the model to
predict missing views in a panorama (MPM), predict missing steps in the full trajectory (MTM), and generate the
next view based on the full instruction and navigation history (APIG), respectively. We then fine-tune the agent on
the VLN task with an auxiliary loss that minimizes the difference between the view semantics generated by the agent
and the ground truth view semantics of the next step. Empirically, our VLN-SIG achieves the new state-of-the-art
on both Room-to-Room dataset and CVDN dataset. We further show that our agent learns to fill in missing patches in
future views qualitatively, which brings more interpretability over agents’ predicted actions. Lastly, we demonstrate
that learning to predict future view semantics also enables
the agent to have better performance on longer paths.1

1. Introduction
In Vision-and-Language Navigation, the agent needs to
navigate through the environment based on natural lan1 Code is available at https://github.com/jialuli-luka/
VLN-SIG.git.

,PDJH
7RNHQL]HU

&RGHERRN
6HOHFWLRQ

3DWFK
6HPDQWLF
&DOFXODWLRQ

,PDJH
6HPDQWLFV

7UDLQWR*HQHUDWH,PDJH6HPDQWLFV

$FWLRQ3UHGLFWLRQZLWK
,PDJH*HQHUDWLRQ
$3,*

0DVNHG7UDMHFWRU\
0RGHOLQJ
070

0DVNHG3DQRUDPD
0RGHOLQJ
030

&URVV0RGDOLW\7UDQVIRUPHU
:DONWKURXJKWKHEHGURRPLQWRWKHKDOOZD\
7XUQULJKWDWWKHVHFRQGGRRU«

7H[W(QFRGLQJ

«
+LVWRU\(QFRGLQJ

«
2EVHUYDWLRQ(QFRGLQJ

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed method VLN-SIG. We obtain
the semantics of an image with a pre-trained image tokenizer, and
use codebook selection (Sec. 3.4) and patch semantic calculation
(Sec. 3.3) to adapt it to efficient in-domain VLN learning. We pretrain the agent on three proxy tasks (Sec. 3.5) and fine-tune the
agent using Action Prediction with Image Generation (APIG) as
the additional auxiliary task (Sec. 3.6).

guage instructions. Many datasets have been proposed to
solve this challenging task [2, 5, 22, 33, 40]. Based on these
datasets, previous works aim to strengthen the navigation
model or agent from several aspects: understanding long
and detailed instructions in different languages, inferring
and locating target objects based on common knowledge,
navigating in diverse and potentially unseen environments,
and learning better alignment between the environment and
the instructions. However, most previous work simplifies
the navigation process as an action selection process, where
at each time step, the agent picks the action from a set of
pre-defined candidates. This simplification does not take
advantage of human’s ability to expect what scene will be
more likely to happen next during navigation. For example, given the instruction “Walk through the bedroom into
the hallway. Turn right and wait in the kitchen doorway.”,
before walking out of the bedroom, humans will expect the
hallway to be a long passage with doors, and the kitchen
probably contains objects like a kitchen island and sink.
Humans have these expectations based on common sense
knowledge and use them to select candidates during navigation. Thus, in this paper, we explore whether AI agents

10803

