This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SMOC-Net: Leveraging Camera Pose for Self-Supervised Monocular Object
Pose Estimation
Tao Tan1,2 , Qiulei Dong1,2,3
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
1

tantao2022@ia.ac.cn,qldong@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,Corresponding author:Qiulei Dong

Abstract
Recently, self-supervised 6D object pose estimation,
where synthetic images with object poses (sometimes jointly
with un-annotated real images) are used for training, has
attracted much attention in computer vision. Some typical
works in literature employ a time-consuming differentiable
renderer for object pose prediction at the training stage, so
that (i) their performances on real images are generally limited due to the gap between their rendered images and real
images and (ii) their training process is computationally expensive. To address the two problems, we propose a novel
Network for Self-supervised Monocular Object pose estimation by utilizing the predicted Camera poses from unannotated real images, called SMOC-Net. The proposed
network is explored under a knowledge distillation framework, consisting of a teacher model and a student model.
The teacher model contains a backbone estimation module
for initial object pose estimation, and an object pose refiner
for refining the initial object poses using a geometric constraint (called relative-pose constraint) derived from relative camera poses. The student model gains knowledge for
object pose estimation from the teacher model by imposing the relative-pose constraint. Thanks to the relative-pose
constraint, SMOC-Net could not only narrow the domain
gap between synthetic and real data but also reduce the
training cost. Experimental results on two public datasets
demonstrate that SMOC-Net outperforms several state-ofthe-art methods by a large margin while requiring much less
training time than the differentiable-renderer-based methods.

1. Introduction
Monocular 6D object pose estimation is a challenging
task in the computer vision field, which aims to estimate
object poses from single images. According to whether real

images with ground-truth object poses are given for model
training, the existing works for monocular object pose estimation in literature could be divided into two categories:
fully-supervised methods [17, 35] which are trained by utilizing annotated real images with ground-truth object poses,
and self-supervised methods [16, 34] which are trained by
utilizing synthetic images with object poses (sometimes
jointly with un-annotated real images). Since it is very timeconsuming to obtain high-quality object poses as ground
truth, self-supervised monocular object pose estimation has
attracted increasing attention recently [16, 33, 39].
Some existing methods for self-supervised monocular
object pose estimation [16, 31] use only synthetic images
with object poses (which are generated via Blender [22]
or some other rendering tools [24, 29]) for training. However, due to the domain gap between real and synthetic
data, the performances of these self-supervised methods are
significantly lower compared to the fully-supervised methods [22, 35]. Addressing this domain gap problem, a few
recent self-supervised methods [33, 34, 39] jointly use synthetic images with object pose and un-annotated real images
at their training stage, where a differentiable renderer [19] is
introduced to provide a constraint on the difference between
real and rendered images. Although these methods could alleviate the domain gap problem by utilizing the introduced
differentiable renderer, they still have to be confronted with
the following two problems: (i) There still exists a noticeable gap between real images and rendered images by the
differentiable renderer, so that their performances on object
pose estimation are still limited; (ii) Much time has to be
spent on differentiable rendering during training, so that the
training costs of these methods are quite heavy.
To address the above problems, this paper proposes a
novel Network for Self-supervised Monocular Object pose
estimation by utilizing the predicted Camera poses from unannotated real images, called SMOC-Net. The SMOC-Net
is designed via the knowledge distillation technique, con-

21307

