This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global and Local Mixture Consistency Cumulative Learning for Long-tailed
Visual Recognitions
Fei Du1,2,3 , Peng Yang1,3 , Qi Jia1,3 , Fengtao Nan1,2,3 , Xiaoting Chen1,3 , Yun Yang1,3 *
1
National Pilot School of Software, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, China
3
Yunnan Key Laboratory of Software Engineering
{dufei,yangpeng,jiaqi,fengtaonan,chenxiaoting}@mail.ynu.edu.cn yangyun@ynu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, our goal is to design a simple learning
paradigm for long-tail visual recognition, which not only
improves the robustness of the feature extractor but also
alleviates the bias of the classifier towards head classes
while reducing the training skills and overhead. We propose an efficient one-stage training strategy for long-tailed
visual recognition called Global and Local Mixture Consistency cumulative learning (GLMC). Our core ideas are
twofold: (1) a global and local mixture consistency loss improves the robustness of the feature extractor. Specifically,
we generate two augmented batches by the global MixUp
and local CutMix from the same batch data, respectively,
and then use cosine similarity to minimize the difference. (2)
A cumulative head-tail soft label reweighted loss mitigates
the head class bias problem. We use empirical class frequencies to reweight the mixed label of the head-tail class
for long-tailed data and then balance the conventional loss
and the rebalanced loss with a coefficient accumulated by
epochs. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy
on CIFAR10-LT, CIFAR100-LT, and ImageNet-LT datasets.
Additional experiments on balanced ImageNet and CIFAR
demonstrate that GLMC can significantly improve the generalization of backbones. Code is made publicly available
at https://github.com/ynu-yangpeng/GLMC.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the available large-scale datasets, e.g., ImageNet [10], MS COCO [27], and Places [46] Database,
deep neural networks have achieved dominant results in
image recognition [15]. Distinct from these well-designed
balanced datasets, data naturally follows long-tail distribution in real-world scenarios, where a small number of head
classes occupy most of the samples. In contrast, dominant
* Corresponding author

sim3)48 / 56)7- ..
#$%&'(
,- ./ ,
)*)+
0.
!"

(1*2(
,( ./ ,
0.
!" )*)+

sim3)4- / 56)78 ..

Share Weights

forward propagation

predictor head

stop-grad propagation

projection head
classifier head

Figure 1. An overview of our GLMC: two types of mixed-label
augmented images are processed by an encoder network and a projection head to obtain the representation hg and hl . Then a prediction head transforms the two representations to output ug and ul .
We minimize their negative cosine similarity as an auxiliary loss
in the supervised loss. sg(·) denotes stop gradient operation.

tail classes only have a few samples. Moreover, the tail
classes are critical for some applications, such as medical
diagnosis and autonomous driving. Unfortunately, learning
directly from long-tailed data may cause model predictions
to over-bias toward the head classes.
There are two classical rebalanced strategies for longtailed distribution, including resampling training data [7,
13, 35] and designing cost-sensitive reweighting loss functions [3, 20]. For the resampling methods, the core idea is
to oversample the tail class data or undersample the head
classes in the SGD mini-batch to balance training. As for

15814

