This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiGeo: Discriminative Geometry-Aware Learning for
Generalized Few-Shot Object Detection
Jiawei Ma

Yulei Niu∗

Jincheng Xu Shiyuan Huang
Columbia University

Guangxing Han

Shih-Fu Chang

{jiawei.m, yulei.niu, jx2467,
shiyuan.h, gh2561, sc250}@columbia.edu
10-shot
5-shot

Abstract
Generalized few-shot object detection aims to achieve
precise detection on both base classes with abundant annotations and novel classes with limited training data. Existing approaches enhance few-shot generalization with the
sacrifice of base-class performance, or maintain high precision in base-class detection with limited improvement in
novel-class adaptation. In this paper, we point out the reason is insufficient Discriminative feature learning for all of
the classes. As such, we propose a new training framework, DiGeo, to learn Geometry-aware features of interclass separation and intra-class compactness. To guide
the separation of feature clusters, we derive an offline simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF) classifier whose weights
serve as class centers and are maximally and equally separated. To tighten the cluster for each class, we include
adaptive class-specific margins into the classification loss
and encourage the features close to the class centers. Experimental studies on two few-shot benchmark datasets
(VOC, COCO) and one long-tail dataset (LVIS) demonstrate that, with a single model, our method can effectively
improve generalization on novel classes without hurting the
detection of base classes. Our code can be found here.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the tremendous growth of
object detection through deep neural models and large-scale
training [2, 13–15, 40, 42, 45, 60, 65]. However, the success
of detection models heavily relies on the amount and quality of annotations, which requires expensive annotation cost
and time. In addition, traditional object detection models
perform worse on the classes with a limited number of annotations [11, 52, 56], while human are able to learn from
few observations. In order to close the gap between human
vision system and detection models, recent studies have
investigated how to generalize well on rare classes under
∗ Corresponding Author.

Novel class detection (nAP50)

3-shot
Meta Learning

60
50
40

20

TFA
Retentive
RCNN

FSRW

Meta
R-CNN

40

Ours

MPSR

FsDetView

30

Ours

Transfer Learning

10-shot
5-shot
3-shot

FRCN
ft-full

55

70

Base class detection (bAP50)

(base-only 85
Pre-training)

Figure 1. Performance on few-shot object detection on Pascal
VOC [3]. Previous transfer-learning approaches (blue) balancing
the training data by aggressively down-sampling the base set and
may result in overfitting. Instead, we (red) use the full train set,
aiming to both maintain precise base detection but learn discriminative features from the limited annotations for few-shot classes.

the few-shot object detection (FSOD) setting. Specifically,
given many-shot (base) classes with plenty of training data
and few-shot (novel) classes with extremely limited training
data (e.g., 5 annotated instances per class), FSOD expects
the model to detect the objects in the novel classes well.
To improve the generalization ability on novel-class detection, recent studies [6, 44, 52] conduct transfer learning
in a two-step manner. In detail, the model is pre-trained
on the whole set of base classes, and then fine-tuned on the
union of the set of novel classes and an aggressively downsampled base subset. However, the efficient few-shot adaptation is often achieved at the expense of sacrificing precision on base detection (Fig. 1). Being aware of this limitation, Fan et al. [6] proposed to evaluate the performance of
both base and novel classes in the generalized few-shot object detection (GFSOD) setting. In addition, they proposed
a consistency regularization to emphasize the pre-trained
base knowledge during fine-tuning and employed an ensembling strategy. However, they design different classifiers for
base and novel classes, and the adaptation on novel classes
is impeded due to a complex ensembling process.
In this paper, we pointed out that the devil is in in-

3208

