This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-LRFusion: Bi-Directional LiDAR-Radar Fusion for 3D Dynamic
Object Detection
Yingjie Wang1,4 Jiajun Deng2∗ Yao Li1 Jinshui Hu3 Cong Liu3 Yu Zhang1 Jianmin Ji1
Wanli Ouyang4 Yanyong Zhang1∗
2 University of Sydney

Abstract

1. Introduction
LiDAR has been considered as the primary sensor in the
perception subsystem of most autonomous vehicles (AVs)
due to its capability of providing accurate position measurements [9, 16, 32]. However, in addition to object positions, AVs are also in an urgent need for estimating the
motion state information (e.g., velocity), especially for dynamic objects. Such information cannot be measured by
*Corresponding Author: Jiajun Deng and Yanyong Zhang.

4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

L LiDAR Data R Radar Data R2L Radar-to-LiDAR L2R LiDAR-to-Radar

L

Encoder

R

Encoder

R2L

(a) Uni-directional fusion

AP gains of RadarNet*
AP gain (%)

LiDAR and Radar are two complementary sensing approaches in that LiDAR specializes in capturing an object’s
3D shape while Radar provides longer detection ranges as
well as velocity hints. Though seemingly natural, how to
efficiently combine them for improved feature representation is still unclear. The main challenge arises from that
Radar data are extremely sparse and lack height information. Therefore, directly integrating Radar features into
LiDAR-centric detection networks is not optimal. In this
work, we introduce a bi-directional LiDAR-Radar fusion
framework, termed Bi-LRFusion, to tackle the challenges
and improve 3D detection for dynamic objects. Technically,
Bi-LRFusion involves two steps: first, it enriches Radar’s
local features by learning important details from the LiDAR
branch to alleviate the problems caused by the absence of
height information and extreme sparsity; second, it combines LiDAR features with the enhanced Radar features in
a unified bird’s-eye-view representation. We conduct extensive experiments on nuScenes and ORR datasets, and
show that our Bi-LRFusion achieves state-of-the-art performance for detecting dynamic objects. Notably, Radar data
in these two datasets have different formats, which demonstrates the generalizability of our method. Codes are available at https://github.com/JessieW0806/BiLRFusion.

3 iFLYTEK

4.0

L

Encoder

R

Encoder

L2R

(b) Our bi-directional fusion

Radar sensor’s height

Average height

3.87

+3.5

3.0

R2L

4.00

3.41

3.00

+2.7
2.24

2.0

Height (m)

1 University of Science and Technology of China

2.00

+1.3
1.0
0.72

0.39

+0.5

0.31

+0.0

0.0
-1.0

Car

Motor.

Bicycle

-0.5
Truck

Bus

1.00

0.98
0.00

Trailer

-1.00

(c) AP gains of RadarNet* over categories with different average height.

Figure 1. An illustration of (a) uni-directional LiDAR-Radar fusion mechanism, (b) our proposed bi-directional LiDAR-Radar fusion mechanism, and (c) the average precision gain (%) of unidirectional fusion method RadarNet∗ against the LiDAR-centric
baseline CenterPoint [40] over categories with different average
height (m). We use * to indicate it is re-produced by us on the CenterPoint. The improvement by involving Radar data is not consistent for objects with different height, i.e., taller objects like truck,
bus and trailer do not enjoy as much performance gain. Note that
all height values are transformed to the LiDAR coordinate system.

LiDAR sensors since they are insensitive to motion. As a
result, millimeter-wave Radar (referred to as Radar in this
paper) sensors are engaged because they are able to infer the
object’s relative radial velocity [21] based upon the Doppler
effect [28]. Besides, on-vehicle Radar usually offers longer
detection range than LiDAR [36], which is particularly useful on highways and expressways. In the exploration of
combining LiDAR and Radar data for ameliorating 3D dynamic object detection, the existing approaches [22, 25, 36]
follow the common mechanism of uni-directional fusion,

13394

