This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Video Multi-Frame Interpolation and Deblurring
under Unknown Exposure Time
Wei Shang1 , Dongwei Ren1 *, Yi Yang1 , Hongzhi Zhang1 , Kede Ma2 , Wangmeng Zuo1,3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
City University of Hong Kong 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
Exposure time

Natural videos captured by consumer cameras often suffer from low framerate and motion blur due to the combination of dynamic scene complexity, lens and sensor imperfection, and less than ideal exposure setting. As a result,
computational methods that jointly perform video frame interpolation and deblurring begin to emerge with the unrealistic assumption that the exposure time is known and fixed.
In this work, we aim ambitiously for a more realistic and
challenging task - joint video multi-frame interpolation and
deblurring under unknown exposure time. Toward this goal,
we first adopt a variant of supervised contrastive learning to construct an exposure-aware representation from input blurred frames. We then train two U-Nets for intramotion and inter-motion analysis, respectively, adapting to
the learned exposure representation via gain tuning. We
finally build our video reconstruction network upon the exposure and motion representation by progressive exposureadaptive convolution and motion refinement. Extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world datasets show
that our optimized method achieves notable performance
gains over the state-of-the-art on the joint video ×8 interpolation and deblurring task. Moreover, on the seemingly implausible ×16 interpolation task, our method outperforms
existing methods by more than 1.5 dB in terms of PSNR.

1. Introduction
When capturing videos, shutter period (i.e., the inverse
of the framerate) and exposure time are two major factors
that we are able to manipulate for improved video quality, compared to other confounding factors such as object
motion in the scene, lens imperfection, and sensor limitations [3]. Particularly, a long shutter period corresponds to
lower framerate, and a longer exposure time increases the
possibility of introducing severer motion blur (see Fig. 1).
Often, we have good control over the shutter period in the
* Corresponding author: rendongweihit@gmail.com.

Frame index

Abstract

Figure 1. Visualization of motion blur under different exposure
time and object motion. Frames from the left to right are obtained
with increasing exposure time, leading to severer degree of motion
blur. The situation may be worse if stronger motion is present, as
illustrated by images in the second row.

form of the framerate, which is, nevertheless, quite limited in consumer cameras (e.g., 30 frames per second, or
FPS). This is not the case for exposure time, which may
constantly and dynamically change depending on the video
shooting environment, e.g., illumination and reflection conditions [25]. Therefore, video frame interpolation (also
known as framerate up-conversion [5, 10, 15]) and video
deblurring methods (under unknown exposure time) are
crucial for improving the quality of low framerate blurred
videos, and are widely applicable to video editing, video
compression, and slow-motion video generation.
In literature, video frame interpolation [21,30,42,48] and
video deblurring [9, 35] have long been treated as individual problems and tackled separately with worth-celebrating
successes. A straightforward approach to joint video frame
interpolation and deblurring is to deploy deblurring methods followed by frame interpolation. However, this type
of cascaded methods usually cannot obtain satisfactory reconstruction results, since algorithm-dependent deblurring
artifacts would be propagated to and amplified in interpolated frames [41]. Similar situations will occur if we cascade video frame interpolation first [1]. This inspires recent work [1, 34, 41, 47] to cast video frame interpolation
and deblurring (or super-resolution) as a joint and emerging low-level vision problem. However, these methods as-

13935

