This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SE-ORNet: Self-Ensembling Orientation-aware Network for Unsupervised Point
Cloud Shape Correspondence
Jiacheng Deng1,∗, Chuxin Wang1,∗, Jiahao Lu1 , Jianfeng He1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,3,†, Jiyang Yu2 , Zhe Zhang3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 China Academy of Space Technology, 3 Deep Space Exploration Lab
{dengjc, wcx0602, lujiahao, hejf}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn
yujiyang@spacechina.com, cnclepzz@126.com

Abstract
Unsupervised point cloud shape correspondence aims to
obtain dense point-to-point correspondences between point
clouds without manually annotated pairs. However, humans and some animals have bilateral symmetry and various orientations, which lead to severe mispredictions of
symmetrical parts. Besides, point cloud noise disrupts consistent representations for point cloud and thus degrades
the shape correspondence accuracy. To address the above
issues, we propose a Self-Ensembling ORientation-aware
Network termed SE-ORNet. The key of our approach is
to exploit an orientation estimation module with a domain
adaptive discriminator to align the orientations of point
cloud pairs, which significantly alleviates the mispredictions of symmetrical parts. Additionally, we design a selfensembling framework for unsupervised point cloud shape
correspondence. In this framework, the disturbances of
point cloud noise are overcome by perturbing the inputs of
the student and teacher networks with different data augmentations and constraining the consistency of predictions.
Extensive experiments on both human and animal datasets
show that our SE-ORNet can surpass state-of-the-art unsupervised point cloud shape correspondence methods.

1. Introduction
With the cost of LiDAR and depth cameras falling, it
is more accessible to obtain 3D point cloud data. For
real-world applications, such as articulated motion transfer [5, 26] and non-rigid human body alignment [3], the
correspondence between two point clouds is indispensable.
However, we are hard to directly obtain the correspondence
between two raw point clouds due to various object orientations and ununified coordinate systems.
To accurately find the point-to-point correspondence be∗ Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Source

Target (baseline)

Target (Ours)

Target (GT)

Figure 1. The visualization of dense point matching results.
Three point cloud pairs have different relative rotation angles. GT
denotes ground truth. The correspondence is visualized by transferring colors from source to target according to matching results.
The baseline predicts many false matches, especially for symmetrical, similar parts of the object. Our method achieves accurate
matches for these parts with our orientation estimation module.

tween two point clouds, spectral-based methods [1, 9, 15,
19, 28] have been proven as practical shape correspondence
methods by computing functional mapping between the
projected features and learning a transformation for the correspondence. Nevertheless, the spectral-based methods suffer from complicated pre-processing steps and the necessity for connectivity information between points. With the
rapid development of deep learning, many fully supervised
point cloud shape correspondence methods [4, 8, 16] have
been proposed to lead to remarkable progress. However,
these methods rely on a large amount of carefully annotated
point cloud pairs, which are expensive and time-consuming
to collect. To relieve the annotation cost of fully supervised methods, unsupervised methods [12, 32] that utilize
unlabeled data for model training have attracted more and
more attention. CorrNet3D [32] proposes the first unsupervised deep learning framework for building dense correspondence between point clouds in an end-to-end manner.
DPC [12] models the local point cloud structure by exploring the proximity of points using DGCNN [29] and designs
reconstruction losses to extract continuous point cloud rep-

5364

