This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Space Neural Radiance Fields
Ze-Xin Yin

Jiaxiong Qiu
Ming-Ming Cheng
VCIP, CS, Nankai University

Bo Ren*

{Zexin.Yin.cn, qiujiaxiong727}@gmail.com, {cmm, rb}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) methods suffer from the existence of reflective objects, often resulting in blurry or distorted rendering. Instead of calculating a single radiance field, we propose a multi-space neural radiance field (MS-NeRF) that represents the scene using a group of feature fields in parallel sub-spaces, which
leads to a better understanding of the neural network toward the existence of reflective and refractive objects. Our
multi-space scheme works as an enhancement to existing
NeRF methods, with only small computational overheads
needed for training and inferring the extra-space outputs.
We demonstrate the superiority and compatibility of our approach using three representative NeRF-based models, i.e.,
NeRF, Mip-NeRF, and Mip-NeRF 360. Comparisons are
performed on a novelly constructed dataset consisting of 25
synthetic scenes and 7 real captured scenes with complex
reflection and refraction, all having 360-degree viewpoints.
Extensive experiments show that our approach significantly
outperforms the existing single-space NeRF methods for
rendering high-quality scenes concerned with complex light
paths through mirror-like objects. Our code and dataset
will be publicly available at https://zx-yin.github.io/msnerf.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [25] and its variants are
refreshing the community of neural rendering, and the potential for more promising applications is still under exploration. NeRF represents scenes as continuous radiance
fields stored by simple Multi-layer Perceptrons (MLPs) and
renders novel views by integrating the densities and radiance, which are queried from the MLPs by points sampled
along the ray from the camera to the image plane. Since its
first presentation [25], many efforts have been investigated
to enhance the method, such as extending to unbounded
scenes [2, 50], handling moving objects [29, 30, 37], or reconstructing from pictures in the wild [6, 21, 35, 49].
* Bo Ren is the corresponding author.

(a) Mip-NeRF 360 [2], SSIM=0.825

(b) Our Model, SSIM=0.881

Figure 1. (a) Though Mip-NeRF 360 can handle unbounded
scenes, it still suffers from reflective surfaces, as the virtual images
violate the multi-view consistency, which is of vital importance
to NeRF-based methods. (b) Our method can help conventional
NeRF-like methods learn the virtual images with little extra cost.

However, rendering scenes with mirrors is still a challenging task for state-of-the-art NeRF-like methods. One of
the principle assumptions for the NeRF method is the multiview consistency property of the target scenes [16, 20, 36].
When there are mirrors in the space, if one allows the viewpoints to move 360-degree around the scene, there is no
consistency between the front and back views of a mirror,
since the mirror surface and its reflected virtual image are
only visible from a small range of views. As a result, it is
often required to manually label the reflective surfaces in
order to avoid falling into sub-optimal convergences [12].
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-space NeRFbased method to allow the automatic handling of mirror-like
objects in the 360-degree high-fidelity rendering of scenes
without any manual labeling. Instead of regarding the Euclidean scene space as one single space, we treat it as composed of multiple virtual sub-spaces, whose composition
changes according to location and view direction. We show
that our approach using such a multi-space decomposition
leads to successful handlements of complex reflections and
refractions where the multi-view consistency is heavily violated in the Euclidean real space. Furthermore, we show
that the above benefits can be achieved by designing a lowcost multi-space module and replacing the original output
layer with it. Therefore, our multi-space approach serves as

12407

