This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Renderable Neural Radiance Map for Visual Navigation
Obin Kwon Jeongho Park Songhwai Oh *
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, ASRI, Seoul National University
obin.kwon@rllab.snu.ac.kr, jeongho.park@rllab.snu.ac.kr, songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel type of map for visual navigation,
a renderable neural radiance map (RNR-Map), which is
designed to contain the overall visual information of a 3D
environment. The RNR-Map has a grid form and consists
of latent codes at each pixel. These latent codes are embedded from image observations, and can be converted to the
neural radiance field which enables image rendering given
a camera pose. The recorded latent codes implicitly contain
visual information about the environment, which makes the
RNR-Map visually descriptive. This visual information in
RNR-Map can be a useful guideline for visual localization
and navigation. We develop localization and navigation
frameworks that can effectively utilize the RNR-Map. We
evaluate the proposed frameworks on camera tracking, visual localization, and image-goal navigation. Experimental
results show that the RNR-Map-based localization framework can find the target location based on a single query
image with fast speed and competitive accuracy compared to
other baselines. Also, this localization framework is robust to
environmental changes, and even finds the most visually similar places when a query image from a different environment
is given. The proposed navigation framework outperforms
the existing image-goal navigation methods in difficult scenarios, under odometry and actuation noises. The navigation
framework shows 65.7% success rate in curved scenarios of
the NRNS [21] dataset, which is an improvement of 18.6%
over the current state-of-the-art. Project page: https:
//rllab-snu.github.io/projects/RNR-Map/

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address how to explicitly embed the visual information from a 3D environment into a grid form and
how to use it for visual navigation. We present renderable
neural radiance map (RNR-Map), a novel type of a grid map
for navigation.We point out three main properties of RNRMap which make RNR-Map navigation-friendly. First, it is
* This work was supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea
government (MSIT) (No. 2019-0-01190, [SW Star Lab] Robot Learning:
Efficient, Safe, and Socially-Acceptable Machine Learning). (Corresponding author: Songhwai Oh)

visually descriptive. Commonly used grid-based maps such
as occupancy maps [10,11,17] and semantic maps [9,19,36],
record obstacle information or object information into grids.
In contrast, RNR-Map converts image observations to latent
codes which are then embedded in grid cells. Each latent
code in a grid cell can be converted to a neural radiance
field, which can render the corresponding region. We can
utilize the implicit visual information of these latent codes
to understand and reason about the observed environment.
For example, we can locate places based on an image or
determine which region is the most related to a given image. RNR-Map enables image-based localization only with
a simple forward pass in a neural network, by directly utilizing the latent codes without rendering images. We build
a navigation framework with RNR-Map, to navigate to the
most plausible place given a query image. Through extensive experiments, we validate that the latent codes can serve
as important visual clues for both image-based localization
and image-goal navigation. More importantly, a user has an
option to utilize the renderable property of RNR-Map for
more fine-level of localization such as camera tracking.
RNR-Map is generalizable. There have been a number
of studies that leverage neural radiance fields (NeRF) for
various applications other than novel view synthesis. The
robotic applications of NeRF are also now beginning to
emerge [1, 15, 28, 35, 42]. However, many of the approaches
require pretrained neural radiance fields about a specific
scene and are not generalizable to various scenes. This can
be a serious problem when it comes to visual navigation
tasks, which typically assume that an agent performs the
given task in an unseen environment [16]. In contrast, RNRMap is applicable in arbitrary scenes without additional optimization. Even with the unseen environment, the RNR-Map
can still embed the useful information from images to the
map and render images. The neural radiance fields of RNRMap are conditioned on the latent codes. A pair of encoder
and decoder is trained to make these latent codes from images of arbitrary scenes and reconstruct images using neural
radiance fields. These pretrained encoder and decoder enable
the generalization to unseen environments.
Third, RNR-Map is real-time capable. The majority of
the present NeRF-based navigation methods require a significant time for inference because of required computationheavy image rendering and rendering-based optimization

9099

