This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Specialist Diffusion: Plug-and-Play Sample-Efficient Fine-Tuning of
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models to Learn Any Unseen Style
Haoming Lu1∗ , Hazarapet Tunanyan1∗ , Kai Wang2 , Shant Navasardyan1 , Zhangyang Wang1,3 , Humphrey Shi1,2
1

Picsart AI Research (PAIR), 2 U of Oregon, 3 UT Austin

https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/Specialist-Diffusion

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated impressive capability of text-conditioned image synthesis, and broader application horizons are emerging by personalizing those pretrained diffusion models toward generating some specialized target object or style. In this paper, we aim to learn
an unseen style by simply fine-tuning a pre-trained diffusion model with a handful of images (e.g., less than 10),
so that the fine-tuned model can generate high-quality images of arbitrary objects in this style. Such extremely lowshot fine-tuning is accomplished by a novel toolkit of finetuning techniques, including text-to-image customized data
augmentations, a content loss to facilitate content-style disentanglement, and sparse updating that focuses on only a
few time steps. Our framework, dubbed Specialist Diffusion, is plug-and-play to existing diffusion model backbones and other personalization techniques. We demonstrate it to outperform the latest few-shot personalization
alternatives of diffusion models such as Textual Inversion
[7] and DreamBooth [24], in terms of learning highly sophisticated styles with ultra-sample-efficient tuning. We
further show that Specialist Diffusion can be integrated
on top of textual inversion to boost performance further,
even on highly unusual styles. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/
Specialist-Diffusion.

1. Introduction
Image synthesis has received increasing attention, partially owing to the recent breakthroughs made by diffusion
models [10, 23, 28, 30, 34]. Training a diffusion model requires gradually adding random noises with a sequence of
diffusion steps, and learning to rebuild data from noises by
reversing the steps. By running the diffusion process on a
lower-dimensional latent space instead of the pixel space,
the latent diffusion model [23] achieves competitive per1 The first two authors Lu and Tunanyan contributed equally.

Style

DreamBooth

Textual inversion

Our method

Flat design

Fantasy

Food doodle

Prompt: “a castle beside a lake”

Figure 1. Comparison of fine-tuning the pre-trained Stable Diffusion [23] model, using our Specialist Diffusion method versus
two other methods, from left to right columns. Three rows represent three different, rare styles (“Flat design”, “Fantasy”, and
“Food doodle”) that we hope to personalize the Stable Diffusion
model to learn, using only a handful of samples (even less than
10). All examples are generated using the same text prompt except
for the style identifier. As a method focused on representing new
objects, DreamBooth [24] performs poorly when being applied to
capturing styles. Textual inversion [7] achieves neat performance
on some styles, but fails on more unusual styles such as “Flat design”. Specialist Diffusion (rightmost) succeeds to capture those
highly unusual, specialized, and sophisticated styles via few-shot
tuning. Please see Sec. 4 for more dataset and experiment details.

formance more efficiently. Diffusion models are capable
of both unconditioned and conditioned image synthesis, the
previous one generates samples from random noise (noiseto-image), while the latter takes a condition such as text to
guide the generation. In this paper, we will focus on textto-image synthesis for its broad application interests.
Diffusion models nowadays are able to synthesize highquality images on a wide variety of sophisticated text

14267

