This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RangeViT: Towards Vision Transformers
for 3D Semantic Segmentation in Autonomous Driving
Angelika Ando1,2, *, Spyros Gidaris1 , Andrei Bursuc1 , Gilles Puy1 , Alexandre Boulch1 , Renaud Marlet1,3
2
Valeo.ai, Paris, France
Centre for Robotics, Mines Paris, Université PSL, Paris, France
3
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds permits
vehicles to perceive their surrounding 3D environment in* This project was done during an internship at Valeo.ai.

Decoder

ViT
Encoder

Image classification
Image segmentation
Self-supervised learning

RGB Images

Fine-tuning

Copying

Point Clouds

ViT
Encoder

RangeViT

Decoder

Casting semantic segmentation of outdoor LiDAR point
clouds as a 2D problem, e.g., via range projection, is an
effective and popular approach. These projection-based
methods usually benefit from fast computations and, when
combined with techniques which use other point cloud
representations, achieve state-of-the-art results. Today,
projection-based methods leverage 2D CNNs but recent advances in computer vision show that vision transformers
(ViTs) have achieved state-of-the-art results in many imagebased benchmarks. In this work, we question if projectionbased methods for 3D semantic segmentation can benefit
from these latest improvements on ViTs. We answer positively but only after combining them with three key ingredients: (a) ViTs are notoriously hard to train and require
a lot of training data to learn powerful representations.
By preserving the same backbone architecture as for RGB
images, we can exploit the knowledge from long training
on large image collections that are much cheaper to acquire and annotate than point clouds. We reach our best
results with pre-trained ViTs on large image datasets. (b)
We compensate ViTs’ lack of inductive bias by substituting
a tailored convolutional stem for the classical linear embedding layer. (c) We refine pixel-wise predictions with a
convolutional decoder and a skip connection from the convolutional stem to combine low-level but fine-grained features of the the convolutional stem with the high-level but
coarse predictions of the ViT encoder. With these ingredients, we show that our method, called RangeViT, outperforms existing projection-based methods on nuScenes
and SemanticKITTI. The code is available at https://
github.com/valeoai/rangevit.

Pre-training

Stem

Abstract

Stem

1

LiDAR Segmentation

Figure 1. Exploiting vision transformer (ViT) architectures
and weights for LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation.
We leverage the flexibility of transformer-based architectures to
re-purpose them with minimal changes for processing sparse point
clouds in autonomous driving tasks. The common ViT backbone
across modalities allows to effectively transfer weights pre-trained
on large image repositories towards improving point cloud segmentation performance with fine-tuning.

dependently of the lighting condition, providing useful information to build safe and reliable vehicles. A common
approach to segment large scale LiDAR point clouds is to
project the points on a 2D surface and then to use regular
CNNs, originally designed for images, to process the projected point clouds [1, 11, 26, 36, 60, 66]. Recently, Vision
Transformers (ViTs) were introduced as an alternative to
convolutional neural networks for processing images [14]:
images are divided into patches which are linearly embedded into a high-dimensional space to create a sequence of
visual tokens; these tokens are then consumed by a pure
transformer architecture [51] to output deep visual representations of each token. Despite the absence of almost
any domain-specific inductive bias apart from the image tokenization process, ViTs have a strong representation learning capacity [14] and achieve excellent results on various

5240

