This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Referring Relationships in Videos
Yogesh Kumar and Anand Mishra
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
{kumar.204, mishra}@iitj.ac.in
https://vl2g.github.io/projects/refRelations/

(b) Predicate Distribution

(a) Problem Setup

ride

fall off

Frequency

<bird, ﬂy above, person> <helicopter, ﬂy above, train> <plane, ﬂy above, truck>

video-1

<plane, ﬂy above, plane>

video-2
video-3
Support Set

video-4

(c) Accuracy Distribution
Accuracy

<plane, ﬂy above, person>

Test video

Predicate

Output

Figure 1. The proposed problem setup. (a) Given a query visual relationship as <subject, predicate, object> and a test video, our goal is
to localize the subject and object on the test video using a support set containing a few videos sharing the same predicate. In this example,
the goal is to spatiotemporally localize the plane (subject), and person (object) that are connected via fly above (predicate), using a support
set containing only four videos sharing predicate fly above. It should be noted here that fly above is unseen during training. We refer to this
problem as few-shot referring relationship in videos. This problem setup is inspired by the real-world scenario where obtaining large-scale
annotations for every visual relationship is practically infeasible. As shown in (b), a popular visual relationship video dataset, namely
ImageNet-VidVRD [27], contains many predicates with very few examples, i.e., it has long-tail distribution. Further, as shown in (c), the
success of a recent visual relationship localization technique (vRGV) [35] is clearly proportional to predicate distribution in the train set.
This calls for solving referring relationship tasks in a few-shot setup. We propose this task and present a novel principled solution.

Abstract
Interpreting visual relationships is a core aspect of comprehensive video understanding. Given a query visual relationship as <subject, predicate, object> and a test video,
our objective is to localize the subject and object that are
connected via the predicate. Given modern visio-lingual
understanding capabilities, solving this problem is achievable, provided that there are large-scale annotated training
examples available. However, annotating for every combination of subject, object, and predicate is cumbersome, expensive, and possibly infeasible. Therefore, there is a need
for models that can learn to spatially and temporally localize subjects and objects that are connected via an un-

seen predicate using only a few support set videos sharing the common predicate. We address this challenging
problem, referred to as few-shot referring relationships in
videos for the first time. To this end, we pose the problem
as a minimization of an objective function defined over a
T-partite random field. Here, the vertices of the random
field correspond to candidate bounding boxes for the subject and object, and T represents the number of frames in
the test video. This objective function is composed of framelevel and visual relationship similarity potentials. To learn
these potentials, we use a relation network that takes queryconditioned translational relationship embedding as inputs
and is meta-trained using support set videos in an episodic
manner. Further, the objective function is minimized using

2289

