This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DYNA F ED: Tackling Client Data Heterogeneity with Global Dynamics
Renjie Pi1 * Weizhong Zhang2 †* Yueqi Xie1 * Jiahui Gao3 Xiaoyu Wang1
Sunghun Kim1 Qifeng Chen1†
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Fudan University 3 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract

(2)

!
" &"$

"$

"
#$

!
" !"'

The Federated Learning (FL) paradigm is known to face
challenges under heterogeneous client data. Local training
on non-iid distributed data results in deflected local optimum,
which causes the client models drift further away from each
other and degrades the aggregated global model’s performance. A natural solution is to gather all client data onto
the server, such that the server has a global view of the entire data distribution. Unfortunately, this reduces to regular
training, which compromises clients’ privacy and conflicts
with the purpose of FL. In this paper, we put forth an idea to
collect and leverage global knowledge on the server without
hindering data privacy. We unearth such knowledge from
the dynamics of the global model’s trajectory. Specifically,
we first reserve a short trajectory of global model snapshots
on the server. Then, we synthesize a small pseudo dataset
such that the model trained on it mimics the dynamics of
the reserved global model trajectory. Afterward, the synthesized data is used to help aggregate the deflected clients into
the global model. We name our method DYNA F ED, which
enjoys the following advantages: 1) we do not rely on any
external on-server dataset, which requires no additional cost
for data collection; 2) the pseudo data can be synthesized in
early communication rounds, which enables DYNA F ED to
take effect early for boosting the convergence and stabilizing
training; 3) the pseudo data only needs to be synthesized
once and can be directly utilized on the server to help aggregation in subsequent rounds. Experiments across extensive
benchmarks are conducted to showcase the effectiveness of
DYNA F ED. We also provide insights and understanding of
the underlying mechanism of our method.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has become a popular distributed
training paradigm to alleviate the server’s computational bur* Joint first authors. Code is available at this link.
† Correspondence to Weizhong Zhang (weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn)

and Qifeng Chen (chenqifeng22@gmail.com)

Sample
! !"#

Match
!
" !"#

Trajectory List

{! ! , ! " … ! & }
(1)
!*

!!"#

Global Server

Se
nd

%

Sen

l !$
oca
dL

Gl
ob

al
!%

…
Client 1

Client 2

Client M

Figure 1. Illustration of DYNA F ED. Firstly, we run the standard
FedAvg for L communication rounds and save the checkpoints
to form a trajectory of the global model at the server. Then, we
synthesize a pseudo dataset Dsyn , with which the network can be
trained to mimic the dynamics of the global trajectory. In this way,
the knowledge that captures the essential information about the
global data distribution is transferred from the global dynamics to
Dsyn . Afterward, Dsyn is adopted to help aggregate the deflected
clients into the global model at the server.

den and preserve clients’ data privacy [3, 23, 31, 45]. In the
FL paradigm, the clients only have access to their private
datasets, while the server is responsible for aggregating the
clients’ updates into a global model. The most prevalent
approaches in FL are based on local-SGD [34] (also referred
to as FedAvg), where the client model is updated locally for
multiple steps before being sent and merged on the server.
Such approaches save communication costs and perform
well given the client data are iid-distributed. However, in
real-world applications such as healthcare [22,23,36,37] and
bio-metrics [2], the client data usually demonstrates heterogeneity (highly non-iid), which deflects the local optimum
from the global optimum [24, 32, 52] and makes the locally

12177

