This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Constructing Deep Spiking Neural Networks from Artificial Neural Networks
with Knowledge Distillation
Qi Xu1 , Yaxin Li1 , Jiangrong Shen2* , Jian K. Liu 3 ,
Huajin Tang2 , Gang Pan2*
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalin University of Technology
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
3
School of Computing, University of Leeds

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are well-known as
brain-inspired models with high computing efficiency, due
to a key component that they utilize spikes as information
units, close to the biological neural systems. Although spiking based models are energy efficient by taking advantage of
discrete spike signals, their performance is limited by current network structures and their training methods. As discrete signals, typical SNNs cannot apply the gradient descent rules directly into parameter adjustment as artificial
neural networks (ANNs). Aiming at this limitation, here
we propose a novel method of constructing deep SNN models with knowledge distillation (KD) that uses ANN as the
teacher model and SNN as the student model. Through the
ANN-SNN joint training algorithm, the student SNN model
can learn rich feature information from the teacher ANN
model through the KD method, yet it avoids training SNN
from scratch when communicating with non-differentiable
spikes. Our method can not only build a more efficient deep
spiking structure feasibly and reasonably but use few time
steps to train the whole model compared to direct training or ANN to SNN methods. More importantly, it has a
superb ability of noise immunity for various types of artificial noises and natural signals. The proposed novel
method provides efficient ways to improve the performance
of SNN through constructing deeper structures in a highthroughput fashion, with potential usage for light and efficient brain-inspired computing of practical scenarios.

1. Introduction
By referring to the information processing mechanism
and structural characteristics of the biological nervous
system, spiking neural networks (SNNs) are remarkably
* Corresponding authors: jrshen@zju.edu.cn and gpan@zju.edu.cn.

good at computational intelligence tasks [26] and suitable
for processing unstructured information, with stronger autonomous learning capabilities and ultra-low power consumption [2, 7, 23, 37].
Although various engineering effort has been made in
this area, such type of biological information processing
system still underperforms artificial systems (artificial neural networks, ANNs) in some common computer tasks,
such as image classification. One possible reason for this
is that typical SNNs lack deep hierarchical network structures compared to those from ANNs. Due to the nondifferentiable spikes, typical SNNs are restricted to global
training rules which lead to various of current SNNs being
just shallow fully-connected layer based [28, 34]. Limited
by training rules and structures, although SNNs can significantly handle spatial-temporal data efficiently, it is difficult
to train a deep SNN directly as using backpropagation (BP)
in ANNs do [22].
By drawing on some key tricks from ANNs, some studies want to improve image classification accuracy which
is led by SNNs by combing structure and learning rules
those has been proven to be effective in improving model
performance in ANNs. [3, 6] proposed methods to convert ANNs to SNNs by controlling the output and network
structure of ANN and SNN to be as consistent as possible. Through this way, although they can build effective
deep SNNs, these conversion methods suffer long training
time and lack some intermediate information during ANN
training period. [12, 19] tried to adopt the threshold of spiking neurons to make them suitable for using gradient surrogate method, these models adopted too complex neuron
models to get good performance and take up large computational memory and cost. [8] did interesting work on directly
converting an adjusted ANN to an SNN using the theoretical equivalence between activation and firing rate, which
achieves superior performance. [29] constructed ANN-SNN
hybrid models to improve the feature extraction, but these

7886

