This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GANHead: Towards Generative Animatable Neural Head Avatars
Sijing Wu1 Yichao Yan2∗ Yunhao Li1 Yuhao Cheng2
Wenhan Zhu2 Ke Gao3 Xiaobo Li3 Guangtao Zhai1,2∗
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Alibaba Group
{wusijing, yanyichao, lyhsjtu, chengyuhao, zhuwenhan823, zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn
{gaoke.gao, xiaobo.lixb}@alibaba-inc.com

Figure 1. We propose GANHead to generate diverse head avatars with complete geometry and realistic texture. The generated avatars can
be deformed to target poses and expressions through FLAME [22] parameters, which generalize well to unseen poses and expressions.

Abstract
To bring digital avatars into people’s lives, it is highly
demanded to efficiently generate complete, realistic, and
animatable head avatars. This task is challenging, and it is
difficult for existing methods to satisfy all the requirements
at once. To achieve these goals, we propose GANHead
(Generative Animatable Neural Head Avatar), a novel generative head model that takes advantages of both the finegrained control over the explicit expression parameters and
the realistic rendering results of implicit representations.
Specifically, GANHead represents coarse geometry, finegained details and texture via three networks in canonical
space to obtain the ability to generate complete and realistic
∗ Corresponding author

Project page: https://wsj-sjtu.github.io/GANHead/

head avatars. To achieve flexible animation, we define the
deformation filed by standard linear blend skinning (LBS),
with the learned continuous pose and expression bases and
LBS weights. This allows the avatars to be directly animated by FLAME [22] parameters and generalize well to
unseen poses and expressions. Compared to state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods, GANHead achieves superior performance
on head avatar generation and raw scan fitting.

1. Introduction
How to efficiently generate photorealistic and animatable head avatars without manual effort is an open problem in computer vision and computer graphics, which has
numerous applications in VR/AR, games, movies, and the
metaverse. In these applications, it is desirable that the head

437

