This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Devil is in the Points: Weakly Semi-Supervised Instance Segmentation
via Point-Guided Mask Representation
Beomyoung Kim1,2

Joonhyun Jeong1,2

NAVER Cloud, ImageVision1

Dongyoon Han3
KAIST2

NAVER AI Lab3

Abstract
Proposal Branch

In this paper, we introduce a novel learning scheme
named weakly semi-supervised instance segmentation (WSSIS) with point labels for budget-efficient and highperformance instance segmentation. Namely, we consider a
dataset setting consisting of a few fully-labeled images and
a lot of point-labeled images. Motivated by the main challenge of semi-supervised approaches mainly derives from
the trade-off between false-negative and false-positive instance proposals, we propose a method for WSSIS that
can effectively leverage the budget-friendly point labels as
a powerful weak supervision source to resolve the challenge. Furthermore, to deal with the hard case where the
amount of fully-labeled data is extremely limited, we propose a MaskRefineNet that refines noise in rough masks.
We conduct extensive experiments on COCO and BDD100K
datasets, and the proposed method achieves promising results comparable to those of the fully-supervised model,
even with 50% of the fully labeled COCO data (38.8% vs.
39.7%). Moreover, when using as little as 5% of fully labeled COCO data, our method shows significantly superior performance over the state-of-the-art semi-supervised
learning method (33.7% vs. 24.9%). The code is available
at https://github.com/clovaai/PointWSSIS.

1. Introduction
Recently proposed instance segmentation methods [5,
8, 9, 13, 15, 16, 23, 32, 42, 45] have achieved remarkable performance owing to the availability of abundant
of segmentation labels for training. However, compared
to other label types (e.g., bounding box or point), segmentation labels necessitate delicate pixel-level annotations, demanding much more monetary cost and human effort. Consequently, weakly-supervised instance segmentation (WSIS) and semi-supervised instance segmentation
(SSIS) approaches have gained attention to reduce anno-

Sung Ju Hwang2

False-Negative
(Missing) Proposal

Mask
Branch

True-Positive
(Correct) Proposal

Mask
Branch

False-Positive
(Noise) Proposal

Mask
Branch

Input

Figure 1. Proposals and instance masks. The absence of a proposal leads to the missing mask, even though the mask could be
generated if given the correct proposal (zebra). Also, noise proposal often leads to noisy masks. Our motivation stems from the
bottleneck in the proposal branch, and this paper shows economic
point labels can be leveraged to resolve it.

tation costs. WSIS approaches alternatively utilize inexpensive weak labels such as image-level labels [1, 26, 52],
point labels [11, 26, 27] or bounding box labels [19, 31, 43].
Besides, SSIS approaches [47, 51] employ a small amount
of pixel-level (fully) labeled data and a massive amount
of unlabeled data. Although they have shown potential
in budget-efficient instance segmentation, there still exists
a large performance gap between theirs and the results of
fully-supervised learning methods.
Specifically, SSIS approaches often adopt the following
training pipeline: (1) train a base network with fully labeled data, (2) generate pseudo instance masks for unlabeled images using the base network, and (3) train a target
network using both full and pseudo labels. The major challenge of SSIS approaches comes from the trade-off between
the number of missing (i.e., false-negative) and noise (i.e.,
false-positive) samples in the pseudo labels. Namely, some
strategies for reducing false-negatives, which is equivalent
to increasing true-positives, often end up increasing falsepositives accordingly; an abundance of false-negatives or
false-positives in pseudo labels impedes stable convergence
of the target network. However, optimally reducing falsenegatives/positives while increasing true-positives is quite
challenging and remains a significant challenge for SSIS.

11360

