This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Painting 3D Nature in 2D:
View Synthesis of Natural Scenes from a Single Semantic Mask
Shangzhan Zhang1∗

Sida Peng1∗

Tianrun Chen1

Kaicheng Yu2

Yiyi Liao1

1

Snow

Clouds

Sand

Grass

Sky

Rock

Mountain

Sea

2

Zhejiang University

Linzhan Mou1

Haotong Lin1∗

Xiaowei Zhou1∗†

Alibaba Group

Novel View 1
Novel View 2

Camera Trajectory

Semantic Manipulation via Semantic Mask

Figure 1. Given only a single semantic map as input (the first row), our approach is able to generate neural fields for view
synthesis of natural scenes. Photorealistic images can be rendered via neural fields (the last two rows).
project website is https://zju3dv.github.io/paintingnature/.

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach that takes a single semantic mask as input to synthesize multi-view consistent color
images of natural scenes, trained with a collection of single
images from the Internet. Prior works on 3D-aware image
synthesis either require multi-view supervision or learning
category-level prior for specific classes of objects, which
are inapplicable to natural scenes. Our key idea to solve
this challenge is to use a semantic field as the intermediate representation, which is easier to reconstruct from an
input semantic mask and then translated to a radiance field
with the assistance of off-the-shelf semantic image synthesis models. Experiments show that our method outperforms
baseline methods and produces photorealistic and multiview consistent videos of a variety of natural scenes. The
∗ Affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University.
† Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

1. Introduction
Natural scenes are indispensable content in many applications such as film production and video games. This work
focuses on a specific setting of synthesizing novel views
of natural scenes given a single semantic mask, which enables us to generate 3D contents by editing 2D semantic
masks. With the development of deep generative models,
2D semantic image synthesis methods [24, 46, 61, 66] have
achieved impressive advances. However, they do not consider the underlying 3D structure and cannot generate multiview consistent free-viewpoint videos.
To address this problem, a straightforward approach
is first utilizing semantics-driven image generator like
SPADE [46] to synthesize an image from the input semantic
mask and then predicting novel views based on the generated image. Although the existing single-view view syn-

8518

