This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leverage Interactive Affinity for Affordance Learning
Hongchen Luo1‡ Wei Zhai1‡ Jing Zhang2 Yang Cao1,4 * Dacheng Tao3,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
3
The University of Sydney
JD Explore Academy
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
lhc12@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au,
{wzhai056,forrest}@ustc.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Perceiving potential “action possibilities” (i.e., affordance) regions of images and learning interactive functionalities of objects from human demonstration is a challenging task due to the diversity of human-object interactions. Prevailing affordance learning algorithms often
adopt the label assignment paradigm and presume that
there is a unique relationship between functional region and
affordance label, yielding poor performance when adapting to unseen environments with large appearance variations. In this paper, we propose to leverage interactive affinity for affordance learning, i.e.extracting interactive affinity
from human-object interaction and transferring it to noninteractive objects. Interactive affinity, which represents the
contacts between different parts of the human body and local regions of the target object, can provide inherent cues of
interconnectivity between humans and objects, thereby reducing the ambiguity of the perceived action possibilities.
Specifically, we propose a pose-aided interactive affinity
learning framework that exploits human pose to guide the
network to learn the interactive affinity from human-object
interactions. Particularly, a keypoint heuristic perception
(KHP) scheme is devised to exploit the keypoint association
of human pose to alleviate the uncertainties due to interaction diversities and contact occlusions. Besides, a contactdriven affordance learning (CAL) dataset is constructed by
collecting and labeling over 5, 000 images. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method outperforms the representative models regarding objective metrics and visual
quality. Code and dataset: github.com/lhc1224/PIAL-Net.

1. Introduction
The objective of affordance learning is to locate the “action possibilities” regions of an object [15, 18]. For an in* Corresponding author. ‡ Equal contributions.

Figure 1. (a) Interaction affinity refers to the contact between different parts of the human body and the local regions of a target
object. (b) The interactive affinity provides rich cues to guide the
model to acquire invariant features of the object’s local regions interacting with the body part, thus counteracting the multiple possibilities caused by diverse interactions.

telligent agent, it is vital to perceive not only the object semantics but also how to interact with various objects’ local
regions. Perceiving and reasoning about the object’s interactable regions is a critical capability for embodied intelligent systems to interact with the environment actively, distinct from passive perception systems [3, 38, 39, 44]. Moreover, affordance learning has a wide range of applications
in fields such as action recognition [13, 24, 43], scene understanding [9, 69], human-robot interaction [51, 63], autonomous driving [7] and VR/AR [50, 53].
Affordance is a dynamic property closely related to humans and the environment [18]. Previous works [11, 37, 40,
46] focus on establishing mapping relationships between
appearances and labels for affordance learning. However,
they neglect the multiple possibilities of affordance brought
about by changes in the environment and actors, leading
to an incorrect perception. Recent studies [39, 48] utilize reinforcement learning to allow intelligent agents to
perceive the environment through numerous interactions in
simulated/actual scenarios. Such approaches are mainly
limited by their high cost and struggle to generalize to

6809

