This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P ROTO C ON: Pseudo-label Refinement via Online Clustering and Prototypical
Consistency for Efficient Semi-supervised Learning
Islam Nassar1
1
2

Munawar Hayat1 Ehsan Abbasnejad2
Gholamreza Haffari1

Hamid Rezatofighi1

Data Science and AI Department, Monash University, Australia – firstname.lastname@monash.edu

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide, Australia – firstname.lastname@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Prediction

Refined Pseudo-label

consistency

Confidence-based pseudo-labeling is among the dominant approaches in semi-supervised learning (SSL). It relies on including high-confidence predictions made on unlabeled data as additional targets to train the model. We
propose P ROTO C ON, a novel SSL method aimed at the lessexplored label-scarce SSL where such methods usually underperform. P ROTO C ON refines the pseudo-labels by leveraging their nearest neighbours’ information. The neighbours are identified as the training proceeds using an online clustering approach operating in an embedding space
trained via a prototypical loss to encourage well-formed
clusters. The online nature of P ROTO C ON allows it to
utilise the label history of the entire dataset in one training cycle to refine labels in the following cycle without the
need to store image embeddings. Hence, it can seamlessly
scale to larger datasets at a low cost. Finally, P ROTO C ON
addresses the poor training signal in the initial phase of
training (due to fewer confident predictions) by introducing an auxiliary self-supervised loss. It delivers significant
gains and faster convergence over state-of-the-art across 5
datasets, including CIFARs, ImageNet and DomainNet.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) [10, 40] leverages unlabeled data to guide learning from a small amount of labeled data; thereby, providing a promising alternative to
costly human annotations. In recent years, SSL frontiers
have seen substantial advances through confidence-based
pseudo-labeling [21, 22, 38, 42, 43]. In these methods,
a model iteratively generates pseudo-labels for unlabeled
samples which are then used as targets to train the model.
To overcome confirmation bias [1, 27] i.e., the model being
biased by training on its own wrong predictions, these methods only retain samples with high confidence predictions
for pseudo-labeling; thus ensuring that only reliable samples are used to train the model. While confidence works
well in moderately labeled data regimes, it usually strug-

zebra

Original Pseudo-label

tiger

zebra
Cluster Pseudo-label

bird

tiger

bird

Refine

classify

classify
zebra

tiger

bird

zebra

tiger

bird

project
co

ns

iste

nc

y

project

weak augmentation

strong augmentation

Class
Prototypes
obtained via
online clustering

Figure 1. P ROTO C ON refines a pseudo-label of a given sample by
knowledge of its neighbours in a prototypical embedding space.
Neighbours are identified in an online manner using constrained
K-means clustering. Best viewed zoomed in.

gles in label-scarce settings1 . This is primarily because the
model becomes over-confident about the more distinguishable classes [17, 28] faster than others, leading to a collapse.
In this work, we propose P ROTO C ON, a novel method
which addresses such a limitation in label-scarce SSL. Its
key idea is to complement confidence with a label refinement strategy to encourage more accurate pseudo-labels.
To that end, we perform the refinement by adopting a cotraining [5] framework: for each image, we obtain two different labels and combine them to obtain our final pseudolabel. The first is the model’s softmax prediction, whereas
the second is an aggregate pseudo-label describing the image’s neighbourhood based on the pseudo-labels of other
images in its vicinity. However, a key requirement for
the success of co-training is to ensure that the two labels
are obtained using sufficiently different image representations [40] to allow the model to learn based on their disagreements. As such, we employ a non-linear projection
to map our encoder’s representation into a different embed1 We denote settings with less than 10 images per class as “label-scarce.”

11641

