This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterative Proposal Refinement for Weakly-Supervised Video Grounding
Meng Cao1 ,* Fangyun Wei2 , Can Xu3 , Xiubo Geng3 , Long Chen4 ,
Can Zhang1 , Yuexian Zou1 , Tao Shen3 , Daxin Jiang3†
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Microsoft 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Weakly-Supervised Video Grounding (WSVG) aims to
localize events of interest in untrimmed videos with only
video-level annotations. To date, most of the state-of-the-art
WSVG methods follow a two-stage pipeline, i.e., firstly generating potential temporal proposals and then grounding
with these proposal candidates. Despite the recent progress,
existing proposal generation methods suffer from two drawbacks: 1) lack of explicit correspondence modeling; and 2)
partial coverage of complex events. To this end, we propose
a novel IteRative prOposal refiNement network (dubbed as
IRON) to gradually distill the prior knowledge into each
proposal and encourage proposals with more complete coverage. Specifically, we set up two lightweight distillation
branches to uncover the cross-modal correspondence on
both the semantic and conceptual levels. Then, an iterative Label Propagation (LP) strategy is devised to prevent
the network from focusing excessively on the most discriminative events instead of the whole sentence content. Precisely, during each iteration, the proposal with the minimal
distillation loss and its adjacent ones are regarded as the
positive samples, which refines proposal confidence scores
in a cascaded manner. Extensive experiments and ablation
studies on two challenging WSVG datasets have attested to
the effectiveness of our IRON. The code will be available at
https://github.com/mengcaopku/IRON.

1. Introduction
Weakly-Supervised Video Grounding (WSVG) [21, 37,
41, 72, 73] aims to localize the moment of interest from
an untrimmed video according to a query sentence without frame-wise annotations. It has drawn increasing attention in both industry and academia due to its wide applications, e.g., video retrieval [13, 19], video question answer-

Video
Query

Fusion

Proposal
Generation

Grounding
Module

Output

Explicit correspondence modeling

(a)
Query: The kite weaves through the air, turning and twisting as it goes.

Ground Truth

113.3s

Proposal #1
Proposal #2

169.1s
131.6s

112.9s

142.3s

confidence score: 0.87

148.3s

confidence score: 0.24

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The conventional WSVG pipeline (i.e., baseline)
lacks explicit correspondence modeling. (b) Partial coverage of
complex events. Proposal #1 with the high confidence score (i.e.,
0.87) tends to be of short duration. The more reasonable proposal
#2 has the lower confidence score.

ing [1], human-computer interaction [49], etc. Currently,
the overwhelming majority of state-of-the-art WSVG methods follow a two-stage pipeline, i.e., they firstly generate
potential proposals and then use these proposals to conduct
grounding via multi-instance learning (MIL) [21, 27, 40, 41]
or query reconstruction [37, 40, 50, 72]. This paradigm
commonly relies on densely-placed proposals to achieve
high recall and ensure as much coverage as possible, which
causes severe computation redundancy. Recent works [72,
73] reduce the number of required proposals by predicting Gaussian masks to highlight query-relevant segments.
However, a such constraint is too rigorous and lacks flexibility. Thus, in this paper, we work toward designing sparse
and reliable proposals without any distribution assumptions.
Despite of the dominated performance achieved, it is
worth noting that current proposal generation methods suffer from two inherent drawbacks: 1) Lack of explicit correspondence modeling: A simple pipeline1 for the conventional proposal-based WSVG methods is illustrated in Fig-

* Work done during the internship at Microsoft.
† Corresponding author: Daxin Jiang (djiang@microsoft.com).

1 We call this pipeline as baseline and refer to the appendix for details.

6524

