This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified HDR Imaging Method with Pixel and Patch Level
Qingsen Yan†1 , Weiye Chen†2 , Song Zhang†2 , Yu Zhu1 , Jinqiu Sun1 , Yanning Zhang1 *
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 Xidian University

Abstract
Mapping Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images with different exposures to High Dynamic Range (HDR) remains nontrivial and challenging on dynamic scenes due to ghosting
caused by object motion or camera jitting. With the success
of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), several DNNs-based
methods have been proposed to alleviate ghosting, they cannot generate approving results when motion and saturation
occur. To generate visually pleasing HDR images in various
cases, we propose a hybrid HDR deghosting network, called
HyHDRNet, to learn the complicated relationship between
reference and non-reference images. The proposed HyHDRNet consists of a content alignment subnetwork and a
Transformer-based fusion subnetwork. Specifically, to effectively avoid ghosting from the source, the content alignment subnetwork uses patch aggregation and ghost attention to integrate similar content from other non-reference
images with patch level and suppress undesired components with pixel level. To achieve mutual guidance between
patch-level and pixel-level, we leverage a gating module
to sufficiently swap useful information both in ghosted and
saturated regions. Furthermore, to obtain a high-quality
HDR image, the Transformer-based fusion subnetwork uses
a Residual Deformable Transformer Block (RDTB) to adaptively merge information for different exposed regions. We
examined the proposed method on four widely used public
HDR image deghosting datasets. Experiments demonstrate
that HyHDRNet outperforms state-of-the-art methods both
quantitatively and qualitatively, achieving appealing HDR
visualization with unified textures and colors.

1. Introduction
Natural scenes cover a very broad range of illumination, but standard digital camera sensors can only measure
* † The first three authors contributed equally to this work. This
work was partially supported by NSFC (U19B2037, 61901384), Natural Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi (2021JCW-03, 2023-JCQN-0685), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (D5000220444), and National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated
Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology. Corresponding author: Jinqiu Sun.

Figure 1. Our approach produces high-quality HDR images, leveraging both patch-wise aggregation and pixel-wise ghost attention. The two modules provide complementary visual information:
patch aggregation recovers patch-level content of the complex distorted regions and ghost attention provides pixel-level alignment.

a limited dynamic range. Images captured by cameras often have saturated or under-exposed regions, which lead to
terrible visual effects due to severely missing details. High
Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging has been developed to address these limitations, and it can display richer details. A
common way of HDR imaging is to fuse a series of differently exposed Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images. It can
recover a high-quality HDR image when both the scene and
the camera are static, however, it suffers from ghosting artifacts on dynamic objects or hand-held camera scenarios.
Several methods have been proposed to alleviate these
problems, including alignment-based methods [1, 7, 20],
rejection-based methods [3, 8, 16, 18, 33] and patch-based
methods [5, 13, 19]. The alignment-based methods employ
global (e.g., homographies) or non-rigid alignment (e.g.,
optical flow) to rectify the content of motion regions, but
they are error-prone and cause ghosts due to saturation and
occlusion. The rejection-based methods attempt to remove
the motion components from the exposed images and replace them with the content of the reference image. Al-

22211

