This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Image Modeling with Local Multi-Scale Reconstruction
Haoqing Wang1 , Yehui Tang1,2 , Yunhe Wang2 ,* Jianyuan Guo2 , Zhi-Hong Deng1 ,* Kai Han2
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{wanghaoqing,yhtang,zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn, {yunhe.wang, kai.han}@huawei.com

Abstract
Masked Image Modeling (MIM) achieves outstanding
success in self-supervised representation learning. Unfortunately, MIM models typically have huge computational burden and slow learning process, which is an inevitable obstacle for their industrial applications. Although the lower
layers play the key role in MIM, existing MIM models conduct reconstruction task only at the top layer of encoder.
The lower layers are not explicitly guided and the interaction among their patches is only used for calculating new
activations. Considering the reconstruction task requires
non-trivial inter-patch interactions to reason target signals,
we apply it to multiple local layers including lower and upper layers. Further, since the multiple layers expect to learn
the information of different scales, we design local multiscale reconstruction, where the lower and upper layers reconstruct fine-scale and coarse-scale supervision signals
respectively. This design not only accelerates the representation learning process by explicitly guiding multiple layers, but also facilitates multi-scale semantical understanding to the input. Extensive experiments show that with significantly less pre-training burden, our model achieves comparable or better performance on classification, detection
and segmentation tasks than existing MIM models. Code is
available with both MindSpore and PyTorch.

1. Introduction
Recently, Masked Image Modeling (MIM) [2, 21, 50]
achieves outstanding success in the field of self-supervised
visual representation learning, which is inspired by the
Masked Language Modeling (MLM) [4, 29] in natural language processing and benefits from the development of vision transformers [16, 33, 45]. MIM learns semantic representations by first masking some parts of the input and then
predicting their signals based on the unmasked parts, e.g.,
normalized pixels [21,50], discrete tokens [2,15], HOG feature [47], deep features [1, 54] or frequencies [32, 49].
* Corresponding author.

Despite superior performance on various downstream
tasks, these models have huge computational burden and
slow learning process [26]. They typically require thousands of GPU Hours for pre-training on ImageNet-1K to
get generalizing representations. Since we expect to pretrain these models on more massive amount of unlabeled
data (e.g., free Internet data) to obtain more generalizing
representations in practice, the pre-training efficiency is
an inevitable bottleneck limiting the industrial applications
of MIM. How to accelerate the representation learning in
MIM is an important topic. To this end, MAE [21] pioneered the asymmetric encoder-decoder strategy, where the
costly encoder only operates few visible patches and the
lightweight decoder takes all the patches as input for prediction. Further, GreenMIM [26] extends the asymmetric
encoder-decoder strategy to hierarchical vision transformers (e.g., Swin [33]). Besides, [8, 19, 30] shrinks the input
resolution to lessen the input patches, thereby reducing the
computational burden. However, they all aim to accelerate
the encoding process rather than the representation learning.
In MIM, the learning of upper layers depends on that of
lower ones during pre-training, since the upper-layer features are calculated from the lower layers. Besides, during
fine-tuning the upper layers are typically tuned quickly to
adapt to the downstream task while the lower ones change
more slowly and need to be well-learned [2, 25, 52]. Even
fine-tuning only the several upper layers and freezing the
others can obtain similar performance [21]. Therefore, the
lower layers of encoder play the key role in MIM. However,
all existing MIM models only conduct reconstruction task at
the top layer of encoder and the lower ones are not explicitly
guide, thus the interaction among their patches is only used
for calculating the activations of the next layer. Considering
the reconstruction task requires non-trivial inter-patch interactions to reason target signals, we apply it to both lower
and upper layers to explicitly guide them and thus accelerate
the overall learning process. Using tiny decoder is sufficient
for each local reconstruction task and does not significantly
increase the computational burden.
How to properly conduct reconstruction tasks at multiple local layers is a non-trivial problem. For example, ap-

2122

