This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

STMT: A Spatial-Temporal Mesh Transformer for
MoCap-Based Action Recognition

1

Xiaoyu Zhu1 , Po-Yao Huang2† , Junwei Liang3† , Celso M. de Melo4 , Alexander Hauptmann1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 FAIR, Meta AI, 3 HKUST (Guangzhou), 4 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Figure 1. Current state-of-the-art MoCap-based action recognition methods first convert body markers into a human body mesh, which
is used to predict a standardized 3D skeleton. The 3D skeleton is used as input for action recognition models (dashed line). We propose
a method that directly models the dynamics of raw mesh sequences (solid line). Our method saves the manual effort to derive skeleton
representation, and achieves superior recognition performance by leveraging surface motion and body shape knowledge from meshes.

Abstract
We study the problem of human action recognition using
motion capture (MoCap) sequences. Unlike existing techniques that take multiple manual steps to derive standardized skeleton representations as model input, we propose
a novel Spatial-Temporal Mesh Transformer (STMT) to directly model the mesh sequences. The model uses a hierarchical transformer with intra-frame off-set attention and
inter-frame self-attention. The attention mechanism allows
the model to freely attend between any two vertex patches
to learn non-local relationships in the spatial-temporal domain. Masked vertex modeling and future frame prediction
are used as two self-supervised tasks to fully activate the
bi-directional and auto-regressive attention in our hierarchical transformer. The proposed method achieves state-ofthe-art performance compared to skeleton-based and pointcloud-based models on common MoCap benchmarks. Code
is available at https://github.com/zgzxy001/
STMT.

1. Introduction
Motion Capture (MoCap) is the process of digitally
recording the human movement, which enables the fine†Equal Contribution.

grained capture and analysis of human motions in 3D space
[40, 50]. MoCap-based human perception serves as key
elements for various research fields, such as action recognition [15, 46–48, 50, 57], tracking [47], pose estimation
[1, 27], imitation learning [76], and motion synthesis [47].
Besides, MoCap is one of the fundamental technologies to
enhance human-robot interactions in various practical scenarios including hospitals and manufacturing environment
[22, 28, 41, 43, 45, 77]. For example, Hayes [22] classified automotive assembly activities using MoCap data of
humans and objects. Understanding human behaviors from
MoCap data is fundamentally important for robotics perception, planning, and control.
Skeleton representations are commonly used to model
MoCap sequences. Some early works [3, 29] directly used
body markers and their connectivity relations to form a
skeleton graph. However, the marker positions depend on
each subject (person), which brings sample variances within
each dataset. Moreover, different MoCap datasets usually have different numbers of body markers. For example, ACCAD [48], BioMotion [64], Eyes Japan [15], and
KIT [42] have 82, 41, 37, and 50 body markers respectively. This prevents the model to be trained and tested on
a unified framework. To use standard skeleton representa-

1526

