This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Accurate Image Coding:
Improved Autoregressive Image Generation with Dynamic Vector Quantization
Mengqi Huang1 , Zhendong Mao1, 2 *, Zhuowei Chen1 , Yongdong Zhang1, 2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China;
2
Institute of Artificial intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Hefei, China
{huangmq, chenzw01}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zdmao, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing vector quantization (VQ) based autoregressive
models follow a two-stage generation paradigm that first
learns a codebook to encode images as discrete codes,
and then completes generation based on the learned codebook. However, they encode fixed-size image regions into
fixed-length codes and ignore their naturally different information densities, which results in insufficiency in important regions and redundancy in unimportant ones, and finally degrades the generation quality and speed. Moreover, the fixed-length coding leads to an unnatural rasterscan autoregressive generation. To address the problem,
we propose a novel two-stage framework: (1) DynamicQuantization VAE (DQ-VAE) which encodes image regions into variable-length codes based on their information densities for an accurate & compact code representation. (2) DQ-Transformer which thereby generates images autoregressively from coarse-grained (smooth regions
with fewer codes) to fine-grained (details regions with
more codes) by modeling the position and content of codes
in each granularity alternately, through a novel stackedtransformer architecture and shared-content, non-shared
position input layers designs. Comprehensive experiments
on various generation tasks validate our superiorities in
both effectiveness and efficiency. Code will be released
at https : / / github . com / CrossmodalGroup /
DynamicVectorQuantization.

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) Existing fixed-length
coding ignores information densities, which results in insufficiency in dense information regions like region ② and redundancy
in sparse information regions like region ①, generating poor details and inconsistent structure. Our information-density-based
variable-length coding encodes accurately and produces rich details and consistent structure. (b) Comparison of existing unnatural raster-scan autoregressive generation order and our natural and
more effective coarse-to-fine autoregressive generation order.
Error map: l1 loss of each 322 region between original images and reconstructions, higher (redder) worse. Existing examples are taken from [13].

1. Introduction
The vision community has witnessed the rapid progress
of deep generative models, pushing image generation quality to an unprecedented level. As a fundamental task, generating realistic images from arbitrary inputs (e.g., class labels) can empower humans to create rich and diverse visual
content and bring numerous real-world applications. Unify* Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

ing the realism of local details and the consistency of global
structure is the eternal pursuit for all image generations.
Recently, vector quantization (VQ) [37] has been a foundation for various types of generative models as evidenced
by numerous large-scale diffusion models like LDM [32],
autoregressive models like DALL-E [30], etc. These models follow a two-stage generation paradigm, i.e., the first
stage learns a codebook by VQ to encode images as dis-

22596

