This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobileVOS: Real-Time Video Object Segmentation
Contrastive Learning meets Knowledge Distillation
Roy Miles* Mehmet Kerim Yucel Bruno Manganelli
Samsung Research UK

Abstract
This paper tackles the problem of semi-supervised video
object segmentation on resource-constrained devices, such
as mobile phones. We formulate this problem as a distillation task, whereby we demonstrate that small spacetime-memory networks with finite memory can achieve competitive results with state of the art, but at a fraction of
the computational cost (32 milliseconds per frame on a
Samsung Galaxy S22). Specifically, we provide a theoretically grounded framework that unifies knowledge distillation with supervised contrastive representation learning. These models are able to jointly benefit from both
pixel-wise contrastive learning and distillation from a pretrained teacher. We validate this loss by achieving competitive J &F to state of the art on both the standard DAVIS
and YouTube benchmarks, despite running up to ˆ5 faster,
and with ˆ32 fewer parameters.

1. Introduction
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) is a foundational task
in computer vision, where the aim is to segment and track
objects in a sequence of frames. VOS is the backbone of
many applications such as video editing, autonomous driving, surveillance, and augmented reality [55]. In this work,
we focus on semi-supervised VOS (SVOS), where the mask
annotations for only the initial frame are provided. SVOS
is a notoriously difficult task, where one needs to model the
motion and appearance changes under severe occlusion and
drifts, while performing well in a class-agnostic manner.
SVOS approaches can be divided into three main methods, namely, online fine-tuning [4, 20, 27, 36, 43, 53], object flow [12, 35, 40, 50, 61, 63], and offline matching [8, 21,
52, 64, 65]. Memory-based matching methods have shown
impressive results in the last years. These approaches
[9, 10, 26, 29, 32, 34, 41, 47, 54, 57] leverage memory banks
to encode and memorize previous frames. They find feature
correspondences between the memory and the current frame

Albert Saà-Garriga

to predict the next object masks. Despite their good results,
memory-networks tend to suffer from a trade-off between
the memory usage and accuracy [26]. Storing a reduced
number of frames [9,26,54], storing local segmentation features [37, 57] (i.e. features of only a part of the image), or
segmenting only on keyframes [59], have been proposed as
methods to tackle this tradeoff. Recent methods are now
accurate and fast on high-end GPUs, but there is no method
in the literature that is capable of retaining state-of-the-art
results while performing in real-time on mobile phones.
Our work addresses real-time SVOS on resourceconstrained devices. Specifically, we focus on memorybased networks and begin to bridge the gap between infinite
memory and finite memory networks. In contrast with existing methods that do so by architectural [26] and memorybank design changes [9, 54], we adopt a novel approach
that addresses the problem through knowledge distillation.
Specifically, we propose a pixel-wise representation distillation loss that aims to transfer the structural information
of a large, infinite memory teacher to that of a smaller,
finite memory student. We then show that using a simple boundary-aware sampling strategy can improve training
convergence. Finally, we provide a natural generalisation to
encompass a supervised pixel-wise contrastive representation objective. Using ground-truth labels as another venue
for structural information, we interpolate between representation distillation and contrastive learning with a hyperparameter, and use it as a unified loss. Our results on popular SVOS datasets show that we are competitive with stateof-the-art [26], while running ˆ5 faster and having ˆ32
fewer parameters. Our model, without any pruning or quantisation, runs comfortably in real-time on a mobile device.
The summary of our main contributions is given as follows:
• We unify knowledge distillation and supervised contrastive learning to design a novel representation-based
loss that bridges the gap between the large, infinite
memory models and those with small, finite memory.
Additionally, we show that a simple boundary-aware
pixel sampling strategy can further improve the results
and model convergence.

* Work done while being an intern at Samsung Research UK

10480

