This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Private Image Generation with Dual-Purpose Auxiliary Classifier
Chen Chen1
1

Daochang Liu1

Siqi Ma2

Surya Nepal3

Chang Xu1

School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
2

3
The University of New South Wales, Canberra
CSIRO, Data61
cche0711@uni.sydney.edu.au,
{daochang.liu, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au,
siqi.ma@adfa.edu.au,

surya.nepal@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Privacy-preserving image generation has been important for segments such as medical domains that have sensitive and limited data. The benefits of guaranteed privacy
come at the costs of generated images’ quality and utility
due to the privacy budget constraints. The utility is currently measured by the gen2real accuracy (g2r%), i.e., the
accuracy on real data of a downstream classifier trained
using generated data. However, apart from this standard
utility, we identify the “reversed utility” as another crucial aspect, which computes the accuracy on generated data
of a classifier trained using real data, dubbed as real2gen
accuracy (r2g%). Jointly considering these two views of
utility, the standard and the reversed, could help the generation model better improve transferability between fake
and real data. Therefore, we propose a novel private image
generation method that incorporates a dual-purpose auxiliary classifier, which alternates between learning from real
data and fake data, into the training of differentially private
GANs. Additionally, our deliberate training strategies such
as sequential training contributes to accelerating the generator’s convergence and further boosting the performance
upon exhausting the privacy budget. Our results achieve
new state-of-the-arts over all metrics on three benchmarks:
MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, and CelebA.

1. Introduction
By combining game theory with the powerful deep neural networks, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [19]
and its variants [2, 21, 24, 27] have shown impressive capability to learn the data distribution and synthesise data of
high fidelity and diversity that are challenging to be differentiated from the real ones. Therefore, they are appealing
data augmentation methods in domains where real data is
too rare or contains sensitive information, such as the medical domain. For example, GANs can be used to generate
synthetic liver lesions [16], MRIs [5], and CT scans [34]

Figure 1. In each training loop, the proposed dual-purpose auxiliary classifier is trained sequentially to improve on both two aspects of transferability and provide feedback to the generator.

that could then be fed into machine learning models to unleash their power for building high-quality medical analytics systems. Ideally, this could also protect the privacy of
real patient data and encourage data sharing between institutions by only releasing the synthetic ones generated by
GANs. This seems to solve the two problems mentioned,
the scarcity and sensitivity of data.
Unfortunately, recent works have shown that GANs are
not safe from leaking sensitive information about training
sample [3, 29, 40] as GANs are subject to model inversion
attacks and membership inference attacks in both whitebox and black-box settings [15, 23, 35, 42]. To preserve
privacy, recent works have made progress by adopting Differential Privacy (DP) [12], a rigorously privacy-guaranteed
mechanism, in GAN training [8, 14, 25, 30, 37]. Along this
line, GS-WGAN [8] is a current state-of-the-art method,
which demonstrated that DP can be achieved by only selectively sanitising the generator, while leaving the discrim-

20361

