This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Patch-Mix Transformer for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation: A Game
Perspective
Jinjing Zhu1 * Haotian Bai1 * Lin Wang1,2†
1

AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

2

Dept. of CSE, HKUST

zhujinjing.hkust@gmail.com, haotianwhite@outlook.com, linwang@ust.hk

Abstract

55
50
Accuracy

Endeavors have been recently made to leverage the vision transformer (ViT) for the challenging unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) task. They typically adopt the
cross-attention in ViT for direct domain alignment. However,
as the performance of cross-attention highly relies on the
quality of pseudo labels for targeted samples, it becomes
less effective when the domain gap becomes large. We solve
this problem from a game theory’s perspective with the proposed model dubbed as PMTrans, which bridges source and
target domains with an intermediate domain. Speciﬁcally,
we propose a novel ViT-based module called PatchMix that
effectively builds up the intermediate domain, i.e., probability distribution, by learning to sample patches from both
domains based on the game-theoretical models. This way,
it learns to mix the patches from the source and target domains to maximize the cross entropy (CE), while exploiting
two semi-supervised mixup losses in the feature and label
spaces to minimize it. As such, we interpret the process of
UDA as a min-max CE game with three players, including
the feature extractor, classiﬁer, and PatchMix, to ﬁnd the
Nash Equilibria. Moreover, we leverage attention maps from
ViT to re-weight the label of each patch by its importance,
making it possible to obtain more domain-discriminative
feature representations. We conduct extensive experiments
on four benchmark datasets, and the results show that
PMTrans signiﬁcantly surpasses the ViT-based and CNNbased SoTA methods by +3.6% on Ofﬁce-Home, +1.4% on
Ofﬁce-31, and +17.7% on DomainNet, respectively. https:
//vlis2022.github.io/cvpr23/PMTrans

45
40
35
30
25
20
clp

inf

pnt

qdr

rel

skt

Target¬ tasks

Figure 1. The classiﬁcation accuracy of our PMTrans surpasses the
SoTA methods by +17.7% on the most challenging DomainNet
dataset. Note that the target tasks treat one domain of DomainNet
as the target domain and the others as the source domains.

knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled
target domain [30]. A signiﬁcant line of solutions reduces
the domain gap based on the category-level alignment which
produces pseudo labels for the target samples, such as metric
learning [14,53], adversarial training [12,17,34], and optimal
transport [44]. Furthermore, several works [11, 36] explore
the potential of ViT for the non-trivial UDA task. Recently,
CDTrans [45] exploits the cross-attention in ViT for direct
domain alignment, buttressed by the crafted pseudo labels
for target samples. However, CDTrans has a distinct limitation: as the performance of cross-attention highly depends
on the quality of pseudo labels, it becomes less effective
when the domain gap becomes large. As shown in Fig. 1,
due to the signiﬁcant gap between the domain qdr and the
other domains, aligning distributions directly between them
performs poorly.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
tremendous success on numerous vision tasks; however, they
still suffer from the limited generalization capability to a new
domain due to the domain shift problem [50]. Unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) tackles this issue by transferring

In this paper, we probe a new problem for UDA: how
to smoothly bridge the source and target domains by constructing an intermediate domain with an effective ViTbased solution? The intuition behind this is that, compared
to direct aligning domains, alleviating the domain gap between the intermediate and source/target domain can facili-

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author.

3561

