This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond mAP: Towards better evaluation of instance segmentation
Rohit Jena1† Lukas Zhornyak∗ 1 Nehal Doiphode∗ 1 Pratik Chaudhari 1
Vivek Buch 2 James Gee 1 Jianbo Shi 1
1
2
University of Pennsylvania
Stanford University
{rjena,zhornyak,lahen,pratikac,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu, vpbuch@stanford.edu, gee@upenn.edu

Abstract
Correctness of instance segmentation constitutes counting the number of objects, correctly localizing all predictions and classifying each localized prediction. Average
Precision is the de-facto metric used to measure all these
constituents of segmentation. However, this metric does not
penalize duplicate predictions in the high-recall range, and
cannot distinguish instances that are localized correctly but
categorized incorrectly. This weakness has inadvertently
led to network designs that achieve significant gains in AP
but also introduce a large number of false positives. We
therefore cannot rely on AP to choose a model that provides
an optimal tradeoff between false positives and high recall.
To resolve this dilemma, we review alternative metrics in
the literature and propose two new measures to explicitly
measure the amount of both spatial and categorical duplicate predictions. We also propose a Semantic Sorting and
NMS module to remove these duplicates based on a pixel
occupancy matching scheme. Experiments show that modern segmentation networks have significant gains in AP, but
also contain a considerable amount of duplicates. Our Semantic Sorting and NMS can be added as a plug-and-play
module to mitigate hedged predictions and preserve AP.

1. Introduction
Tasks like classification and semantic segmentation have
a fixed output space, i.e. the K-dimensional probability distribution of the classes and the per-pixel semantic class respectively. For classification, we can use the zero-one loss,
and for semantic segmentation we can use a per-pixel cross
entropy loss. On the other hand, instance segmentation is
a challenging problem because the output is a set containing an arbitrary number of objects, and the network does
not have knowledge of the number of objects in the scene
apriori. Therefore, the model has to count the correct number of objects in the scene, localize them all and classify
† Correspondence to: rjena@seas.upenn.edu
* Equal contribution

them correctly. Deep learning for instance segmentation has
two broad paradigms - top-down and bottom-up instance
segmentation. In bottom-up instance segmentation, the image is converted into per-pixel features, and pixel features
are aggregated to predict objects. This is typically done by
grouping or clustering the pixels based on some similarity
in the feature space [2, 7, 13, 30, 36, 41]. In top-down instance segmentation, a model proposes a set of candidate
proposals, out of which proposals not containing an object
are removed. This leaves us with a smaller set of proposals which are further passed into a localization and classification branch. This is typically followed by an NMS
step, since an object may have multiple candidate proposals, so duplicates must be removed. Popular approaches
are dominated by top-down methods where the network regresses a bounding box, mask, and category. Mask-RCNN
[14, 16, 24] approaches it as a two-stage problem: localize
the object, then predict the associated instance segmentation mask. SOLO [37, 38] builds on an anchor-free framework and directly regresses an object segmentation using
a spatial grid feature as a probe. More recent work based
on Transformers ( [6, 12]) explicitly learn a query in the
network memory, then refines this prediction.
We can
interpret all these top-down methods as implementing the
query-key paradigm. Each uses different query designs: anchor box-based object proposal for Mask R-CNN, grid-cell
for SOLO, or learnable latent features for DETR/QueryInst.
The Query-Key interaction aims to extract different representations of the object: ROI pooled features for MaskRCNN, center-based convolution filters for SOLO, and crossattention features in DETR.
In analyzing why top-down methods consistently perform better than bottom-up methods, we make an unusual observation. The qualitative performance of bottomup methods is at par with that of top-down methods, but
there is a significant gap in mAP. Upon further analysis of
the precision-recall curves in top-down methods, we find
that mAP can be increased by increasing the number of
low-confidence predictions. We observe that recent design
choices in the literature has exacerbated this problem. In

11309

