This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Next3D: Generative Neural Texture Rasterization for 3D-Aware Head Avatars
Jingxiang Sun1
1

Xuan Wang2
Lizhen Wang14
Xiaoyu Li3
Hongwen Zhang1
Yebin Liu1

Tsinghua University

2

Ant Group

3

Tencent AI Lab

4

Yong Zhang3

NNKosmos

Figure 1. Our 3D GAN synthesizes generative, high-quality, and 3D-consistent facial avatars from unstructured 2D images. Unlike current
animatable 3D GANs that only modify yaw-pitch head poses and facial expressions, our approach enables fine-grained control over fullhead rotations, facial expressions, eye blinks, and gaze directions with strict 3D consistency and a high level of photorealism. Our approach
also provides strong 3D priors for downstream tasks such as 3D-aware stylization.

Abstract
3D-aware generative adversarial networks (GANs) synthesize high-fidelity and multi-view-consistent facial images
using only collections of single-view 2D imagery. Towards
fine-grained control over facial attributes, recent efforts
incorporate 3D Morphable Face Model (3DMM) to describe deformation in generative radiance fields either explicitly or implicitly. Explicit methods provide fine-grained
expression control but cannot handle topological changes
caused by hair and accessories, while implicit ones can
model varied topologies but have limited generalization
caused by the unconstrained deformation fields. We propose a novel 3D GAN framework for unsupervised learning of generative, high-quality and 3D-consistent facial
avatars from unstructured 2D images. To achieve both deformation accuracy and topological flexibility, we propose
a 3D representation called Generative Texture-Rasterized
Tri-planes. The proposed representation learns Generative Neural Textures on top of parametric mesh templates

and then projects them into three orthogonal-viewed feature
planes through rasterization, forming a tri-plane feature
representation for volume rendering. In this way, we combine both fine-grained expression control of mesh-guided
explicit deformation and the flexibility of implicit volumetric representation. We further propose specific modules for
modeling mouth interior which is not taken into account
by 3DMM. Our method demonstrates state-of-the-art 3Daware synthesis quality and animation ability through extensive experiments. Furthermore, serving as 3D prior, our
animatable 3D representation boosts multiple applications
including one-shot facial avatars and 3D-aware stylization. Project page: https://mrtornado24.github.io/Next3D/.
Code: https://github.com/MrTornado24/Next3D.

1. Introduction
Animatable portrait synthesis is essential for movie postproduction, visual effects, augmented reality (AR), and vir-

20991

