This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modality-invariant Visual Odometry for Embodied Vision
Marius Memmel1 *
1
University of Washington

Roman Bachmann2
Amir Zamir2
2
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)

https://vo-transformer.github.io

Abstract
Effectively localizing an agent in a realistic, noisy setting
is crucial for many embodied vision tasks. Visual Odometry (VO) is a practical substitute for unreliable GPS and
compass sensors, especially in indoor environments. While
SLAM-based methods show a solid performance without
large data requirements, they are less flexible and robust
w.r.t. to noise and changes in the sensor suite compared
to learning-based approaches. Recent deep VO models,
however, limit themselves to a fixed set of input modalities,
e.g., RGB and depth, while training on millions of samples. When sensors fail, sensor suites change, or modalities are intentionally looped out due to available resources,
e.g., power consumption, the models fail catastrophically.
Furthermore, training these models from scratch is even
more expensive without simulator access or suitable existing models that can be fine-tuned. While such scenarios
get mostly ignored in simulation, they commonly hinder a
model’s reusability in real-world applications. We propose
a Transformer-based modality-invariant VO approach that
can deal with diverse or changing sensor suites of navigation agents. Our model outperforms previous methods while
training on only a fraction of the data. We hope this method
opens the door to a broader range of real-world applications that can benefit from flexible and learned VO models.

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence has found its way into many commercial products that provide helpful digital services. To increase its impact beyond the digital world, personal robotics
and embodied AI aims to put intelligent programs into bodies that can move in the real world or interact with it [15].
One of the most fundamental skills embodied agents must
learn is to effectively traverse the environment around them,
allowing them to move past stationary manipulation tasks
and provide services in multiple locations instead [40]. The
ability of an agent to locate itself in an environment is vital to navigating it successfully [12, 64]. A common setup
is to equip an agent with an RGB-D (RGB and Depth)
* Work done on exchange at EPFL

Figure 1. An agent is tasked to navigate to a goal location using RGB-D sensors. Because GPS+Compass are not available,
the location is inferred from visual observations only. Nevertheless, sensors can malfunction, or availability can change during
test-time (indicated by ∼), resulting in catastrophic failure of the
localization. We train our model to react to such scenarios by randomly dropping input modalities. Furthermore, our method can
be extended to learn from multiple arbitrary input modalities, e.g.,
surface normals, point clouds, or internal measurements.

camera and a GPS+Compass sensor and teach it to navigate to goals in unseen environments [2]. With extended
data access through simulators [28, 39, 40, 47, 57], photorealistic scans of 3D environments [7, 28, 46, 56, 58], and
large-scale parallel training, recent approaches reach almost perfect navigation results in indoor environments [55].
However, these agents fail catastrophically in more realistic settings with noisy, partially unavailable, or failing
RGB-D sensor readings, noisy actuation, or no access to
GPS+Compass [6, 64].
Visual Odometry (VO) is one way to close this performance gap and localize the agent from only RGB-D
observations [2], and deploying such a model has been
shown to be especially beneficial when observations are
noisy [12, 64]. However, those methods are not robust to
any sensory changes at the test-time, such as a sensor failing, underperforming, or being intentionally looped out.
In practical applications [43], low-cost hardware can also
experience serious bandwidth limitations, causing RGB (3
channels) and Depth (1 channel) to be transferred at different rates. Furthermore, mobile edge devices must balance battery usage by switching between passive (e.g., RGB)
and active (e.g., LIDAR) sensors depending on the specific
episode. Attempting to solve this asymmetry by keeping

21549

