This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Dual-Lens Super-Resolution
Ruikang Xu∗
Mingde Yao∗
Zhiwei Xiong†
University of Science and Technology of China
{xurk, mdyao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

   


Abstract
The asymmetric dual-lens conﬁguration is commonly
available on mobile devices nowadays, which naturally
stores a pair of wide-angle and telephoto images of the
same scene to support realistic super-resolution (SR). Even
on the same device, however, the degradation for modeling realistic SR is image-speciﬁc due to the unknown acquisition process (e.g., tiny camera motion). In this paper,
we propose a zero-shot solution for dual-lens SR (ZeDuSR),
where only the dual-lens pair at test time is used to learn an
image-speciﬁc SR model. As such, ZeDuSR adapts itself to
the current scene without using external training data, and
thus gets rid of generalization difﬁculty. However, there are
two major challenges to achieving this goal: 1) dual-lens
alignment while keeping the realistic degradation, and 2)
effective usage of highly limited training data. To overcome
these two challenges, we propose a degradation-invariant
alignment method and a degradation-aware training strategy to fully exploit the information within a single dual-lens
pair. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of ZeDuSR over existing solutions on both synthesized and realworld dual-lens datasets. The implementation code is available at https://github.com/XrKang/ZeDuSR.

Figure 1. Degradation kernel (estimated by KernelGAN [1]) clustering on wide-angle images from iPhone11 [43].

changeably. Beyond traditional methods that simply transfer the telephoto content to the wide-angle view in the
overlapped FoV, recent deep-learning-based methods enable resolution enhancement of the full wide-angle image.
Speciﬁcally, Wang et al. [43] utilize the overlapped FoV of
dual-lens image pairs to learn a reference-based SR model,
where the wide-angle view is super-resolved by using the
telephoto view as a reference. However, the external training data are synthesized with the predeﬁned bicubic degradation, which leads to generalization difﬁculty when the
trained SR model is applied to real devices. To narrow the
domain gap between the training and inference stages, they
further adopt a self-supervised adaptation strategy to ﬁnetune the pretrained model on real devices. On the other
hand, Zhang et al. [53] adopt self-supervised learning to
train an SR model directly on a dual-lens dataset to avoid
the predeﬁned degradation, with the assumption of consistent degradation on the same device.
In practice, however, the degradation kernel for modeling realistic SR is inﬂuenced by not only the camera optics
but also tiny camera motion during the acquisition process
on mobile devices [1, 6, 36], resulting in the image-speciﬁc
degradation for each dual-lens pair, even on the same device. Figure 1 gives an exemplar analysis, where we estimate the degradation kernels of 146 wide-angle images
captured by the dual-lens device iPhone11 [43] and cluster
them using t-SNE [41]. Although these images are captured
by the same device, they exhibit notably different degradation kernels due to the unknown acquisition process. This
limits the performances of previous dual-lens SR methods
for practical applications, since they assume that the realis-

1. Introduction
Mobile devices such as smartphones are generally
equipped with an asymmetric camera system consisting of
multiple lenses with different focal lengths. As a common
conﬁguration, with a wide-angle lens and a telephoto lens,
one can capture the same scene with different ﬁeld-of-views
(FoVs). Within the overlapped FoV, the wide-angle and
telephoto images naturally store low-resolution (LR) and
high-resolution (HR) counterparts for learning a realistic
super-resolution (SR) model. This provides a feasible way
to obtain an HR image with a large FoV at the same time,
which is beyond the capability of the original device.
There are a few pioneer works along this direction,
which are referred to as dual-lens/camera/zoomed SR inter∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

9130

