This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DP-NeRF: Deblurred Neural Radiance Field with Physical Scene Priors
Dogyoon Lee1

Minhyeok Lee1 Chajin Shin1 Sangyoun Lee1,2
1
Yonsei University
2
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

{nemotio, hydragon516, chajin, syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has exhibited outstanding three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction quality via the
novel view synthesis from multi-view images and paired
calibrated camera parameters. However, previous NeRFbased systems have been demonstrated under strictly controlled settings, with little attention paid to less ideal scenarios, including with the presence of noise such as exposure, illumination changes, and blur. In particular, though
blur frequently occurs in real situations, NeRF that can
handle blurred images has received little attention. The
few studies that have investigated NeRF for blurred images have not considered geometric and appearance consistency in 3D space, which is one of the most important
factors in 3D reconstruction. This leads to inconsistency
and the degradation of the perceptual quality of the constructed scene. Hence, this paper proposes a DP-NeRF,
a novel clean NeRF framework for blurred images, which
is constrained with two physical priors. These priors are
derived from the actual blurring process during image acquisition by the camera. DP-NeRF proposes rigid blurring
kernel to impose 3D consistency utilizing the physical priors and adaptive weight proposal to refine the color composition error in consideration of the relationship between
depth and blur. We present extensive experimental results
for synthetic and real scenes with two types of blur: camera
motion blur and defocus blur. The results demonstrate that
DP-NeRF successfully improves the perceptual quality of
the constructed NeRF ensuring 3D geometric and appearance consistency. We further demonstrate the effectiveness
of our model with comprehensive ablation analysis. 1 2

1. Introduction
The synthesis of the photo-realistic novel view image
of complex three-dimensional (3D) scenes has advanced
rapidly due to the emergence of the Neural Radiance
Field(NeRF) [26]. NeRF has introduced implicit scene representation to the field, which maps an arbitrary continuous
1 Code: https://github.com/dogyoonlee/DP-NeRF
2 Project: https://dogyoonlee.github.io/dpnerf/

[Camera Motion Blur]
"
𝒓!

[ Defocus Blur ]
𝑓𝑜𝑐𝑢𝑠 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑒

𝒓"%&'(
!;$

"%&'(

𝒓!;$
"%&'(
𝒓!;)
"

𝒅!

2𝐷 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔
𝑘𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑙

a) Deblur-NeRF

"%&'(

𝒓!;)
𝑅𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

𝑅𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑑 𝑚𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

b) DP-NeRF(Ours)

Figure 1. (a) Deblur-NeRF models blurring kernel based on 2D
offset on the image pixels. This modeling break the consistency
in trained neural radiance field due to the lack of a 3D consistency priors. However, (b) DP-NeRF can render clean neural radiance field guaranteeing the 3D consistency with rigid motion of
the camera based on the physical priors of the blur occurrence.

3D coordinate to the volume density and radiance color using volume-rendering technique and implicit neural representation. NeRF densely reconstructs continuous 3D space
to produce photorealistic rendered images with novel view.
Though NeRF has achieved remarkable success in a variety of fields, most of the NeRF variants have been designed and tested for a carefully controlled environment that
requires well-captured images from multiple views with
calibrated camera parameters. However, various forms of
noises are usually included in the data captured for the
NeRF in real scenarios, complicating geometric and appearance consistency in 3D representation.
Several NeRF variants have attempted to reconstruct
3D scene in the presence of noise, including exposure
noise [8, 11, 25], motion [17–19, 29, 30, 33, 49, 55], illumination changes [6, 23, 57], and aliasing [1, 2]. However,
although it frequently occurs in real-world settings, blur
has not been sufficiently addressed to date, despite the fact
that it generates critical artifacts in 3D scene reconstruction. Deblur-NeRF [22] introduced blurring kernel estimation for a NeRF by imitating in-camera blurred image acquisition based on a blind deblurring method. Their method
demonstrated excellent performance and produced clearly
rendered images from multi-view images. However, the
blurring kernel in [22] is implemented by optimizing ray
deformation and composition weights depending on the 2D

12386

