This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TWINS: A Fine-Tuning Framework for Improved Transferability of Adversarial
Robustness and Generalization
Ziquan Liu1 , Yi Xu2 *, Xiangyang Ji3 and Antoni B. Chan1∗
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
1

ziquanliu.cs@gmail.com, yxu@dlut.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent years have seen the ever-increasing importance
of pre-trained models and their downstream training in
deep learning research and applications. At the same time,
the defense for adversarial examples has been mainly investigated in the context of training from random initialization
on simple classification tasks. To better exploit the potential
of pre-trained models in adversarial robustness, this paper
focuses on the fine-tuning of an adversarially pre-trained
model in various classification tasks. Existing research has
shown that since the robust pre-trained model has already
learned a robust feature extractor, the crucial question is
how to maintain the robustness in the pre-trained model
when learning the downstream task. We study the modelbased and data-based approaches for this goal and find that
the two common approaches cannot achieve the objective of
improving both generalization and adversarial robustness.
Thus, we propose a novel statistics-based approach, TwoWIng NormliSation (TWINS) fine-tuning framework, which
consists of two neural networks where one of them keeps
the population means and variances of pre-training data in
the batch normalization layers. Besides the robust information transfer, TWINS increases the effective learning rate
without hurting the training stability since the relationship
between a weight norm and its gradient norm in standard
batch normalization layer is broken, resulting in a faster escape from the sub-optimal initialization and alleviating the
robust overfitting. Finally, TWINS is shown to be effective
on a wide range of image classification datasets in terms of
both generalization and robustness.

1. Introduction
The adversarial vulnerability of deep neural networks
(DNNs) [59] is one of the major obstacles for their wide
* Corresponding author

(a) CIFAR10

(b) Caltech-256

Figure 1. The performance of fine-tuning robust and non-robust
large-scale pre-trained (PT) ResNet50 [26, 55] on CIFAR10 [34]
and Caltech-256 [22]. We compare standard adversarial training
(AT), Learning without Forgetting (LwF) (model approach) [39],
joint fine-tuning with UOT data selection (data approach) [46]
and our TWINS fine-tuning. The robust accuracy is evaluated
using l∞ norm bounded AutoAttack [11] with ϵ = 8/255. On
CIFAR10, the data-based and model-based approach fail to improve clean and robust accuracy. On Caltech, both approaches improve the clean accuracy but hurt the robust accuracy. Our TWINS
fine-tuning improves the clean and robust performance on both
datasets. The pink triangle denotes the performance of standard
AT with the non-robust pre-trained ResNet50, which drops considerably compared with fine-tuning starting from the robust pretrained model.

applications in safety-critical scenarios such as self-driving
cars [18] and medical diagnosis [19]. Thus, addressing
this issue has been one focus of deep learning research
in the past eight years. Existing works have proposed
to improve adversarial robustness from different perspectives, including data augmentation [21, 48, 53, 56], regularization [37, 43, 44, 51] and neural architecture [23, 28].
However, most of existing works investigate the problem
under the assumption that the training data is sufficient
enough, and training from scratch gives a satisfactory performance, which is not realistic in the real world. There
are a large number of computer vision tasks where training
from scratch is inferior to training from pre-trained weights,
such as fine-grained image classification (e.g., Caltech-

16436

