This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tunable Convolutions with Parametric Multi-Loss Optimization
Matteo Maggioni, Thomas Tanay, Francesca Babiloni, Steven McDonagh, Aleš Leonardis
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{matteo.maggioni, thomas.tanay, francesca.babiloni, steven.mcdonagh, ales.leonardis}@huawei.com

Abstract
Behavior of neural networks is irremediably determined
by the specific loss and data used during training. However it is often desirable to tune the model at inference
time based on external factors such as preferences of the
user or dynamic characteristics of the data. This is especially important to balance the perception-distortion tradeoff of ill-posed image-to-image translation tasks. In this
work, we propose to optimize a parametric tunable convolutional layer, which includes a number of different kernels, using a parametric multi-loss, which includes an equal
number of objectives. Our key insight is to use a shared
set of parameters to dynamically interpolate both the objectives and the kernels. During training, these parameters are sampled at random to explicitly optimize all possible combinations of objectives and consequently disentangle their effect into the corresponding kernels. During inference, these parameters become interactive inputs of the
model hence enabling reliable and consistent control over
the model behavior. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our tunable convolutions effectively work as a
drop-in replacement for traditional convolutions in existing
neural networks at virtually no extra computational cost,
outperforming state-of-the-art control strategies in a wide
range of applications; including image denoising, deblurring, super-resolution, and style transfer.

1. Introduction
Neural networks are commonly trained by optimizing a
set of learnable weights against a pre-defined loss function,
often composed of multiple competing objectives which are
delicately balanced together to capture complex behaviors
from the data. Specifically, in vision, and in image restoration in particular, many problems are ill-posed, i.e. admit a
potentially infinite number of valid solutions [15]. Thus, selecting an appropriate loss function is necessary to constrain
neural networks to a specific inference behavior [39, 64].
However, any individual and fixed loss defined empirically
before training is inherently incapable of generating opti-

← Perceptual Quality

Fidelity →

Figure 1. We propose a framework to build a single neural network that can be tuned at inference without retraining by interacting with controllable parameters, e.g. to balance the perceptiondistortion tradeoff in image restoration tasks.

mal results for any possible input [43]. A classic example is
the difficulty in finding a good balance for the perceptiondistortion trade-off [5, 64], as shown in the illustrative example of Fig. 1. The solution to this problem is to design a
mechanism to reliably control (i.e. tune) neural networks at
inference time. This comes with several advantages, namely
providing a flexible behavior without the need to retrain the
model, correcting failure cases on the fly, and balancing
competing objectives according to user preference.
Existing approaches to control neural networks, commonly based on weights [54, 55] or feature [53, 63] modulation, are fundamentally limited to consider only two objectives, and furthermore require the addition of a new set
of layers or parameters for every additional loss considered. Different approaches, specific to image restoration
tasks, first train a network conditioned on the true degradation parameter of the image, e.g. noise standard deviation
or blur size, and then, at inference time, propose to interact
with these parameters to modulate the effects of the restoration [17, 24, 50]. However this leads the network to an undefined state when asked to operate in regimes corresponding to combinations of input and parameters unseen during
training [27].
In this work, we introduce a novel framework to reliably
and consistently tune model behavior at inference time. We
propose a parametric dynamic layer, called tunable convolution, consisting in p individual kernels (and biases) which
we optimize using a parametric dynamic multi-loss, con-

20226

