This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training Debiased Subnetworks with Contrastive Weight Pruning
Geon Yeong Park1
Sangmin Lee2
Sang Wan Lee1∗
Jong Chul Ye1,2,3∗
1
Bio and Brain Engineering, 2 Mathematical Sciences, 3 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
{pky3436, leeleesang, sangwan, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural networks are often biased to spuriously correlated features that provide misleading statistical evidence
that does not generalize. This raises an interesting question: “Does an optimal unbiased functional subnetwork exist in a severely biased network? If so, how to extract such
subnetwork?” While empirical evidence has been accumulated about the existence of such unbiased subnetworks,
these observations are mainly based on the guidance of
ground-truth unbiased samples. Thus, it is unexplored how
to discover the optimal subnetworks with biased training
datasets in practice. To address this, here we first present
our theoretical insight that alerts potential limitations of
existing algorithms in exploring unbiased subnetworks in
the presence of strong spurious correlations. We then further elucidate the importance of bias-conflicting samples
on structure learning. Motivated by these observations, we
propose a Debiased Contrastive Weight Pruning (DCWP)
algorithm, which probes unbiased subnetworks without expensive group annotations. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art debiasing methods despite its considerable reduction in the number of parameters.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks have made substantial
progress in solving challenging tasks, they often undesirably rely on spuriously correlated features or dataset bias,
if present, which is considered one of the major hurdles in
deploying models in real-world applications. For example,
consider recognizing desert foxes and cats from natural images. If the background scene (e.g., a desert) is spuriously
correlated to the type of animal, the neural networks might
use the background information as a shortcut to classification, resulting in performance degradation in different backgrounds (e.g., a desert fox in the house).
To investigate the origin of the spurious correlations, this
paper considers shortcut learning as a fundamental architec-

tural design issue of neural networks. Specifically, if any
available information channels in deep networks’ structure
could transmit the information of spuriously correlated features (spurious features from now on), networks would exploit those features as long as they are sufficiently predictive. It naturally follows that pruning weights on spurious
features can purify the biased latent representations, thereby
improving performances on bias-conflicting samples1 . We
conjecture that this neural pruning may improve the generalization of the network in a way that reduces the effective
dimension of spurious features, considering that the failure
of Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization may arise due
to high-dimensional spurious features [24, 31].
Recently, Zhang et al. [33] has empirically demonstrated
the existence of subnetworks that are less susceptible to
spurious features. Based on the modular property of neural networks [5], they prune out weights that are closely
related to the spurious attributes. While [33] affords us
valuable insights on the importance of neural architectures,
the study has limitation in that such neural pruning requires
sufficient number of ground-truth bias-conflicting samples.
Thus, how to discover the optimal subnetworks in practice
when the dataset is highly biased?
To address this, we first present a simple theoretical observation that reveals the limitations of existing substructure probing methods in searching unbiased subnetworks.
Specifically, we reveal that there exists an unavoidable generalization gap in the subnetworks obtained by standard
pruning algorithms in the presence of strong spurious correlations. Our analysis also shows that trained models may inevitably rely on the spuriously correlated features in a practical training setting with finite training time and a number
of samples.
In addition, we show that sampling more bias-conflicting
data makes it possible to identify spurious weights. Specifically, bias-conflicting samples require that the weights as1 The bias-aligned samples refer to data with a strong correlation be-

tween (potentially latent) spurious features and target labels (e.g., cat in
the house). The bias-conflicting samples refer to the opposite cases where
spurious correlations do not exist (e.g., cat in the desert).

7929

