This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCConv: Spatial and Channel Reconstruction Convolution for Feature
Redundancy

1

Jiafeng Li1 , Ying Wen1 *, Lianghua He2
School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
51205904113@stu.ecnu.edu.cn;ywen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn;helianghua@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
remarkable performance in various computer vision tasks
but this comes at the cost of tremendous computational
resources, partly due to convolutional layers extracting redundant features. Recent works either compress
well-trained large-scale models or explore well-designed
lightweight models. In this paper, we make an attempt
to exploit spatial and channel redundancy among features
for CNN compression and propose an efficient convolution module, called SCConv (Spatial and Channel reconstruction Convolution), to decrease redundant computing
and facilitate representative feature learning. The proposed SCConv consists of two units: spatial reconstruction
unit (SRU) and channel reconstruction unit (CRU). SRU
utilizes a separate-and-reconstruct method to suppress the
spatial redundancy while CRU uses a split-transform-andfuse strategy to diminish the channel redundancy. In addition, SCConv is a plug-and-play architectural unit that can
be used to replace standard convolution in various convolutional neural networks directly. Experimental results show
that SCConv-embedded models are able to achieve better
performance by reducing redundant features with significantly lower complexity and computational costs.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have obtained widespread applications in computer vision
tasks [24] due to its ability in obtaining representative features. However, such success relies heavily on intensive
resources of computation and storage, which poses severe challenges to their efficient deployment on resourceconstrained environments. Therefore, to address these challenges, various types of model compression strategies and
network designs have been explored to improve network ef* Corresponding author (e-mail: ywen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn)

ficiency [1, 2, 26]. The former includes network pruning,
weight quantization, low-rank factorization, and knowledge
distillation. To be specific, network pruning [17, 22, 30] is a
straightforward way to prune the uncritical neuron connections from an existing learned big model to make it thinner.
Weight quantization [9] mainly focuses on converting network weights from floating-point types to integer ones to
save computation resources. Low-rank factorization [5] applies the matrix decomposition techniques to estimate the
informative parameters. Knowledge distillation [11, 34]
generates small student networks with the guidance of a
well-trained big teacher network. The common part of these
compression techniques is that they have been regarded as
post-processing steps, thus their performance is usually upper bounded by the given initial model. Meanwhile, the accuracy of these methods drastically drops while achieving a
high compression rate.
Network design is another alternative way, which aims
at reducing the inherent redundancy in dense model parameters and further developing a lightweight network model.
For example, ResNet [10] and DenseNet [14] utilize an efficient shortcut connection to improve the network topology,
which connects all preceding feature maps to diminish the
redundant parameters. ResNeXt [31] replaces traditional
convolutions with sparsely connected group convolutions
to reduce inter-channel connectivity. Networks like Xception [4], MobileNet [12] and MobileNeXt [35] disentangle standard convolution into depth-wise convolution and
point-wise convolution to further decrease the connection
density between channels. MicroNet [19] adopts microfactorized convolution to handle extremely low FLOPs by
integrating sparse connectivity into convolution. In addition, EfficientNet [27] learns to automatically search optimal network architectures to lower the redundancy in dense
model parameters.
Moreover, in CNN architecture design, bottleneck structure has been well adopted, in which 3 × 3 convolutional
layers account for a majority of the model parameters and
FLOPs. Therefore various efficient convolutional opera-

6153

