This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DNF: Decouple and Feedback Network for Seeing in the Dark
Xin Jin1 * Ling-Hao Han1 * Zhen Li1 Chun-Le Guo1† Zhi Chai2 Chongyi Li3
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 Hisilicon Technologies Co. Ltd.
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{xjin, lhhan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, zhenli1031@gmail.com, guochunle@nankai.edu.cn,
chaizhi2@huawei.com, chongyi.li@ntu.edu.sg
https://github.com/Srameo/DNF
Intermediate
Supervision

Abstract
The exclusive properties of RAW data have shown great
potential for low-light image enhancement. Nevertheless, the performance is bottlenecked by the inherent limitations of existing architectures in both single-stage and
multi-stage methods. Mixed mapping across two different domains, noise-to-clean and RAW-to-sRGB, misleads
the single-stage methods due to the domain ambiguity.
The multi-stage methods propagate the information merely
through the resulting image of each stage, neglecting the
abundant features in the lossy image-level dataflow. In this
paper, we probe a generalized solution to these bottlenecks
and propose a Decouple aNd Feedback framework, abbreviated as DNF. To mitigate the domain ambiguity, domainspecific subtasks are decoupled, along with fully utilizing
the unique properties in RAW and sRGB domains. The feature propagation across stages with a feedback mechanism
avoids the information loss caused by image-level dataflow.
The two key insights of our method resolve the inherent
limitations of RAW data-based low-light image enhancement satisfactorily, empowering our method to outperform
the previous state-of-the-art method by a large margin with
only 19% parameters, achieving 0.97dB and 1.30dB PSNR
improvements on the Sony and Fuji subsets of SID.

1. Introduction
Imaging in low-light scenarios attracts increasing attention, especially with the popularity of the night sight mode
on smartphones and surveillance systems. However, lowlight image enhancement (LLIE) is a challenging task due
to the exceptionally low signal-to-noise ratio. Recently,
deep learning solutions have been widely studied to tackle
this task in diverse data domains, ranging from sRGB-based
methods [14,15,21,40] to RAW-based methods [2,7,35,47].
Compared with sRGB data, RAW data with the unpro* Equal contribution.
† C. L. Guo is the corresponding author.

Enc Dec

Enc Dec

(a) Single-stage

Enc Dec

(b) Multi-stage

Feature Feedback
Dec

Noisy RAW
Clean RAW

Enc
Dec

Clean sRGB

(c) Our Proposed
Figure 1. Thumbnail of different RAW-based low-light image enhancement methods. (a) Single-stage method. (b) Multi-stage
method with intermediate supervision. (c) The proposed DNF.

cessed signal is unique in three aspects that benefit LLIE:
1) the signal is linearly correlated with the photon counts
in the RAW domain, 2) the noise distributions on RAW images are tractable before the image signal processing (ISP)
pipeline [33], and 3) the higher bit depth of RAW format
records more distinguishable low-intensity signals.
The pioneering work SID [2] proposed a large-scale
paired dataset for RAW-based LLIE, igniting a renewed
interest in data-driven approaches. As shown in Fig. 1,
one line of work [2, 5, 12, 13, 22, 42] focuses on designing
single-stage network architectures, and another [4,7,35,47]
exploits the multi-stage networks for progressive enhancement. Despite the great performance improvement, both
architectures are still bottlenecked by inherent limitations.
First, current single-stage methods force neural networks to
learn a direct mapping from noisy RAW domain to clean
sRGB domain. The mixed mapping across two different
domains, noisy-to-clean and RAW-to-sRGB, would mislead the holistic enhancement process, leading to the domain ambiguity issue. For example, the tractable noise in
RAW images would be mapped to an unpredictable distribution during color space transformation. Therefore, shifting colors and unprocessed noises inevitably appear in the

18135

