This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-Fidelity Guided Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models
Jaskirat Singh1
Stephen Gould1,2
Liang Zheng1,2
1
2
The Australian National University
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{jaskirat.singh, stephen.gould, liang.zheng}@anu.edu.au

Text Prompt:
“a photo of a beautiful landscape”

castle

castle
stream
flowers

mountains

forest

lake
pavement
pyramid
forest
lake
rocks
(a) Reference

(b) SDEdit

(c) Loopback

(d) Ours

(e) Target Domain

Semantic Guide

Outputs

Figure 1. Overview. We propose a novel stroke based guided image synthesis framework which (Left) resolves the intrinsic domain shift
problem in prior works (b), wherein the final images lack details and often resemble simplistic representations of the target domain (e)
(generated using only text-conditioning). Iteratively reperforming the guided synthesis with the generated outputs (c) seems to improve
realism but it is expensive and the generated outputs might lose faithfulness with the reference (a) with each iteration. (Right) Additionally,
the user is also able to specify the semantics of different painted regions without requiring any additional training or finetuning.

Abstract
Controllable image synthesis with user scribbles has
gained huge public interest with the recent advent of textconditioned latent diffusion models. The user scribbles control the color composition while the text prompt provides
control over the overall image semantics. However, we note
that prior works in this direction suffer from an intrinsic
domain shift problem wherein the generated outputs often
lack details and resemble simplistic representations of the
target domain. In this paper, we propose a novel guided image synthesis framework, which addresses this problem by
modelling the output image as the solution of a constrained
optimization problem. We show that while computing an
exact solution to the optimization is infeasible, an approximation of the same can be achieved while just requiring a
single pass of the reverse diffusion process. Additionally,

we show that by simply defining a cross-attention based
correspondence between the input text tokens and the user
stroke-painting, the user is also able to control the semantics of different painted regions without requiring any conditional training or finetuning. Human user study results
show that the proposed approach outperforms the previous
state-of-the-art by over 85.32% on the overall user satisfaction scores. Project page for our paper is available at
https://1jsingh.github.io/gradop.

1. Introduction
Guided image synthesis with user scribbles has gained
widespread public attention with the recent advent of largescale language-image (LLI) models [23, 26, 28, 30, 40]. A

5997

