This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-end Video Matting with Trimap Propagation
Wei-Lun Huang
National Taiwan University

Ming-Sui Lee
National Taiwan University

r09944040@csie.ntu.edu.tw

mslee@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
The research of video matting mainly focuses on temporal
coherence and has gained significant improvement via
neural networks. However, matting usually relies on
user-annotated trimaps to estimate alpha values, which is
a labor-intensive issue. Although recent studies exploit
video object segmentation methods to propagate the given
trimaps, they suffer inconsistent results. Here we present
a more robust and faster end-to-end video matting model
equipped with trimap propagation called FTP-VM (Fast
Trimap Propagation - Video Matting). The FTP-VM
combines trimap propagation and video matting in one
model, where the additional backbone in memory matching
is replaced with the proposed lightweight trimap fusion
module. The segmentation consistency loss is adopted from
automotive segmentation to fit trimap segmentation with
the collaboration of RNN (Recurrent Neural Network) to
improve the temporal coherence. The experimental results
demonstrate that the FTP-VM performs competitively both
in composited and real videos only with few given trimaps.
The efficiency is eight times higher than the state-of-the-art
methods, which confirms its robustness and applicability
in real-time scenarios. The code is available at https:
//github.com/csvt32745/FTP-VM .

1. Introduction
Image matting aims to estimate the alpha value of each pixel
for a target in the input image. Unlike general segmentation,
which generates binary values, matting outputs values
between 0 and 1, meaning the degree of transparency. The
output alpha mattes can describe semi-transparent objects
with precise details. As shown in Eq. (1), each pixel color
C of an image is composited by the foreground color F ,
background color B, and an alpha value α, where the
background can be substituted to generate a matting dataset.
  C=\alpha F + (1-\alpha )B \label {eq:comp} 

(1)

Given a frame like Fig. 1a, a trimap Fig. 1b is the common
requirement for image matting, which divides the pixels

(a) Memory frame

(b) Memory trimap

(c) Query frame

(d) The result of RVM [32]

(e) The result of OTVM [42]

(f) The result of FTP-VM (ours)

Figure 1. An example of an in-street interview video. (d)
Automatic matting, (e) Trimap-propagation-based method (f) The
proposed method.

into three regions: foreground, background and unknown.
Matting methods adopt such information to solve alpha
values of unknown (gray) regions.
Video matting extracts an alpha matte of each frame of
the given video. The resulting alpha mattes can be used
for background replacement, which is decisive for video
applications such as video conferencing and visual effects.
It is intuitive to perform image matting on each frame
of a video. However, severe flickering artifacts would
occur in the resultant image sequence. In order to improve
the robustness, considering spatial and temporal coherence
is the main challenge for video matting as the temporal
information helps infer the matting target from the previous
frames. Another challenge is to provide a trimap for each
frame, which is expected to be a massive cost to most users.
To tackle the above two issues, automatic matting and
trimap propagation are addressed in this paper. Automatic
matting captures specific targets without trimaps, but

14337

