This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CUF: Continuous Upsampling Filters
Cristina N. Vasconcelos Cengiz Oztireli Mark Matthews
Milad Hashemi Kevin Swersky Andrea Tagliasacchi
Google Research

Figure 1. We report (left) memory and FLOPs for upsampling an 256 × 256 image by different scale factors (2×,3×,4×) using integer
scale upsamplers (Sub-Pixel Convolution [31] and CUF-instantiated) and arbitrary-scale upsamplers (Meta-SR [16], LIIF [6], LTE [19]
and CUF), but the same encoder backbone (EDSR-baseline [21]); and (right) the relationship between each upsampler FLOPS and PSNR
performance on DIV2k dataset. Our arbitrary scale model is significantly lighter than other methods in the same class (i.e. continuous
super-res). Further, when instantiated for integer scale factors, our upsampler is even-more efficient than sub-pixel convolutions [31].

Abstract

1. Introduction
Neural-fields represent signals with coordinate-based
neural-networks. They have found application in a multitude of areas including 3D reconstruction [24], novel-view
synthesis [32], convolutions [14], and many others [37].
Recent research has investigated the use of neural fields
in the context of single image super-resolution [6, 19].1
These models are based on multi-layer perceptrons conditioned on latent representation produced by encoders2 .
While such architectures allow for continuous-scale superresolution, they require the execution of a conditional neural
field for every pixel at the target resolution, making them
unsuitable in applications with limited computational resources. Further, such a large use of resources is not justified by a increase in performance compared to classical convolutional architectures such as sub-pixel convolutions [31].
In summary, neural fields have not yet found widespread
adoption as classical solutions are 1 trivial to implement
and 2 more efficient. As they generally perform compa-

Neural fields have rapidly been adopted for representing 3D signals, but their application to more classical 2D
image-processing has been relatively limited. In this paper, we consider one of the most important operations in
image processing: upsampling. In deep learning, learnable
upsampling layers have extensively been used for single image super-resolution. We propose to parameterize upsampling kernels as neural fields. This parameterization leads
to a compact architecture that obtains a 40-fold reduction in
the number of parameters when compared with competing
arbitrary-scale super-resolution architectures. When upsampling images of size 256x256 we show that our architecture is 2x-10x more efficient than competing arbitraryscale super-resolution architectures, and more efficient than
sub-pixel convolutions when instantiated to a single-scale
model. In the general setting, these gains grow polynomially with the square of the target scale. We validate our
method on standard benchmarks showing such efficiency
gains can be achieved without sacrifices in super-resolution
performance. https://cuf-paper.github.io

1 Thereon we assume single image when talking about super-resolution.
2 These encoders were originally proposed for classical super-resolution

applications, and include both convolutional [8, 21, 40] as well as attentional [7, 20, 39] architectures.

9999

