This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Self-Supervised Vision Transformers
for Weakly-Supervised Few-Shot Classification & Segmentation

1

Dahyun Kang1,2 * Piotr Koniusz3,4 Minsu Cho2 Naila Murray1
Meta AI 2 POSTECH 3 Data61rCSIRO 4 Australian National University

3-way 1-shot support set
with no ground-truth masks

Abstract
We address the task of weakly-supervised few-shot image classification and segmentation, by leveraging a Vision
Transformer (ViT) pretrained with self-supervision. Our
proposed method takes token representations from the selfsupervised ViT and leverages their correlations, via selfattention, to produce classification and segmentation predictions through separate task heads. Our model is able
to effectively learn to perform classification and segmentation in the absence of pixel-level labels during training, using only image-level labels. To do this it uses attention maps, created from tokens generated by the selfsupervised ViT backbone, as pixel-level pseudo-labels. We
also explore a practical setup with “mixed” supervision,
where a small number of training images contains groundtruth pixel-level labels and the remaining images have only
image-level labels. For this mixed setup, we propose to improve the pseudo-labels using a pseudo-label enhancer that
was trained using the available ground-truth pixel-level labels. Experiments on Pascal-5i and COCO-20i demonstrate
significant performance gains in a variety of supervision
settings, and in particular when little-to-no pixel-level labels are available.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning [22, 23, 77] is the problem of learning to perform a prediction task using only a small number
of examples (i.e. supports) of the completed task, typically
in the range of 1-10 examples. This problem setting is appealing for applications where large amounts of annotated
data are expensive or impractical to collect. In computer vision, few-shot learning has been actively studied for image
classification [24, 36, 46, 66, 70, 85] and semantic segmentation [17, 58, 61, 88, 89]. In this work, we focus on the
combined task of few-shot classification and segmentation
(FS-CS) [33], which aims to jointly predict (i) the presence
of each support class, i.e., multi-label classification, and (ii)
* Work done during an internship at FAIR.

class 1

class 2

class 3

Weaklysupervised
few-shot
learner

2

3

query image

Figure 1. Weakly-supervised few-shot classification and segmentation. In this paper, we explore training few-shot models
using little-to-no ground-truth segmentation masks.

its pixel-level semantic segmentation.
Few-shot learners are typically trained either by metalearning [24, 56, 63, 71] or by transfer learning with finetuning [11, 12, 16]. Both these paradigms commonly assume the availability of a large-scale and fully-annotated
training dataset. For FS-CS, we need Ground-Truth (GT)
segmentation masks for query and support images during
training. We also need these GT masks for support images during testing. A natural alternative to collecting such
expensive segmentation masks would be to instead employ a weaker supervision, e.g. image-level [52, 59] or boxlevel labels [13, 30], for learning, i.e., to adopt a weaklysupervised learning approach [5, 41, 43, 51]. Compared to
conventional weakly-supervised learning however, weaklysupervised few-shot learning has rarely been explored in the
literature and is significantly more challenging. This is because in few-shot learning, object classes are completely
disjoint between training and testing, resulting in models
which are susceptible to severe over-fitting to the classes
seen during training.
In this work we tackle this challenging scenario, addressing weakly-supervised FS-CS where only image-level labels, i.e. class labels, are available (cf. Fig. 1). Inspired by

19627

