This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Category Human-Object Interaction Pre-training
via Language Modeling Framework
Sipeng Zheng
Renmin University of China

Boshen Xu
UESTC

Qin Jin*
Renmin University of China

zhengsipeng@ruc.edu.cn

xuboshen.uestc@gmail.com

qjin@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Human-object interaction (HOI) has long been plagued
by the conflict between limited supervised data and a vast
number of possible interaction combinations in real life.
Current methods trained from closed-set data predict HOIs
as fixed-dimension logits, which restricts their scalability
to open-set categories. To address this issue, we introduce
OpenCat, a language modeling framework that reformulates HOI prediction as sequence generation. By converting HOI triplets into a token sequence through a serialization scheme, our model is able to exploit the open-set
vocabulary of the language modeling framework to predict novel interaction classes with a high degree of freedom. In addition, inspired by the great success of visionlanguage pre-training, we collect a large amount of weaklysupervised data related to HOI from image-caption pairs,
and devise several auxiliary proxy tasks, including soft relational matching and human-object relation prediction, to
pre-train our model. Extensive experiments show that our
OpenCat significantly boosts HOI performance, particularly on a broad range of rare and unseen categories.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) task [5, 6], whose output is usually in the format of a triplet: <human, relation,
object>, has drawn increasing attention due to its crucial
role in scene understanding. As humans, we have a rich vocabulary to describe one human-object relation in various
ways (e.g., near, next to, close to). We can also recognize
different combinations of HOI triplets in our real-life scenarios. However, current HOI methods have struggled to
achieve such ºopen-categoryº capability for a long time.
We argue that this is primarily due to two deficiencies: inflexible prediction manner and insufficient supervised data.
Previous works treat HOI learning as a classification
problem where the class vocabulary must be pre-defined.
* Qin Jin is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. OpenCat reformulates HOI learning as a sequence generation task, rather than a closed-set classification task. Through the
aid of task-specific pre-training with weak supervision, our model
achieves open-category prediction on a large number of tail and
unseen HOI classes.

This approach involves projecting the input image into
fixed-dimension logits through a classifier, which restricts
the ability to identify new HOI triplets. In contrast, language models [51] are more suited to predict free-form
texts, thanks to their extensive token vocabulary. Recently,
other works [9, 62] explore to generate visual outputs using
a single language modeling objective. Inspired by this line
of research, we reformulate HOI learning as a language sequence generation problem as illustrated in Figure 1, which
enables our model to leverage an open-set vocabulary, generating HOI triplets with a high degree of freedom.
Moreover, HOI learning requires abundant labels for exhaustive HOI categories. However, due to the high cost of
labeling grounded HOIs and the natural long-tailed distribution of HOI categories, it is unrealistic to ensure sufficient
instances in each category. In fact, the two most popular
benchmarks so far, HICO-DET [5] and V-COCO [21], contain 117 and 50 relation classes respectively, covering just
a small portion of the HOI categories in reality. Models
trained on such closed-set data fail to handle the large number of possible combinations of human, relation and object.

19392

