This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation via
Adversarial Learning of Classifier and Reconstructor
Hyeokjun Kweon∗ , Sung-Hoon Yoon∗ , and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{0327june,yoon307,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS),
Class Activation Maps (CAMs) usually 1) do not cover
the whole object and 2) be activated on irrelevant regions.
To address the issues, we propose a novel WSSS framework via adversarial learning of a classifier and an image reconstructor. When an image is perfectly decomposed
into class-wise segments, information (i.e., color or texture) of a single segment could not be inferred from the
other segments. Therefore, inferability between the segments can represent the preciseness of segmentation. We
quantify the inferability as a reconstruction quality of one
segment from the other segments. If one segment could
be reconstructed from the others, then the segment would
be imprecise. To bring this idea into WSSS, we simultaneously train two models: a classifier generating CAMs
that decompose an image into segments and a reconstructor that measures the inferability between the segments.
As in GANs, while being alternatively trained in an adversarial manner, two networks provide positive feedback
to each other. We verify the superiority of the proposed
framework with extensive ablation studies. Our method
achieves new state-of-the-art performances on both PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014. The code is available
at https://github.com/sangrockEG/ACR.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, learning-based semantic segmentation has made significant advancements. However, the
high labeling cost remains a major challenge when applying
existing methods to real cases. In response to this challenge,
without relying on pixel-wise supervision, Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) has been proposed
to learn semantic segmentation with weak labels only.
The field of WSSS has studied several types of weak labels such as scribbles [29, 36], bounding boxes [16, 23, 31],
and image-level classification labels [1–3, 7, 12, 19, 21, 28,
* The first two authors contributed equally. In alphabetical order.

Figure 1. Demonstration of our method. We are motivated by
the relation between semantic segmentation and inferability. We
realize it as adversarial learning of a classifier and a reconstructor.

37, 42, 46, 47, 49, 52], which are relatively inexpensive to
acquire. Among them, using image-level labels is the most
widely studied setting due to its high accessibility and efficiency. Different from the other supervisions that roughly
notify the locations of the things in the image, image-level
labels only contain categorical information. Therefore, the
main challenge in WSSS using image-level labels is localizing the regions of each class.
To dispel this challenge, most of the existing literature
employs Class Activation Maps (CAMs) [51] that highlight
the regions highly contributing to the prediction of a classifier. Intuitively, the classifier learns shared patterns among
the images including the same class, and thereby the CAM
of each class is activated on the image regions corresponding to the class. However, the CAMs usually show a tendency to focus on the most discriminative regions of each
class (e.g. face for the cat class), which leads to incomplete
segmentation. Also, due to the absence of pixel-wise supervision, the CAMs are rather imprecise at the boundary,
which is a critical issue from the perspective of segmentation. Technically, the goal of WSSS can be summarized as
obtaining better CAMs, which can serve as precise pseudolabels for learning semantic segmentation.

11329

