This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Contour Tracking of Live Cells
by Mechanical and Cycle Consistency Losses
Junbong Jang
KAIST

Kwonmoo Lee*
Boston Children’s Hospital
Harvard Medical School

Tae-Kyun Kim*
KAIST
Imperial College London

Abstract
Analyzing the dynamic changes of cellular morphology is important for understanding the various functions
and characteristics of live cells, including stem cells and
metastatic cancer cells. To this end, we need to track all
points on the highly deformable cellular contour in every
frame of live cell video. Local shapes and textures on the
contour are not evident, and their motions are complex, often with expansion and contraction of local contour features. The prior arts for optical flow or deep point set
tracking are unsuited due to the fluidity of cells, and previous deep contour tracking does not consider point correspondence. We propose the first deep learning-based
tracking of cellular (or more generally viscoelastic materials) contours with point correspondence by fusing dense
representation between two contours with cross attention.
Since it is impractical to manually label dense tracking
points on the contour, unsupervised learning comprised of
the mechanical and cyclical consistency losses is proposed
to train our contour tracker. The mechanical loss forcing
the points to move perpendicular to the contour effectively
helps out. For quantitative evaluation, we labeled sparse
tracking points along the contour of live cells from two
live cell datasets taken with phase contrast and confocal
fluorescence microscopes. Our contour tracker quantitatively outperforms compared methods and produces qualitatively more favorable results. Our code and data are publicly available at https://github.com/JunbongJang/
contour-tracking/

1. Introduction
During cell migration, cells change their morphology by
expanding or contracting their plasma membranes continuously like viscoelastic materials [21]. The dynamic change
in the morphology of a live cell is called cellular morpho* Corresponding authors: kimtaekyun@kaist.ac.kr and
kwonmoo.lee@childrens.harvard.edu

Figure 1. Visualization of contour tracking results. Dense point
correspondences between adjacent contours are shown with white
arrows overlaid on the first frame. The first frame’s contour points
are in dark green, and the last frame’s contour points are in red.
Only half of the contour points and correspondences are shown
for visualization purposes. The trajectories of a few tracked points
are shown on the right.

dynamics and ranges from cellular to the subcellular movement of contour at varying spatiotemporal scales. While
cellular morphodynamics plays a vital role in angiogenesis, immune response, stem cell differentiation, and cancer
invasiveness [6, 17], it is challenging to understand the various functions of cellular morphodynamics because its uncharacterized heterogeneity could mask crucial mechanistic
details. As an initial step to understanding cellular morphodynamics, cellular morphodynamics is quantified by tracking every point along the cellular contour (contour tracking) and estimating their velocity [12, 13, 21]. Then, quantification of cellular morphodynamics is further processed
by other downstream machine learning tasks to characterize
the drug-sensitive morphodynamic phenotypes with distinct
molecular mechanisms [6,20,36]. Because contour tracking
(e.g., Fig. 1) is the important first step, the tracking accuracy

227

