This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Cross-Modal Retrieval with Set of Diverse Embeddings
Dongwon Kim1
Namyup Kim1
Suha Kwak1,2
1
2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH
https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/DivE/

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval across image and text modalities
is a challenging task due to its inherent ambiguity: An image often exhibits various situations, and a caption can
be coupled with diverse images. Set-based embedding has
been studied as a solution to this problem. It seeks to encode a sample into a set of different embedding vectors that
capture different semantics of the sample. In this paper, we
present a novel set-based embedding method, which is distinct from previous work in two aspects. First, we present
a new similarity function called smooth-Chamfer similarity, which is designed to alleviate the side effects of existing
similarity functions for set-based embedding. Second, we
propose a novel set prediction module to produce a set of
embedding vectors that effectively captures diverse semantics of input by the slot attention mechanism. Our method is
evaluated on the COCO and Flickr30K datasets across different visual backbones, where it outperforms existing methods including ones that demand substantially larger computation at inference.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval is the task of searching for data
relevant to a query from a database when the query and
database have different modalities. While it has been studied for various pairs of modalities such as video-text [3, 7,
19] and audio-text [5, 16], the most representative setting
for the task is the retrieval across image and text modalities [10, 29, 37, 45]. A naı̈ve solution to cross-modal retrieval is a straightforward extension of the conventional
unimodal retrieval framework [17, 18, 26], i.e., learning
a joint embedding space of the different modalities with
known ranking losses (e.g., contrastive loss [9] and triplet
loss [43]). In this framework, each sample is represented as
a single embedding vector and the task reduces to neighbor
search on the joint embedding space.
However, this naı̈ve approach has trouble in handling the
inherent ambiguity of the cross-modal retrieval across image and text modalities [10, 45, 46]. A cause of the am-

“Boys wearing helmets carry a
bicycle up a ramp at a skate park.”

“Small children stand near
bicycles at a skate park.”
“A group of young children
riding bikes and skateboards.”
Figure 1. An example of the ambiguity problem introduced in
the cross-modal retrieval task; an image region and a word corresponding to each other are highlighted in the same color. This example demonstrates that a single image can be coupled with multiple heterogeneous captions.

biguity is the fact that even a single image often contains
various situations and contexts. Consider an image in Figure 1, which illustrates a group of children in a skate park.
One of the captions coupled with it could be about children carrying up a bike, while another may describe the
child riding a skateboard. Indeed, different local features of
the image are matched to different captions. Similarly, visual manifestations of a caption could vary significantly as
text descriptions are highly abstract. This ambiguity issue
suggests that a sample should be embedded while reflecting
its varying semantics in cross-modal retrieval. Embedding
models dedicated to the uni-modal retrieval do not meet this
requirement since they represent a sample as a single embedding vector.
Various methods have been studied to mitigate the ambiguity issue of cross-modal retrieval. Most of them adopt
cross-attention networks that directly predict the similarity
of an input image-caption pair [12, 14, 25, 30, 37, 38, 49,
50, 53]. These models successfully address the ambiguity
since they explicitly infer relations across the modalities by
drawing attentions on both modalities at once. However,
they inevitably impose a large computation burden on retrieval systems since they demand both image and caption
to be processed together for computing their similarity; all
data in a database thus have to be reprocessed whenever
a query arrives. In contrast, methods using separate textual and visual encoders [17, 21, 24, 29] seek to find sam-

23422

