This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guiding Pseudo-labels with Uncertainty Estimation for Source-free Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation
Mattia Litrico
Alessio Del Bue
Pietro Morerio
Pattern Analysis and Computer Vision (PAVIS) - Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
mattia.litrico@phd.unict.it, alessio.delbue@iit.it, pietro.morerio@iit.it

Abstract
Standard Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods assume the availability of both source and target data
during the adaptation. In this work, we investigate Sourcefree Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (SF-UDA), a specific
case of UDA where a model is adapted to a target domain
without access to source data. We propose a novel approach
for the SF-UDA setting based on a loss reweighting strategy
that brings robustness against the noise that inevitably affects the pseudo-labels. The classification loss is reweighted
based on the reliability of the pseudo-labels that is measured
by estimating their uncertainty. Guided by such reweighting strategy, the pseudo-labels are progressively refined by
aggregating knowledge from neighbouring samples. Furthermore, a self-supervised contrastive framework is leveraged
as a target space regulariser to enhance such knowledge
aggregation. A novel negative pairs exclusion strategy is proposed to identify and exclude negative pairs made of samples
sharing the same class, even in presence of some noise in the
pseudo-labels. Our method outperforms previous methods
on three major benchmarks by a large margin. We set the new
SF-UDA state-of-the-art on VisDA-C and DomainNet with
a performance gain of +1.8% on both benchmarks and on
PACS with +12.3% in the single-source setting and +6.6%
in multi-target adaptation. Additional analyses demonstrate
that the proposed approach is robust to the noise, which results in significantly more accurate pseudo-labels compared
to state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods achieve remarkable performance
in visual tasks when the training and test sets share a similar
distribution, while their generalisation ability on unseen data
decreases in presence of the so called domain shift [18, 48].
Moreover, DNNs require a huge amount of labelled data to
be trained on a new domain entailing a considerable cost
for collecting and labelling the data. Unsupervised Domain

Adaptation (UDA) approaches aim to transfer the knowledge
learned on a labelled source domain to an unseen target
domain without requiring any target label [2, 13, 22, 57].
Common UDA techniques have the drawback of requiring
access to source data while they are adapting the model
to the target domain. This may not always be possible in
many applications, i.e. when data privacy or transmission
bandwidth become critical issues. In this work, we focus
on the setting of Source-free adaptation (SF-UDA) [37, 55,
61, 66], where source data is no longer accessible during
adaptation, but only unlabelled target data is available. As
a result, standard UDA methods cannot be applied in the
SF-UDA setting, since they require data from both domains.
Recently, several SF-UDA methods have been proposed,
focusing on generative models [36,43], class prototypes [37],
entropy-minimisation [37, 61], self-training [37] and auxiliary self-supervised tasks [55]. Yet, generative models require a large computational effort to generate images/features
in the target style [36], entropy-minimisation methods often lead to posterior collapse [37] and the performance of
self-training solutions [37] suffer from noisy pseudo-labels.
Self supervision and pseudo-labelling have also been introduced as joint SF-UDA strategies [55, 60], raising the issue
of choosing a suitable pretext task and refining pseudo-labels.
For instance, Chen et al. [5] propose to refine predictions
within a self-supervised strategy. Yet, their work does not
take into account the noise inherent in pseudo-labels, which
leads to equally weighting all samples without explicitly accounting for their uncertainty. This may cause pseudo-labels
with high uncertainty to still contributing in the classification
loss, resulting in detrimental noise overfitting and thus poor
adaptation.
In this work, we propose a novel Source-free adaptation
approach that builds upon an initial pseudo-labels assignment (for all target samples) performed by using the pretrained source model, always assumed to be available. To
obtain robustness against the noise that inevitably affects
such pseudo-labels, we propose to reweight the classification
loss based on the reliability of the pseudo-labels. We measure it by estimating pseudo-labels uncertainty, after they

7640

