This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AdaptiveMix: Improving GAN Training via Feature Space Shrinkage
Haozhe Liu1† , Wentian Zhang2† , Bing Li1B , Haoqian Wu3 , Nanjun He2 , Yawen Huang2
Yuexiang Li2B ,Bernard Ghanem1 , Yefeng Zheng2
1
AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
2
Jarvis Lab, Tencent, 3 YouTu Lab, Tencent
{haozhe.liu;bing.li;bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa; zhangwentianml@gmail.com;
{linuswu;yawenhuang;nanjunhe;vicyxli;yefengzheng}@tencent.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Artificial Curiosity [40, 41] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have attracted extensive attention
due to their remarkable performance in image generation
† Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors: Bing Li and Yuexiang Li.

AFHQ-Cat-5k
(5,153 img)

StyleGAN2+AdaptiveMix

FFHQ-5k
(5,000 img)

Due to the outstanding capability for data generation, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have attracted
considerable attention in unsupervised learning. However,
training GANs is difficult, since the training distribution is
dynamic for the discriminator, leading to unstable image
representation. In this paper, we address the problem
of training GANs from a novel perspective, i.e., robust
image classification. Motivated by studies on robust image
representation, we propose a simple yet effective module,
namely AdaptiveMix, for GANs, which shrinks the regions
of training data in the image representation space of the
discriminator. Considering it is intractable to directly
bound feature space, we propose to construct hard samples
and narrow down the feature distance between hard and
easy samples. The hard samples are constructed by mixing
a pair of training images. We evaluate the effectiveness
of our AdaptiveMix with widely-used and state-of-the-art
GAN architectures. The evaluation results demonstrate
that our AdaptiveMix can facilitate the training of GANs
and effectively improve the image quality of generated
samples. We also show that our AdaptiveMix can be further
applied to image classification and Out-Of-Distribution
(OOD) detection tasks, by equipping it with state-of-theart methods. Extensive experiments on seven publicly
available datasets show that our method effectively boosts
the performance of baselines. The code is publicly available at https : / / github . com / WentianZhang ML/AdaptiveMix.

StyleGAN2

Figure 1. Results generated by StyleGAN-V2 [20] and our method
(StyleGAN-V2 + AdaptiveMix) on AFHQ-Cat and FFHQ-5k. We
propose a simple yet effective module AdaptiveMix, which can
be used for helping the training of unsupervised GANs. When
trained on a small amount of data, StyleGAN-V2 generates images
with artifacts, due to unstable training. However, our AdaptiveMix
effectively boosts the performance of StyleGAN-V2 in terms of
image quality.

[18,45,55,57]. A standard GAN consists of a generator and
a discriminator network, where the discriminator is trained
to discriminate real/generated samples, and the generator
aims to generate samples that can fool the discriminator.
Nevertheless, the training of GANs is difficult and unstable,
leading to low-quality generated samples [23, 34].
Many efforts have been devoted to improving the training of GANs (e.g. [1, 5, 12, 25, 27, 34, 39]). Previous studies
[37] attempted to co-design the network architecture of the
generator and discriminator to balance the iterative training.
Following this research line, PG-GAN [16] gradually trains

16219

