This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Universal Instance Perception as Object Discovery and Retrieval
Bin Yan1 ,* Yi Jiang2,† , Jiannan Wu3 , Dong Wang1 ,
Ping Luo3 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Huchuan Lu1,4,†
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
ByteDance 3 The University of Hong Kong 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Format

Abstract

Fine
person

All instance perception tasks aim at finding certain objects specified by some queries such as category names, language expressions, and target annotations, but this complete field has been split into multiple independent subtasks. In this work, we present a universal instance perception model of the next generation, termed UNINEXT.
UNINEXT reformulates diverse instance perception tasks
into a unified object discovery and retrieval paradigm and
can flexibly perceive different types of objects by simply
changing the input prompts. This unified formulation brings
the following benefits: (1) enormous data from different
tasks and label vocabularies can be exploited for jointly
training general instance-level representations, which is especially beneficial for tasks lacking in training data. (2)
the unified model is parameter-efficient and can save redundant computation when handling multiple tasks simultaneously. UNINEXT shows superior performance on 20
challenging benchmarks from 10 instance-level tasks including classical image-level tasks (object detection and
instance segmentation), vision-and-language tasks (referring expression comprehension and segmentation), and six
video-level object tracking tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/MasterBin-IIAU/UNINEXT.

1. Introduction
Object-centric understanding is one of the most essential and challenging problems in computer vision. Over the
years, the diversity of this field increases substantially. In
this work, we mainly discuss 10 sub-tasks, distributed on
the vertices of the cube shown in Figure 1. As the most
fundamental tasks, object detection [8, 9, 30, 59, 82, 84, 91]
and instance segmentation [6, 37, 64, 90, 97] require finding
all objects of specific categories by boxes and masks respectively. Extending inputs from static images to dynamic
* This work was performed while Bin Yan worked as an intern at
ByteDance. Email: yan bin@mail.dlut.edu.cn. † Corresponding authors:
jiangyi.enjoy@bytedance.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn.

sheep sheepsheep sheep
sheep

dog

Instance
Segmentation

MOTS

VIS

a zebra to the
left of the frame

The fourth person
from the left

RES

VOS

RVOS

Coarse
person

None

Language or
Annotation
Reference

Static

Dynamic
Time

skateboard

Object
Detection

MOT

tennis player in white

REC

SOT

Figure 1. Task distribution on the Format-Time-Reference space.
Better view on screen with zoom-in.

videos, Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) [3, 74, 126, 128],
Multi-Object Tracking and Segmentation (MOTS) [47, 93,
108], and Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) [43, 100, 103,
112] require finding all object trajectories of specific categories in videos. Except for category names, some tasks
provide other reference information. For example, Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) [115,121,130], Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) [116,119,121], and
Referring Video Object Segmentation (R-VOS) [7, 86, 104]
aim at finding objects matched with the given language expressions like “The fourth person from the left”. Besides,
Single Object Tracking (SOT) [5, 51, 106] and Video Object Segmentation (VOS) [18, 78, 107] take the target annotations (boxes or masks) given in the first frame as the
reference, requiring to predict the trajectories of the tracked
objects in the subsequent frames. Since all the above tasks
aim to perceive instances of certain properties, we refer to
them collectively as instance perception.
Although bringing convenience to specific applications,
such diverse task definitions split the whole field into fragmented pieces. As the result, most current instance perception methods are developed for only a single or a part of
sub-tasks and trained on data from specific domains. Such

15325

