This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta Compositional Referring Expression Segmentation
Li Xu1 , Mark He Huang1,3 , Xindi Shang2 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Ying Sun3 , Jun Liu 1 *
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
2
ByteDance
3
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
{li xu, he huang}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
{shangxindi, yuanzehuan}@bytedance.com
suny@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Referring expression segmentation aims to segment an
object described by a language expression from an image.
Despite the recent progress on this task, existing models
tackling this task may not be able to fully capture semantics
and visual representations of individual concepts, which
limits their generalization capability, especially when handling novel compositions of learned concepts. In this work,
through the lens of meta learning, we propose a Meta Compositional Referring Expression Segmentation (MCRES)
framework to enhance model compositional generalization
performance. Specifically, to handle various levels of novel
compositions, our framework first uses training data to construct a virtual training set and multiple virtual testing sets,
where data samples in each virtual testing set contain a
level of novel compositions w.r.t. the virtual training set.
Then, following a novel meta optimization scheme to optimize the model to obtain good testing performance on the
virtual testing sets after training on the virtual training set,
our framework can effectively drive the model to better capture semantics and visual representations of individual concepts, and thus obtain robust generalization performance
even when handling novel compositions. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
Referring expression segmentation (RES) [12, 38, 40]
aims to segment a visual entity in an image given a linguistic expression. This task has been receiving increasing attention in recent years [5, 18, 34, 37], as it can play
an important role in various applications, such as languagebased human-robot interaction and interactive image edit* Corresponding Author

Training Data

Testing Data

"dark horse"
"mug with 

dark coffee"
Novel Composition

"the coffee mug"

(a)
“white bird standing in water”
white bird
white

bird

standing in water
standing

in water
in

phrase-phrase
word-phrase
word-word

water

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of novel compositions and various levels
of compositions. (a) An example of the testing sample containing
the novel composition of “dark coffee” in RefCOCO dataset [41].
Such a novel composition itself does not exist in the training data,
but its individual components (i.e., “dark” and “coffee”) exist in
the training data. (b) An example of various levels of compositions
in an expression. We perform constituency parsing of the expression using AllenNLP [9]. Based on the obtained parsing tree as
shown above, we can then obtain various levels of compositions
(e.g., word-word level, word-phrase level) in this expression.

ing. However, despite the recent progress on tackling this
task [5, 34, 42], existing methods may struggle with handling the testing samples, of which the expressions contain
novel compositions of learned concepts. Here a novel composition means that the composition itself does not exist in
the training data, but its individual components (e.g., words,
phrases) exist in the training data, as shown in Fig. 1a.
We observe that testing samples containing such novel
compositions of learned concepts widely exist in RES
datasets [26, 28, 41]. However, existing RES models may
not be able to well handle novel compositions during testing. Here we test the generalization capability of multiple state-of-the-art models [25, 37, 42] in terms of handling

19478

