This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Independent Component Alignment for Multi-Task Learning
Dmitry Senushkin

Nikolay Patakin
Arseny Kuznetsov
Samsung Research

Anton Konushin

{d.senushkin, n.patakin, a.konushin}@samsung.com

Abstract
In a multi-task learning (MTL) setting, a single model
is trained to tackle a diverse set of tasks jointly. Despite
rapid progress in the field, MTL remains challenging due
to optimization issues such as conflicting and dominating
gradients. In this work, we propose using a condition number of a linear system of gradients as a stability criterion
of an MTL optimization. We theoretically demonstrate that
a condition number reflects the aforementioned optimization issues. Accordingly, we present Aligned-MTL, a novel
MTL optimization approach based on the proposed criterion, that eliminates instability in the training process by
aligning the orthogonal components of the linear system
of gradients. While many recent MTL approaches guarantee convergence to a minimum, task trade-offs cannot be
specified in advance. In contrast, Aligned-MTL provably
converges to an optimal point with pre-defined task-specific
weights, which provides more control over the optimization
result. Through experiments, we show that the proposed approach consistently improves performance on a diverse set
of MTL benchmarks, including semantic and instance segmentation, depth estimation, surface normal estimation, and
reinforcement learning. The source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/SamsungLabs/MTL.

1. Introduction
In a multi-task learning (MTL), several tasks are solved
jointly by a single model [2, 10]. In such a scenario, information can be shared across tasks, which may improve the
generalization and boost the performance for all objectives.
Moreover, MTL can be extremely useful when computational resources are constrained, so it is crucial to have a
single model capable of solving various tasks [17, 19, 30]. In
reinforcement learning [39,50], MTL setting arises naturally,
when a single agent is trained to perform multiple tasks.
Several MTL approaches [15, 24, 28, 29, 31, 35, 42] focus
on designing specific network architectures and elaborate
strategies of sharing parameters and representations across
tasks for a given set of tasks. Yet, such complicated and

powerful models are extremely challenging to train.
Direct optimization of an objective averaged across tasks
might experience issues [54] related to conflicting and dominating gradients. Such gradients destabilize the training process and degrade the overall performance. Accordingly, some
other MTL approaches address these issues with multi-task
gradient descent: either using gradient altering [9, 27, 48, 54]
or task balancing [16, 25, 28]. Many recent MTL methods [27, 37, 48] guarantee convergence to a minimum, yet
task trade-offs cannot be specified in advance. Unfortunately,
the lack of control over relative task importance may cause
some tasks to be compromised in favor of others [37].
In this work, we analyze the multi-task optimization challenges from the perspective of stability of a linear system of
gradients. Specifically, we propose using a condition number
of a linear system of gradients as a stability criterion of an
MTL optimization. According to our thorough theoretical
analysis, there is a strong relation between the condition
number and conflicting and dominating gradients issues. We
exploit this feature to create Aligned-MTL, a novel gradient manipulation approach, which is the major contribution of this work. Our approach resolves gradient conflicts
and eliminates dominating gradients by aligning principal
components of a gradient matrix, which makes the training
process more stable. In contrast to other existing methods
(e.g. [27,37,48,54]), Aligned-MTL has a provable guarantee
of convergence to an optimum with pre-defined task weights.
We provide an in-depth theoretical analysis of the
proposed method and extensively verify its effectiveness.
Aligned-MTL consistently outperforms previous methods
on various benchmarks. First, we evaluate the proposed approach on the problem of scene understanding; specifically,
we perform joint instance segmentation, semantic segmentation, depth and surface normal estimation on two challenging
datasets – Cityscapes [6] and NYUv2 [36]. Second, we apply
our method to multi-task reinforcement learning and conduct experiments with the MT10 dataset [55]. Lastly, in order
to analyze generalization performance, Aligned-MTL has
been applied to two different network architectures, namely
PSPNet [48] and MTAN [28], in the scene understanding
experiments.

20083

