This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot Model Diagnosis
Jinqi Luo*

Zhaoning Wang*

Chen Henry Wu
Dong Huang
Carnegie Mellon University

Fernando De la Torre

{jinqil, zhaoning, chenwu2, dghuang, ftorre}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
When it comes to deploying deep vision models, the behavior of these systems must be explicable to ensure confidence in their reliability and fairness. A common approach
to evaluate deep learning models is to build a labeled test
set with attributes of interest and assess how well it performs. However, creating a balanced test set (i.e., one that
is uniformly sampled over all the important traits) is often time-consuming, expensive, and prone to mistakes. The
question we try to address is: can we evaluate the sensitivity of deep learning models to arbitrary visual attributes
without an annotated test set?
This paper argues the case that Zero-shot Model Diagnosis (ZOOM) is possible without the need for a test set nor
labeling. To avoid the need for test sets, our system relies
on a generative model and CLIP. The key idea is enabling
the user to select a set of prompts (relevant to the problem) and our system will automatically search for semantic counterfactual images (i.e., synthesized images that flip
the prediction in the case of a binary classifier) using the
generative model. We evaluate several visual tasks (classification, key-point detection, and segmentation) in multiple
visual domains to demonstrate the viability of our methodology. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
is capable of producing counterfactual images and offering
sensitivity analysis for model diagnosis without the need for
a test set.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models inherit data biases, which can be
accentuated or downplayed depending on the model’s architecture and optimization strategy. Deploying a computer
vision deep learning model requires extensive testing and
evaluation, with a particular focus on features with potentially dire social consequences (e.g., non-uniform behavior across gender or ethnicity). Given the importance of
the problem, it is common to collect and label large-scale
datasets to evaluate the behavior of these models across
attributes of interest. Unfortunately, collecting these test
* Equal contribution.

User Diagnosis Request

How would a change
in [attribute] affect
[my model]'s prediction?

[attribute] = "green eye"
"vertical pupil"
"pointed ear"
...

Neural Tools

CLIP

Diagnosis Outcomes

...
ye" pupil" ear"
en e
l
d
"gre vertica "pointe ...
"
Zero-shot sensitivity histogram

StyleGAN
Generator

[my model] = cat/dog classifier
...
Zero-shot counterfactual images

Figure 1. Given a differentiable deep learning model (e.g., a
cat/dog classifier) and user-defined text attributes, how can we determine the model’s sensitivity to specific attributes without using labeled test data? Our system generates counterfactual images
(bottom right) based on the textual directions provided by the user,
while also computing the sensitivity histogram (top right).

datasets is extremely time-consuming, error-prone, and expensive. Moreover, a balanced dataset, that is uniformly
distributed across all attributes of interest, is also typically
impractical to acquire due to its combinatorial nature. Even
with careful metric analysis in this test set, no robustness
nor fairness can be guaranteed since there can be a mismatch between the real and test distributions [25]. This
research will explore model diagnosis without relying on
a test set in an effort to democratize model diagnosis and
lower the associated cost.
Counterfactual explainability as a means of model diagnosis is drawing the community’s attention [5,20]. Counterfactual images visualize the sensitive factors of an input image that can influence the model’s outputs. In other words,
counterfactuals answer the question: “How can we modify
the input image x (while fixing the ground truth) so that the
model prediction would diverge from y to ŷ?”. The parameterization of such counterfactuals will provide insights into
identifying key factors of where the model fails. Unlike existing image-space adversary techniques [4,18], counterfactuals provide semantic perturbations that are interpretable
by humans. However, existing counterfactual studies re-

11631

