This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PET-NeuS: Positional Encoding Tri-Planes for Neural Surfaces
Yiqun Wang
Chongqing University and KAUST

Abstract
A signed distance function (SDF) parametrized by an
MLP is a common ingredient of neural surface reconstruction. We build on the successful recent method NeuS to extend it by three new components. The first component is
to borrow the tri-plane representation from EG3D and represent signed distance fields as a mixture of tri-planes and
MLPs instead of representing it with MLPs only. Using triplanes leads to a more expressive data structure but will
also introduce noise in the reconstructed surface. The second component is to use a new type of positional encoding
with learnable weights to combat noise in the reconstruction process. We divide the features in the tri-plane into
multiple frequency scales and modulate them with sin and
cos functions of different frequencies. The third component
is to use learnable convolution operations on the tri-plane
features using self-attention convolution to produce features
with different frequency bands. The experiments show that
PET-NeuS achieves high-fidelity surface reconstruction on
standard datasets. Following previous work and using the
Chamfer metric as the most important way to measure surface reconstruction quality, we are able to improve upon the
NeuS baseline by 57% on Nerf-synthetic (0.84 compared to
1.97) and by 15.5% on DTU (0.71 compared to 0.84). The
qualitative evaluation reveals how our method can better
control the interference of high-frequency noise.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural functions, or neural fields, have received
a lot of attention in recent research. The seminal paper
NeRF [25] combines neural fields with volume rendering,
enabling high-quality novel view synthesis. Inspired by
NeRF, NeuS [41] and VolSDF [44] introduce a signed distance function (SDF) into the volume rendering equation
and regularize the SDF, so that smooth surface models can
be reconstructed. However, these methods use pure MLP
networks to encode SDFs. Although these two methods can
reconstruct smooth surfaces, they both leave room for improvement when it comes to reconstructing surface details.
One research direction ( [5, 6, 26, 33, 46]) explores data

Ivan Skorokhodov
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

structures such as tri-planes or voxel grids that are suitable
to improve the NeRF framework, in terms of speed or reconstruction quality. However, data structures that are successful for novel view synthesis may not bring immediate success when employed for surface reconstruction as shown in
the third column of Fig. 1. While a greater expressiveness to
encode local details is useful to better fit the input data, there
is also less inductive bias towards a smooth surface. Therefore, noise during image acquisition, high-frequency shading, or high-frequency texture variations are more likely to
result in a noisy reconstructed surface.
In our work, we explore how to increase expressiveness
to encode local features while at the same time reducing the
impact of noise interference. We choose to build on the triplane data structure since it consumes less memory and can
be easier scaled to higher resolutions.
In our work, we build on EG3D and NeuS to propose
a novel framework, called PET-NeuS. First, we propose a
method to integrate the tri-plane data structure into a surface reconstruction framework in order to be able to model
an SDF with more local details. Second, since the features
between tri-plane pixels do not share learnable parameters,
we use positional encoding to modulate the tri-plane features, thereby enhancing the smoothness of the learnable
features. Third, the positional encoding involves functions
of different frequencies. In order to better match different frequencies, we propose to use multi-scale self-attention
convolution kernels with different window sizes to perform
convolution in the spatial domain to generate features of different frequency bands. This further increases the fidelity of
the surface reconstruction while suppressing noise.
We experiment on two datasets to verify the effectiveness
of our method, the DTU dataset and the NeRF-Synthetic
dataset. Since the DTU dataset contains non-Lambertian
surfaces, the ability of the network to resist noise interference can be verified. The NeRF-Synthetic dataset has many
sharp features, which can verify that our framework can effectively utilize its improved local expressiveness to better
reconstruct local details. We show superior performance
compared to state-of-the-art methods on both datasets.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose to train neural implicit surfaces with a tri-

12598

