This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fuzzy Positive Learning for Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Pengchong Qiao1,2,4* Zhidan Wei1,4* Yu Wang1,4 Zhennan Wang2 Guoli Song2
Fan Xu2 Xiangyang Ji3 Chang Liu3† Jie Chen1,2,4†
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
{pcqiao,adan,rain wang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {wangzhn,songgl,xuf01,chenj}@pcl.ac.cn,
{xyji,liuchang2022}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) essentially pursues class
boundary exploration with less dependence on human annotations. Although typical attempts focus on ameliorating the inevitable error-prone pseudo-labeling, we think
differently and resort to exhausting informative semantics
from multiple probably correct candidate labels. In this paper, we introduce Fuzzy Positive Learning (FPL) for accurate SSL semantic segmentation in a plug-and-play fashion, targeting adaptively encouraging fuzzy positive predictions and suppressing highly-probable negatives. Being conceptually simple yet practically effective, FPL can
remarkably alleviate interference from wrong pseudo labels and progressively achieve clear pixel-level semantic
discrimination. Concretely, our FPL approach consists
of two main components, including fuzzy positive assignment (FPA) to provide an adaptive number of labels for
each pixel and fuzzy positive regularization (FPR) to restrict the predictions of fuzzy positive categories to be
larger than the rest under different perturbations. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments on Cityscapes
and VOC 2012 with consistent performance gain justify
the superiority of our approach. Codes are provided in
https://github.com/qpc1611094/FPL.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation models enable accurate scene
understanding [1, 29, 45] with the help of fine pixel-level
annotations. Yet, collecting labeled segmentation datasets
is time-consuming and labor-costing [6]. Considering unlabeled data are annotation-free and easily accessible, semi* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

supervised learning (SSL) is introduced into semantic segmentation [5, 34, 43, 49, 51, 53] to encourage the model to
generalize better on unseen data with less dependence on
artificial annotations.

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods using pseudo label to utilize unlabeled data. (b) The proposed FPL that provides multiple fuzzy
positive labels for each pixel to utilize unlabeled data. The example of ‘Truck’ shows that our method covers ground truth (GT)
more comprehensively than vanilla positive learning.

The semi-supervised segmentation task faces a scenario
where only a subset of training images are assigned segmentation labels while the others remain unlabeled. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods utilize unlabeled data
via consistency regularization, which aims to obtain invariant predictions for unlabeled pixels under various perturbations [5, 34, 49, 53]. Their general paradigm is to use the
pseudo label generated under weak (or none) perturbations
as the learning target of predictions under strong perturbations. Though achieving promising results, errors are inevitable in the pseudo label used in these methods, misguid-

15465

