This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEV-LaneDet: An Efﬁcient 3D Lane Detection Based on Virtual Camera via
Key-Points
Ruihao Wang1,2 , Jian Qin*1 , Kaiying Li1 , Yaochen Li2 , Dong Cao1 , Jintao Xu1
1
HAOMO.AI Technology Co., Ltd.
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
{wangruihao, qinjian, likaiying, caodong, xujintao}@haomo.ai, yaochenli@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Autonomous Driving Systems (ADS), vehicle self-control,
localization, and map construction.

3D lane detection which plays a crucial role in vehicle
routing, has recently been a rapidly developing topic in autonomous driving. Previous works struggle with practicality due to their complicated spatial transformations and inﬂexible representations of 3D lanes. Faced with the issues,
our work proposes an efﬁcient and robust monocular 3D
lane detection called BEV-LaneDet with three main contributions. First, we introduce the Virtual Camera that uniﬁes
the in/extrinsic parameters of cameras mounted on different vehicles to guarantee the consistency of the spatial relationship among cameras. It can effectively promote the
learning procedure due to the uniﬁed visual space. We secondly propose a simple but efﬁcient 3D lane representation
called Key-Points Representation. This module is more suitable to represent the complicated and diverse 3D lane structures. At last, we present a light-weight and chip-friendly
spatial transformation module named Spatial Transformation Pyramid to transform multiscale front-view features
into BEV features. Experimental results demonstrate that
our work outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches in
terms of F-Score, being 10.6% higher on the OpenLane
dataset and 4.0% higher on the Apollo 3D synthetic dataset,
with a speed of 185 FPS. Code is released at https:
//github.com/gigo-team/bev_lane_det.

BEV output

Z
3D Head

Backbone

Virtual
Camera

STP

Figure 1. End-to-end framework illustrated. The original image
in bottom-right is transformed to an input image by the Virtual
Camera module. The input image is then encoded into front-view
features by the backbone. Multiscale features from the backbone
are put into the Spatial Transformation Pyramid (STP) to obtain
BEV features. Given the BEV features, the 3D Head called KeyPoints Representation generates BEV output and Z, the height of
BEV lanes. At last, with the BEV output and Z, we can obtain 3D
lanes.

2D lane detection methods have demonstrated remarkable performances [4, 18, 20, 22]. Moreover, their outputs
are usually projected to the ﬂat ground plane by Inverse Perspective Transformation (IPM) with the camera in/extrinsic
parameters, and then curve ﬁtting is performed to obtain the
BEV lanes. However, the pipeline might cause other problems in the actual driving process [1, 20] for challenging
situations like uphill and downhill.
In order to overcome these problems, more recent methods [3, 6, 8, 9, 14] have started to focus on the more complicated 3D lane perception domain. There are two significant challenges in 3D lane detection: an efﬁcient spatial
transformation module to obtain BEV features and a robust

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental guarantees for autonomous
driving, lane detection has recently received much attention
from researchers. Robust lane detection in real-time is one
of the foundations for advanced autonomous driving, which
can provide substantial amounts of useful information for
* Corresponding author

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Project of New Generation Artiﬁcial Intelligence of China under
Grant 2018AAA0102504.

1002

