This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiDAR-in-the-loop Hyperparameter Optimization
Félix Goudreault1

Dominik Scheuble2 Mario Bijelic2,3 Nicolas Robidoux1
1
Algolux 2 Mercedes-Benz 3 Princeton University

Abstract
LiDAR has become a cornerstone sensing modality for
3D vision. LiDAR systems emit pulses of light into the
scene, take measurements of the returned signal, and rely
on hardware digital signal processing (DSP) pipelines to
construct 3D point clouds from these measurements. The
resulting point clouds output by these DSPs are input to
downstream 3D vision models – both, in the form of training datasets or as input at inference time. Existing LiDAR
DSPs are composed of cascades of parameterized operations; modifying configuration parameters results in significant changes in the point clouds and consequently the output of downstream methods. Existing methods treat LiDAR
systems as fixed black boxes and construct downstream task
networks more robust with respect to measurement fluctuations. Departing from this approach, the proposed method
directly optimizes LiDAR sensing and DSP parameters for
downstream tasks. To investigate the optimization of LiDAR
system parameters, we devise a realistic LiDAR simulation
method that generates raw waveforms as input to a LiDAR
DSP pipeline. We optimize LiDAR parameters for both 3D
object detection IoU losses and depth error metrics by solving a nonlinear multi-objective optimization problem with
a 0th-order stochastic algorithm. For automotive 3D object
detection models, the proposed method outperforms manual
expert tuning by 39.5% mean Average Precision (mAP).

1. Introduction
Environment perception for autonomous drones [12, 53]
and vehicles [72] requires precise depth sensing for safetycritical control decisions. Scanning LiDAR sensors have
been broadly adopted in autonomous driving [3, 7, 56] as
they provide high temporal and spatial resolution, and recent advances in MEMS scanning [67] and photodiode technology [64] have reduced their cost and form factor.
The 3D LiDAR point cloud (PC) data that existing 3D
detection methods take as input is produced by a LiDAR
and digital signal processor (DSP) pipeline with many measurement and processing steps. Typical LiDAR sensors operate by sending out a laser pulse and measuring the temporal response through an Avalanche Photo Diode (APD).
This temporal wavefront signal is fed to a DSP that extracts

Felix Heide1,3

peaks corresponding to echos from candidate targets within
the scene [70]. As such, DSP processing results in a 1000fold data reduction for a single emitted beam, producing
single or multiple 3D points per beam. Compressing the
waveform into points in 3D space with minimal information loss is challenging because of object discontinuities,
sub-surface scattering, multipath reflections, and scattering
media, see Fig. 1. In particular, significant scattering occurs
in adverse weather conditions like fog [3,4,6,20,23,25,66],
rain [6,18,66] and snow [19,25,27,34]. LiDAR manufacturers currently handle such complications by manually adjusting internal sensing and DSP parameters in controlled environments and restricted real-world scenarios using a combination of visual inspection and depth quality metrics.
Generally, LiDAR production units are black boxes with
configuration parameters hidden from the user. To account for noisy point cloud measurements with spurious artifacts, existing work has explored methods that add simulated adverse effects and point cloud degradations that
model rain [18, 26, 58], fog [3, 20, 50] and snow [19] to
real black-box LiDAR datasets. Augmented point clouds
in hand, downstream vision models are retrained for predictions more robust to point cloud data corruption. Another approach consists of generating synthetic measurements from 3D scenes using rendering engines [24, 57, 69].
Such existing methods typically avoid simulating transient
light propagation and signal processing by converting 3D
scene depth directly into a point cloud, thus lack physically realistic modeling of fluctuations arising from multipath effects or measurement noise. Notably, existing simulation methods that alter measurements or generate synthetic point clouds do not optimize sensing or DSP parameters for downstream vision performance.
In this work, we directly optimize LiDAR pulse configuration and DSP hyperparameters for end-to-end downstream 3D object detector losses and PC depth quality metrics, a challenging task because hyperparameter space involves tens to hundreds of categorical, discrete and effectively continuous parameters affecting downstream tasks in
complex nonlinear ways via the intermediate point cloud.
Examples of categorical hyperparameters are Velodyne
LiDAR sensor return modes that configure internal wavefront peak selection algorithms for point cloud formation;

13404

