This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CDDFuse: Correlation-Driven Dual-Branch Feature Decomposition
for Multi-Modality Image Fusion
Zixiang Zhao1,2 Haowen Bai1 Jiangshe Zhang1 * Yulun Zhang2
Shuang Xu3,4 Zudi Lin5 Radu Timofte2,6 Luc Van Gool2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich
3
Research and Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University 5 Harvard University 6 University of Würzburg
zixiangzhao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jszhang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-modality (MM) image fusion aims to render fused
images that maintain the merits of different modalities, e.g.,
functional highlight and detailed textures. To tackle the challenge in modeling cross-modality features and decomposing
desirable modality-specific and modality-shared features,
we propose a novel Correlation-Driven feature Decomposition Fusion (CDDFuse) network. Firstly, CDDFuse uses
Restormer blocks to extract cross-modality shallow features.
We then introduce a dual-branch Transformer-CNN feature
extractor with Lite Transformer (LT) blocks leveraging longrange attention to handle low-frequency global features and
Invertible Neural Networks (INN) blocks focusing on extracting high-frequency local information. A correlationdriven loss is further proposed to make the low-frequency
features correlated while the high-frequency features uncorrelated based on the embedded information. Then, the
LT-based global fusion and INN-based local fusion layers
output the fused image. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our CDDFuse achieves promising results in multiple
fusion tasks, including infrared-visible image fusion and
medical image fusion. We also show that CDDFuse can
boost the performance in downstream infrared-visible semantic segmentation and object detection in a unified benchmark. The code is available at https://github.com/
Zhaozixiang1228/MMIF-CDDFuse.

1. Introduction
Image fusion is a basic image processing topic that aims
to generate informative fused images by combining the important information from source ones [47,75,78,79,87]. The
fusion targets include digital [45,84], multi-modal [36,70,88]
* Corresponding author.

(a) Existing MMIF methods vs. CDDFuse. The base and detail encoders are responsible for extracting global and local features, respectively.

(b) CDDFuse (highlighted in yellow) achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
MSRS [57] and RoadScene [71] in eight metrics.

Figure 1. Workflow and performance comparison of our proposed
CDDFuse with existing MM image fusion approaches.

and remote sensing [4, 76, 91] images, etc. The InfraredVisible image Fusion (IVF) and Medical Image Fusion (MIF)
are two challenging sub-categories of Multi-Modality Image
Fusion (MMIF), focusing on modeling the cross-modality
features from all the sensors and aggregating them into the
output images. Specifically, IVF targets fused images that
preserve thermal radiation information in the input infrared
images and detailed texture information in the input visible
images. The fused images can avoid the shortcomings of
visible images being sensitive to illumination conditions as
well as the infrared images being noisy and low-resolution.
Downstream recognition tasks, e.g., multi-modal saliency
detection [33, 52, 63], object detection [6, 34, 58] and se-

5906

