This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D shape reconstruction of semi-transparent worms
Thomas P. Ilett*

Omer Yuval* Thomas Ranner* Netta Cohen*†
University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom

David C. Hogg*†

Figure 1. Posture reconstruction pipeline and imaging setup.

Abstract
3D shape reconstruction typically requires identifying
object features or textures in multiple images of a subject. This approach is not viable when the subject is semitransparent and moving in and out of focus. Here we overcome these challenges by rendering a candidate shape with
adaptive blurring and transparency for comparison with
the images. We use the microscopic nematode Caenorhabditis elegans as a case study as it freely explores a 3D
complex fluid with constantly changing optical properties.
We model the slender worm as a 3D curve using an intrinsic parametrisation that naturally admits biologicallyinformed constraints and regularisation. To account for
the changing optics we develop a novel differentiable renderer to construct images from 2D projections and compare
* {T.Ilett, O.Yuval, T.Ranner, N.Cohen,
D.C.Hogg}@leeds.ac.uk

Funding This work was supported by University of Leeds and EPSRC.
Author contributions Conceptualisation, Methodology, Formal analysis,
Investigation, Software, Visualisation: TPI. Data curation, Validation:
TPI, OY. Writing: TPI (original), all (review and editing). Funding
acquisition, Supervision: NC, DCH, TR. † Equal contribution.
Acknowledgements Additional thanks to Matan Braunstein (for help with
Fig. 1), Robert I. Holbrook (data), Felix Salfelder (discussions and data),
Lukas Deutz (discussions) and Jen Kruger (proof reading).
Data availability Supplementary movies are available here:
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.22310650.

against raw images to generate a pixel-wise error to jointly
update the curve, camera and renderer parameters using
gradient descent. The method is robust to interference such
as bubbles and dirt trapped in the fluid, stays consistent
through complex sequences of postures, recovers reliable
estimates from blurry images and provides a significant improvement on previous attempts to track C. elegans in 3D.
Our results demonstrate the potential of direct approaches
to shape estimation in complex physical environments in the
absence of ground-truth data.

1. Introduction
Many creatures such as fish, birds and insects move in all
directions to search and navigate volumetric environments.
Acquiring 3D data of their motion has informed models of
locomotion, behaviour and neural and mechanical control
[3,22]. While technological advances have made the collection of large quantities of multi-viewpoint visual data more
attainable, methods for extracting and modelling 3D information remain largely domain-dependant as few species
share common geometric models or exist within the same
spatial and temporal scales [4, 11, 14, 26, 37, 41, 50, 54, 65].
Furthermore, while humans and some domesticated animals [30,60] may act naturally while wearing special markers, marker-less observations of many species makes fea-

12565

