This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrowdCLIP: Unsupervised Crowd Counting via Vision-Language Model
Dingkang Liang∗1 , Jiahao Xie∗2 , Zhikang Zou3 , Xiaoqing Ye3 , Wei Xu2 , Xiang Bai†1
1

2

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, {dkliang, xbai}@hust.edu.cn
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, {xiejiahao, xuwei2020}@bupt.edu.cn
3
Baidu Inc., China

Abstract
Image
Encoder

Supervised crowd counting relies heavily on costly manual labeling, which is difficult and expensive, especially
in dense scenes. To alleviate the problem, we propose a
novel unsupervised framework for crowd counting, named
CrowdCLIP. The core idea is built on two observations:
1) the recent contrastive pre-trained vision-language model
(CLIP) has presented impressive performance on various
downstream tasks; 2) there is a natural mapping between
crowd patches and count text. To the best of our knowledge, CrowdCLIP is the first to investigate the visionlanguage knowledge to solve the counting problem. Specifically, in the training stage, we exploit the multi-modal
ranking loss by constructing ranking text prompts to match
the size-sorted crowd patches to guide the image encoder
learning. In the testing stage, to deal with the diversity
of image patches, we propose a simple yet effective progressive filtering strategy to first select the highly potential crowd patches and then map them into the language
space with various counting intervals. Extensive experiments on five challenging datasets demonstrate that the
proposed CrowdCLIP achieves superior performance compared to previous unsupervised state-of-the-art counting
methods. Notably, CrowdCLIP even surpasses some popular fully-supervised methods under the cross-dataset setting. The source code will be available at https://
github.com/dk-liang/CrowdCLIP.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of people from images or videos in various crowd scenes, which
has received tremendous attention due to its wide applications in public safety and urban management [14, 42]. It is
very challenging to accurately reason the count, especially
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Work done when Dingkang Liang was an intern at Baidu.

Image
Decoder

GT
density map

Supervised methods: rely on point-level labels

Image
Encoder

Similarity
map

Predicted count

Text
Encoder

“The photo
contains
[prompt] people”
(20, 55, 90, 125…)

Our CrowdCLIP: no need for any labeled image
(a)

Patches for crowd counting

Diverse crowd patches

Ambiguous crowd patches
(b)

Figure 1. (a) The supervised methods require point-level annotations, which need heavy manual labor to label a large-scale dataset.
The proposed method transfers the vision-language knowledge to
perform unsupervised crowd counting without any annotation; (b)
Crowd counting aims to calculate the number of human heads,
while some crowd patches do not contain human heads, i.e., ambiguous patches.

in dense regions where the crowd gathers.
The recent crowd counting methods [5, 18, 41, 62] attempt to regress a density map (Fig. 1(a)). To train such
density-based models, point-level annotations are required,
i.e., assigning a point in each human head. However, annotating point-level object annotations is an expensive and
laborious process. For example, the NWPU-Crowd [48]
dataset, containing 5, 109 images, needs 30 annotators and
3, 000 human hours for the entire annotation process. To
reduce the annotation cost, some weakly-supervised methods [16, 19, 59] and semi-supervised methods [22, 28] are
proposed, where the former usually adopts the count-level

2893

