This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Distribution Matching for Dataset Condensation
Ganlong Zhao1,2 Guanbin Li1,3 * Yipeng Qin4 Yizhou Yu2∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 4 Cardiff University
zhaogl@connect.hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, qiny16@cardiff.ac.uk, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Dataset Condensation aims to condense a large dataset
into a smaller one while maintaining its ability to train a
well-performing model, thus reducing the storage cost and
training effort in deep learning applications. However, conventional dataset condensation methods are optimizationoriented and condense the dataset by performing gradient
or parameter matching during model optimization, which is
computationally intensive even on small datasets and models. In this paper, we propose a novel dataset condensation
method based on distribution matching, which is more efficient and promising. Specifically, we identify two important shortcomings of naive distribution matching (i.e., imbalanced feature numbers and unvalidated embeddings for
distance computation) and address them with three novel
techniques (i.e., partitioning and expansion augmentation,
efficient and enriched model sampling, and class-aware distribution regularization). Our simple yet effective method
outperforms most previous optimization-oriented methods
with much fewer computational resources, thereby scaling data condensation to larger datasets and models. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method. Codes are available at https://github.
com/uitrbn/IDM

1. Introduction
Deep learning [23, 25, 57] is notoriously data-hungry,
which poses challenges for both its training and data storage. To improve data storage efficiency, Dataset Condensation (DC) [47, 56] aims to condense large datasets into
smaller ones while retaining their validity for model training. Unlike traditional coreset selection methods [38, 44,
49,50], such dataset condensation is often achieved through
image synthesis and yields better performance. If properly condensed, the resulting datasets not only consume less
storage space, but can also benefit various downstream tasks
* Corresponding authors are Guanbin Li and Yizhou Yu.

Optimization-Oriented Methods

Distribution Matching Methods

Forward

: Model Parameter at Iteration t

: Gradient

Backward

: Loss of Target Task

: Model Output

Figure 1. Illustration of optimization-oriented methods and distribution matching methods. L: classification loss; g: gradient; O:
output of models; Lmatching : the matching loss for condensation.

such as network architecture search and continual learning
&
: Synthetic and real samples
by reducing their computational
costs.
The pioneering DC approach [56, 56] guarantees the validity of a condensed dataset by imposing a strong assumption that a model trained on it should be identical to that
trained on the real dataset. However, naive matching between these converged models can be too challenging due to
their large parameter space and long optimization towards
convergence. To this end, they impose an even stronger assumption that the two models should share an identical or
similar optimization path, which can be achieved by matching either their gradients [53,56] or their intermediate model
parameters [8] during training. We therefore refer to them
as optimization-oriented methods.
However, despite their success, the unique characteristics of optimization-oriented DC methods imply that they
inevitably suffer from high computational costs and thus
scale poorly to large datasets and models. Specifically, they
all involve the optimization of models (either randomlyinitialized [53, 56] or initialized with parameters of pretrained models [8]) against the condensed dataset, and thus
rely on a nested loop that optimizes the condensed dataset
and model parameters in turn. Note that the use of pretrained models require additional computation and storage
space [8]. As a result, existing optimization-oriented DC
methods are only applicable to “toy” networks (e.g., threelayer convolutional networks) and small datasets (e.g., CIFAR10, CIFAR100). Whether they can be scaled to realworld scenarios is still an open question.

7856

