This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointClustering: Unsupervised Point Cloud Pre-training using
Transformation Invariance in Clustering
Fuchen Long, Ting Yao, Zhaofan Qiu, Lusong Li and Tao Mei
HiDream.ai Inc.
JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
{longfc.ustc, tingyao.ustc, zhaofanqiu, lilusong}@gmail.com
tmei@hidream.ai

1. Introduction
3D point cloud analysis has seen tremendous progress
and made great success in industrial applications, e.g., autonomous driving, augmented reality and robotics. The
achievements heavily rely on large quantities of human an-

Distance
Optimization

back‐propagation
point clouds

View 2

transformation

backbone

point clouds

Clustering

(a) clustering learning on point cloud

Scene 1

View 1

View 2

point feature
1

1

2

3

transformation

(b) point level invariance learning

Scene 1

2

3
4

4

View 1

Clustering Learning

View 2

A

instance feature

B

transformation

C
D

Scene 2

Feature invariance under different data transformations,
i.e., transformation invariance, can be regarded as a type
of self-supervision for representation learning. In this paper, we present PointClustering, a new unsupervised representation learning scheme that leverages transformation
invariance for point cloud pre-training. PointClustering
formulates the pretext task as deep clustering and employs
transformation invariance as an inductive bias, following
the philosophy that common point cloud transformation will
not change the geometric properties and semantics. Technically, PointClustering iteratively optimizes the feature clusters and backbone, and delves into the transformation invariance as learning regularization from two perspectives:
point level and instance level. Point-level invariance learning maintains local geometric properties through gathering
point features of one instance across transformations, while
instance-level invariance learning further measures clusters over the entire dataset to explore semantics of instances.
Our PointClustering is architecture-agnostic and readily
applicable to MLP-based, CNN-based and Transformerbased backbones. We empirically demonstrate that the
models pre-learnt on the ScanNet dataset by PointClustering provide superior performances on six benchmarks, across downstream tasks of classification and segmentation. More remarkably, PointClustering achieves an accuracy of 94.5% on ModelNet40 with Transformer backbone. Source code is available at https://github.
com/FuchenUSTC/PointClustering.

View 1

Abstract

transformation
C

D

Clustering Learning

(c) instance level invariance learning

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) clustering learning on point cloud by
using feature invariance at (b) point level and (c) instance level.

notations for supervised learning. However, acquiring and
manual labeling 3D point cloud data is very expensive and
time-consuming, while the underlying rich data structure is
also not yet fully leveraged. In contrast, unsupervised learning leaves it on its own to characterize the underlying feature distribution completely on data itself and is therefore
an appealing way towards more generic model pre-training.
The research in unsupervised point cloud pre-training
has mainly proceeded along two dimensions with respect to the formulation of pretext task: contrastive learning
[23, 65, 74] and reconstruction [34, 52, 60]. Early works of
contrastive learning generally suggest to leverage point or
scene discrimination across different views [65] or modalities [1, 74] for similarity learning. Instead, the direction
of point cloud reconstruction [34, 60] formulates the learning target as shape completion from the partial points. Unlike existing discrimination or reconstruction paradigm in a

21824

