This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Human Pose Estimation with Spatio-Temporal Criss-cross Attention*
Zhenhua Tang, Zhaofan Qiu, Yanbin Hao, Richang Hong, Ting Yao
Hefei University of Technology, Anhui, China
HiDream.ai Inc
University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China
zhenhuat@foxmail.com, zhaofanqiu@gmail.com, haoyanbin@hotmail.com
hongrc.hfut@gmail.com, tingyao.ustc@gmail.com

Abstract

C

Receptive Field

T

xL

S

Recent transformer-based solutions have shown great
success in 3D human pose estimation. Nevertheless, to calculate the joint-to-joint affinity matrix, the computational
cost has a quadratic growth with the increasing number
of joints. Such drawback becomes even worse especially
for pose estimation in a video sequence, which necessitates
spatio-temporal correlation spanning over the entire video.
In this paper, we facilitate the issue by decomposing correlation learning into space and time, and present a novel
Spatio-Temporal Criss-cross attention (STC) block. Technically, STC first slices its input feature into two partitions
evenly along the channel dimension, followed by performing spatial and temporal attention respectively on each partition. STC then models the interactions between joints in an
identical frame and joints in an identical trajectory simultaneously by concatenating the outputs from attention layers.
On this basis, we devise STCFormer by stacking multiple
STC blocks and further integrate a new Structure-enhanced
Positional Embedding (SPE) into STCFormer to take the
structure of human body into consideration. The embedding
function consists of two components: spatio-temporal convolution around neighboring joints to capture local structure, and part-aware embedding to indicate which part each
joint belongs to. Extensive experiments are conducted on
Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP benchmarks, and superior results are reported when comparing to the state-ofthe-art approaches. More remarkably, STCFormer achieves
to-date the best published performance: 40.5mm P1 error
on the challenging Human3.6M dataset.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation has attracted intensive research attention in CV community due to its great poten* This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grants 61932009.

Spatio-Temporal
Attention

(a)

C

MLP

T

Spatial
Attention

(b)

C

Temporal
Attention

MLP

MLP

xL

T

Spatial
Attention

S

(c)

x L2

x L1

S

C

slicing
Temporal
Attention

MLP

concat

Figure 1. Modeling spatio-temporal correlation for 3D human
pose estimation by (a) utilizing spatio-temporal attention on all
joints in the entire video, (b) separating the framework into two
steps that respectively capture spatial and temporal context, and
(c) our Spatio-Temporal Criss-cross attention (STC), i.e., a twopathway block that models spatial and temporal information in
parallel. In the visualization of receptive field, the covered joints
of each attention strategy is marked as red nodes.

tial in numerous applications such as human-robot interaction [20, 43], virtual reality [11] and motion prediction
[27, 28]. The typical monocular solution is a two-stage
pipeline, which first extracts 2D keypoints by 2D human
pose detectors (e.g., [7] and [41]), and then lifts 2D coordinates into 3D space [31]. Despite its simplicity, the second
stage is an ill-posed problem which lacks the depth prior,
and suffers from the ambiguity problem.
To mitigate this issue, several progresses propose to aggregate the temporal cues in a video sequence to promote
pose estimation by grid convolutions [15,26,35], graph convolutions [4, 47] and multi-layer perceptrons [6, 21]. Recently, Transformer structure has emerged as a dominant architecture in both NLP and CV fields [8,24,45,49], and also
demonstrated high capability in modeling spatio-temporal
correlation for 3D human pose estimation [13, 22, 23, 25,
48, 52, 54]. Figure 1(a) illustrates a straightforward way
to exploit the transformer architecture for directly learning
spatio-temporal correlation between all joints in the entire
video sequence. However, the computational cost of calcu-

4790

