This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Train/Test-Time Adaptation with Retrieval
Luca Zancato

Alessandro Achille

Tian Yu Liu* Matthew Trager

Pramuditha Perera

Stefano Soatto

AWS AI Labs
zancato@amazon.it
{aachille,tytianyu,mttrager,pramudi,soattos}@amazon.com
Abstract
We introduce Train/Test-Time Adaptation with Retrieval (T3 AR), a method to adapt models both at train and
test time by means of a retrieval module and a searchable
pool of external samples. Before inference, T3 AR adapts a
given model to the downstream task using refined pseudolabels and a self-supervised contrastive objective function
whose noise distribution leverages retrieved real samples
to improve feature adaptation on the target data manifold.
The retrieval of real images is key to T3 AR since it does
not rely solely on synthetic data augmentations to compensate for the lack of adaptation data, as typically done
by other adaptation algorithms. Furthermore, thanks to
the retrieval module, our method gives the user or service
provider the possibility to improve model adaptation on the
downstream task by incorporating further relevant data or
to fully remove samples that may no longer be available
due to changes in user preference after deployment. First,
we show that T3 AR can be used at training time to improve downstream fine-grained classification over standard
fine-tuning baselines, and the fewer the adaptation data the
higher the relative improvement (up to 13%). Second, we
apply T3 AR for test-time adaptation and show that exploiting a pool of external images at test-time leads to more robust representations over existing methods on DomainNet126 and VISDA-C, especially when few adaptation data are
available (up to 8%).

1. Introduction
While Deep Learning models are evolving rapidly, machine learning systems used in production are updated
rarely, as each deployment requires the provider to engage
in a complex process of scaling, securitization, certification
of new model and dataset cards, bias evaluation, and re* Work done during an internship at AWS AI Labs.

Source data from S

Pre-trained decision
boundary

Test samples from T
Decision boundary
after adaptation

Retrieved samples

A

SS

T

Source dataset

Target dataset

External dataset

Figure 1. Adaptation with retrieval from an external data pool.
Illustration of how T3 AR exploits target data T and the external
data pool A to adapt the decision boundary after pre-training on
the source datasets S. For new test queries from the target dataset,
T3 AR approximates the local data manifold around T by retrieving similar unlabelled examples from A. Then, it updates the decision boundary with a contrastive self-supervised objective.

gression tests. It is now common for users to adapt trained
models to their specific use cases, or to the changed context as time goes by [16, 39, 60]. Such adaptation can be
performed by fine-tuning on a specific dataset S owned by
the user [1, 18]. However, on an even finer time-scale, users
may want to adapt their models based on data they observe
at test time, bypassing the time-consuming annotation process [8, 35, 53, 57]. Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) refers to
the problem of adapting a source model to a target task T
represented by test data, for which no ground-truth labels
are given.
This trend is exacerbated by the advent of Foundation
Models [2, 10, 38, 59], at least in the visual domain where
tasks can be antagonistic and models are sensitive to even
subtle changes in the data distribution. At the same time,
both users and providers typically have access to evergrowing pools of auxiliary data, albeit often heterogeneous
(pertaining to concepts other than the one of interest at test-

15911

