This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Difficulty-based Sampling for Debiased Contrastive Representation Learning
Taeuk Jang, Xiaoqian Wang*
Purdue University
465 Northwestern Ave, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{jang141@,joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning is a self-supervised representation
learning method that achieves milestone performance in
various classification tasks. However, due to its unsupervised fashion, it suffers from the false negative sample problem: randomly drawn negative samples that are assumed to
have a different label but actually have the same label as
the anchor. This deteriorates the performance of contrastive
learning as it contradicts the motivation of contrasting semantically similar and dissimilar pairs. This raised the attention and the importance of finding legitimate negative
samples, which should be addressed by distinguishing between 1) true vs. false negatives; 2) easy vs. hard negatives.
However, previous works were limited to the statistical approach to handle false negative and hard negative samples
with hyperparameters tuning. In this paper, we go beyond
the statistical approach and explore the connection between
hard negative samples and data bias. We introduce a novel
debiased contrastive learning method to explore hard negatives by relative difficulty referencing the bias amplifying
counterpart. We propose triplet loss for training a biased
encoder that focuses more on easy negative samples. We
theoretically show that the triplet loss amplifies the bias in
self-supervised representation learning. Finally, we empirically show the proposed method improves downstream classification performance.

1. Introduction
The key idea of contrastive learning [4, 5, 31] is to learn
the representation that projects samples from the same class
to be closer to each other than samples from different
classes in the embedding space. To ensure this property
in an unsupervised manner, we randomly draw a sample
(anchor, xa ) and enforce it to stay closer to its own augmentations (positive samples, x+ ) and be apart from the
other samples (negative samples, x− ) also randomly drawn
* Corresponding author.

from the same training dataset. Such approach achieves
superior performance over conventional supervised classification methods in various tasks, such as object detection
[12, 39, 43] and natural language processing [28].
Recent works study sampling methods to draw goodquality positive and negative samples to train effective selfsupervised contrastive learning models. Various augmentation and positive sampling techniques are developed to
boost the performance and generalization. For example,
random noise perturbations [4, 7, 39] are adopted in the
computer vision domain to preserve semantic information
such as random cropping, random noise injection, and tilting. Unlike positive sampling, finding legitimate negative
samples is not a trivial problem. First, negative samples
are not guaranteed to have a different class from the anchor [8, 19] due to the unsupervised fashion of contrastive
learning. Thus, the debiasing method [8] was proposed to
address this false negatives problem by decomposing the
marginal data distribution. Second, finding hard negative
samples, i.e., hard to distinguish from the anchor, is crucial
as they are more informative [36]. Supervised contrastive
learning [19] validated the importance of hard negative mining. However, this has been rarely studied in the literature.
In supervised learning, e.g., classification, some works
observed hard samples are related to data bias. Because
some models tend to be misled by some correlation between
biasing attributes and target labels, such as texture, color,
and background in image classification [2,25], and race and
gender in face recognition [17], samples against such correlation are likely to be hard samples. For instance, in the
animal classification task, if most bird images in the training set are assumed to have sky as a background instead
of others, sky would be strongly correlated with the class
bird. However, birds may also exist in other backgrounds,
such as water, rock, etc. We can consider these birds in
the background other than the sky as bias-conflicting samples. Then, it is natural to emphasize bias-conflicting samples (birds on water) more than bias-aligned ones (birds in
the sky) for better performance and generalization as they
are more informative. From the contrastive learning view-

24039

