This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Zero-shot Generalization and Robustness of Multi-modal Models
Yunhao Ge1,2∗ , Jie Ren1∗ , Andrew Gallagher1 , Yuxiao Wang1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1 ,
Hartwig Adam1 , Laurent Itti2 , Balaji Lakshminarayanan1† , Jiaping Zhao1†
1
Google Research 2 University of Southern California
∗

co-first author,

†correspondence to {balajiln, jiapingz}@google.com

Abstract
Multi-modal image-text models such as CLIP and LiT
have demonstrated impressive performance on image classification benchmarks and their zero-shot generalization
ability is particularly exciting. While the top-5 zero-shot
accuracies of these models are very high, the top-1 accuracies are much lower (over 25% gap in some cases). We
investigate the reasons for this performance gap and find
that many of the failure cases are caused by ambiguity in
the text prompts. First, we develop a simple and efficient
zero-shot post-hoc method to identify images whose top-1
prediction is likely to be incorrect, by measuring consistency of the predictions w.r.t. multiple prompts and image
transformations. We show that our procedure better predicts mistakes, outperforming the popular max logit baseline on selective prediction tasks. Next, we propose a simple
and efficient way to improve accuracy on such uncertain images by making use of the WordNet hierarchy; specifically
we augment the original class by incorporating its parent
and children from the semantic label hierarchy, and plug the
augmentation into text prompts. We conduct experiments
on both CLIP and LiT models with five different ImageNetbased datasets. For CLIP, our method improves the top1 accuracy by 17.13% on the uncertain subset and 3.6%
on the entire ImageNet validation set. We also show that
our method improves across ImageNet shifted datasets, four
other datasets, and other model architectures such as LiT.
The proposed method1 is hyperparameter-free, requires
no additional model training and can be easily scaled to
other large multi-modal architectures. Code is available
at https://github.com/gyhandy/Hierarchy-CLIP.

1. Introduction
Vision-language multi-modal models trained on largescale data have achieved significant success in numerous
domains and have demonstrated excellent zero-shot generalization ability [7, 12, 18, 19, 20, 28]. Given a test image
and a set of candidate class labels, one can compute the
similarity between the embedding of the image and the embedding of each candidate class labels, and predict the class
1 Work carried out mainly at Google

as the one with the highest similarity. The zero-shot top-1
accuracy for ImageNet [4] using CLIP variants (CLIP ViTL) matches the performance of the original ResNet model
trained from scratch. Recently, CLIP has been found to
be more robust to distribution shift than ResNet, achieving
good performance on ImageNet-V2 [21], ImageNet-R [9],
ImageNet-A [11], and ImageNet-Sketch [25].
We noticed a large gap between the top-1 accuracy and
top-5 accuracy, 64.2% vs. 89.4% respectively, revealing
potential headroom for improvement. We investigated the
cases where the top-1 prediction was incorrect but the top-5
prediction was correct, and identified several typical failure
modes. Despite the well-known multi-label issues in ImageNet [1], we found many of the remaining failure cases are
caused by noise and ambiguous text prompts related to the
WordNet hierarchical structure of ImageNet. Some class
names are quite general so that the model cannot correctly
match images from their specific subclasses. For example,
the hot-air balloon images belonging to the “balloon” class
were misclassified as “airship”, see Figure 1 middle. On
the other hand, some class names are too specific such that
the model fails to correlate them with their more generic
super-classes. For example, 96% of images with ground
truth label “tusker” are wrongly classified as other elephant
classes such as “Asian elephant”, see Figure 1 left. The failure modes analysis suggests that the text encoder is very
sensitive to inputs and as a result, the overall classification
lacks robustness.
Inspired by these observations, we propose to first identify the subset of images whose top-1 prediction is likely
to be incorrect, and then improve the accuracy for those
images by a principled framework to augment their class
labels by WordNet hierarchy. To estimate whether an image has an incorrect prediction, i.e., to estimate the prediction confidence, we use the consistency of predictions under
different text prompt templates and image augmentations
as a signal for prediction confidence estimation. Although
prediction confidence estimation has been well studied in
single-modal classification models, we found those commonly used confidence scores, maximum softmax proba-

11093

