This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discriminator-Cooperated Feature Map Distillation for GAN Compression
Tie Hu1 , Mingbao Lin3 , Lizhou You1 , Fei Chao1 , Rongrong Ji1,2,4 *
1
MAC Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
Tencent Youtu Lab
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University
{hutie, lmbxmu, youlizhou}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {fchao, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Teacher

Despite excellent performance in image generation,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are notorious for
its requirements of enormous storage and intensive computation. As an awesome “performance maker”, knowledge distillation is demonstrated to be particularly efficacious in exploring low-priced GANs. In this paper, we investigate the irreplaceability of teacher discriminator and
present an inventive discriminator-cooperated distillation,
abbreviated as DCD, towards refining better feature maps
from the generator. In contrast to conventional pixel-topixel match methods in feature map distillation, our DCD
utilizes teacher discriminator as a transformation to drive
intermediate results of the student generator to be perceptually close to corresponding outputs of the teacher generator. Furthermore, in order to mitigate mode collapse
in GAN compression, we construct a collaborative adversarial training paradigm where the teacher discriminator
is from scratch established to co-train with student generator in company with our DCD. Our DCD shows superior
results compared with existing GAN compression methods.
For instance, after reducing over 40× MACs and 80× parameters of CycleGAN, we well decrease FID metric from
61.53 to 48.24 while the current SoTA method merely has
51.92. This work’s source code has been made accessible at
https://github.com/poopit/DCD-official.

1. Introduction
Image generation transforms random noise or sourcedomain images to other images in user-required domains.
Recent years have witnessed the burgeoning of generative adversarial networks (GANs) that lead to substantial
progress in image-to-image translation [8, 9, 18, 49], style
transfer [11, 12, 42], image synthesis [3, 22, 23, 32, 46], etc.
* Corresponding Author

Student
(a)

(b)

Teacher

Student

.....
.....

.....
.....

Distance
Function

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Layer-by-layer feature map distillation [34]. (b)
Cross-layer feature map distillation [6]. (c) Our discriminatorcooperated feature map distillation.

Image generation has a wide application in daily entertainment such as TikTok AI image generator, Dream by
WOMBO, Google Imagen, and so on. Running platforms
performing these applications are typically featured with
poor memory storage and limited computational power.
However, GANs are also ill-famed for the growing spurt of
learnable parameters and multiply-accumulate operations
(MACs), raising a huge challenge to the storage requirement and computing ability of deployment infrastructure.
To address the above dilemma for better usability of
GANs in serving human life, methods such as pruning [7,
27, 28, 33], neural network architecture search (NAS) [10,
19, 26] and quantization [39, 40], have been broadly explored to obtain a smaller generator. On the premise of these
compression researches, knowledge distillation, in particular to distilling feature maps, has been accepted as a supplementary means to enhance the performance of compressed
generators [1, 4, 17, 26, 29, 41]. Originated from image classification, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), feature map based distillation, which extracts information of intermediate activations and transfers the knowledge from the teacher model to
the student one, has been extensively explored and demonstrated to well improve the capability of lightweight mod-

20351

