This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visibility Constrained Wide-band Illumination Spectrum Design for
Seeing-in-the-Dark
Muyao Niu, Zhuoxiao Li, Zhihang Zhong, Yinqiang Zheng*
The University of Tokyo
muyao.niu@gmail.com, {lizhuoxiao@g.ecc, zhong@is.s, yqzheng@ai}.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Seeing-in-the-dark is one of the most important and
challenging computer vision tasks due to its wide applications and extreme complexities of in-the-wild scenarios. Existing arts can be mainly divided into two threads:
1) RGB-dependent methods restore information using degraded RGB inputs only (e.g., low-light enhancement), 2)
RGB-independent methods translate images captured under
auxiliary near-infrared (NIR) illuminants into RGB domain
(e.g., NIR2RGB translation). The latter is very attractive
since it works in complete darkness and the illuminants are
visually friendly to naked eyes, but tends to be unstable due
to its intrinsic ambiguities. In this paper, we try to robustify
NIR2RGB translation by designing the optimal spectrum
of auxiliary illumination in the wide-band VIS-NIR range,
while keeping visual friendliness. Our core idea is to quantify the visibility constraint implied by the human vision system and incorporate it into the design pipeline. By modeling the formation process of images in the VIS-NIR range,
the optimal multiplexing of a wide range of LEDs is automatically designed in a fully differentiable manner, within
the feasible region defined by the visibility constraint. We
also collect a substantially expanded VIS-NIR hyperspectral image dataset for experiments by using a customized
50-band filter wheel. Experimental results show that the
task can be significantly improved by using the optimized
wide-band illumination than using NIR only. Codes Available: https://github.com/MyNiuuu/VCSD.

1. Introduction
Seeing-in-the-dark is critical for modern industries, because of its promising applications in nighttime photography and visual surveillance. However, it remains challenging due to complex degradation mechanisms and dynamics
of in-the-wild environments.
To achieve this task, a number of methods have been pro* Corresponding author

posed, which can be roughly divided into two threads. The
first thread features RGB-dependent methods [3, 4, 29, 42,
44,45,52] that aim to fully exploit the RGB input, even with
severe degradations. These methods have gained great success through directly learning the mapping from low-light
input to normal-light output, in the presence of complex
noises and color discrepancies. However, even state-of-theart methods along this thread may struggle with in-the-wild
data captured under nearly complete darkness.
In contrast, the second thread features RGB-independent
methods [24, 28, 33, 38, 40] for non-interfering surveillance
that try to recover RGB information from images of invisible ranges, without requiring any RGB input. The most
attractive characteristics lie in its applicability to complete
darkness and the visual friendliness of auxiliary illumination to naked eyes. NIR2RGB is one of the representative
tasks of this thread, which aims to translate near-infrared
images to RGB images.
As for auxiliary illumination in the NIR range, the industry practice is to use NIR LEDs, usually centered at
850 nm or 940 nm. However, the captured images are
almost monochromatic and lack visual color and texture,
which makes NIR2RGB translation ambiguous. The fundamental reasons for the ambiguities are two folds: 1) The
spectral sensitivities of commodity RGB cameras almost
overlap around both 850 nm and 940 nm, making it hard
to recover three-channel color from a single intensity observation. 2) Reflectance spectra of many materials become
almost indistinguishable beyond 850 nm, which leads to obvious structure gaps from RGB images. As a result, existing studies that tried to directly convert such NIR images
to VIS images, even with the most advanced deep learning techniques, can hardly provide satisfying results due
to these fundamental restrictions. In [24], Liu et al. proposed to properly multiplex different NIR LEDs, ranging
from 700 nm to 1000 nm, to robustify the NIR2RGB task,
and achieves apparently better results than using traditional
850 nm or 940 nm LEDs. However, structure gaps still exist due to the restriction of wavelengths in the NIR range,
making the results far from satisfying.

13976

