This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Look, Radiate, and Learn:
Self-Supervised Localisation via Radio-Visual Correspondence
Mohammed Alloulah*
Maximilian Arnold†
Nokia Bell Labs

Abstract
Next generation cellular networks will implement radio sensing functions alongside customary communications,
thereby enabling unprecedented worldwide sensing coverage
outdoors. Deep learning has revolutionised computer vision
but has had limited application to radio perception tasks,
in part due to lack of systematic datasets and benchmarks
dedicated to the study of the performance and promise of
radio sensing. To address this gap, we present MaxRay:
a synthetic radio-visual dataset and benchmark that facilitate precise target localisation in radio. We further propose to learn to localise targets in radio without supervision
by extracting self-coordinates from radio-visual correspondence. We use such self-supervised coordinates to train a
radio localiser network. We characterise our performance
against a number of state-of-the-art baselines. Our results
indicate that accurate radio target localisation can be automatically learned from paired radio-visual data without
labels, which is important for empirical data. This opens
the door for vast data scalability and may prove key to realising the promise of robust radio sensing atop a unified
communication-perception cellular infrastructure. Dataset
will be hosted on IEEE DataPort.

1. Introduction
Sixth-generation (6G) wireless networks are being designed from the ground up to support sensing at the physical
layer [79]. Such a brand new capability in 6G networks
marks a departure from communication-only functions, and
aims to supply applications with sensing primitives atop
a unified communication-perception infrastructure. Concretely, dense cellular deployments in urban settings (e.g.,
per lamppost) would allow for unprecedented radio coverage, enabling a multitude of challenging perception tasks.
Examples include around-the-corner obstacle detection in
support of autonomous driving and pedestrian and drone
localisation, to name a few [2].
* Correspondence to alloulah@outlook.com
† Work done whilst at Bell Labs.

Cross-modal Training

Inference on Radio

Look
Learn

Downstream localisation

Self-labels

Learnt from self-labels

Radiate

Figure 1. We train a radio localisation network by using commonalities with vision to drive spatial attention. Without laborious
manual annotations, we learn to suppress clutter and localise targets
in radio heatmaps.

Training perception models for radio signals is a key
challenge for network infrastructure vendors. Unlike vision
and audio, radio signals are hard to label manually because
they are not human interpretable. Typically, sparse radio
signals have been paired with a groundtruth vision modality
for reliable semantic and qualitative filtration via a crossmodal annotation flow [34, 56, 77, 85]. Recently, this radiovisual pairing has been shown to work in a self-supervised
fashion [10], building on a wave of progress in vision selfsupervised learning (SSL) [19,22,26,40–42,45,61,62,82,84].
Computer vision has traditionally benefited from synthetic datasets for: (a) content augmentation for enhanced
generalisability [54, 81], or (b) closing the learning loop on
out-of-distribution failure modes [68], e.g., in the context
of autonomous driving [1]. Extrapolating from vision, it is
also likely that synthetic data will play an important role
towards realising robust radio sensing. However, radio perception tasks have yet to benefit from such publicly available
datasets.
In this work we aim to support next-gen 6G perception tasks, while championing a self-supervised radio-visual
learning approach. Concretely, Fig. 1 captures the crux of
our new machine learning proposition for radio sensing. We
demonstrate how to automatically extract radio self-labels
through cross-modal learning with vision. We then use such
self-labels to train a downstream localiser network. We show

17430

