This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DAvatarGAN: Bridging Domains for Personalized Editable Avatars
Rameen Abdal²1

Hsin-Ying Lee2

Peihao Zhu²1

Peter Wonka1
1

KAUST

Menglei Chai2

Aliaksandr Siarohin2

Sergey Tulyakov2
2

Snap Inc.

Figure 1. Editable 3D avatars. We present 3DAvatarGAN, a 3D GAN able to produce and edit personalized 3D avatars from a single
photograph (real or generated). Our method distills information from a 2D-GAN trained on 2D artistic datasets like Caricatures, Pixar
toons, Cartoons, Comics etc. and requires no camera annotations.

Abstract
Modern 3D-GANs synthesize geometry and texture by
training on large-scale datasets with a consistent structure.
Training such models on stylized, artistic data, with often
unknown, highly variable geometry, and camera information has not yet been shown possible. Can we train a 3D
GAN on such artistic data, while maintaining multi-view
consistency and texture quality? To this end, we propose
an adaptation framework, where the source domain is a
pre-trained 3D-GAN, while the target domain is a 2D-GAN
trained on artistic datasets. We, then, distill the knowledge from a 2D generator to the source 3D generator. To
do that, we first propose an optimization-based method to
align the distributions of camera parameters across domains. Second, we propose regularizations necessary to
learn high-quality texture, while avoiding degenerate geometric solutions, such as flat shapes. Third, we show

a deformation-based technique for modeling exaggerated
geometry of artistic domains, enablingÐas a byproductÐ
personalized geometric editing. Finally, we propose a novel
inversion method for 3D-GANs linking the latent spaces of
the source and the target domains. Our contributionsÐfor
the first timeÐallow for the generation, editing, and animation of personalized artistic 3D avatars on artistic datasets.
Project Page: https:/rameenabdal.github.io/3DAvatarGAN

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic portrait face generation is an iconic application demonstrating the capability of generative models
especially GANs [28,30,31]. A recent development has witnessed an advancement from straightforwardly synthesizing
2D images to learning 3D structures without 3D supervision, referred to as 3D-GANs [10, 41, 55, 64]. Such training
² Part of the work was done during an internship at Snap Inc.

4552

