This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FIANCEE: Faster Inference of Adversarial Networks via Conditional Early Exits
Karpikova Polina *1,2 , Radionova Ekaterina *1 , Yaschenko Anastasia *1,2 , Spiridonov Andrei *1
Kostyushko Leonid 3 , Fabbricatore Riccardo 1 , Ivakhnenko Aleksei 1†
1
Samsung AI Center - Moscow, Russia 2 Higher School of Economics - Moscow, Russia
3
Lomonosov Moscow State University - Russia

Abstract
Generative DNNs are a powerful tool for image synthesis, but they are limited by their computational load. On
the other hand, given a trained model and a task, e.g. faces
generation within a range of characteristics, the output image quality will be unevenly distributed among images with
different characteristics. It follows, that we might restrain
the model’s complexity on some instances, maintaining a
high quality. We propose a method for diminishing computations by adding so-called early exit branches to the original architecture, and dynamically switching the computational path depending on how difficult it will be to render the
output. We apply our method on two different SOTA models
performing generative tasks: generation from a semantic
map, and cross-reenactment of face expressions; showing it
is able to output images with custom lower-quality thresholds. For a threshold of LPIPS ≤ 0.1, we diminish their
computations by up to a half. This is especially relevant
for real-time applications such as synthesis of faces, when
quality loss needs to be contained, but most of the inputs
need fewer computations than the complex instances.

1. Introduction
Image synthesis by generative adversarial networks
(GANs) received great attention in the last years [64, 71],
its applications span from image-to-image translation [35]
to text-to-image rendering [21], neural head avatars generation [17] and many more. However, this approach suffers
from heavy computational burdens when challenged with
producing photo-realistic images. Our work stems from the
observation that deep neural networks (DNNs) output images with different but consistent quality when conditioned
on certain parameters. Since their expressivity is uneven
within the set of possibly generated images, it follows that
for some examples, a simpler DNN may suffice in generat* These authors contributed equally to this work
† aleksei.ivakhnenko@mail.ru

ing an output with the required quality.
On the other hand, approaches aimed at easing the
heavy computational load of DNNs have been applied with
great results, significantly decreasing redundant computations [2,13]. While strategies such as pruning [46,53,65] or
knowledge distillation [4, 9, 26] generate a DNN with fewer
parameters, early exit (EE) [42,78] is a setup that allows for
dynamic variation of the computational burden, and therefore presents itself as an ideal candidate for an image generation strategy aimed at outputting pictures of consistent
quality, while avoiding excessive computation due to their
irregular rendering difficulty.
Despite this, implementing EE strategies has remained
out of the scope of studies on generative models. This is
perhaps due to the fact that EE processes logits of intermediate layers, thus restricting their field of application to
tasks where the latter are meaningful (e.g. in classification),
while excluding pipelines in which a meaningful output is
given only at the last layer (e.g. generative convolutional
networks).
We propose a method that employs an EE strategy for
image synthesis, dynamically routing the computational
flow towards the needed exit in accordance to pictures’
complexity, therefore reducing computational redundancy
while maintaining consistent quality. To accomplish this,
we employ three main elements, which constitute the novel
contributions of our work.
First, we attach exit branches to the original DNN (referred as the backbone), as portrayed in Fig. 1. These
branches are built of lightweight version of the modules
constituting the backbone architecture, their complexity can
be tuned in accordance with the desired quality-cost relation. Their depth (i.e. number of modules) varies in accordance to the number of backbone modules left after the
point they get attached to. In this way, intermediate backbone logits are fairly processed.
In second place, we make use of a small database of features, from which guiding examples are selected and used to
condition image generation by concatenating them to the input of each branch. These features are obtained by process-

12032

