This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DANI-Net: Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo by Differentiable Shadow
Handling, Anisotropic Reflectance Modeling, and Neural Inverse Rendering
Zongrui Li1
1

Gang Pan2,3

Xudong Jiang1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3

4

Qian Zheng2,3, * Boxin Shi4,5

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
5

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China

{zongrui001, EXDJiang}@ntu.edu.sg, {qianzheng,gpan}@zju.edu.cn, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Uncalibrated photometric stereo (UPS) is challenging
due to the inherent ambiguity brought by the unknown light.
Although the ambiguity is alleviated on non-Lambertian objects, the problem is still difficult to solve for more general
objects with complex shapes introducing irregular shadows and general materials with complex reflectance like
anisotropic reflectance. To exploit cues from shadow and
reflectance to solve UPS and improve performance on general materials, we propose DANI-Net, an inverse rendering framework with differentiable shadow handling and
anisotropic reflectance modeling. Unlike most previous
methods that use non-differentiable shadow maps and assume isotropic material, our network benefits from cues of
shadow and anisotropic reflectance through two differentiable paths. Experiments on multiple real-world datasets
demonstrate our superior and robust performance.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo (PS) [48] aims at recovering the surface normal from several images captured under varying
light conditions with a fixed viewpoint. It has been applied to many fields (e.g., movies production [6], industrial quality inspection [47], and biometrics [53]) due to
its advantage in recovering fine-detailed surfaces over other
approaches [10, 16] (e.g., multi-view stereo [38], active
sensor-based solutions [61]). Light calibration is crucial to
the performance [52]. However, it is also tedious, restricting
the applicability of PS. Therefore, uncalibrated photometric
stereo (UPS) methods estimating surface normal with unknown lights have been widely studied in the literature.
* Corresponding author

Uncalibrated photometric stereo suffers from General
Bas-Relief (GBR) ambiguity [4] for an integrable, Lambertian surface. However, GBR ambiguity is alleviated
on a non-Lambertian surface [13]. Therefore, recent advances in UPS (e.g., [26,56]) adopt the isotropic reflectance
model accounting for non-Lambertian effects to solve UPS.
Nonetheless, such a model restricts methods’ performance
on objects with more general (e.g., anisotropic) materials,
while modeling general reflectance is challenging due to
extra unknowns, which eventually make UPS intractable.
Other works (e.g., [25, 56, 57]) notice the benefits of the
shadow cues in utilizing global shape-light information to
solve PS/UPS because the shadow reflects the interaction
of shape and light [24, 59]. However, these methods either
fail to exploit the shadow cues due to the lack of a differentiable path from the shadow to the concerned unknowns
like shape [25], or the shadow cues have limited effects on
the visible shape reconstruction due to the implicit shape
representation [56, 57].
To this end, this paper proposes the DANI-Net, which
solves UPS by Differentiable shadow handling, Anisotropic
reflectance modeling, and Neural Inverse Rendering.
DANI-Net builds the differentiable path in the sequence
of inverse rendering errors, shadow maps, and surface normal maps (or light conditions) (Fig. 1) to fully exploit the
shadow cues to solve UPS. Since those cues facilitate solving extra unknowns introduced by a more sophisticated
reflectance model, DANI-Net manages to build up such
a model (Fig. 1) to improve the performance on general
materials. During optimization, DANI-Net propagates inverse rendering errors via two paths of shadow cues and
anisotropic reflectance, respectively, and simultaneously
optimizes the shape (i.e., the depth map and surface normal map), anisotropic reflectance model, shadow map, and
light conditions (i.e., direction and intensity). As a result,

8381

