This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoRecon: Automated 3D Object Discovery and Reconstruction
Yuang Wang

Xingyi He

Sida Peng

Haotong Lin

Hujun Bao

Xiaowei Zhou†

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
A fully automated object reconstruction pipeline is crucial for digital content creation. While the area of 3D reconstruction has witnessed profound developments, the removal
of background to obtain a clean object model still relies
on different forms of manual labor, such as bounding box
labeling, mask annotations, and mesh manipulations. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework named AutoRecon for the automated discovery and reconstruction of an
object from multi-view images. We demonstrate that foreground objects can be robustly located and segmented from
SfM point clouds by leveraging self-supervised 2D vision
transformer features. Then, we reconstruct decomposed neural scene representations with dense supervision provided
by the decomposed point clouds, resulting in accurate object reconstruction and segmentation. Experiments on the
DTU, BlendedMVS and CO3D-V2 datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness and robustness of AutoRecon. The code and
supplementary material are available on the project page:
https://zju3dv.github.io/autorecon/.

1. Introduction
3D object reconstruction has long been investigated in
computer vision. In this work, we focus on the specific setting of reconstructing a salient foreground object from multiview images and automatically segmenting the object from
the background without any annotation, which enables scalable 3D content creation for VR/AR and may open up the
possibility to generate free 2D and 3D object annotations at
a large scale for supervised-learning tasks.
Traditional multi-view stereo [8, 32] and recent neural
scene reconstruction methods [40, 46] have attained impressive reconstruction quality. However, these methods cannot
identify objects and the reconstructed object models are typically coupled with the surrounding background. A straightforward solution is utilizing the foreground object masks to
The authors are affiliated with the ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
† Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

Input Images

Reg.
SDF Radiance
Field

Structure-from-Motion

Foreground Reconstruction

Trans.

DINO Point Cloud

Coarse Segmentation

Foreground Segmentation

Figure 1. Overview of our fully-automated pipeline and results.
Given an object-centric video, we achieve coarse decomposition by
segmenting the salient foreground object from a semi-dense SfM
point cloud, with pointwise-aggregated 2D DINO features [3]. Then
we train a decomposed neural scene representation from multi-view
images with the help of coarse decomposition results to reconstruct
foreground objects and render multi-view consistent high-quality
foreground masks.

obtain clean foreground object models. However, accurate
2D object masks are expensive to annotate, and salient object segmentation techniques [21, 34, 41] generally produce
masks with limited granularity, thus degrading the reconstruction quality, especially for objects with thin structures.
Recently, some methods [23,30,50] attempt to automatically
decompose objects from 3D scenes given minimal human
annotations, such as 3D object bounding boxes, scribbles
or pixel labels. But the requirement of manual annotations
limits the feasibility of more scalable 3D content creation.
In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage framework for
the fully-automated 3D reconstruction of salient objects, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. We first perform coarse decomposition to
automatically segment the foreground SfM point cloud, and
then reconstruct the foreground object geometry by learning
an implicit neural scene representation under explicit supervision from the coarse decomposition. The key idea of our
coarse decomposition is to leverage the semantic features

21382

