This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

B-spline Texture Coefficients Estimator
for Screen Content Image Super-Resolution
Byeonghyun Pak* Jaewon Lee* Kyong Hwan Jin†
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Korea
{w9bkje, ljw3136, kyong.jin}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
Screen content images (SCIs) include many informative
components, e.g., texts and graphics. Such content creates
sharp edges or homogeneous areas, making a pixel distribution of SCI different from the natural image. Therefore, we
need to properly handle the edges and textures to minimize
information distortion of the contents when a display device’s resolution differs from SCIs. To achieve this goal, we
propose an implicit neural representation using B-splines
for screen content image super-resolution (SCI SR) with arbitrary scales. Our method extracts scaling, translating,
and smoothing parameters of B-splines. The followed multilayer perceptron (MLP) uses the estimated B-splines to recover high-resolution SCI. Our network outperforms both
a transformer-based reconstruction and an implicit Fourier
representation method in almost upscaling factor, thanks to
the positive constraint and compact support of the B-spline
basis. Moreover, our SR results are recognized as correct text letters with the highest confidence by a pre-trained
scene text recognition network. Source code is available at
https://github.com/ByeongHyunPak/btc.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of multimedia applications,
screen content images (SCIs) have been common in people’s daily life. Many users interact with SCIs through
various display terminals, so resolution mismatch between
a display device and SCIs occurs frequently. In this regard, we need to consider a flexible reconstruction at arbitrary magnification from low-resolution (LR) SCI to its
high-resolution (HR). As in Figs. 1a and 1b, SCI has discontinuous tone contents, whereas natural image (NI) has
smooth and continuous textures. Such characteristics are
observed as a Gaussian distribution in the naturalness value
of NIs [25] and sharp fluctuations in the naturalness value
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Screen content image

(b) Natural image

(c) Naturalness value distributions for 500 images per each class

Figure 1. Comparison on naturalness value distribution [25]
between screen content images and natural images.

of SCIs in Fig. 1c. This observation leads to a screen content image super-resolution (SCI SR) method considering
such distributional properties. However, most SR methods [4, 5, 8–10, 28, 29] are applied to NIs.
Recently, Yang et al. proposed a novel SCI SR
method based on a transformer, implicit transformer superresolution network (ITSRN) [26]. Since ITSRN evaluates each pixel value by a point-to-point implicit function
through a transformer architecture, it outperforms CNNbased methods [28, 29]. However, even though ITSRN represents SCI’s characters (e.g., sharp edges or homogeneous
areas) continuously, it has a large model size leading to inefficient memory consumption and slow inference time.
Meanwhile, Chen et al. first introduced implicit neural representation (INR) to single image super-resolution
(SISR) [4]. The implicit neural function enables arbitrary
scale super-resolution by jointly combining the continuous
query points and the encoded feature of the input LR image.
Nevertheless, such implicit neural function, implemented
with a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), is biased to learn the
low-frequency components, called spectral bias [15].

10062

