This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Dive into Gradients: Better Optimization for 3D Object Detection with
Gradient-Corrected IoU Supervision
Qi Ming† , Lingjuan Miao, Zhe Ma, Lin Zhao,
Zhiqiang Zhou∗† , Xuhui Huang, Yuanpei Chen, Yufei Guo∗
School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, China,
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC,
chaser.ming@gmail.com,{miaolingjuan,zhzhzhou}@bit.edu.cn,zhaolins@foxmail.com,yfguo@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Intersection-over-Union (IoU) is the most popular metric
to evaluate regression performance in 3D object detection.
Recently, there are also some methods applying IoU to the
optimization of 3D bounding box regression. However,
we demonstrate through experiments and mathematical
proof that the 3D IoU loss suffers from abnormal gradient
w.r.t. angular error and object scale, which further leads
to slow convergence and suboptimal regression process,
respectively. In this paper, we propose a GradientCorrected IoU (GCIoU) loss to achieve fast and accurate
3D bounding box regression. Specifically, a gradient
correction strategy is designed to endow 3D IoU loss
with a reasonable gradient. It ensures that the model
converges quickly in the early stage of training, and helps
to achieve fine-grained refinement of bounding boxes in
the later stage. To solve suboptimal regression of 3D IoU
loss for objects at different scales, we introduce a gradient
rescaling strategy to adaptively optimize the step size.
Finally, we integrate GCIoU Loss into multiple models
to achieve stable performance gains and faster model
convergence. Experiments on KITTI dataset demonstrate
superiority of the proposed method. The code is available
at https://github.com/ming71/GCIoU-loss.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving has received extensive attention in
recent years due to its broad application scenarios. 3D object detection is a very important and promising topic of
autonomous driving. Currently, LiDAR is the most commonly used sensor to obtain representations of object in the
real world for 3D object detection [4,21,33,35,40,44]. The
∗ Corresponding author.
† Contribute equally.

Oscillation of 3D IoU loss
(a) Gradient anomalies in angle convergence.
GT

prediction

anchor

(b) Different convergence for multi-scale objects.

Figure 1. Visualization of some problems in current 3D IoU loss.
(a) Gradient changes of 3D IoU loss w.r.t. angular error. Gradients
are small under large angular errors. (b) Convergence of bounding
boxes of different scales under supervision of 3D IoU loss. The
optimization for multi-scale objects is different. IoU Loss converges slower for large objects.

sparse point cloud data from LiDAR scanners can provide
depth information of objects, which is critical for accurate
3D object detection.
Intersection-over-Union (IoU) is the most popular metric
used to measure the detection accuracy and evaluate performance of the model. But in the training phase, current
detectors usually use the Lnorm -based loss function to optimize the bounding box regression [6, 24, 34, 43, 50]. The
inconsistency between training loss and evaluation metric
would lead to a misaligned optimization process. Specifically, a lower loss value does not guarantee better detection
performance (higher IoU), which has also been discussed in
some previous work [25,26,38,41,48,49]. For example, Yu

5136

