This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Zone-aware Hierarchical Planner for Vision-Language Navigation
Chen Gao1 ,
1

Xingyu Peng1 , Mi Yan3 , He Wang3 , Lirong Yang4
Haibing Ren4 , Hongsheng Li5 , Si Liu1,2 *

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
3

CFCS and School of EECS, Peking University 4 Meituan 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
The task of Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) is for an
embodied agent to reach the global goal according to the
instruction. Essentially, during navigation, a series of subgoals need to be adaptively set and achieved, which is naturally a hierarchical navigation process. However, previous methods leverage a single-step planning scheme, i.e.,
directly performing navigation action at each step, which
is unsuitable for such a hierarchical navigation process.
In this paper, we propose an Adaptive Zone-aware Hierarchical Planner (AZHP) to explicitly divides the navigation
process into two heterogeneous phases, i.e., sub-goal setting via zone partition/selection (high-level action) and subgoal executing (low-level action), for hierarchical planning.
Specifically, AZHP asynchronously performs two levels of
action via the designed State-Switcher Module (SSM). For
high-level action, we devise a Scene-aware adaptive Zone
Partition (SZP) method to adaptively divide the whole navigation area into different zones on-the-fly. Then the Goaloriented Zone Selection (GZS) method is proposed to select
a proper zone for the current sub-goal. For low-level action, the agent conducts navigation-decision multi-steps in
the selected zone. Moreover, we design a Hierarchical RL
(HRL) strategy and auxiliary losses with curriculum learning to train the AZHP framework, which provides effective
supervision signals for each stage. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method, which
achieves state-of-the-art performance on three VLN benchmarks (REVERIE, SOON, R2R).

1. Introduction
In recent years, Embodied-AI (E-AI) research has attracted a surge of interest within the computer vision, natural language processing and robotics communities since
its interdisciplinary nature. The long-term goal of E-AI research is to build intelligent agents that can interact with
humans to complete assigned tasks. In this paper, we fo* Corresponding author

Instruction (global goal): Bring me the white pillow
Global-goal

(a)

Action Space

Single-step
Action

High-level
Action

(b)

① Sub-goal

Low-level
Action

High-level
Action

(c)

② Sub-goal

Low-level
Action

Figure 1. Given a goal-oriented/semantic-level instruction, (a) previous methods essentially adopt a singel-step navigation paradigm,
i.e., directly taking an action from the action space according to
the global goal at each step; (b)(c) we instead propose a hierarchical navigation paradigm, containing high- and low-level actions to
adaptively set and achieve a series of sub-goals.

cus on the Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) task, one of
the most fundamental E-AI topics, where embodied agents
need to navigate in a photorealistic 3D environment (generally unseen) according to the natural language instruction.
The instruction given to the agent is mainly two types,
i.e., step-by-step instruction (e.g. R2R) and goal-oriented
instruction (e.g. REVERIE and SOON). The latter is more
practical for the home assistant robot since people usually
do not provide fine-grained commands, but also more challenging. Firstly, the goal-oriented instruction contains po-

14911

