This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScaleKD: Distilling Scale-Aware Knowledge in Small Object Detector
Yichen Zhu1 , Qiqi Zhou2,1 , Ning Liu1 , Zhiyuan Xu1 ,
Zhicai Ou1 , Xiaofeng Mou1 , Jian Tang1, *
1
Midea Group,
2
Shanghai University of Electric Power
{zhuyc25, zhouqq31, lining22, xuzy70, zhicai.ou, mouxf, jiantang22}@midea.com

Abstract
Despite the prominent success of general object detection, the performance and efficiency of Small Object Detection (SOD) are still unsatisfactory. Unlike existing works
that struggle to balance the trade-off between inference
speed and SOD performance, in this paper, we propose
a novel Scale-aware Knowledge Distillation (ScaleKD),
which transfers knowledge of a complex teacher model to
a compact student model. We design two novel modules to
boost the quality of knowledge transfer in distillation for
SOD: 1) a scale-decoupled feature distillation module that
disentangled teacher’s feature representation into multiscale embedding that enables explicit feature mimicking of
the student model on small objects. 2) a cross-scale assistant to refine the noisy and uninformative bounding boxes
prediction student models, which can mislead the student
model and impair the efficacy of knowledge distillation. A
multi-scale cross-attention layer is established to capture
the multi-scale semantic information to improve the student
model. We conduct experiments on COCO and VisDrone
datasets with diverse types of models, i.e., two-stage and
one-stage detectors, to evaluate our proposed method. Our
ScaleKD achieves superior performance on general detection performance and obtains spectacular improvement regarding the SOD performance.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task that has been
developed over the past twenty-year in the computer vision community. Despite the state-of-the-art performance
for general object detection having been conspicuously
improved since the rise of deep learning, balancing the
complexity-precision for small object detection is still an
open question. Current works strive to refine feature fusion modules [9, 21], devise novel training schemes [32, 33]
* Corresponding author

to explicitly train on small objects, design new neural architectures [20,39] to better extract small objects’ features, and
leverage increased input resolution to enhance representation quality [1, 49]. However, these approaches struggle to
balance detection quality on small objects with computational costs at the inference stage.
The above reasons incentivize us to design a cost-free
technique at test time to improve SOD performance. In
the spirit of the eminent success of knowledge distillation
(KD) on image data [14], we explore distillation methods
for SOD. Typically, knowledge distillation opts for a complex, high-performance model (teacher) that transfers its
knowledge to a compact, low-performance model (student).
The student model can harness instructive information to
enhance its representation learning ability. Nevertheless,
unlocking this potential in SOD involves overcoming two
challenges: 1) SOD usually suffers from noisy feature representations. Due to the nature of small objects, which generally take over a small region in the whole image, the feature representations of these small objects can be contaminated by the background and other instances with relatively
larger sizes. 2) Object detectors have a low tolerance for
noisy bounding boxes on small objects. It is inevitable that
teacher models make incorrect predictions. Usually, student
models can extract informative dark knowledge [14, 28]
from imperfect predictions from the teacher. However, in
SOD, small perturbations on the teacher’s bounding box can
dramatically impair SOD performance on the student detector (§3.2).
To this end, we propose Scale-aware Knowledge Distillation for small object detection (ScaleKD). Our proposed
ScaleKD consists of two modules, a Scale-Decoupled Feature (SDF) distillation module and a Cross-Scale Assistant
(CSA), to address the aforementioned two challenges correspondingly. The SDF is inspired by the crucial shortcoming
of existing feature distillation methods, where the feature
representations of objects with varying scales are coupled
in a single embedding. It poses difficulty for the student
to mimic small objects’ features from the teacher model.

19723

