This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP-S4 : Language-Guided Self-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Wenbin He
Suphanut Jamonnak
Liang Gou
Liu Ren
Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{wenbin.he2, suphanut.jamonnak, liang.gou, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Image

Abstract
Existing semantic segmentation approaches are often
limited by costly pixel-wise annotations and predefined
classes. In this work, we present CLIP-S4 that leverages
self-supervised pixel representation learning and visionlanguage models to enable various semantic segmentation tasks (e.g., unsupervised, transfer learning, languagedriven segmentation) without any human annotations and
unknown class information. We first learn pixel embeddings
with pixel-segment contrastive learning from different augmented views of images. To further improve the pixel embeddings and enable language-driven semantic segmentation, we design two types of consistency guided by visionlanguage models: 1) embedding consistency, aligning our
pixel embeddings to the joint feature space of a pre-trained
vision-language model, CLIP [34]; and 2) semantic consistency, forcing our model to make the same predictions
as CLIP over a set of carefully designed target classes with
both known and unknown prototypes. Thus, CLIP-S4 enables a new task of class-free semantic segmentation where
no unknown class information is needed during training. As
a result, our approach shows consistent and substantial performance improvement over four popular benchmarks compared with the state-of-the-art unsupervised and languagedriven semantic segmentation methods. More importantly,
our method outperforms these methods on unknown class
recognition by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to partition an input image
into semantically meaningful regions and assign each region a semantic class label. Recent advances in semantic segmentation [6, 27, 48] heavily rely on pixel-wise human annotations, which have two limitations. First, acquiring pixel-wise annotations is extremely labor intensive
and costly, which can take up to 1.5 hours to label one image [31]. Second, human annotations are often limited to a
set of predefined semantic classes, with which the learned
models lack the ability to recognize unknown classes [25].

MaskCLIP

MaskCLIP+

CLIP-S⁴

(a) Pixel embeddings generated by different CLIP-based unsupervised approaches
MaskCLIP
MaskCLIP+
CLIP-S⁴
Known: airplane
Unknown: moon

(b) Semantic segmentation generated by different CLIP-based unsupervised approaches
ci

ci

cj

cj

Align
ci

unknown

CLIP (Text)
CLIP (Pixel)
CLIP-S⁴ (Pixel w/o Alignment)

CLIP (Text)
CLIP (Pixel)
CLIP-S⁴ (Pixel w/ Alignment)

(c) CLIP-S⁴ aligns the pixel embeddings and their semantics with CLIP feature space

Figure 1. (a) Pixel embeddings from different CLIP-based unsupervised methods: Our method, CLIP-S4 , generates sharper
and more coherent pixel embeddings than MaskCLIP [49] and
MaskCLIP+’s [49]; (b) Language-driven semantic segmentation
by different methods: CLIP-S4 can recognize challenging unknown classes (e.g., moon); (c) The key idea behind CLIP-S4 :
aligning the pixel embeddings and their semantics with CLIP feature space.

Various approaches have been proposed to tackle these
limitations, among which we are inspired by two lines of
recent research in particular. First, for unsupervised semantic segmentation (i.e., without human annotations), selfsupervised pixel representation learning approaches [14,18,
19, 23, 40] have shown promising results on popular unsupervised benchmarks. The main idea is to extend selfsupervised contrastive learning [7, 16] from images to pixels by attracting each pixel’s embedding to its positive pairs
and repelling it from negative pairs. The prior of pairs
can be contours [18, 19], hierarchical groups [23], salience
maps [40], and pre-trained models [14]. Although these
approaches can group pixels into semantically meaningful
clusters, human annotations are still needed to assign class
labels to the clusters for semantic segmentation [37].
Second, for unknown classes in semantic segmentation, large-scale vision-language models such as CLIP [34]

11207

