This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatio-Focal Bidirectional Disparity Estimation from a Dual-Pixel Image
Donggun Kim

Hyeonjoong Jang

Inchul Kim

Min H. Kim

KAIST

Abstract
Dual-pixel photography is monocular RGB-D photography
with an ultra-high resolution, enabling many applications
in computational photography. However, there are still several challenges to fully utilizing dual-pixel photography.
Unlike the conventional stereo pair, the dual pixel exhibits
a bidirectional disparity that includes positive and negative values, depending on the focus plane depth in an image. Furthermore, capturing a wide range of dual-pixel
disparity requires a shallow depth of field, resulting in a
severely blurred image, degrading depth estimation performance. Recently, several data-driven approaches have been
proposed to mitigate these two challenges. However, due
to the lack of the ground-truth dataset of the dual-pixel
disparity, existing data-driven methods estimate either inverse depth or blurriness map. In this work, we propose
a self-supervised learning method that learns bidirectional
disparity by utilizing the nature of anisotropic blur kernels
in dual-pixel photography. We observe that the dual-pixel
left/right images have reflective-symmetric anisotropic kernels, so their sum is equivalent to that of a conventional
image. We take a self-supervised training approach with
the novel kernel-split symmetry loss accounting for the phenomenon. Our method does not rely on a training dataset
of dual-pixel disparity that does not exist yet. Our method
can estimate a complete disparity map with respect to the
focus-plane depth from a dual-pixel image, outperforming
the baseline dual-pixel methods.

1. Introduction
Dual-pixel is an image sensor technology that a single pixel
has two photodiodes, while a pixel on the traditional image
sensor has only a single photodiode. The dual-pixel is originally invented to leverage the phase difference of two photodiodes for efficient autofocusing [1, 14, 27]. Nowadays,
dual-pixel image sensors can be easily found in multiple
camera platforms such as Canon EOS 5D Mark IV DSLR
and Google Pixel phone cameras. The dual-pixel cameras
make possible not only traditional autofocusing but also

St
e
r
e
o

pi
xe
l
Le
f
tDual

Ri
ght

Le
f
t

Ri
ght

Figure 1. Captured images from the traditional binocular stereo
camera and dual-pixel camera, with a focus-plane depth at the
middle object. Upper part of the image is a left image, and lower
part is a right image from each camera. Arrows note parallax,
which is unidirectional in stereo imaging and bidirectional in dualpixel imaging.

a wide range of interesting applications of RGB-D computational photography, such as depth estimation [9], refocusing [29], deblurring [2, 34] or reflection removal [24].
The captured dual-pixel image can be separated into two
images by gathering pixels from the left and ride sides of
photodiodes, respectively. Although the baseline between
dual-pixel photodiodes is short, these two images capture
slightly different light fields, producing disparity by parallax.
One characteristic of the dual-pixel setup compared with
a traditional binocular stereo is that it yields a bidirectional
disparity shown in Figure 1, depending on the focus-plane
depth that is the distance between a camera lens and the perfect point of focus in an image (Figure 2). The dual-pixel
disparity estimation should account for the direction of horizontal shift changes by the focus-plane depth. In addition,
the magnitude of a dual-pixel disparity is proportional to the
size of a circle of confusion. To guarantee enough disparity
in dual-pixel imaging, optics with a large aperture are required to obtain a shallow depth of field for a large circle of
confusion, which is the area around the plane of focus that
appears to be in focus. As a result, the disparity is estimated
from a pair of blurry dual-pixel images caused by the shallow depth of field, which raises another challenge. The conventional camera has an isotropic blur kernel when an image is out of focus (Figure 2). However, a dual-pixel camera
produces anisotropic blur kernels, i.e., the kernel shapes of
the left/right photodiodes are anisotropic and symmetrically

5023

