This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PMR: Prototypical Modal Rebalance for Multimodal Learning
Yunfeng Fan1 , Wenchao Xu1 , Haozhao Wang2, ,* Junxiao Wang3,4 , and Song Guo1
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
KAUST, 4 SDAIA-KAUST AI Center
{yunfeng.fan,wenchao.xu}@polyu.edu.hk, hz wang@hust.edu.cn,
junxiao.wang@kaust.edu.sa, song.guo@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Multimodal learning (MML) aims to jointly exploit the
common priors of different modalities to compensate for
their inherent limitations. However, existing MML methods often optimize a uniform objective for different modalities, leading to the notorious “modality imbalance” problem and counterproductive MML performance. To address
the problem, some existing methods modulate the learning
pace based on the fused modality, which is dominated by the
better modality and eventually results in a limited improvement on the worse modal. To better exploit the features
of multimodal, we propose Prototypical Modality Rebalance (PMR) to perform stimulation on the particular slowlearning modality without interference from other modalities. Specifically, we introduce the prototypes that represent
general features for each class, to build the non-parametric
classifiers for uni-modal performance evaluation. Then, we
try to accelerate the slow-learning modality by enhancing
its clustering toward prototypes. Furthermore, to alleviate
the suppression from the dominant modality, we introduce
a prototype-based entropy regularization term during the
early training stage to prevent premature convergence. Besides, our method only relies on the representations of each
modality and without restrictions from model structures and
fusion methods, making it with great application potential
for various scenarios. The source code is available here1 .

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning (MML) [24, 34, 36] emerges to
mimic the way humans perceive the world, i.e., from multiple sense channels toward a common phenomenon for better understanding the external environment, which has attracted extensive attention in various scenarios, e.g. video
classification [13, 28, 37], event localization [38, 43], ac* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/fanyunfeng-bit/Modal-Imbalance-PMR

direction disturbed
by dominant modal

update

Interfered
by others:

direction to
prototypes

Ours:

prototypes

Figure 1. The slow-learning modal’s updating direction is severely
disturbed by the dominant one, making it hard to exploit its features. We propose to use the prototypes, the centroids of each class
in representation space, to adjust updating direction for better unimodal performance. Other modalities will not interfere with the
new direction, which ensures improvement.

tion recognition [10, 33], audiovisual speech recognition
[23, 25]. By employing a complementary manner of multimodal training, it is expected that MML can achieve better performance than using a single modality. However, the
heterogeneity of multimodal data poses challenges on how
to learn multimodal correlations and complementarities.
According to recent research [29, 42], although the overall performance of multimodal learning exceeds that of
single-modal learning, the performance of each modality
tends to be far from their upper bound. The reason behind
this phenomenon is the “modality imbalance” problem, in
which the dominant modality will hinder the full utilization of multimodal. The researchers [40] also claimed that
different modalities overfit and converge at different rates,
meaning that optimizing the same objective for different
modalities leads to inconsistent learning efficiency.
Several methods [29, 40, 44] have been proposed to address the problem. Some of them [29, 44] try to modu-

20029

