This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unifying Short and Long-Term Tracking with Graph Hierarchies

1

Orcun Cetintas1* Guillem Brasó12* Laura Leal-Taixé1†
Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning
Time

Detections

Short-term
Long-term

Short-term

Long-term

Trajectory
a)

Local tracker

b)

Graph-based tracker

c)

Hybrid multi-level tracker

d)

Our uniﬁed, scalable and hierarchical
tracker

Figure 1. (a) Local tracker focusing on short-term scenarios and lacking robustness at long-term identity preservation (b) Graph-based
tracker tackling longer-term association but unable to cover large time gaps due to its limited scalability (c) Hybrid multi-level tracker
engineering a combination of techniques but still struggling with scalability (d) Our unified hierarchical tracker with high scalability.

Abstract
Tracking objects over long videos effectively means solving a spectrum of problems, from short-term association
for un-occluded objects to long-term association for objects
that are occluded and then reappear in the scene. Methods tackling these two tasks are often disjoint and crafted
for specific scenarios, and top-performing approaches are
often a mix of techniques, which yields engineering-heavy
solutions that lack generality. In this work, we question the
need for hybrid approaches and introduce SUSHI, a unified and scalable multi-object tracker. Our approach processes long clips by splitting them into a hierarchy of subclips, which enables high scalability. We leverage graph
neural networks to process all levels of the hierarchy, which
makes our model unified across temporal scales and highly
general. As a result, we obtain significant improvements
over state-of-the-art on four diverse datasets. Our code and
models are available at bit.ly/sushi-mot.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) aims to identify the trajectories of all moving objects from a video. It is an essential task for many applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, and video analysis. Tracking-by-detection is
a commonly used paradigm that divides the problem into
(i) detecting objects at every frame and (ii) performing data
association, i.e., linking objects into trajectories.
In the presence of highly accurate object detections, data
association happens mostly among detections that are close
* Equal contribution.
† Currently at NVIDIA.

in time, i.e., short-term association. Simple cues such as
position and motion-based proximity [2, 3, 45, 65, 67] or local appearance [30, 49, 52, 66] are often enough for accurate association. Different challenges appear in crowded
scenes, when objects may be often occluded and not detected for several frames. This forces methods to perform
association among detections in distant time frames, i.e.,
long-term association. This requires specific solutions that
build more robust global appearance models [32, 35, 44],
create motion models capable of long-term trajectory prediction [11, 21, 37] or bring robustness by performing association across all frames and all trajectories using a graph
representation [4, 8, 14, 43, 44].
Due to the different nature of these tasks, solutions used
for short-term associations tend to fail in long-term scenarios. In fact, most state-of-the-art trackers use a combination
of approaches to track over different timespans and therefore can be considered to be multi-level trackers. Several
short-term trackers use independent re-identification (reID)
mechanisms for long-term association [2, 28, 40, 52, 57].
Analogously, various graph approaches rely on local trackers to perform short-term association [4,15,16]. All of these
hybrid multi-level approaches have two main limitations.
The first one is scalability since current methods cannot
deal with long videos. As we increase the timespan between
detections to be linked, association becomes more ambiguous due to significant appearance changes and large displacements. Hence, local trackers using a handcrafted combination of appearance and motion cues will fail to scale
to arbitrary timespans. Graph-based methods are more robust, but association for large timespans entails the creation
of very large graphs (even if combined with local methods),
which is infeasible both computationally and memory-wise.

22877

