This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unifying Layout Generation with a Decoupled Diffusion Model
Mude Hui1 * Zhizheng Zhang2 Xiaoyi Zhang2 Wenxuan Xie2 Yuwang Wang3 Yan Lu2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Tsinghua University
{zhizzhang, xiaoyizhang, wenxie, yanlu}@microsoft.com
theflood@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

wang-yuwang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Input

Abstract
Layout generation aims to synthesize realistic graphic
scenes consisting of elements with different attributes including category, size, position, and between-element relation. It is a crucial task for reducing the burden on heavyduty graphic design works for formatted scenes, e.g., publications, documents, and user interfaces (UIs). Diverse application scenarios impose a big challenge in unifying various layout generation subtasks, including conditional and
unconditional generation. In this paper, we propose a Layout Diffusion Generative Model (LDGM) to achieve such
uniﬁcation with a single decoupled diffusion model. LDGM
views a layout of arbitrary missing or coarse element attributes as an intermediate diffusion status from a completed layout. Since different attributes have their individual semantics and characteristics, we propose to decouple
the diffusion processes for them to improve the diversity of
training samples and learn the reverse process jointly to exploit global-scope contexts for facilitating generation. As a
result, our LDGM can generate layouts either from scratch
or conditional on arbitrary available attributes. Extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate
our proposed LDGM outperforms existing layout generation models in both functionality and performance.

1. Introduction
Layout determines the placements and sizes of primitive elements on a page of formatted scenes (e.g., publications, documents, UIs), which has critical impacts on how
viewers understand and interact with the information in this
page [13]. Layout generation is an emerging task of synthesizing realistic and attractive graphic scenes with primitive elements of different categories, sizes, positions, and
relations. It is of high demands for reducing the burden
on heavy-duty graphic design works in diverse application
* This work was done when Mude Hui was an intern at MSRA.

Category

Relation

Left

Text

Icon at
the top
of Text

H1

Icon

X2

Y2

W2

H2

Button

X3

Y3

W3

H3

Diffusion
(Noise adding)

Output

Target layout
Ico
Icon
n
Text
Button

Precise Attribute

Wide Height
W1

Generation
(Denoising)

Target UI

Top

Coarse Attribute

Category Left

Top

Wide

Height

Text

X1

Y1

W1

H1

Icon

X2

Y2

W2

H2

Button

X3

Y3

W3

H2

Element Relation

Missing Attribute

Figure 1. The layout generation tasks can be uniﬁed into a diffusion (noise-adding) process and a generation (denoising) process.

scenarios. Recently, there have been some research works
studying unconditional generation [1, 7, 10, 16, 28], conditional generation based on user speciﬁed inputs (e.g., element types [12, 13, 15], element types and sizes [13, 16]
or element relations [12, 15]), conditional reﬁnement based
on coarse attributes [24], and conditional completion based
on partially available elements [7], etc. However, none of
them can cope with all these application scenarios simultaneously. This imposes a big challenge in unifying various
layout generation subtasks with a single model, including
conditional generation upon various speciﬁed attributes and
unconditional generation from scratch. Towards this goal,
the prior work UniLayout [9] takes a further step by proposing a multi-task framework to handle six subtasks for layout generation with a single model. However, the supported
subtasks are pre-deﬁned and could not cover all application
scenarios, e.g., conditional generation based on speciﬁed element sizes. Besides, it does not take into account the combinational cases of several subtasks, e.g., the case wherein
some elements have missing attributes to be generated while
the others are with coarse attributes to be reﬁned in the same

1942

