This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Defending Against Patch-based Backdoor Attacks on Self-Supervised Learning
Ajinkya Tejankar *1

Maziar Sanjabi 2 Qifan Wang 2 Sinong Wang 2
Hamed Pirsiavash 1 Liang Tan 2
1 University of California, Davis
2 Meta AI

Abstract
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) was shown to
be vulnerable to patch-based data poisoning backdoor attacks. It was shown that an adversary can poison a small
part of the unlabeled data so that when a victim trains
an SSL model on it, the final model will have a backdoor that the adversary can exploit. This work aims to
defend self-supervised learning against such attacks. We
use a three-step defense pipeline, where we first train a
model on the poisoned data. In the second step, our proposed defense algorithm (PatchSearch) uses the trained
model to search the training data for poisoned samples
and removes them from the training set. In the third step,
a final model is trained on the cleaned-up training set.
Our results show that PatchSearch is an effective defense.
As an example, it improves a model’s accuracy on images containing the trigger from 38.2% to 63.7% which is
very close to the clean model’s accuracy, 64.6%. Moreover, we show that PatchSearch outperforms baselines and
state-of-the-art defense approaches including those using
additional clean, trusted data. Our code is available at
https://github.com/UCDvision/PatchSearch

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) promises to free deep
learning models from the constraints of human supervision.
It allows models to be trained on cheap and abundantly
available unlabeled, uncurated data [22]. A model trained
this way can then be used as a general feature extractor for
various downstream tasks with a small amount of labeled
data. However, recent works [8, 44] have shown that uncurated data collection pipelines are vulnerable to data poisoning backdoor attacks.
Data poisoning backdoor attacks on self-supervised
learning (SSL) [44] work as follows. An attacker introduces “backdoors” in a model by simply injecting a few
carefully crafted samples called “poisons” in the unlabeled
* Corresponding author <atejankar@ucdavis.edu>. Work
done while interning at Meta AI.

Hamed Firooz 2

training dataset. Poisoning is done by pasting an attacker
chosen “trigger” patch on a few images of a “target” category. A model pre-trained with such a poisoned data behaves similar to a non-poisoned/clean model in all cases except when it is shown an image with a trigger. Then, the
model will cause a downstream classifier trained on top of
it to mis-classify the image as the target category. This types
of attacks are sneaky and hard to detect since the trigger is
like an attacker’s secret key that unlocks a failure mode of
the model. Our goal in this work is to defend SSL models
against such attacks.
While there have been many works for defending supervised learning against backdoor attacks [34], many of
them directly rely upon the availability of labels. Therefore, such methods are hard to adopt in SSL where there are
no labels. However, a few supervised defenses [5, 28] can
be applied to SSL with some modifications. One such defense, proposed in [28], shows the effectiveness of applying
a strong augmentation like CutMix [55]. Hence, we adopt
i-CutMix [33], CutMix modified for SSL, as a baseline. We
show that i-CutMix is indeed an effective defense that additionally improves the overall performance of SSL models.
Another defense that does not require labels was proposed in [44]. While this defense successfully mitigates the
attack, its success is dependent on a significant amount of
clean, trusted data. However, access to such data may not
be practical in many cases. Even if available, the trusted
data may have its own set of biases depending on its sources
which might bias the defended model. Hence, our goal is to
design a defense that does not need any trusted data.
In this paper, we propose PatchSearch, which aims at
identifying poisoned samples in the training set without access to trusted data or image labels. One way to identify a
poisoned sample is to check if it contains a patch that behaves similar to the trigger. A characteristic of a trigger is
that it occupies a relatively small area in an image (≈ 5%)
but heavily influences a model’s output. Hence, we can use
an input explanation method like Grad-CAM [45] to highlight the trigger. Note that this idea has been explored in
supervised defenses [14, 16]. However, Grad-CAM relies
on a supervised classifier which is unavailable in our case.

12239

