This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuWigs: A Neural Dynamic Model for Volumetric Hair Capture and Animation
Ziyan Wang1,2 Giljoo Nam2 Tuur Stuyck2 Stephen Lombardi2 Chen Cao2
Jason Saragih2 Michael Zollhöfer2 Jessica Hodgins1 Christoph Lassner2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Meta Reality Labs

Abstract
The capture and animation of human hair are two of the
major challenges in the creation of realistic avatars for the
virtual reality. Both problems are highly challenging, because hair has complex geometry and appearance and exhibits challenging motion. In this paper, we present a twostage approach that models hair independently of the head
to address these challenges in a data-driven manner. The
first stage, state compression, learns a low-dimensional latent space of 3D hair states including motion and appearance via a novel autoencoder-as-a-tracker strategy. To better disentangle the hair and head in appearance learning,
we employ multi-view hair segmentation masks in combination with a differentiable volumetric renderer. The second stage optimizes a novel hair dynamics model that performs temporal hair transfer based on the discovered latent
codes. To enforce higher stability while driving our dynamics model, we employ the 3D point-cloud autoencoder from
the compression stage for de-noising of the hair state. Our
model outperforms the state of the art in novel view synthesis and is capable of creating novel hair animations without
†
relying on hair observations as a driving signal.

1. Introduction
The ability to model the details of human hair with high
fidelity is key to achieving realism in human avatar creation:
hair can be very important to one’s appearance! The realism of human hair involves many aspects like geometry, appearance and interaction with light. The sheer number of
hair strands leads to a very complex geometry, while the interactions between light and hair strands leads to non-trivial
view-dependent appearance changes. The dynamics of hair
creates another axis for evaluating the realism of a human
avatar while being similarly hard to capture and model due
to the complexity of the hair motion space as well as severe
self-occlusions.
These problems lead to two major challenges for cre†

Project page at https://ziyanw1.github.io/neuwigs/.

Figure 1. Animation from Single View Captures. Our model can
generate realistic hair animation from single view video based on
head motion and gravity direction. Original captures of subjects
wearing a wig cap are shown in red boxes.

ating realistic avatars with hair: appearance modeling and
dynamics modeling. While modern capture systems can reconstruct high fidelity hair appearance from a sparse and
discrete set of real world observations frame by frame, no
dynamics information is discovered through this process.
To capture dynamics, we need to perform tracking to align
those reconstructions in both space and time. However, doing tracking and reconstruction do not directly solve the
problem of novel motion generation. To achieve that, we

8641

