This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-thinking Federated Active Learning based on Inter-class Diversity
SangMook Kim1 *

Sangmin Bae1 *
1
KAIST AI

Hwanjun Song2†
2
NAVER AI LAB

{sangmook.kim, bsmn0223, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Although federated learning has made awe-inspiring advances, most studies have assumed that the client’s data
are fully labeled. However, in a real-world scenario, every client may have a significant amount of unlabeled instances. Among the various approaches to utilizing unlabeled data, a federated active learning framework has
emerged as a promising solution. In the decentralized setting, there are two types of available query selector models,
namely ‘global’ and ‘local-only’ models, but little literature discusses their performance dominance and its causes.
In this work, we first demonstrate that the superiority of
two selector models depends on the global and local interclass diversity. Furthermore, we observe that the global and
local-only models are the keys to resolving the imbalance of
each side. Based on our findings, we propose LoGo, a FAL
sampling strategy robust to varying local heterogeneity levels and global imbalance ratio, that integrates both models
by two steps of active selection scheme. LoGo consistently
outperforms six active learning strategies in the total number of 38 experimental settings. The code is available at:
https://github.com/raymin0223/LoGo.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed framework that
allows multiple parties to learn a unified deep learning
model cooperatively with preserving the privacy of the local
client [23,28,31]. Typically, FL has been actively studied in
a standard supervised learning setting, where all the training instances are labeled, but it is more realistic for each
client to contain both labeled and unlabeled data due to
the high labeling cost [29, 48]. Here, active learning (AL)
can be a promising solution to improve the performance
of a cooperated model with the pool of unlabeled data. In
practice, federated active learning (FAL) framework has recently attempted to bridge two different philosophies in FL
and AL [3,4]. As illustrated in Figure 1-(a) FAL framework
alternates an FL procedure (red line) of training a predictive
* equal contribution
† corresponding authors

Se-Young Yun1†

ghkswns91@gmail.com

model collaboratively through local updates and aggregation phases, and an AL procedure (green line) of querying
and annotating informative instances separately per client.
Although the overall framework just appears to be a
straightforward fusion of two research fields, FL factors introduce two major challenges to the AL procedure. First,
the class imbalance of the local dataset originates from
heterogeneous distribution across local clients [15, 23, 28].
Hence, in the FAL framework, the active selection algorithm has to ensure inter-class diversity from both local
and global perspectives. Second, there are two available
types of query-selecting models, a global model, which is
globally optimized through the FL pipeline, and a localonly model [9, 33], which can be separately trained only for
each client. In the query selection phase, the global model
can leverage the aggregated knowledge of all clients, while
the local-only model is able to detect the most valuable instances for the local updates.
Prior FAL literature [3, 4], which simply adapt conventional AL strategies, had little discussion on these challenges. As our first contribution, we found the significant
performance gap between two types of query selector (see
Figure 1-(b)), and it is the first study to solve a conundrum
of dominance trend by introducing two indicators of interclass diversity1 – local heterogeneity level (α) and global imbalance ratio (ρ). The first indicator α is the concentration
parameter of Dirichlet distribution, commonly seen in the
FL literature [1, 15, 23], resulting in more locally imbalanced class distribution at lower values. Besides, ρ indicator is the ratio of class imbalance for the aggregated global
data of all clients [7, 21]. We discovered three meaningful
insights on selector dominance: (Obs. 1) Interestingly, the
superiority of the two selectors varies depending on the two
indicators of inter-class diversity, α and ρ. (Obs. 2) When
local heterogeneity is severe (α is low), a local-only model
is preferred for weighing minority instances for each client,
and (Obs. 3) when globally minor classes exist (ρ is high),
the knowledge of the entire data distribution, inherent in a
global model, is more essential. ▷ See Section 4
1 We use the term inter-class diversity interchangeably with class balance throughout the paper.

3944

