This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LightPainter: Interactive Portrait Relighting with Freehand Scribble
Yiqun Mei1

He Zhang2 Xuaner Zhang2 Jianming Zhang2 Zhixin Shu2
Zijun Wei2 Shi Yan2 HyunJoon Jung2 Vishal M. Patel1
1

Johns Hopkins University

2

Yilin Wang2

Adobe Inc.

Figure 1. LightPainter is an interactive lighting editing system that takes in an input image with freehand scribbles drawn on top and
renders the correspondingly relit portrait. It enables creative portrait lighting editing (left) and allows users to reproduce a target lighting
effect with ease (right).

Abstract
Recent portrait relighting methods have achieved realistic results of portrait lighting effects given a desired lighting representation such as an environment map. However,
these methods are not intuitive for user interaction and
lack precise lighting control. We introduce LightPainter, a
scribble-based relighting system that allows users to interactively manipulate portrait lighting effect with ease. This
is achieved by two conditional neural networks, a delighting
module that recovers geometry and albedo optionally conditioned on skin tone, and a scribble-based module for relighting. To train the relighting module, we propose a novel
scribble simulation procedure to mimic real user scribbles,
which allows our pipeline to be trained without any human
annotations. We demonstrate high-quality and flexible portrait lighting editing capability with both quantitative and
qualitative experiments. User study comparisons with commercial lighting editing tools also demonstrate consistent
user preference for our method.

1. Introduction
Lighting is a fundamental aspect of portrait photograph,
as lights shape the reality, and give the work depth, colorfulness and excitement. Professional photographers [17,38]
spend hours designing lighting such that shadow and highlight are distributed accurately on the subject to achieve the
desired photographic look. Getting the exact lighting setups
requires years of training, expensive equipment, environment setup, timing, and costly teamwork. Recently, portrait
relighting techniques [20, 22, 33, 43, 45, 48, 53, 61, 63] allow users to apply a different lighting condition to a portrait
photo. These methods require a given lighting condition:
some use an exemplar image [42, 43], which lacks precise
lighting control and requires exhaustive image search to find
the specific style; some use a high dynamic range (HDR)
environment map [33,45, 48,53] that is difficult and unintuitive to interpret or edit.
Hand-drawn sketches and scribbles have been shown to
be good for user interaction and thus are widely used in various image editing applications [6, 9, 10, 30, 32, 57]. Inspired

195

