This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Residual Networks for Adversarial Robustness
Zhichao Lu2 *
1

Kalyanmoy Deb1

Michigan State University

2

Sun Yat-sen University

Efforts to improve the adversarial robustness of convolutional neural networks have primarily focused on developing more effective adversarial training methods. In contrast, little attention was devoted to analyzing the role of
architectural elements (e.g., topology, depth, and width) on
adversarial robustness. This paper seeks to bridge this gap
and present a holistic study on the impact of architectural
design on adversarial robustness. We focus on residual networks and consider architecture design at the block level
as well as at the network scaling level. In both cases, we
first derive insights through systematic experiments. Then
we design a robust residual block, dubbed RobustResBlock,
and a compound scaling rule, dubbed RobustScaling, to
distribute depth and width at the desired FLOP count.
Finally, we combine RobustResBlock and RobustScaling
and present a portfolio of adversarially robust residual
networks, RobustResNets, spanning a broad spectrum of
model capacities. Experimental validation across multiple
datasets and adversarial attacks demonstrate that RobustResNets consistently outperform both the standard WRNs
and other existing robust architectures, achieving state-ofthe-art AutoAttack robust accuracy 63.7% with 500K external data while being 2× more compact in terms of parameters. Code is available at this URL.

1. Introduction
Robustness to adversarial attacks is critical for practical deployments of deep neural networks. Current research on defenses against such attacks has primarily focused on developing better adversarial training (AT) methods [19, 27, 32, 35, 39]. These techniques and the insights
derived from them have primarily been developed by fixing
the architecture of the network, typically variants of wide
residual networks (WRNs) [38]. While a significant body
of knowledge exists on designing effective neural networks
for vision tasks under standard empirical risk minimization
* Corresponding author

% PGD20 Robust Accuracy

{shihuahuang95, luzhichaocn}@gmail.com

Abstract

Vishnu Naresh Boddeti1

60
58

{kdeb, vishnu}@msu.edu

Architecture
Block Level
Network Level

56
54
52
50

Baseline (WRN-28-10)

Block Kernel
Topology size

Act.

Depth

Width Adver.
Training

% AutoAttack Robust Accuracy

Shihua Huang1

Ours (61.10%)
(Architecture)

60

Rebuffi et al. (60.07%)
(Augmentations)
Zhang et al. (53.08%) Gowal et al. (57.20%)
(TRADES)
Rice et al. (53.42%)
(Early stopping)

50
Mardy et al. (44.04%)

40
WRN-70-16
(267M Params)

2018

RobustResNet-A4
(147M Params)

2020

2022

Figure 1. (L) Impact of architectural components on adversarial robustness on CIFAR-10, relative to that of adversarial training methods. The variations of each component are elaborated in
§4. (R) Progress of SotA robust accuracy against AutoAttack
without additional data on CIFAR-10 with ℓ∞ perturbations of
ϵ = 8/255 chronologically. We show that innovation in architecture (this paper) can improve SotA robust accuracy while simultaneously being almost 2× more compact. Zoom in for details.

(ERM) training, i.e., traditional learning without inner optimization needed in AT, limited attention has been devoted
to studying the role of architectural components on adversarial robustness. However, as we preview in Figure 1, architectural components can impact adversarial robustness as
much as, if not more than, different AT methods. As such,
there is a large void in practitioners’ toolboxes for designing
architectures with better adversarial robustness properties.
The primary goal of this paper is to bridge this knowledge gap by (i) systematically studying the contribution
of architectural components to adversarial robustness, (ii)
identify critical design choices that aid adversarial robustness, and (iii) finally construct a new adversarially robust
network that can serve as a baseline and test bed for studying adversarial robustness. We adopt an empirical approach
and conduct an extensive amount of carefully designed experiments to realize this goal.
We start from the well-founded observation that networks with residual connections exhibit more robustness
to adversarial attacks [3], and thus, consider the family of
residual networks. Then we systematically assess the two
main aspects of architecture design, block structure and network scaling, and adversarially train and evaluate more
than 1200 networks. For block structure, we consider the
choice of layers, connections among layers, types of residual connections, activation, etc. For network scaling, we

8202

