This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Graph Representation for Point Cloud Segmentation
via Attentive Filtering
Nan Zhang, Zhiyi Pan, Thomas H. Li, Wei GaoB , Ge Li
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
{zhangnan, panzhiyi}@stu.pku.edu.cn
{thomas, gaowei262}@pku.edu.cn, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, self-attention networks achieve impressive performance in point cloud segmentation due to their superiority in modeling long-range dependencies. However, compared to self-attention mechanism, we find graph convolutions show a stronger ability in capturing local geometry
information with less computational cost. In this paper, we
employ a hybrid architecture design to construct our Graph
Convolution Network with Attentive Filtering (AF-GCN),
which takes advantage of both graph convolution and selfattention mechanism. We adopt graph convolutions to aggregate local features in the shallow encoder stages, while
in the deeper stages, we propose a self-attention-like module named Graph Attentive Filter (GAF) to better model
long-range contexts from distant neighbors. Besides, to further improve graph representation for point cloud segmentation, we employ a Spatial Feature Projection (SFP) module for graph convolutions which helps to handle spatial
variations of unstructured point clouds. Finally, a graphshared down-sampling and up-sampling strategy is introduced to make full use of the graph structures in point cloud
processing. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple datasets including S3DIS, ScanNetV2, Toronto-3D, and
ShapeNetPart. Experimental results show our AF-GCN obtains competitive performance.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D sensing technologies (such as LiDARs and RGB-D cameras), 3D point
clouds have demonstrated great potential in many applications such as robotics, autonomous driving, virtual reality
and augmented reality [10]. Consequently, point cloud segmentation has attracted more and more attention. Unlike
regular pixel grids in 2D images, 3D points in point clouds
are irregular and unstructured, thereby posing significant
Corresponding author: Wei Gao.

(a) Input

(b) Ground Truth

(c) Low-level Features

(d) High-level Features

Figure 1. (a) and (b) are the input point cloud and corresponding
semantic labels, respectively. (c) and (d) are the visualization of
the low-level and high-level point features after the first and last
down-sampling, respectively. Differences in color indicate differences in features. As shown in (c), neighbors in the same object
may have low feature correlations due to the differences in RGB
attributes or geometry structures. As shown in (d), points after several down-sampling are sparse and the distant neighbors in highlevel feature aggregation should be filtered because of containing
possible irrelevant information.

challenges for point cloud segmentation.
Several researches [18, 21, 46] adopt graph convolution
networks to utilize the topological structure of point cloud
for segmentation. Graph convolution networks learn features from points and their neighbors for better capturing local geometric features while maintaining permutation invariance, which have intrinsic advantages for handling non-Euclidean point cloud data. Furthermore, many
works [17, 44, 51, 59] improve the graph convolution networks by proposing well-designed convolution kernels and
get promising performance in point cloud segmentation.
Recently inspired by the great success of vision transformers [8,11,23,34,56], several works [9,15,36,52,55,58]

1244

