This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Multi-Modal Class-Specific Tokens for Weakly Supervised Dense
Object Localization
Lian Xu1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Mohammed Bennamoun1 , Farid Boussaid1 , and Dan Xu3
1
The University of Western Australia 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{lian.xu,mohammed.bennamoun,farid.boussaid}@uwa.edu.au,
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Cla ifie
eigh

Weakly supervised dense object localization (WSDOL)
relies generally on Class Activation Mapping (CAM), which
exploits the correlation between the class weights of the image classifier and the pixel-level features. Due to the limited ability to address intra-class variations, the image classifier cannot properly associate the pixel features, leading
to inaccurate dense localization maps. In this paper, we
propose to explicitly construct multi-modal class representations by leveraging the Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP), to guide dense localization. More specifically, we propose a unified transformer framework to learn
two-modalities of class-specific tokens, i.e., class-specific
visual and textual tokens. The former captures semantics
from the target visual data while the latter exploits the classrelated language priors from CLIP, providing complementary information to better perceive the intra-class diversities. In addition, we propose to enrich the multi-modal
class-specific tokens with sample-specific contexts comprising visual context and image-language context. This enables more adaptive class representation learning, which
further facilitates dense localization. Extensive experiments
show the superiority of the proposed method for WSDOL on
two multi-label datasets, i.e., PASCAL VOC and MS COCO,
and one single-label dataset, i.e., OpenImages. Our dense
localization maps also lead to the state-of-the-art weakly
supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) results on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO. 1

1. Introduction
Fully supervised dense prediction tasks have achieved
great success, which however comes at the cost of expensive
pixel-level annotations. To address this issue, recent works
have investigated the use of weak labels, such as image1 https://github.com/xulianuwa/MMCST

Cla
Te

ken

C C

ela i n

+

F

CNN

ken

ViT

C

(a) CAM: image cla

ifie d i en

+

i n

Image
fea e

ViT

CLIP label e
embedding

C

Den e bjec
l cali a i n ma

+

(b) O

: M l i-m dal cla

-

ecific

ken d i en

Figure 1. (a) CAM exploits the correlation between the image
classifier and the pixel features. (b) We propose to construct multimodal class-specific tokens to guide dense object localization.

level labels, to generate dense object localization maps as
pseudo labels for those tasks. For the weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) task, most methods evaluate localization results on the bounding-box level and a few recent
methods [5] evaluate on the pixel level. We use WSDOL
to focus on the pixel-level evaluation, which is critical for
downstream dense prediction tasks such as WSSS.
Previous works have exploited Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) and Vision Transformers (ViTs) [7] for
WSDOL with image-level labels [21, 40]. These methods have generally relied on Class Activation Mapping
(CAM) [48], which generates class-specific localization
maps by computing the correlation between the classspecific weight vectors of the image classifier and every
pixel feature vector. However, image classifiers generally
have a limited ability to address the intra-class variation, let
alone at the pixel level. This thus leads to inaccurate dense
localization results. In the conventional fully supervised
learning paradigm, the image classification model aims to
convert images to numeric labels, ignoring the context of
the labels. Hence, it tends to learn the pattern that maximizes the inter-class differences but disregards the intraclass diversities. This largely restricts the model’s ability of

19596

