This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CompletionFormer: Depth Completion with Convolutions and
Vision Transformers
Youmin Zhang1
Zheng Zhu2
1
1

Xianda Guo2
Guan Huang2

University of Bologna

2

Matteo Poggi1
Stefano Mattoccia1

PhiGent Robotics

{youmin.zhang2, m.poggi, stefano.mattoccia}@unibo.it

Abstract
Given sparse depths and the corresponding RGB images,
depth completion aims at spatially propagating the sparse
measurements throughout the whole image to get a dense
depth prediction. Despite the tremendous progress of deeplearning-based depth completion methods, the locality of
the convolutional layer or graph model makes it hard for
the network to model the long-range relationship between
pixels. While recent fully Transformer-based architecture
has reported encouraging results with the global receptive field, the performance and efficiency gaps to the welldeveloped CNN models still exist because of its deteriorative local feature details. This paper proposes a Joint Convolutional Attention and Transformer block (JCAT), which
deeply couples the convolutional attention layer and Vision
Transformer into one block, as the basic unit to construct
our depth completion model in a pyramidal structure. This
hybrid architecture naturally benefits both the local connectivity of convolutions and the global context of the Transformer in one single model. As a result, our CompletionFormer outperforms state-of-the-art CNNs-based methods
on the outdoor KITTI Depth Completion benchmark and
indoor NYUv2 dataset, achieving significantly higher efficiency (nearly 1/3 FLOPs) compared to pure Transformerbased methods. Code is available at https://github.
com/youmi-zym/CompletionFormer.

1. Introduction
Active depth sensing has achieved significant gains in
performance and demonstrated its utility in numerous applications, such as autonomous driving and augmented reality. Although depth maps captured by existing commercial depth sensors (e.g., Microsoft Kinect [23], Intel RealSense [11]) or depths points within the same scanning
line of LiDAR sensors are dense, the distance between
valid/correct depth points could still be far owing to the

sensor noise, challenging conditions such as transparent,
shining, and dark surfaces, or the limited number of scanning lines of LiDAR sensors. To address these issues, depth
completion [2, 16, 26, 31], which targets at completing and
reconstructing the whole depth map from sparse depth measurements and a corresponding RGB image (i.e., RGBD),
has gained much attention in the latest years.
For depth completion, one key point is to get the depth
affinity among neighboring pixels so that reliable depth labels can be propagated to the surroundings [2, 3, 8, 16, 26].
Based on the fact that the given sparse depth could be
highly sparse due to noise or even no measurement being returned from the depth sensor, it requires depth completion methods to be capable of 1) detecting depth outliers by measuring the spatial relationship between pixels
in both local and global perspectives; 2) fusing valid depth
values from close or even extremely far distance points.
All these properties ask the network for the potential to
capture both local and global correlations between pixels.
Current depth completion networks collect context information with the widely used convolution neural networks
(CNNs) [2, 3, 8, 16, 26, 29, 37, 51] or graph neural network [42, 49]. However, both the convolutional layer and
graph models can only aggregate within a local region, e.g.
square kernel in 3×3 for convolution and kNN-based neighborhood for graph models [42, 49], making it still tough to
model global long-range relationship, in particular within
the shallowest layers of the architecture. Recently, GuideFormer [31] resorts fully Transformer-based architecture to
enable global reasoning. Unfortunately, since Vision Transformers project image patches into vectors through a single
step, this causes the loss of local details, resulting in ignoring local feature details in dense prediction tasks [28, 43].
For depth completion, the limitations affecting pure CNNs
or Transformer based networks also manifest, as shown in
Fig. 1. Despite any distance the reliable depth points could
be distributed at, exploring an elegant integration of these
two distinct paradigms, i.e. CNNs and Transformer, has not

18527

