This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S3 C: Semi-Supervised VQA Natural Language Explanation via
Self-Critical Learning

1

Wei Suo1 *, Mengyang Sun2 *, Weisong Liu1 , Yiqi Gao1 , Peng Wang1†, Yanning Zhang1†, Qi Wu3
School of Computer Science and Ningbo Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
2
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China.
3
University of Adelaide, Australia.
{suowei1994,sunmenmian,liuweisong,gyqjz}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
{peng.wang,ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Visual
Encoder

VQA Natural Language Explanation (VQA-NLE) task
aims to explain the decision-making process of VQA models in natural language. Unlike traditional attention or gradient analysis, free-text rationales can be easier to understand and gain users’ trust. Existing methods mostly use
post-hoc or self-rationalization models to obtain a plausible explanation. However, these frameworks are bottlenecked by the following challenges: 1) the reasoning process cannot be faithfully responded to and suffer from the
problem of logical inconsistency. 2) Human-annotated explanations are expensive and time-consuming to collect. In
this paper, we propose a new Semi-Supervised VQA-NLE
via Self-Critical Learning (S 3 C), which evaluates the candidate explanations by answering rewards to improve the
logical consistency between answers and rationales. With
a semi-supervised learning framework, the S 3 C can benefit from a tremendous amount of samples without humanannotated explanations. A large number of automatic measures and human evaluations all show the effectiveness of
our method. Meanwhile, the framework achieves a new
state-of-the-art performance on the two VQA-NLE datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have enabled significant breakthroughs in a variety of vision-language (VL) tasks such
as image captioning [10, 47] and visual question answering (VQA) [2, 39]. Unfortunately, most of them are black
box systems, which makes it challenging to gain users’
trust [20]. Explaining the decision-making process of
deep VL models is a long-standing and essential problem.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

Q: How many people
will dine at this table?

cls

Language
Encoder

E1
E2

Visual
Encoder
Q: How many people
will dine at this table?

cls

Language
Encoder

VL Pretrained
Model

Reason: There is
one cup.

(a) Post-hoc explanation Method

VL and
Explainer Model

one, there is only
one cup of water...

E1
E2

Visual
Encoder
Q: How many people Language
will dine at this table? Encoder

Natural Language
Explainer

Answer: One

labelled
samples
cls
E1
E2

unlabelled
samples

(b) Self-rationalization Method

VL and
Explainer Model

𝑅1: There is only
one cup of water.
𝑅2: There is only
one dish at table...

Reward or
Punishment

Answer
Scores

(c) Our Method

Figure 1. Paradigm comparison of different VQA-NLE methods. (a) Post-hoc explanation method adopts two independent
models to predict answers and explanations respectively. (b) Selfrationalization method uses a united VL model to simultaneously
generate answers and explanations. (c) Our self-critical strategy
utilizes answer scores as rewards and obtains more reliable rationales with semi-supervised learning.

Some approaches depend on attention mechanisms [2, 30]
or gradient-based localization [50] to acquire visual explanations, which can highlight some contributing image regions for the predicted answers. However, simple visualization cannot explain how these areas support the answers and
they are also hard to comprehend [20, 48]. Conversely, Natural Language Explanation (NLE) task [6, 38] can explain
the decision-making process of a model by generating a natural language sentence. The language-based explanations
are more accessible for users to understand, and they can
also help researchers optimize the structure of models [34].
Recently, some models of NLE in the VL commu-

2646

