This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PyramidFlow: High-Resolution Defect Contrastive Localization
using Pyramid Normalizing Flow
Jiarui Lei1,2

Xiaobo Hu1,2

Yue Wang1,2

Dong Liu1,2,3,4∗

1

State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, Zhejiang University
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, China
3
Jiaxing Key Laboratory of Photonic Sensing & Intelligent Imaging, China
4
Intelligent Optics & Photonics Research Center, Jiaxing Research Institute Zhejiang University
2

{karrilett, huxiaobo, 426195, liudongopt}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
During industrial processing, unforeseen defects may
arise in products due to uncontrollable factors. Although
unsupervised methods have been successful in defect localization, the usual use of pre-trained models results in lowresolution outputs, which damages visual performance. To
address this issue, we propose PyramidFlow, the first fully
normalizing flow method without pre-trained models that
enables high-resolution defect localization. Specifically,
we propose a latent template-based defect contrastive localization paradigm to reduce intra-class variance, as the
pre-trained models do. In addition, PyramidFlow utilizes
pyramid-like normalizing flows for multi-scale fusing and
volume normalization to help generalization. Our comprehensive studies on MVTecAD demonstrate the proposed
method outperforms the comparable algorithms that do not
use external priors, even achieving state-of-the-art performance in more challenging BTAD scenarios.

1. Introduction
Due to the uncontrollable factors in the complex industrial manufacturing process, unforeseen defects will be
brought to products inevitably. As the human visual system
has the inherent ability to perceive anomalies [25], quality
control relies on manual inspection for a long time. However, large-scale images and tiny defects are challenging for
manual inspection, so increasing research is focused on automated machine vision inspection. Among all the methods, supervised deep learning has achieved great success.
It relies on annotated datasets to learn discriminative features, effectively overcoming the hand-crafted shortcomings. However, because of insufficient negative samples,
the high demand for labels, and the absence of prior knowledge, those approaches based on supervised learning may

Backbone

I

I

I

NF
z

I

(b) anomaly-based method

(a) reconstruction-based method

zd

xd

I

NF
(c) PyramidFlow

Figure 1. Illustration of various anomaly localization methods.
(a) Reconstruction-based method. (b) Anomaly-based method,
where NF denotes normalizing flow. (c) Our PyramidFlow, which
combines latent templates and normalizing flow, enables highresolution localization.

suffer in identifying unseen defects in practices,
Recently, unsupervised methods have been applied to
defect detection, as shown in Fig. 1(a,b). Reconstructionbased methods [4, 15, 23, 29] are the most famous, which
take reconstructed images as templates and then apply explicit contrast in image space to achieve high-resolution localization. However, reconstructing using decoders is an
ill-posed inverse problem, it is hard to reconstruct complex details. To overcome the above limitations, anomalybased methods [6, 7] utilizing texture-aware pre-trained
models achieves high image-level performance, which also
damages pixel-level visual performance. One of the most
promising methods is convolutional normalizing flows [10,
22, 27], which models the probability distribution further
from pre-trained features, earning higher performance.
In this paper, a Pyramid Normalizing Flow (PyramidFlow) is proposed. It develops the idea of templates from
image space into latent space by normalizing flow, then
performing contrast ∆zd for high-resolution anomaly localization, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Specifically, we propose
the multi-scale Pyramid Coupling Block, which includes

14143

