This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stimulus Verification is a Universal and Effective Sampler in Multi-modal
Human Trajectory Prediction
Jianhua Sun*, Yuxuan Li*, Liang Chai, Cewu Lu§
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{gothic,yuxuan li,chailiang1234,lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
To comprehensively cover the uncertainty of the future,
the common practice of multi-modal human trajectory prediction is to first generate a set/distribution of candidate future trajectories and then sample required numbers of trajectories from them as final predictions. Even though a
large number of previous researches develop various strong
models to predict candidate trajectories, how to effectively
sample the final ones has not received much attention yet.
In this paper, we propose stimulus verification, serving as
a universal and effective sampling process to improve the
multi-modal prediction capability, where stimulus refers to
the factor in the observation that may affect the future
movements such as social interaction and scene context.
Stimulus verification introduces a probabilistic model, denoted as stimulus verifier, to verify the coherence between a
predicted future trajectory and its corresponding stimulus.
By highlighting prediction samples with better stimuluscoherence, stimulus verification ensures sampled trajectories plausible from the stimulus’ point of view and therefore aids in better multi-modal prediction performance. We
implement stimulus verification on five representative prediction frameworks and conduct exhaustive experiments on
three widely-used benchmarks. Superior results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Human trajectory prediction [3, 8, 9, 17, 35, 38, 39, 43]
is a vital task towards autonomous driving systems and
social robots, bridging the perception and decision modules [4, 26, 27, 42]. Due to the fact that there is no single
correct future, one of the most important aspects of trajectory prediction lies in multi-modal prediction, studying to
* contributed equally
§ Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, the member of Qing Yuan Re-

search Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

𝛩

ℳ
Distribution

(a)

Sampled Trajectory

Set

(b)

Observed Trajectory

Possible Prediction

Impossible Prediction

Figure 1. (a) Multi-modal trajectory prediction pipeline, including
two major components: base prediction model M and sampler Θ.
(b) Examples of stimulus(context)-inconsistent trajectories sampled from a stimulus(context)-aware base prediction model, Sophie [33]. Predictions in red leads to impossible regions.

cover multiple distinct future possibilities with finite predictions. Specifically, for an observation, a set/distribution
of candidate trajectories is first generated by a base prediction model, after which final ones of required number are
sampled from the candidates, seeing Fig. 1-a.
To guarantee the performance of multi-modal trajectory
prediction, countless efforts have been put into the design
of prediction models in prior works using either generative or classification frameworks. For generative ones,
some popular architectures such as GAN [7], VAE [14]
and Normalizing Flow [29] have been applied and improved in plenty of studies on multi-modal trajectory prediction [8, 23, 33, 34, 40]. In the meantime, impressive results are also achieved with classification models such as
MultiPath [3] and PCCSNet [39]. Yet it is often neglected
that an effective sampling strategy, which selects the appropriate trajectories from the collection of candidates, also
has a great impact on the prediction performance. Typically,
random or Monte-Carlo sampling is adopted as the default
one. Only a handful of works [2, 22, 46] have studied on

22014

