This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Affordance Grounding from Demonstration Video to Target Image
Joya Chen

Difei Gao Kevin Qinghong Lin Mike Zheng Shou†
Show Lab, National University of Singapore

{joyachen,qinghonglin}@u.nus.edu

{daniel.difei.gao,mike.zheng.shou}@gmail.com

Abstract
Humans excel at learning from expert demonstrations
and solving their own problems. To equip intelligent robots
and assistants, such as AR glasses, with this ability, it is
essential to ground human hand interactions (i.e., affordances) from demonstration videos and apply them to a
target image like a user’s AR glass view. This video-toimage affordance grounding task is challenging due to (1)
the need to predict fine-grained affordances, and (2) the limited training data, which inadequately covers video-image
discrepancies and negatively impacts grounding. To tackle
them, we propose Affordance Transformer (Afformer),
which has a fine-grained transformer-based decoder that
gradually refines affordance grounding. Moreover, we
introduce Mask Affordance Hand (MaskAHand), a selfsupervised pre-training technique for synthesizing videoimage data and simulating context changes, enhancing affordance grounding across video-image discrepancies. Afformer with MaskAHand pre-training achieves state-of-theart performance on multiple benchmarks, including a substantial 37% improvement on the OPRA dataset. Code is
made available at https://github.com/showlab/afformer.

1. Introduction
Humans frequently learn from observing others interact
with objects to enhance their own experiences, such as following an online tutorial to operate a novel appliance. To
equip AI systems with this ability, a key challenge lies in
comprehending human interaction across videos and images. Specifically, a robot must ascertain the points of interaction (i.e., affordances [19]) in a demonstration video and
apply them to a new target image, such as the user’s view
through AR glasses.
This process is formulated as video-to-image affordance
grounding, recently proposed by [13], which presents a
more challenging setting than previous affordance-related
tasks, including affordance detection [11, 59], action-toimage grounding [18,40,41,44], and forecasting [16,35,36].
† Corresponding Author.

Demonstration
Video

① Self-supervised
Affordance Pretraining on Videos

Target
Image
Intelligent Robots/AR glasses

Video-to-Image
Affordance Grounding
② Fine-grained
Affordance
Heatmap
Decoding

action: press
action: pull

Figure 1. This figure demonstrates the video-to-image affordance
grounding task, which aims to identify the area of human hand interaction (i.e., affordance) in a demonstration video and map it to
a target image (e.g., AR glass view). Our contributions include (1)
proposing a self-supervised pre-training approach for affordance
grounding, and (2) establishing a new model that excels remarkably in fine-grained heatmap decoding.

The complexity of this setting stems from two factors: (1)
Fine-grained grounding: Unlike conventional grounding
tasks that usually localize coarse affordance positions (e.g.,
identifying all buttons related to “press”), video-to-image
affordance grounding predicts fine-grained positions specific to the query video (e.g., only buttons pressed in the
video). (2) Grounding accross various video-image discrepancies: Demonstration videos and images are often captured in distinct environments, such as a store camera’s perspective versus a user’s view in a kitchen, which complicates the grounding of affordances from videos to images.
Moreover, annotating for this task is labor-intensive, as it
necessitates thoroughly reviewing the entire video, correlating it with the image, and pinpointing affordances. As
a result, affordance grounding performance may be limited
by insufficient data on diverse video-image discrepancies.

6799

