This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single View Scene Scale Estimation using Scale Field
Byeong-Uk Lee1

Jianming Zhang2 Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 In So Kweon1
1
KAIST, Republic of Korea 2 Adobe Inc., USA

81.21 / 118.88 ≈ 0.68 times

Height Measurement

Object Insertion

Scale Field Estimation

In-Scale Image Compositing

Scale Field Use Cases

Figure 1. Scale field estimation results and their use cases.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a single image scale estimation method based on a novel scale field representation. A
scale field defines the local pixel-to-metric conversion ratio
along the gravity direction on all the ground pixels. This
representation resolves the ambiguity in camera parameters, allowing us to use a simple yet effective way to collect
scale annotations on arbitrary images from human annotators. By training our model on calibrated panoramic image
data and the in-the-wild human annotated data, our single image scene scale estimation network generates robust
scale field on a variety of image, which can be utilized in
various 3D understanding and scale-aware image editing
applications.

1. Introduction
Single image 3D understanding plays a significant role in
various computer vision tasks, such as AR/VR applications,
robotics, and computational 3D photography. Many recent
approaches show promising results in estimating depth [17,

18, 25], scene structure [24, 32], or radiance field [20, 22,
23]. However, they often treat scale as an undetermined
factor as it is a very ill-posed problem when the physical
extrinsics of the camera is unknown. Therefore, it remains a
very challenging task to estimate the metric scale of a scene
for a single unconstrained image.
One seminal work in scale estimation is single view
metrology [6]. As detailed in this line of works [6, 10, 35],
knowing horizon line, field of view (FoV) and absolute
camera height enables the conversion between any 2D measurements in image space to 3D measurements. Horizon
line and FoV can be estimated using visual features, as
many of other previous methods suggest [9, 11, 29, 30, 35].
However, since the absolute camera height information cannot be obtained from low-level visual features, Criminisi et
al. [6], Hoiem et al. [10] and Zhu et al. [35] utilize canonical object heights as reference. Reprojecting the 2D bounding boxes of well-known objects like humans or cars to 3D
space with their known metric heights, these methods derive
the vertical height of the camera, and then calculate metric
scale of other objects in the 2D image.

21435

