This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMVC: Learned Multi-Mode Video Compression with Block-based Prediction
Mode Selection and Density-Adaptive Entropy Coding
Bowen Liu, Yu Chen*, Rakesh Chowdary Machineni*, Shiyu Liu, Hun-Seok Kim
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{bowenliu, unchenyu, mrakeshc, shiyuliu, hunseok}@umich.edu

Abstract
Learning-based video compression has been extensively
studied over the past years, but it still has limitations in
adapting to various motion patterns and entropy models.
In this paper, we propose multi-mode video compression
(MMVC), a block wise mode ensemble deep video compression framework that selects the optimal mode for feature domain prediction adapting to different motion patterns. Proposed multi-modes include ConvLSTM-based feature domain prediction, optical flow conditioned feature domain prediction, and feature propagation to address a wide
range of cases from static scenes without apparent motions to dynamic scenes with a moving camera. We partition the feature space into blocks for temporal prediction
in spatial block-based representations. For entropy coding,
we consider both dense and sparse post-quantization residual blocks, and apply optional run-length coding to sparse
residuals to improve the compression rate. In this sense, our
method uses a dual-mode entropy coding scheme guided by
a binary density map, which offers significant rate reduction surpassing the extra cost of transmitting the binary selection map. We validate our scheme with some of the most
popular benchmarking datasets. Compared with state-ofthe-art video compression schemes and standard codecs,
our method yields better or competitive results measured
with PSNR and MS-SSIM.

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, with the emergence and
booming of short videos and video conferences across the
world, video has become the major container of information and interaction among people on a daily basis. Consequently, we have been witnessing a vast demand increase on
transmission bandwidth and storage space, together with the
vibrant growth and discovery of handcrafted codecs such
as AVC/H.264 [23], HEVC [23], and the recently released

VVC [22], along with a number of learning based methods [1, 7, 9, 11, 12, 15–17, 21, 27, 30, 31].
Prior works in deep video codecs have underlined the
importance of utilizing and benefiting from deep neural network models, which can exploit complex spatial-temporal
correlations and have the ability of ‘learning’ contextual and
motion features. The main objective of deep video compression is to predict the next frame from previous frames
or historical data, which results in the reduction of amount
of residual information that needs to be encoded and transmitted. This has so far led to two directions: (1) to build efficient prediction or estimation models, and extract motion
information by leveraging the temporal correlation across
the frames [1, 9, 16, 31]; (2) to make accurate estimation
of the distribution of residual data and push down the information entropy statistically by appropriate conditioning
[7, 11, 30]. The existing works usually fall in one or a combination of the above two realms. In the light of learning
capability that deep neural networks can offer, we argue and
demonstrate in this work that some measures of adaptively
selecting the right mode among different available models
in the encoding path can be advantageous on top of the existing schemes, especially when the adaptive model selection is applied at the block level in the feature space.
Drawing wisdom from conventional video codec standards that typically address various types of motions (including the unchanged contextual information) in the unit of
macroblocks, we present a learning-based, block wise video
compression scheme that applies content-driven mode selection on the fly. Our proposed method consists of four
modes targeting different scenarios:
• Skip mode (S) aims to utilize the frame buffer on the
decoder and find the most condensed representation to
transmit unchanged blocks to achieve the best possible bitrate. This mode is particularly useful for static
scenes where same backgrounds are captured by a
fixed view camera.
• Optical Flow Conditioned Feature Prediction mode
(OFC) leverages the temporal locality of motions. In

* Equally contributed authors.

18487

