This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeepMapping2: Self-Supervised Large-Scale LiDAR Map Optimization
Chao Chen1, ,* Xinhao Liu1, ,* Yiming Li1 , Li Ding2 , Chen Feng1,†
1
New York University 2 University of Rochester
https://ai4ce.github.io/DeepMapping2/

LeGO-LOAM

ICP+DM2 (ours)

GPS

KITTI (0027)

KITTI (0018)

Multiway registration

Trajectory example:

Straight
(good)

Straight
(bad)

Corner
(good)

Corner
(bad)

Figure 1. Mapping result on the KITTI dataset. The bird’s eye view map is shown together with the estimated sensor pose of each
frame. Each pose is represented by an arrow indicating the xy-coordinate and heading (yaw angle) as shown in the bottom examples. The
color indicates the frame index in the trajectory. Challenging regions are zoomed in for a clear view. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
LiDAR mapping is important yet challenging in selfdriving and mobile robotics. To tackle such a global point
cloud registration problem, DeepMapping [1] converts the
complex map estimation into a self-supervised training of
simple deep networks. Despite its broad convergence range
on small datasets, DeepMapping still cannot produce satisfactory results on large-scale datasets with thousands of
frames. This is due to the lack of loop closures and exact cross-frame point correspondences, and the slow convergence of its global localization network. We propose
DeepMapping2 by adding two novel techniques to address
these issues: (1) organization of training batch based on
map topology from loop closing, and (2) self-supervised
* Equal contribution
† The corresponding author is Chen Feng cfeng@nyu.edu

local-to-global point consistency loss leveraging pairwise
registration. Our experiments and ablation studies on public datasets such as KITTI, NCLT, and Nebula demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Mapping is a fundamental ability for autonomous mobile agents. It organizes an agent’s local sensor observations into a map, i.e., a global spatial representation of the
environment. A pre-built map is useful in robotics, selfdriving, and augmented reality for agents to localize themselves [2–6]. Various simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) methods can create maps of new environments from 2D and/or 3D sensors [7–13]. In particular,
LiDAR-based mapping is often adopted to build large-scale
maps in self-driving and mobile robotics due to LiDAR’s
direct and accurate 3D point cloud sensing capability.

9306

