This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Congealing: Aligning Images to a Joint Semantic Atlas
Dolev Ofri-Amar1

Yoni Kasten2

Weizmann Institute of Science

2

Tali Dekel1

NVIDIA Research

Edited Images Congealed Images

Input Images

1

Michal Geyer1

Figure 1. Given a set of input images, our method automatically detects and jointly aligns semantically-common content across the images.
This is achieved through a test-time training approach that estimates a unified 2D atlas that represents the common semantic content, and
dense mappings from the joint atlas to each of the input images. Our atlas and mappings are optimized per input set in a self-supervised
manner by leveraging a pre-trained DINO-ViT model. Our method can be applied to diverse image sets, without requiring any additional
training data, and allows us to automatically propagate an edit applied to a single image across the entire set.

Abstract
We present Neural Congealing – a zero-shot selfsupervised framework for detecting and jointly aligning
semantically-common content across a given set of images.
Our approach harnesses the power of pre-trained DINOViT features to learn: (i) a joint semantic atlas – a 2D
grid that captures the mode of DINO-ViT features in the
input set, and (ii) dense mappings from the unified atlas
to each of the input images. We derive a new robust selfsupervised framework that optimizes the atlas representation and mappings per image set, requiring only a few realworld images as input without any additional input information (e.g., segmentation masks). Notably, we design our
losses and training paradigm to account only for the shared
content under severe variations in appearance, pose, background clutter or other distracting objects. We demonstrate results on a plethora of challenging image sets including sets of mixed domains (e.g., aligning images depicting sculpture and artwork of cats), sets depicting related
yet different object categories (e.g., dogs and tigers), or domains for which large-scale training data is scarce (e.g.,
coffee mugs). We thoroughly evaluate our method and show
that our test-time optimization approach performs favorably compared to a state-of-the-art method that requires extensive training on large-scale datasets. Project webpage:
https://neural-congealing.github.io/

1. Introduction
Humans can easily associate and match semanticallyrelated objects across images, even under severe variations
in appearance, pose and background content. For example, by observing the images in Fig. 1, we can immediately
focus and visually compare the different butterflies, while
ignoring the rest of the irrelevant content. While computational methods for establishing semantic correspondences
have seen a significant progress in recent years, research efforts are largely focused on either estimating sparse matching across multiple images (e.g., keypoint detection), or establishing dense correspondences between a pair of images.
In this paper, we consider the task of joint dense semantic
alignment of multiple images. Solving this long-standing
task is useful for a variety of applications, ranging from
editing image collections [36,56], browsing images through
canonical primitives, and 3D reconstruction (e.g., [8, 47]).
The task of joint image alignment dates back to the seminal congealing [13, 14, 20, 28], which aligns a set of images into a common 2D space. Recently, GANgealing [36]
has modernized this approach for congealing an entire domain of images. This is achieved by leveraging a pre-trained
GAN to generate images that serve as self-supervisory signal. Specifically, their method jointly learns both the mode
of the generated images in the latent space of the GAN, and
a network that predicts the mappings of the images into the

19403

