This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Watch or Listen: Robust Audio-Visual Speech Recognition
with Visual Corruption Modeling and Reliability Scoring
Joanna Hong*

Minsu Kim*
Jeongsoo Choi
Yong Man Ro†
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST

{joanna2587, ms.k, jeongsoo.choi, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper deals with Audio-Visual Speech Recognition
(AVSR) under multimodal input corruption situations where
audio inputs and visual inputs are both corrupted, which is
not well addressed in previous research directions. Previous studies have focused on how to complement the corrupted audio inputs with the clean visual inputs with the
assumption of the availability of clean visual inputs. However, in real life, clean visual inputs are not always accessible and can even be corrupted by occluded lip regions or
noises. Thus, we firstly analyze that the previous AVSR models are not indeed robust to the corruption of multimodal
input streams, the audio and the visual inputs, compared to
uni-modal models. Then, we design multimodal input corruption modeling to develop robust AVSR models. Lastly,
we propose a novel AVSR framework, namely Audio-Visual
Reliability Scoring module (AV-RelScore), that is robust to
the corrupted multimodal inputs. The AV-RelScore can determine which input modal stream is reliable or not for the
prediction and also can exploit the more reliable streams
in prediction. The effectiveness of the proposed method
is evaluated with comprehensive experiments on popular
benchmark databases, LRS2 and LRS3. We also show that
the reliability scores obtained by AV-RelScore well reflect
the degree of corruption and make the proposed model focus on the reliable multimodal representations.

1. Introduction
Imagine you are watching the news on Youtube.
Whether the recording microphone is a problem or the video
encoding is wrong, the anchor’s voice keeps breaking off, so
you cannot hear well. You try to understand her by her lip
motions, but making matters worse, the microphone keeps
covering her mouth, so the news is hardly recognizable.
These days, people often face these kinds of situations, even
in video conferences or interviews where the internet situa* Both authors have contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

tion cuts in and out.
As understanding speech is the core part of human communication, there have been a number of works on speech
recognition [1, 2], especially based on deep learning. These
works have tried to enhance audio representation for recognizing speech in a noisy situation [3–6] or to utilize additional visual information for obtaining complementary effects [7–12]. Recently, even technologies that comprehend
speech from only visual information have been developed
[13–21].
With the research efforts, automatic speech recognition technologies including Audio Speech Recognition
(ASR), Visual Speech Recognition (VSR), and AudioVisual Speech Recognition (AVSR) are achieving great developments with outstanding performances [22–24]. With
the advantages of utilizing multimodal inputs, audio and visual, AVSR that can robustly recognize speech even in a
noisy environment, such as in a crowded restaurant, is rising for the future speech recognition technology. However,
the previous studies have mostly considered the case where
the audio inputs are corrupted and utilizing the additional
clean visual inputs for complementing the corrupted audio
information. Looking at the case, we come up with an important question, what if both visual and audio information
are corrupted, even simultaneously? In real life, like the
aforementioned news situation, cases where both visual and
audio inputs are corrupted alternatively or even simultaneously, are frequently happening. To deal with the question,
we firstly analyze the robustness of the previous ASR, VSR,
and AVSR models on three different input corruption situations, 1) audio input corruption, 2) visual input corruption,
and 3) audio-visual input corruption. Then, we show that
the previous AVSR models are not indeed robust to audiovisual input corruption and show even worse performances
than uni-modal models, which is eventually losing the benefit of utilizing multimodal inputs.
To maximize the superiority of using multimodal systems over the uni-modal system, in this paper, we propose
a novel multimodal corruption modeling method and show
its importance in developing robust AVSR technologies for

18783

