This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViPLO: Vision Transformer based Pose-Conditioned Self-Loop Graph for
Human-Object Interaction Detection
Jeeseung Park1
Jin-Woo Park1,2
Jong-Seok Lee2
1
2
mAy-I Inc., Seoul, Korea,
Yonsei University, Korea
{jspark, jin}@may-i.io

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, which localizes and infers relationships between human and objects, plays an important role in scene understanding. Although two-stage HOI detectors have advantages of high
efficiency in training and inference, they suffer from lower
performance than one-stage methods due to the old backbone networks and the lack of considerations for the
HOI perception process of humans in the interaction classifiers. In this paper, we propose Vision Transformer
based Pose-Conditioned Self-Loop Graph (ViPLO) to resolve these problems. First, we propose a novel feature extraction method suitable for the Vision Transformer backbone, called masking with overlapped area (MOA) module.
The MOA module utilizes the overlapped area between each
patch and the given region in the attention function, which
addresses the quantization problem when using the Vision
Transformer backbone. In addition, we design a graph with
a pose-conditioned self-loop structure, which updates the
human node encoding with local features of human joints.
This allows the classifier to focus on specific human joints
to effectively identify the type of interaction, which is motivated by the human perception process for HOI. As a result, ViPLO achieves the state-of-the-art results on two public benchmarks, especially obtaining a +2.07 mAP performance gain on the HICO-DET dataset.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to localize human and objects in the image, and classify interactions between them. A detected HOI instance is represented
in the form of ⟨human, object, interaction⟩ triplet. HOI
detection is steadily attracting attention in the computer vision field, due to the high potential for use in the downstream tasks such as action recognition [46], scene understanding [44], and image captioning [47].
Existing HOI detectors can be divided into two cate-

jong-seok.lee@yonsei.ac.kr

gories: two-stage methods and one-stage methods. The former usually consists of three steps: 1) human and object
detection with an off-the-shelf detector; 2) feature extraction for human and objects with ROI-Pooling; and 3) prediction of the interaction between human and objects with
the extracted features [3, 8, 12, 15, 16, 40]. One-stage HOI
detection framework is first proposed in PPDM [26], which
directly predicts HOI triplets based on interaction points
[26,42] and union boxes [21]. Recent studies based on onestage structure use the two-branch transformer, which predict HOI triplets with two sub-task decoders and matching
processes [27, 53]. Nevertheless, these methods suffer from
low training speed and large memory usage [50, 55].
In contrast, two-stage HOI detectors show high training
speed using pre-trained object detectors. They are also advantageous when the object bounding box is known in advance from the image. For example, when analyzing HOI
events of fixed target objects, we can efficiently detect interaction using the fixed object regions without an extra object
detection process. Moreover, interaction inference can be
performed only for the desired human-object pair, which
is also a big advantage compared to the one-stage methods
in the application situation. Despite these advantages, twostage methods have recently been less studied due to their
low performance. In this paper, we focus on improving the
performance of the two-stage approach, which can also enjoy the benefit of reduced computational and memory complexity. In particular, we improve the two important parts:
feature extraction and interaction prediction.
Regarding the feature extraction part, we note that most
of the two-stage methods rely on ResNet [14] as backbone networks [15, 16, 49]. Recently, the Vision Transformer (ViT) has emerged as a powerful alternative yielding state-of-the-art performance in various computer vision
fields [34, 36, 38], and it also has a potential as an improved
feature extractor for two-stage HOI detection. However, it
is not straightforward to apply a conventional feature extraction method (e.g., ROIAlign [13]) directly to a ViT backbone due to the different shapes of the output feature maps
of ResNet and ViT. Therefore, we propose a novel Masking

17152

