This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Vision Transformers with Token Gradient
Regularization

1

Michael R. Lyu1
Jianping Zhang1
Yizhan Huang1
Weibin Wu2 *
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{jpzhang, yzhuang22, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, wuwb36@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) have been successfully deployed in a variety of computer vision tasks, but they are still
vulnerable to adversarial samples. Transfer-based attacks
use a local model to generate adversarial samples and directly transfer them to attack a target black-box model. The
high efficiency of transfer-based attacks makes it a severe
security threat to ViT-based applications. Therefore, it is vital to design effective transfer-based attacks to identify the
deficiencies of ViTs beforehand in security-sensitive scenarios. Existing efforts generally focus on regularizing the input gradients to stabilize the updated direction of adversarial samples. However, the variance of the back-propagated
gradients in intermediate blocks of ViTs may still be large,
which may make the generated adversarial samples focus
on some model-specific features and get stuck in poor local optima. To overcome the shortcomings of existing approaches, we propose the Token Gradient Regularization
(TGR) method. According to the structural characteristics
of ViTs, TGR reduces the variance of the back-propagated
gradient in each internal block of ViTs in a token-wise manner and utilizes the regularized gradient to generate adversarial samples. Extensive experiments on attacking both
ViTs and CNNs confirm the superiority of our approach.
Notably, compared to the state-of-the-art transfer-based attacks, our TGR offers a performance improvement of 8.8%
on average.

1. Introduction
Transformers have been widely deployed in the natural language processing, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Vision transformer (ViT) [5] first adapts the transformer structure to the computer vision, and manifests excellent performance. Afterward, diverse variants of ViTs
have been proposed to further improve its performance
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of our Token Gradient Regularization (TGR)
method. The red-colored entry represents the back-propagated
gradient with extreme values. The back-propagated gradients corresponding to one token in the internal blocks of ViTs are called
the token gradients. Since we regularize the back-propagated
gradients in a token-wise manner, we eliminate the token gradients (marked with crosses) where extreme gradients locate during
back-propagation to reduce the gradient variance. We then use the
regularized gradients to generate adversarial samples.

[2, 26] and broaden its application to different computer vision tasks [42, 43], which makes ViTs a well-recognized
successor for convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Unfortunately, recent studies have shown that ViTs are still
vulnerable to adversarial attacks [1, 22], which add humanimperceptible noise to a clean image to mislead deep learning models. It is thus of great importance to understand
DNNs [13, 27, 28, 35] and devise effective attacking methods to identify their deficiencies before deploying them in
safety-critical applications [16, 17, 37].
Adversarial attacks can be generally partitioned into two
categories. The first category is the white-box attack, where
attackers can obtain the structures and weights of the target models for generating adversarial samples. The second
one is the black-box attack, where attackers cannot fetch the
information of the target model. Among different blackbox attacks, transfer-based methods employ white-box attacks to attack a local source model and directly transfer

16415

