This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReCo: Region-Controlled Text-to-Image Generation
Zhengyuan Yang, Jianfeng Wang, Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin,
Chenfei Wu, Nan Duan, Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, Lijuan Wang
Microsoft
{zhengyang,jianfw,zhe.gan,lindsey.li,keli,chewu,nanduan,zliu,ce.liu,nzeng,lijuanw}@microsoft.com

… … …

Figure 1. (a) ReCo extends pre-trained text-to-image models (Stable Diffusion [34]) with an extra set of input position tokens (in dark
blue color) that represent quantized spatial coordinates. Combining position and text tokens yields the region-controlled text input, which
can specify an open-ended regional description precisely for any image region. (b) With the region-controlled text input, ReCo can better
control the object count/relationship/size properties and improve the T2I semantic correctness. We empirically observe that position tokens
are less likely to get overlooked than positional text words, especially when the input query is complicated or describes an unusual scene.

Abstract
Recently, large-scale text-to-image (T2I) models have
shown impressive performance in generating high-fidelity
images, but with limited controllability, e.g., precisely specifying the content in a specific region with a free-form text
description. In this paper, we propose an effective technique
for such regional control in T2I generation. We augment T2I
models’ inputs with an extra set of position tokens, which
represent the quantized spatial coordinates. Each region
is specified by four position tokens to represent the top-left
and bottom-right corners, followed by an open-ended natural language regional description. Then, we fine-tune a
pre-trained T2I model with such new input interface. Our
model, dubbed as ReCo (Region-Controlled T2I), enables
the region control for arbitrary objects described by openended regional texts rather than by object labels from a
constrained category set. Empirically, ReCo achieves better image quality than the T2I model strengthened by posi-

tional words (FID: 8.82 → 7.36, SceneFID: 15.54 → 6.51
on COCO), together with objects being more accurately
placed, amounting to a 20.40% region classification accuracy improvement on COCO. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that ReCo can better control the object count, spatial relationship, and region attributes such as color/size, with
the free-form regional description. Human evaluation on
PaintSkill shows that ReCo is +19.28% and +17.21% more
accurate in generating images with correct object count and
spatial relationship than the T2I model. Code is available
at https://github.com/microsoft/ReCo.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generation aims to generate faithful images based on an input text query that describes the
image content. By scaling up the training data and model
size, large T2I models [31, 34, 36, 45] have recently shown
14246

