This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VQACL: A Novel Visual Question Answering Continual Learning Setting
Xi Zhang1,2 , Feifei Zhang4 , Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4

3

Peng Cheng Laboratory

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology

zhangxi2019@ia.ac.cn, feifeizhang@email.tjut.edu.cn, csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Research on continual learning has recently led to a variety of work in unimodal community, however little attention has been paid to multimodal tasks like visual question
answering (VQA). In this paper, we establish a novel VQA
Continual Learning setting named VQACL, which contains
two key components: a dual-level task sequence where visual and linguistic data are nested, and a novel composition testing containing new skill-concept combinations. The
former devotes to simulating the ever-changing multimodal
datastream in real world and the latter aims at measuring
models’ generalizability for cognitive reasoning. Based on
our VQACL, we perform in-depth evaluations of five wellestablished continual learning methods, and observe that
they suffer from catastrophic forgetting and have weak generalizability. To address above issues, we propose a novel
representation learning method, which leverages a samplespecific and a sample-invariant feature to learn representations that are both discriminative and generalizable for
VQA. Furthermore, by respectively extracting such representation for visual and textual input, our method can explicitly disentangle the skill and concept. Extensive experimental results illustrate that our method significantly outperforms existing models, demonstrating the effectiveness
and compositionality of the proposed approach. The code
is available at https://github.com/zhangxi1997/VQACL.

1. Introduction
Continual learning [43] has recently gained a lot of attention in the deep learning community because it enables
models to learn continually on a sequence of non-stationary
tasks and is close to the human learning process [2, 36].
However, the vibrant research in continual learning mainly
focuses on unimodal tasks such as image classification [37,
46, 51] and sequence tagging [4, 48], and the demand of
multimodal tasks is ignored. In recent years, the volume of
multimodal data has grown tremendously [8, 56, 57]. For
example, tens of millions of texts, images, and videos are
uploaded to social media platforms every day, such as Face-

Figure 1. The illustration of real-world scenario for VQA system,
which may continuously receive new types of questions, fresh
visual concepts, and novel skill-concept compositions.

book and Twitter. To cope with such constantly emerging
real-world data, a practical AI system should be capable of
continually learning from multimodal sources while alleviating forgetting previously learned knowledge.
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a typical multimodal task and has drawn increasing interest over the past
few years [12, 49, 60], which can automatically generate
a textual answer given a question and an image. To deal
with ever-changing questions and visual scenes in real life,
applying continual learning to VQA is essential. However,
it is not easy to set up a suitable continual learning setting
for this task. We identify that two vital issues need to be
considered. First, the VQA input comes from both vision
and linguistic modalities, thus the task setting should simultaneously tackle continuous data from both modalities
in a holistic manner. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the
AI system might deal with new types of questions (e.g.,
Where ..., Why ...) as well as fresh visual concepts (e.g., Loquat, Deer). Second, compositionality [24], a vital property
of cognitive reasoning, should be considered in the VQA
continual learning. The compositionality here denotes the
model’s generalization ability towards novel combinations
of reasoning skills (i.e., question type) and visual concepts
(i.e., image object). As illustrated in Fig. 1, if the system
has been trained with question type Count (e.g., How many)
with a variety of objects (e.g., Person, Cat, and Dount), as
well as another question type (e.g., What color) about a new
object (e.g., Truck). Then, it is expected to answer a novel

19102

