This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving the Transferability of Adversarial Samples by Path-Augmented
Method
Jianping Zhang1
Jen-tse Huang1
Wenxuan Wang1
Yichen Li1
2*
3
2
Weibin Wu
Xiaosen Wang
Yuxin Su
Michael R. Lyu1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
3
Huawei Singular Security Lab, Beijing, China
{jpzhang, jthuang, wxwang, ycli21, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
{wuwb36, suyx35}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, xiaosen@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented success on diverse vision tasks. However, they are vulnerable to
adversarial noise that is imperceptible to humans. This phenomenon negatively affects their deployment in real-world
scenarios, especially security-related ones. To evaluate the
robustness of a target model in practice, transfer-based attacks craft adversarial samples with a local model and have
attracted increasing attention from researchers due to their
high efficiency. The state-of-the-art transfer-based attacks
are generally based on data augmentation, which typically
augments multiple training images from a linear path when
learning adversarial samples. However, such methods selected the image augmentation path heuristically and may
augment images that are semantics-inconsistent with the
target images, which harms the transferability of the generated adversarial samples. To overcome the pitfall, we
propose the Path-Augmented Method (PAM). Specifically,
PAM first constructs a candidate augmentation path pool.
It then settles the employed augmentation paths during adversarial sample generation with greedy search. Furthermore, to avoid augmenting semantics-inconsistent images,
we train a Semantics Predictor (SP) to constrain the length
of the augmentation path. Extensive experiments confirm
that PAM can achieve an improvement of over 4.8% on average compared with the state-of-the-art baselines in terms
of the attack success rates.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) appear to be the stateof-the-art solutions for a wide variety of vision tasks [21,
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of how SIM and our PAM augment images
(red dots) during the generation of adversarial samples. SIM only
considers one linear path from the target image X to a baseline
image X ′ . Besides, SIM may augment images that are semanticsinconsistent with the target image. In contrast, our PAM augments
images along multiple augmentation paths. We also constrain the
length of the path to avoid augmenting images that are semanticsinconsistent with the target one.

28]. However, DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial samples [47], which are elaborately designed by adding humanimperceptible noise to the clean image to mislead DNNs
into wrong predictions. The existence of adversarial samples causes negative effects on security-sensitive DNNbased applications, such as self-driving [27] and medical
diagnosis [6, 7]. Therefore, it is necessary to understand
the DNNs [15, 32, 33, 40] and enhance attack algorithms
to better identify the DNN model’s vulnerability, which is
the first step to improve their robustness against adversarial
samples [23, 24, 42].
There are generally two kinds of attacks in the literature [9]. One is the white-box attacks, which consider the
white-box setting where attackers can access the architectures and parameters of the victim models. The other is
the black-box attacks, which focus on the black-box situation where attackers fail to get access to the specifics of

8173

