This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransFlow: Transformer as Flow Learner
Yawen Lu1, 2 , Qifan Wang3 , Siqi Ma4 , Tong Geng5 , Yingjie Victor Chen1 , Huaijin Chen6 , and
Dongfang Liu2*
1

2

Purdue University
Rochester Institute of Technology
3
Meta AI
4
Westlake University
5
University of Rochester
6
Vayu Robotics

(a) CNN-based pipeline

Abstract

Input
frame

1. Introduction
With the renaissance of connectionism, rapid
progress has been made in optical flow. Till now, most
of the state-of-the-art flow learners were built upon Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [5,7,16,32,40,44].
Despite their diversified model designs and tantalizing
results, existing CNN-based methods commonly rely on

Flow
prediction
FlyingChairs

✘ Temporally
✘ disconnected
✘

FlyingThings

Sintel

Tedious pre-training

(b) Our TransFlow pipeline
Input
video

Spatial
Globalization

Temporal
Association

Flow
prediction

Recon.

Optical flow is an indispensable building block for
various important computer vision tasks, including motion estimation, object tracking, and disparity measurement. In this work, we propose TransFlow, a pure transformer architecture for optical flow estimation. Compared to dominant CNN-based methods, TransFlow
demonstrates three advantages. First, it provides more
accurate correlation and trustworthy matching in flow
estimation by utilizing spatial self-attention and crossattention mechanisms between adjacent frames to effectively capture global dependencies; Second, it recovers
more compromised information (e.g., occlusion and motion blur) in flow estimation through long-range temporal association in dynamic scenes; Third, it enables a
concise self-learning paradigm and effectively eliminate
the complex and laborious multi-stage pre-training procedures. We achieve the state-of-the-art results on the
Sintel, KITTI-15, as well as several downstream tasks,
including video object detection, interpolation and stabilization. For its efficacy, we hope TransFlow could
serve as a flexible baseline for optical flow estimation.

Spatial locality

Encoder

Decoder

Target
domain

Concise pre-training

Figure 1. Conceptual comparison of flow estimation methods. Existing CNN-based methods regress flow via local spatial convolutions, while TransFlow relies on Transformer to perform global matching (both spatial and temporal). The demo video can be found in https://youtu.
be/xbnyj9wspqA.

spatial locality and compute displacements from all-pair
correlation volume for flow prediction (Fig. 1(a)). Very
recently, the vast success of Transformer [42, 47, 48]

18063

