This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UV Volumes for Real-time Rendering of Editable Free-view Human Performance
Xingyu Chen1,2
Qi Zhang4
Xuan Wang3,4 *
Yue Chen1,2 *
Xiaoyu Li4
Yu Guo1,2†
Jue Wang4
Fei Wang1,2
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
2
IAIR, Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Ant Group 4 Tencent AI Lab

(a) Novel View Synthesis

1.5FPS

1.3FPS

0.3FPS

(b) UV Avatar

(c) Retexturing

42FPS

DyNeRF NeuralBody Animatable-NeRF

Ours

(d) Reshaping

(e) Reposing

Figure 1. We decompose a dynamic human into 3D UV Volumes along with a 2D texture. The disentanglement of appearance and geometry
enables us to achieve (a) high-fidelity real-time novel view synthesis guided by (b) a smooth UV avatar, (c) retexturing of a 3D human by
editing a 2D texture, (d) reshaping and (e) reposing by changing the parameters of a human model while keeping the texture untouched.

Abstract
Neural volume rendering enables photo-realistic renderings of a human performer in free-view, a critical task in
immersive VR/AR applications. But the practice is severely
limited by high computational costs in the rendering process. To solve this problem, we propose the UV Volumes,
a new approach that can render an editable free-view video
of a human performer in real-time. It separates the highfrequency (i.e., non-smooth) human appearance from the
3D volume, and encodes them into 2D neural texture stacks
(NTS). The smooth UV volumes allow much smaller and
shallower neural networks to obtain densities and texture
* Authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author. This work is partly supported by the Na-

tional Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2022YFB3303800 and National Key Projects of China, 2021XJTU0040.

coordinates in 3D while capturing detailed appearance in
2D NTS. For editability, the mapping between the parameterized human model and the smooth texture coordinates allows us a better generalization on novel poses and shapes.
Furthermore, the use of NTS enables interesting applications, e.g., retexturing. Extensive experiments on CMU
Panoptic, ZJU Mocap, and H36M datasets show that our
model can render 960 × 540 images in 30FPS on average
with comparable photo-realism to state-of-the-art methods.
The project and supplementary materials are available at
https://fanegg.github.io/UV-Volumes.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing a free-view video of a human performer
in motion is a long-standing problem in computer vision.

16621

