This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GKEAL: Gaussian Kernel Embedded Analytic Learning for Few-shot Class
Incremental Task

1

Huiping Zhuang1∗ , Zhenyu Weng2 , Run He1 , Zhiping Lin2 , Ziqian Zeng1
Shien-Ming Wu School of Intelligent Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
∗

corresponding:

hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Class-incremental learning (CIL) [20] can continuously
absorbs new category knowledge in a phase-by-phase manner with data coming separately in each phase, after training
a classification network. This is important as data can be
scattered at various times and locations in a non-identical
independent way. The few-shot class incremental learning
(FSCIL) [23] further imposes an inefficiency constraint on
the data availability. That is, only a few data samples, i.e.,
few-shot, for each new class is allowed, leading to a more
challenging incremental learning problem.
The major challenge for FSCIL follows from the CIL’s,
namely the catastrophic forgetting. The performance on old

Data
Batch 0

High resemblance

Few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL) aims to
address catastrophic forgetting during class incremental
learning in a few-shot learning setting. In this paper, we
approach the FSCIL by adopting analytic learning, a technique that converts network training into linear problems.
This is inspired by the fact that the recursive implementation (batch-by-batch learning) of analytic learning gives
identical weights to that produced by training on the entire dataset at once. The recursive implementation and the
weight-identical property highly resemble the FSCIL setting
(phase-by-phase learning) and its goal of avoiding catastrophic forgetting. By bridging the FSCIL with the analytic learning, we propose a Gaussian kernel embedded analytic learning (GKEAL) for FSCIL. The key components
of GKEAL include the kernel analytic module which allows
the GKEAL to conduct FSCIL in a recursive manner, and
the augmented feature concatenation module that balances
the preference between old and new tasks especially effectively under the few-shot setting. Our experiments show that
the GKEAL gives state-of-the-art performance on several
benchmark datasets.

Weight trained with analytic learning

Weight trained with recursive analytic learning

Data
Batch 1

…

Data
Batch 0

Data
Batch 1

Data
Batch 1

Data
… Batch
k

Equal weight (weight-invariant property)
Class-incremental learning protocol
Training for phase 0

Can we introduce
weight-invariant property
to the CIL realm?
Training with entire data together

Training for phase 1

…

…

Training for phase K

Ultimate goal of CIL is to achieve the equality

Figure 1. The resemblance between the analytic learning (recursive form) [33] and incremental learning. We want to build a
bridge between these two fields to take advantage of the analytic
learning for addressing the FSCIL.

(base) tasks is tremendously discounted after learning new
tasks. This is caused by the lack of training data for old
tasks, tricking models to focus only on new tasks. The forgetting issue is also referred to as task-recency bias, in favor
of newly learned tasks in prediction. The forgetting issue in
FSCIL manifests more quickly due to over-fitting than that
in the conventional CIL setting as the training samples become scarce for new tasks.
To handle the forgetting, conventional CIL sparks
various contributions, which mainly include the Bias
correction-based CIL [1, 9], Regularization-based CIL [11,
13] and Replay-based CIL [17, 20]. They work well in addressing the catastrophic forgetting in CIL. However, the
few-shot constraint in FSCIL renders the CIL solutions obsolete (see [23] or our experiments). There have been several works [22,23,31] taking into account the few-shot constraint, outperforming the conventional CIL. These FSCIL
techniques take inspirations from existing CIL variants [22]
or the few-shot learning angle (e.g., prototype-based [31])
to present catastrophic forgetting.

7746

