This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OVTrack: Open-Vocabulary Multiple Object Tracking
Siyuan Li*

Tobias Fischer*
Lei Ke
Henghui Ding
Martin Danelljan
Fisher Yu
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich
https://www.vis.xyz/pub/ovtrack/

Abstract
The ability to recognize, localize and track dynamic objects in a scene is fundamental to many real-world applications, such as self-driving and robotic systems. Yet, traditional multiple object tracking (MOT) benchmarks rely
only on a few object categories that hardly represent the
multitude of possible objects that are encountered in the real
world. This leaves contemporary MOT methods limited to
a small set of pre-defined object categories. In this paper,
we address this limitation by tackling a novel task, openvocabulary MOT, that aims to evaluate tracking beyond predefined training categories. We further develop OVTrack, an
open-vocabulary tracker that is capable of tracking arbitrary
object classes. Its design is based on two key ingredients:
First, leveraging vision-language models for both classification and association via knowledge distillation; second,
a data hallucination strategy for robust appearance feature
learning from denoising diffusion probabilistic models. The
result is an extremely data-efficient open-vocabulary tracker
that sets a new state-of-the-art on the large-scale, largevocabulary TAO benchmark, while being trained solely on
static images.

1. Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) aims to recognize, localize and track objects in a given video sequence. It is a
cornerstone of dynamic scene analysis and vital for many
real-world applications such as autonomous driving, augmented reality, and video surveillance. Traditionally, MOT
benchmarks [9, 11, 19, 64, 71] define a set of semantic categories that constitute the objects to be tracked in the training
and testing data distributions. The potential of traditional
MOT methods [3, 4, 33, 43] is therefore limited by the taxonomies of those benchmarks. As consequence, contemporary MOT methods struggle with unseen events, leading
to a gap between evaluation performance and real-world
* Equal contribution.

Training

Static Image

Discriminative
VL Model

OVTrack

Base
Categories

Generative
VL Model

Instance
Similarity
Learning

OVTrack

Testing

Video Frames

Discriminative
VL Model

Any Text Prompt
(Base + Novel)

OVTrack

Figure 1. OVTrack. We approach the task of open-vocabulary multiple object tracking. During training, we leverage vision-language
(VL) models both for generating samples and knowledge distillation. During testing, we track both base and novel classes unseen
during training by querying a vision-language model.

deployment.
To bridge this gap, previous works have tackled MOT in
an open-world context. In particular, Ošep et al. [46, 48]
approach generic object tracking by first segmenting the
scene and performing tracking before classification. Other
works have used class agnostic localizers [10, 49] to perform MOT on arbitrary objects. Recently, Liu et al. [37]
defined open-world tracking, a task that focuses on the evaluation of previously unseen objects. In particular, it requires
any-object tracking as a stage that precedes object classification. This setup comes with two inherent difficulties. First,
in an open-world context, densely annotating all objects
is prohibitively expensive. Second, without a pre-defined
taxonomy of categories, the notion of what is an object is ambiguous. As a consequence, Liu et al. resort to recall-based
evaluation, which is limited in two ways. Penalizing false
positives (FP) becomes impossible, i.e. we cannot measure
the tracker precision. Moreover, by evaluating tracking in a
class-agnostic manner, we lose the ability to evaluate how

5567

