This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SmartBrush: Text and Shape Guided Object Inpainting with Diffusion Model
Shaoan Xie 1 ,* Zhifei Zhang2 , Zhe Lin2 , Tobias Hinz2 , Kun Zhang1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Adobe Research
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
shaoan@cmu.edu, {zzhang, zlin, thinz}@adobe.com, kunz1@cmu.edu

Stable Diffusion Blended Diffusion

GLIDE

Stable Inpainting

DALLE-2

SmartBrush

Mount Fuji

flamingo

Input+Mask

Figure 1. Our method generates high-quality object inpainting results. Different mask precision levels allowing users to either provide
exact masks (top row) or to use a rough mask outline (bottom row). Compared to existing methods, our method generates more realistic
images, follows accurate masks more closely (top row) and shows better background preservation for coarse masks (bottom row).

Abstract
Generic image inpainting aims to complete a corrupted
image by borrowing surrounding information, which barely
generates novel content. By contrast, multi-modal inpainting provides more flexible and useful controls on the inpainted content, e.g., a text prompt can be used to describe
an object with richer attributes, and a mask can be used to
constrain the shape of the inpainted object rather than being only considered as a missing area. We propose a new
diffusion-based model named SmartBrush for completing a
missing region with an object using both text and shapeguidance. While previous work such as DALLE-2 and Stable Diffusion can do text-guided inapinting they do not support shape guidance and tend to modify background texture surrounding the generated object. Our model incorporates both text and shape guidance with precision control. To preserve the background better, we propose a novel
training and sampling strategy by augmenting the diffusion
U-net with object-mask prediction. Lastly, we introduce
a multi-task training strategy by jointly training inpaint* Work done during internship at Adobe.

ing with text-to-image generation to leverage more training
data. We conduct extensive experiments showing that our
model outperforms all baselines in terms of visual quality,
mask controllability, and background preservation.

1. Introduction
Traditional image inpainting aims to fill the missing area
in images conditioned on surrounding pixels, lacking control over the inpainted content. To alleviate this, multimodal image inpainting offers more control through additional information, e.g. class labels, text descriptions, segmentation maps, etc. In this paper, we consider the task
of multi-modal object inpainting conditioned on both a text
description and the shape of the object to be inpainted (see
Fig. 1). In particular, we explore diffusion models for this
task inspired by their superior performance in modeling
complex image distributions and generating high-quality
images.
Diffusion models (DMs) [7, 24], e.g., Stable Diffusion [20], DALL-E [18, 19], and Imagen [21] have shown
promising results in text-to-image generation. They can

22428

