This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskCon: Masked Contrastive Learning for Coarse-Labelled Dataset
Chen Feng, Ioannis Patras
Queen Mary University of London, UK
{chen.feng, i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved great success in recent years
with the aid of advanced neural network structures and
large-scale human-annotated datasets. However, it is often costly and difficult to accurately and efficiently annotate large-scale datasets, especially for some specialized
domains where fine-grained labels are required. In this setting, coarse labels are much easier to acquire as they do not
require expert knowledge. In this work, we propose a contrastive learning method, called masked contrastive learning (MaskCon) to address the under-explored problem setting, where we learn with a coarse-labelled dataset in order to address a finer labelling problem. More specifically,
within the contrastive learning framework, for each sample our method generates soft-labels with the aid of coarse
labels against other samples and another augmented view
of the sample in question. By contrast to self-supervised
contrastive learning where only the sample’s augmentations
are considered hard positives, and in supervised contrastive
learning where only samples with the same coarse labels
are considered hard positives, we propose soft labels based
on sample distances, that are masked by the coarse labels.
This allows us to utilize both inter-sample relations and
coarse labels. We demonstrate that our method can obtain
as special cases many existing state-of-the-art works and
that it provides tighter bounds on the generalization error.
Experimentally, our method achieves significant improvement over the current state-of-the-art in various datasets,
including CIFAR10, CIFAR100, ImageNet-1K, Standford
Online Products and Stanford Cars196 datasets. Code and
annotations are available at https://github.com/
MrChenFeng/MaskCon_CVPR2023.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning with deep neural networks has
achieved great success in various computer vision tasks
such as image classification, action detection and object localization. However, the success of supervised
learning relies on large-scale and high-quality human-

1

2

3

4

5

'british short' 'british short'

'siamese'

'jaguar'

'bottlenose'

'flycatcher'

'cat'

'cat'

'non-cat'

'non-cat'

0
Fine label:
Coarse label:

Self

'cat'

Coarse

'cat'

Fine

Ours (𝜏=1)

Ours (𝜏=0.1)

Figure 1. Contrastive learning sample relations using MaskCon
(ours) and other learning paradigms when only coarse labels are
available. MaskCon are closer to the fine ones.

annotated datasets, whose annotations are time-consuming
and labour-intensive to produce. To avoid such reliance,
various learning frameworks have been proposed and investigated: Self-supervised learning aims to learn meaningful representations with heuristic proxy visual tasks,
such as rotation prediction [16] and the more prevalent instance discrimination task, the latter, being widely applied
in self-supervised contrastive learning framework; semisupervised learning usually considers a dataset for which
only a small part is annotated – within this setting, pseudo
labelling methods [24] and consistency regularization techniques [1, 29] are typically used; Moreover, learning using
more accessible but noisy data, such as web-crawled data,
has also received increasing attention [13, 25].
In this work, we consider an under-explored problem
setting aiming at reducing the annotation effort – learning fine-grained representations with a coarsely-labelled
dataset. Specifically, we learn with a dataset that is fully labeled, albeit at a coarser granularity than we are interested
in (i.e., that of the test set). Compared to fine-grained labels, coarse labels are often significantly easier to obtain,
especially in some of the more specialized domains, such
as the recognition and classification of medical pathology
images. As a simple example, for the task of differentiation between different pets, we need a knowledgeable cat
lover to distinguish between ‘British short’ and ‘Siamese’,

19913

