This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NaQ: Leveraging Narrations as Queries to Supervise Episodic Memory
Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan1
Ziad Al-Halah2
Kristen Grauman1,3
1
UT Austin 2 University of Utah 3 FAIR, Meta AI

Abstract
Searching long egocentric videos with natural language
queries (NLQ) has compelling applications in augmented
reality and robotics, where a fluid index into everything
that a person (agent) has seen before could augment human
memory and surface relevant information on demand. However, the structured nature of the learning problem (freeform text query inputs, localized video temporal window
outputs) and its needle-in-a-haystack nature makes it both
technically challenging and expensive to supervise. We introduce Narrations-as-Queries (NaQ), a data augmentation
strategy that transforms standard video-text narrations into
training data for a video query localization model. Validating our idea on the Ego4D benchmark, we find it has
tremendous impact in practice. NaQ improves multiple top
models by substantial margins (even doubling their accuracy), and yields the very best results to date on the Ego4D
NLQ challenge, soundly outperforming all challenge winners in the CVPR and ECCV 2022 competitions and topping the current public leaderboard. Beyond achieving
the state-of-the-art for NLQ, we also demonstrate unique
properties of our approach such as the ability to perform
zero-shot and few-shot NLQ, and improved performance on
queries about long-tail object categories. Code and models: http://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/naq .

1. Introduction
Human memory can fail us in day-to-day things in our
visual experience. We misplace objects in the house (where
is my passport?), we lose track of what tasks we have or
have not done (did I add the salt already?), we forget where
we did a given activity (where did I buy tickets last time?),
we do not notice the state of an object in our environment
(did I leave the garage door open?). First-person or “egocentric” perception on a wearable camera could reduce that
cognitive overload and provide us with a superhuman personal episodic memory—by seeing what we see, and indexing it in meaningful and easy-to-access ways.
This is the vision of the Natural Language Query (NLQ)

Query: How many eggs did I break into the bowl?

...

...

Response

Figure 1. Episodic memory with natural language queries (NLQ)
aims to search long egocentric videos to identify the temporal
“response” window revealing the answer to a free-form question
about the camera wearer’s past visual experience.

task in Ego4D’s Episodic Memory benchmark [16]. Given
a natural language question and a long egocentric video, the
NLQ task requires identifying the precise temporal window
in the camera wearer’s past video that reveals the answer.
See Figure 1. Such functionality could transform the everyday experience of an augmented reality user with alwayson AR glasses. It could similarly play a role for a mobile
household robot, whom a user may wish to query about its
visual history (have you seen my keys?).
The NLQ challenge has attracted substantial attention
in the research community over the last year [23, 24, 40]
as have related video-language efforts for question answering [31,34,35,37–39]. The technical challenges are striking.
Queries are free-form natural language, response windows
are tiny slivers (a few seconds or less) within a long stretch
of video, and wearable camera video is notoriously noisy
with its quick head motions and limited field of view.
Today’s most successful methods embrace the visuallanguage aspect of the problem. In particular, inspired by
the growing success of visual-linguistic embeddings [22,
25, 29, 33, 37], top competitors on NLQ perform large-scale
pretraining on ⟨video clip, text description⟩ pairs mined
from the Ego4D dataset’s provided narrations [23], which
are timestamped play-by-play descriptions of the camera-

6694

