This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nighttime Smartphone Reflective Flare Removal
Using Optical Center Symmetry Prior
Yuekun Dai Yihang Luo Shangchen Zhou Chongyi Li* Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{YDAI005, c200211, s200094, chongyi.li, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
https://ykdai.github.io/projects/BracketFlare

1. Introduction
Lens flare artifacts can occur when a strong light enters
the camera’s field of view, causing scattering and reflection
within the lenses. Unlike radial-shaped scattering flares, reflective flares appear as groups of bright spots [5, 7] or a
“ghosting effect” like the examples in Fig. 1. With multiple reflections, the light source creates multiple projections
at various positions behind the lens. If the projection is far
from the focal plane, the defocused effect can brighten the
whole sensor and degrade the photo’s quality as shown in
Fig. 2. In near-focus situations, images of the light source
* Corresponding author.

Ours
Estimated flare

Reflective flare is a phenomenon that occurs when light
reflects inside lenses, causing bright spots or a “ghosting
effect” in photos, which can impact their quality. Eliminating reflective flare is highly desirable but challenging.
Many existing methods rely on manually designed features
to detect these bright spots, but they often fail to identify
reflective flares created by various types of light and may
even mistakenly remove the light sources in scenarios with
multiple light sources. To address these challenges, we propose an optical center symmetry prior, which suggests that
the reflective flare and light source are always symmetrical
around the lens’s optical center. This prior helps to locate
the reflective flare’s proposal region more accurately and
can be applied to most smartphone cameras. Building on
this prior, we create the first reflective flare removal dataset
called BracketFlare, which contains diverse and realistic
reflective flare patterns. We use continuous bracketing to
capture the reflective flare pattern in the underexposed image and combine it with a normally exposed image to synthesize a pair of flare-corrupted and flare-free images. With
the dataset, neural networks can be trained to remove the
reflective flares effectively. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on both synthetic and
real-world datasets.

Input

Abstract

(a) iPhone 13 Pro

(b) Huawei P40

(c) Sony ILCE-6400

Figure 1. Reflective flare removal with our proposed dataset and
prior. The network trained on our dataset can effectively separate
the reflective flare and flare-free images from a flare-corrupted image. Our method can generalize well to different types of smartphones and even cameras with specific types of lenses.

can result in a line of unfocused, bright blobs on the captured photo.
Applying anti-reflective (AR) coating is a common technique for reducing internal reflections [22]. The coating is
effective for unfocused spots with low luminance, but cannot mitigate a bright spot with high luminance at the focal
plane. Even with a well-designed lens system, a bright reflective spot may remain in the photo, known as the ghosting effect [10]. Reflective flare is common on all types of
smartphone lenses, and certain types of smartphones (e.g.,
the iPhone series) can produce a large area of inverted reflective flare from neon lights or large, luminous standing
signs, as shown in Fig. 1. The phenomenon becomes more
pronounced when capturing a photo at night with multiple
lights in the scene. Numerous bright spots and inverted re-

20783

