This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SINE: SINgle Image Editing with Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Zhixing Zhang1

Ligong Han1
Arnab Ghosh2
Dimitris Metaxas1
1
2
Rutgers University
Snap Inc.

Jian Ren2

Abstract
Recent works on diffusion models have demonstrated a
strong capability for conditioning image generation, e.g.,
text-guided image synthesis. Such success inspires many
efforts trying to use large-scale pre-trained diffusion models for tackling a challenging problem–real image editing.
Works conducted in this area learn a unique textual token
corresponding to several images containing the same object. However, under many circumstances, only one image is available, such as the painting of the Girl with a
Pearl Earring. Using existing works on fine-tuning the pretrained diffusion models with a single image causes severe
overfitting issues. The information leakage from the pretrained diffusion models makes editing can not keep the
same content as the given image while creating new features depicted by the language guidance. This work aims
to address the problem of single-image editing. We propose
a novel model-based guidance built upon the classifier-free
guidance so that the knowledge from the model trained on
a single image can be distilled into the pre-trained diffusion model, enabling content creation even with one given
image. Additionally, we propose a patch-based fine-tuning
that can effectively help the model generate images of arbitrary resolution. We provide extensive experiments to validate the design choices of our approach and show promising editing capabilities, including changing style, content
addition, and object manipulation. Our code is made publicly available here.

1. Introduction
Automatic real image editing is an exciting direction,
enabling content generation and creation with minimal effort. Although many works have been conducted in this
area, achieving high-fidelity semantic manipulation on an
image is still a challenging problem for the generative models, considering the target image might be out of the training data distribution [4, 11, 25, 26, 32, 58, 59]. The recently
introduced large-scale text-to-image models, e.g., DALL·E
2 [37], Imagen [42], Parti [55], and StableDiffusion [39],
can perform high-quality and diverse image generation with

Source Image

Source Image

“… sculpture”

Source Image

“…covered by snow”

“…super-hero cape” “coffee machine…” “coffee maker…”

Source Image

“… in snow”

“… blossom street”

Figure 1. With only one real image, i.e., Source Image, our method
is able to manipulate and generate the content in various ways,
such as changing style, adding context, modifying the object, and
enlarging the resolution, through guidance from the text prompt.

natural language guidance. The success of these works has
inspired many subsequent efforts to leverage the pre-trained
large-scale models for real image editing [10, 15, 20, 40].
They show that, with properly designed prompts and a limited number of fine-tuning steps, the text-to-image models
can manipulate a given subject with text guidance.
On the downside, the recent text-guided editing works
that build upon the diffusion models suffer several limitations. First, the fine-tuning process might lead to the pretrained large-scale model overfit on the real image, which
degrades the synthesized images’ quality when editing. To
tackle these issues, methods like using multiple images with
the same content and applying regularization terms on the
same object have been introduced [4, 40]. However, querying multiple images with identical content or object might
not be an available choice; for instance, there is only one
painting for Girl with a Pearl Earring. Directly editing
the single image brings information leakage from the pretrained large-scale models, generating images with different content (examples in Fig. 5); therefore, the application
scenarios of these methods are greatly constrained. Second,
these works lack a reasonable understanding of the object
geometry for the edited image. Thus, generating images
with different spatial size as the training data cause undesired artifacts, e.g., repeated objects, and incorrectly modified geometry (examples in Fig. 5). Such drawbacks restrict
applying these methods for generating images with an arbitrary resolution, e.g., synthesizing high-resolution images
from a single photo of a castle (as in Fig. 4), again limiting

6027

