This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Verified Training for Robust Image Classifications via Abstraction
Zhaodi Zhang 1,2,4 , Zhiyi Xue 2 , Yang Chen 2 , Si Liu 3 , Yueling Zhang 2 , Jing Liu 1 , Min Zhang 2
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing
2
East China Normal University
3
ETH Zürich 4 Chengdu Education Research Institute

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel, abstraction-based, certified
training method for robust image classifiers. Via abstraction, all perturbed images are mapped into intervals before
feeding into neural networks for training. By training on
intervals, all the perturbed images that are mapped to the
same interval are classified as the same label, rendering the
variance of training sets to be small and the loss landscape
of the models to be smooth. Consequently, our approach
significantly improves the robustness of trained models. For
the abstraction, our training method also enables a sound
and complete black-box verification approach, which is orthogonal and scalable to arbitrary types of neural networks
regardless of their sizes and architectures. We evaluate our
method on a wide range of benchmarks in different scales.
The experimental results show that our method outperforms
state of the art by (i) reducing the verified errors of trained
models up to 95.64%; (ii) totally achieving up to 602.50x
speedup; and (iii) scaling up to larger models with up to
138 million trainable parameters. The demo is available at
https:// github.com/ zhangzhaodi233/ ABSCERT.git.

1. Introduction
The robustness of image classifications based on neural networks is attracting more attention than ever due to
their applications to safety-critical domains such as selfdriving [51] and medical diagnosis [43]. There has been
a considerable amount of work on training robust neural
networks against adversarial perturbations [1, 6–8, 10, 12,
28,32,56–59,62]. Conventional defending approaches augment the training set with adversarial examples [5, 15, 27,
32, 37, 41, 54, 55]. They target only specific adversaries, depending on how the adversarial samples are generated [7],
but cannot provide robustness guarantees [2, 11, 26].
Recent approaches attempt to train certifiably robust
models with guarantees [2, 11, 14, 24, 26, 29, 49, 63]. They
rely on the robustness verification results of neural networks
in the training process. Most of the existing verification approaches are based on symbolic interval propagation (SIP)

[11,14,14,24,26], by which intervals are symbolically input
into neural networks and propagated on a layer basis. There
are, however, mainly three obstacles for these approaches to
be widely adopted: (i) adding the verification results to the
loss function for training brings limited improvement to the
robustness of neural networks due to overestimation introduced in the verification phase; (ii) they are time-consuming
due to the high complexity of the verification problem per
se, e.g., NP-complete for the simplest ReLU-based fully
connected feedforward neural networks [19]; and (iii) the
verification is tied to specific types of neural networks in
terms of network architectures and activation functions.
To overcome the above obstacles, we propose a novel,
abstraction-based approach for training verified robust image classifications whose inputs are numerical intervals.
Regarding (i), we abstract each pixel of an image into an
interval before inputting it into the neural network. The interval is numerically input to the neural network by assigning to two input neurons its lower and upper bounds, respectively. This guarantees that all the perturbations to the
pixel in this interval do not alter the classification results,
thereby improving the robustness of the network. Moreover, this imposes no overestimation in the training phase.
To address the challenge (ii), we use forward propagation
and back propagation only to train the network without extra time overhead. Regarding (iii), we treat the neural networks as black boxes since we deal only with the input layer
and do not change other layers. Hence, being agnostic to the
actual neural network architectures, our approach can scale
up to fairly large neural networks. Additionally, we identify a crucial hyper-parameter, namely abstraction granularity, which corresponds to the size of intervals used for
training the networks. We propose a gradient descent-based
algorithm to refine the abstraction granularity for training a
more robust neural network.
We implement our method in a tool called A BS C ERT
and assess it, together with existing approaches, on various benchmarks. The experimental results show that our
approach reduces the verified errors of the trained neural
networks up to 95.64%. Moreover, it totally achieves up to

16251

