This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZBS: Zero-shot Background Subtraction via Instance-level Background
Modeling and Foreground Selection
Yongqi An 1,2 Xu Zhao 1, * Tao Yu 1,2 Haiyun Guo1,2
Chaoyang Zhao 1 Ming Tang 1,2 Jinqiao Wang 1,2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China2
{yongqi.an,xu.zhao,haiyun.guo,tangm,jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
yutao2022@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Pixel-level BGS
Input frame

Background subtraction (BGS) aims to extract all moving objects in the video frames to obtain binary foreground
segmentation masks. Deep learning has been widely used in
this field. Compared with supervised-based BGS methods,
unsupervised methods have better generalization. However,
previous unsupervised deep learning BGS algorithms perform poorly in sophisticated scenarios such as shadows or
night lights, and they cannot detect objects outside the predefined categories. In this work, we propose an unsupervised BGS algorithm based on zero-shot object detection
called Zero-shot Background Subtraction (ZBS). The proposed method fully utilizes the advantages of zero-shot object detection to build the open-vocabulary instance-level
background model. Based on it, the foreground can be effectively extracted by comparing the detection results of new
frames with the background model. ZBS performs well for
sophisticated scenarios, and it has rich and extensible categories. Furthermore, our method can easily generalize to
other tasks, such as abandoned object detection in unseen
environments. We experimentally show that ZBS surpasses
state-of-the-art unsupervised BGS methods by 4.70% FMeasure on the CDnet 2014 dataset. The code is released
at https://github.com/CASIA-IVA-Lab/ZBS.

1. Introduction
Background subtraction (BGS) is a fundamental task
in computer vision applications [7], such as autonomous
navigation, visual surveillance, human activity recognition,
etc [15]. BGS aims to extract all moving objects as foreground in each video frame and outputs binary segmenta* Corresponding Author

Ground Truth

Traditional method
(SuBSENSE)

Deep learning-based
unsupervised method
(RT-SBS-v2)

Deep learning-based
supervised method
(BSUV-Net 2.0)

Instance-level
BGS
ZBS (Ours)

Camera Jitter

PTZ

Shadow

Figure 1. The performance of different BGS methods. Previous
BGS methods based on pixel-level background models may misjudge noisy background as foreground objects, such as cameraJitter, PTZ, and shadow. Our method based on an instance-level
background model can obtain precise foreground edges, effectively reducing the confusion of background pixels as foreground
objects.

tions.
The most straightforward BGS algorithm is to directly
compare the current frame with the ”stationary” background
image [7]. However, this strategy cannot handle complex scenarios, such as dynamic background, illumination
changes, and shadows. Therefore, more sophisticated BGS
techniques [7, 20, 24, 47] have been proposed in the past
decades. The traditional methods improve performance in
two aspects. The first is to design more robust feature representations, including color features [43], edge features [20],
motion features [47], and texture features [12]. The second is to design more suitable background models, such
as Gaussian mixture models [35], kernel density estimation
models [14], CodeBook [21], ViBe [4], SuBSENSE [33],
and PAWCS [34]. The traditional methods have relatively
adequate generalization capacity since they are not optimized on specific scenarios or categories of objects. How-

6355

