This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interventional Bag Multi-Instance Learning On Whole-Slide Pathological Images
Tiancheng Lin1,2
Zhimiao Yu1,2
Hongyu Hu1,2
Yi Xu1,2*
Chang Wen Chen3
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Digital Media Processing and Transmission, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
{ltc19940819, carboxy, mathewcrespo, xuyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, changwen.chen@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
The quantitative analysis of whole-slide pathological images (WSIs) is essential for both diagnostic and research
purposes [13]. Beyond complex biological structures, WSIs
are quite different from natural images in the gigapixel resolution and expensive annotation, which is thus formulated
as a multi-instance learning (MIL) [9] problem: treating
each WSI as a labeled bag and the corresponding patches
as unlabeled instances. Such a de facto paradigm has been
demonstrated in extensive tasks on WSIs, e.g., classification [7, 15, 18, 46], regression [40, 41, 48] and segmentation [37]. The prevailing scheme for WSI classification —
bag-level MIL — is depicted in Fig. 1a. Given the patchified
* Corresponding author.

Train Feature Extractor

Train Aggregator

Interventional Training

(a)

Bag A

e Bag

Positive

A

Instances

iv
Negat

Instances

Positive

Bag B

e Bag

iv
Negat

B

Instances

Instances

Multi-instance learning (MIL) is an effective paradigm
for whole-slide pathological images (WSIs) classification to
handle the gigapixel resolution and slide-level label. Prevailing MIL methods primarily focus on improving the feature extractor and aggregator. However, one deficiency of
these methods is that the bag contextual prior may trick the
model into capturing spurious correlations between bags
and labels. This deficiency is a confounder that limits the
performance of existing MIL methods. In this paper, we
propose a novel scheme, Interventional Bag Multi-Instance
Learning (IBMIL), to achieve deconfounded bag-level prediction. Unlike traditional likelihood-based strategies, the
proposed scheme is based on the backdoor adjustment to
achieve the interventional training, thus is capable of suppressing the bias caused by the bag contextual prior. Note
that the principle of IBMIL is orthogonal to existing bag
MIL methods. Therefore, IBMIL is able to bring consistent performance boosting to existing schemes, achieving
new state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/HHHedo/IBMIL.

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Traditional scheme and our interventional training.
(b) Dataset bias. (c) Unreasonable attention maps with right predictions.

images as instances, each instance is embedded in vectors
by a feature extractor in the first stage. Second, for each
bag, their corresponding instance features are aggregated as
a bag-level feature for classification.
More and more new frameworks are proposed to improve the two stages following this scheme [19,28,31,44]. It
is convinced that learning better instance features and modeling more accurate instance relationships can bring better
performance of MIL. While we have witnessed the great
efforts, they still leave the “bag contextual prior” issue unsolved: the information shared by bags of the same class
but irrelevant to the label, which may affect the final predictions. For example, in Fig. 1b, due to the dataset bias, most
of the instances in the positive bags are stained pink but purple in the negative bags. The co-occurrence of specific color
patterns and labels may mislead the model to classify bags
by color statistics instead of the key instances — the more

19830

