This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Orthogonal Annotation Benefits Barely-supervised Medical Image Segmentation
Heng Cai1 , Shumeng Li1 , Lei Qi2 , Qian Yu3 , Yinghuan Shi1, *, Yang Gao1
1
Nanjing University 2 Southest University 3 Shandong Women’s University

Abstract
Transverse plane

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation is one of the most critical
vision tasks in medical image analysis field. Thanks to the
development of deep learning-based methods [8,11,28,32],
segmentation performance has now been substantially improved. However, the current promising performance is at
* Corresponding author: Yinghuan Shi.
Heng Cai, Shumeng Li,
Yinghuan Shi and Yang Gao are with the State Key Laboratory for
Novel Software Technology and National Institute of Healthcare Data
Science, Nanjing University, China. This work is supported by the
NSFC Program (62222604, 62206052, 62192783), CAAI-Huawei MindSpore (CAAIXSJLJJ-2021-042A), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Project (2021M690609), Jiangsu Natural Science Foundation Project
(BK20210224), and CCF-Lenovo Bule Ocean Research Fund.

Coronal plane

Orthogonal annotation

95
90
Dice (%)

Recent trends in semi-supervised learning have significantly boosted the performance of 3D semi-supervised medical image segmentation. Compared with 2D images, 3D
medical volumes involve information from different directions, e.g., transverse, sagittal, and coronal planes, so as
to naturally provide complementary views. These complementary views and the intrinsic similarity among adjacent 3D slices inspire us to develop a novel annotation
way and its corresponding semi-supervised model for effective segmentation. Specifically, we firstly propose the orthogonal annotation by only labeling two orthogonal slices
in a labeled volume, which significantly relieves the burden of annotation. Then, we perform registration to obtain the initial pseudo labels for sparsely labeled volumes.
Subsequently, by introducing unlabeled volumes, we propose a dual-network paradigm named Dense-Sparse Cotraining (DeSCO) that exploits dense pseudo labels in early
stage and sparse labels in later stage and meanwhile forces
consistent output of two networks. Experimental results
on three benchmark datasets validated our effectiveness in
performance and efficiency in annotation. For example,
with only 10 annotated slices, our method reaches a Dice
up to 86.93% on KiTS19 dataset. Our code and models
are available at https://github.com/HengCaiNJU/DeSCO.

85
80
75
70

Orthogonal annotation
Sparse annotation
Dense annotation

65
60
55
Annotation (#slice)

Figure 1. The upper figure illustrates our annotation method,
each volume with annotations is labeled with only two orthogonal
slices. The lower figure shows the comparison between the efficiency and effectiveness of our orthogonal annotation and other
manners, including conventional dense annotation and previous
sparse annotation which labels slices in one plane. All trained on
LA [42] dataset with supervised setting. For sparse annotation and
our orthogonal annotation, we train the models only on labeled
voxels through partial cross-entropy and partial Dice loss.

the cost of large-scale manually precisely labeled dataset,
which is prohibitively expensive and laborious to achieve.
What’s worse, different radiologists might provide different
annotations even for a same image. Therefore, exploring
ways to alleviate the requirement of quantity or quality of
manual annotation is highly demanded. Mainstream methods typically follow two paradigms: 1) degrade annotation
quality, i.e., weakly-supervised segmentation, and 2) reduce
annotation quantity, i.e., semi-supervised segmentation.
Weakly-supervised segmentation methods usually utilize
weak annotations, e.g., image-level label [16, 17], scribble [20, 21], point [3] or partial slices [5, 18]. Unfortunately, most of them are either difficult to distinguish
some fuzzy boundaries or with additional large computational burden [15]. What’s more, weakly-supervised setting
usually requires coarse annotation for every single image.
This is still a heavy burden for radiologists. Besides, most
current methods originally developed for 2D segmentation
could not directly utilize 3D volumetric information [9].
Different from these weakly-supervised methods, semisupervised methods train segmentation models with a small
amount of manually labeled data and a large amount of
unlabeled data, which have achieved remarkable perfor-

3302

