This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

High-fidelity 3D Human Digitization from Single 2K Resolution Images
Sang-Hun Han1 , Min-Gyu Park2 , Ju Hong Yoon2 ,
Ju-Mi Kang2 , Young-Jae Park1 and Hae-Gon Jeon1
1
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), 2 Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI)
{sanghunhan, youngjae.park}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr
{mpark, jhyoon, yypeip}@keti.re.kr

Figure 1. Frame-by-frame reconstruction results for a 2K resolution image sequence. The image sequence is captured by a smartphone.

Abstract
High-quality 3D human body reconstruction requires
high-fidelity and large-scale training data and appropriate
network design that effectively exploits the high-resolution
input images. To tackle these problems, we propose a simple yet effective 3D human digitization method called 2K2K,
which constructs a large-scale 2K human dataset and infers 3D human models from 2K resolution images. The
proposed method separately recovers the global shape of
a human and its details. The low-resolution depth network
predicts the global structure from a low-resolution image,
and the part-wise image-to-normal network predicts the details of the 3D human body structure. The high-resolution
depth network merges the global 3D shape and the detailed
structures to infer the high-resolution front and back side
depth maps. Finally, an off-the-shelf mesh generator reconstructs the full 3D human model, which are available at
https://github.com/SangHunHan92/2K2K. In
addition, we also provide 2,050 3D human models, including
texture maps, 3D joints, and SMPL parameters for research
purposes. In experiments, we demonstrate competitive performance over the recent works on various datasets.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing photo-realistic 3D human models is one of
the actively researched topics in computer vision and graphics. Conventional approaches search for correspondences

across multiple views. Therefore, it was necessary to employ multiple camera systems [9, 11] to acquire high-quality
human models. However, the bulky and expensive camera
systems limit the usage of normal users such as personal
content creators and influencers. Recent progress in deep
learning has shown the possibility of reconstructing human
models from a single image [1,15,21,30,35,40,46,48,54,55].
Nevertheless, there still exists room to improve the quality of
3D human models, especially given an input single image.
Existing approaches fall into two categories; the first is to
predict a deep implicit volume [15, 40, 41] and the second is
to infer multiple depth maps [13] from an image. In the case
of the first approach, the implicit volume can be directly predicted through a deep learning network [46] or the volume
can be constructed by predicting each voxel [40, 41] millions of times. Therefore, these approaches are demanding
either in memory or in time. The second approach requires
to predict at least two depth maps, one for the front and the
other for the back, to build a complete 3D human model.
Gabeur et al. [13] propose an adversarial framework to predict double-sided depth maps; however, it shows poor results
owing to inadequate training data generated by using 19
human scan models in addition to the synthetic dataset [47].
Here, researchers have paid attention to recover not only
geometric details [41] such as facial regions but also people
in various postures by predicting surface normal maps and
parametric template models [33].
We claim that the prediction quality of 3D human models is primarily affected by suitably designed deep neu-

12869

