This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral Enhanced Rectangle Transformer for Hyperspectral Image Denoising
Miaoyu Li 1† , Ji Liu 2† , Ying Fu 1∗ , Yulun Zhang3 , Dejing Dou4
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Baidu Inc., 3 ETH Zürich, 4 BCG X
miaoyli@bit.edu.cn, liuji04@baidu.com, fuying@bit.edu.cn,
yulun100@gmail.com, dejingdou@gmail.com

Abstract
Denoising is a crucial step for hyperspectral image
(HSI) applications. Though witnessing the great power of
deep learning, existing HSI denoising methods suffer from
limitations in capturing the non-local self-similarity. Transformers have shown potential in capturing long-range dependencies, but few attempts have been made with specifically designed Transformer to model the spatial and spectral correlation in HSIs. In this paper, we address these
issues by proposing a spectral enhanced rectangle Transformer, driving it to explore the non-local spatial similarity and global spectral low-rank property of HSIs. For
the former, we exploit the rectangle self-attention horizontally and vertically to capture the non-local similarity in
the spatial domain. For the latter, we design a spectral
enhancement module that is capable of extracting global
underlying low-rank property of spatial-spectral cubes to
suppress noise, while enabling the interactions among nonoverlapping spatial rectangles. Extensive experiments have
been conducted on both synthetic noisy HSIs and real noisy
HSIs, showing the effectiveness of our proposed method in
terms of both objective metric and subjective visual quality.
The code is available at https://github.com/MyuLi/SERT.

1. Introduction
With sufficient spectral information, hyperspectral images (HSIs) can provide more detailed characteristics to
distinguish from different materials compared to RGB images. Thus, HSIs have been widely applied to face recognition [37, 38], vegetation detection [4], medical diagnosis [43], etc. With scanning designs [2] and massive wavebands, the photon numbers in individual bands are limited.
HSI is easily degraded by various noise. Apart from poor
visual effects, such undesired degradation also negatively
affects the downstream applications. To obtain better visual
effects and performance in HSI vision tasks, denoising is a
† Equal Contribution, ∗ Corresponding Author

fundamental step for HSI analysis and processing.
Similar to RGB images, HSIs have self-similarity in
the spatial domain, suggesting that similar pixels can be
grouped and denoised together. Moreover, since hyperspectral imaging systems are able to acquire images at a nominal spectral resolution, HSIs have inner correlations in the
spectral domain. Thus, it is important to consider both spatial and spectral domains when designing denoising methods for HSI. Traditional model-based HSI denoising methods [10, 17, 21] employ handcrafted priors to explore the
spatial and spectral correlations by iteratively solving the
optimization problem. Among these works, total variation
[20, 21, 52] prior, non-local similarity [19], low-rank [8, 9]
property, and sparsity [42] regularization are frequently utilized. The performance of these methods relies on the accuracy of handcrafted priors. In practical HSI denoising,
model-based methods are generally time-consuming and
have limited generalization ability in diverse scenarios.
To obtain robust learning for noise removal, deep learning methods [7, 35, 41, 49] are applied to HSI denoising and
achieve impressive restoration performance. However, most
of these works utilize convolutional neural networks for feature extraction and depend on local filter response to separate noise and signal in a limited receptive field.
Recently, vision Transformers have emerged with competitive results in both high-level tasks [16, 39] and lowlevel tasks [1,13,50], showing the strong capability of modeling long-range dependencies in image regions. To diminish the unaffordable quadratically computation cost to
image size, many works have investigated the efficient design of spatial attention [11, 46, 47]. Swin Transformer [28]
splitted feature maps into shifted square windows. CSWin
Transformer [15] developed a stripe window across the features maps to enlarge the attention area. As HSI usually
has large feature maps, exploring the similarity beyond
the noisy pixel can cause unnecessary calculation burden.
Thus, how to efficiently model the non-local spatial similarity is still challenging for HSI denoising Transformer.
HSIs usually lie in a spectral low-rank subspace [9],
which can maintain the distinguished information and sup-

5805

