This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RefTeacher: A Strong Baseline for Semi-Supervised
Referring Expression Comprehension
Jiamu Sun1 , Gen Luo1 , Yiyi Zhou1,2 *, Xiaoshuai Sun1,2 , Guannan Jiang3 , Zhiyu Wang3 , Rongrong Ji1,2,4
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Xiamen University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
Contemporary Amperex Technology 4 Shenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University
{sunjiamu,luogen}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {zhouyiyi,xssun,rrji}@xmu.edu.cn, {jianggn,wangzy13}@catl.com

Abstract
Referring expression comprehension (REC) often requires a large number of instance-level annotations for fully
supervised learning, which are laborious and expensive. In
this paper, we present the first attempt of semi-supervised
learning for REC and propose a strong baseline method
called RefTeacher. Inspired by the recent progress in computer vision, RefTeacher adopts a teacher-student learning
paradigm, where the teacher REC network predicts pseudolabels for optimizing the student one. This paradigm allows
REC models to exploit massive unlabeled data based on a
small fraction of labeled. In particular, we also identify
two key challenges in semi-supervised REC, namely, sparse
supervision signals and worse pseudo-label noise. To address these issues, we equip RefTeacher with two novel designs called Attention-based Imitation Learning (AIL) and
Adaptive Pseudo-label Weighting (APW). AIL can help the
student network imitate the recognition behaviors of the
teacher, thereby obtaining sufficient supervision signals.
APW can help the model adaptively adjust the contributions
of pseudo-labels with varying qualities, thus avoiding confirmation bias. To validate RefTeacher, we conduct extensive experiments on three REC benchmark datasets. Experimental results show that RefTeacher obtains obvious gains
over the fully supervised methods. More importantly, using
only 10% labeled data, our approach allows the model to
achieve near 100% fully supervised performance, e.g., only
-2.78% on RefCOCO. Project: https://refteacher.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) [33–35,45,
49, 53, 60, 62], also called Visual grounding [26, 51, 52]
or Phrase localization [20, 39], aims to locate the target
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Statistics of the pseudo-label quality in semisupervised REC with different percentages of labeled information. The REC model only predicts one pseudo-box for each
image-text pair and cannot apply filtering, so the pseudo-labels are
usually noisy and low-quality during training.

objects in an image referred by a given natural language
expression. Compared to conventional object detection
tasks [4,9–11,23,24,28,40–42], REC is not limited to a fix
set of categories and can be generalized to open-vocabulary
recognition [31, 60]. However, as a detection task, REC
also requires a large number of instance-level annotations
for training, which poses a huge obstacle to its practical applications.
To address this issue, one feasible solution is semisupervised learning (SSL), which has been well studied on
various computer vision tasks [1–3, 8, 16, 29, 43, 44, 47, 59]
but not yet exploited in REC. In particular, recent advances
in semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) [16, 29, 44, 47,
59] has yielded notable progress in practical applications.
These SSOD methods apply a training framework consisted
of two detection networks with the same configurations, acting as teacher and student, respectively. The teacher network is in charge of generating pseudo-labels to optimize

19144

