This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Selective Structured State-Spaces for Long-Form Video Understanding
Jue Wang

Wentao Zhu

Pichao Wang Xiang Yu Linda Liu
Amazon Prime Video

Mohamed Omar

Raffay Hamid

{juewangn, zhuwent, wpichao, xiangnyu, lindliu, omarmk, raffay}@amazon.com

actions: pick

1. Introduction
Video understanding is an active research area where a
variety of different models have been explored including
e.g., two-stream networks [19, 20, 52], recurrent neural networks [3, 63, 72] and 3-D convolutional networks [59–61].
However, most of these methods have primarily focused on
short-form videos that are typically with a few seconds in
length, and are not designed to model the complex long-

whisk

objects: saucepan stove egg

•••

make cereal

Effective modeling of complex spatiotemporal dependencies
in long-form videos remains an open problem. The recently
proposed Structured State-Space Sequence (S4) model with
its linear complexity offers a promising direction in this
space. However, we demonstrate that treating all imagetokens equally as done by S4 model can adversely affect
its efficiency and accuracy. To address this limitation, we
present a novel Selective S4 (i.e., S5) model that employs
a lightweight mask generator to adaptively select informative image tokens resulting in more efficient and accurate modeling of long-term spatiotemporal dependencies in
videos. Unlike previous mask-based token reduction methods used in transformers, our S5 model avoids the dense
self-attention calculation by making use of the guidance of
the momentum-updated S4 model. This enables our model
to efficiently discard less informative tokens and adapt to
various long-form video understanding tasks more effectively. However, as is the case for most token reduction
methods, the informative image tokens could be dropped incorrectly. To improve the robustness and the temporal horizon of our model, we propose a novel long-short masked
contrastive learning (LSMCL) approach that enables our
model to predict longer temporal context using shorter input videos. We present extensive comparative results using
three challenging long-form video understanding datasets
(LVU, COIN and Breakfast), demonstrating that our approach consistently outperforms the previous state-of-theart S4 model by up to 9.6% accuracy while reducing its
memory footprint by 23%.

pour

cook eggs

Abstract

time

Figure 1. Illustration of long-form videos – Evenly sampled
frames from two long-form videos, that have long duration (more
than 1 minute) and distinct categories in the Breakfast [36] dataset
(grayscale frames are shown for better visualization). The video
on top shows the activity of making scrambled eggs, while the
one on the bottom shows the activity of making cereal. These two
videos heavily overlap in terms of objects (e.g., eggs, saucepan
and stove), and actions (e.g., picking, whisking and pouring). To
effectively distinguish these two videos, it is important to model
long-term spatiotemporal dependencies, which is also the key in
long-form video understanding.

term spatiotemporal dependencies often found in long-form
videos (see Figure 1 for an illustrative example). The recent vision transformer (ViT) [14] has shown promising capability in modeling long-range dependencies, and several
variants [1,4,15,41,45,49,65] have successfully adopted the
transformer architecture for video modeling. However, for a
video with T frames and S spatial tokens, the complexity of
standard video transformer architecture is O(S2 T2 ), which
poses prohibitively high computation and memory costs
when modeling long-form videos. Various attempts [54,68]
have been proposed to improve this efficiency, but the ViT
pyramid architecture prevents them from developing longterm dependencies on low-level features.
In addition to ViT, a recent ViS4mer [29] method has
tried to apply the Structured State-Spaces Sequence (S4)
model [23] as an effective way to model the long-term
video dependencies. However, by introducing simple masking techniques we empirically reveal that the S4 model can
have different temporal reasoning preferences for different
downstream tasks. This makes applying the same image token selection method as done by ViS4mer [29] for all long-

6387

