This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CloSET: Modeling Clothed Humans on Continuous Surface with
Explicit Template Decomposition
Hongwen Zhang1 Siyou Lin1 Ruizhi Shao1 Yuxiang Zhang1 Zerong Zheng1
Han Huang2 Yandong Guo2 Yebin Liu1
1
Tsinghua University 2 OPPO Research Institute

Abstract
Creating animatable avatars from static scans requires the modeling of clothing deformations in different
poses. Existing learning-based methods typically add posedependent deformations upon a minimally-clothed mesh
template or a learned implicit template, which have limitations in capturing details or hinder end-to-end learning. In
this paper, we revisit point-based solutions and propose to
decompose explicit garment-related templates and then add
pose-dependent wrinkles to them. In this way, the clothing
deformations are disentangled such that the pose-dependent
wrinkles can be better learned and applied to unseen poses.
Additionally, to tackle the seam artifact issues in recent
state-of-the-art point-based methods, we propose to learn
point features on a body surface, which establishes a continuous and compact feature space to capture the fine-grained
and pose-dependent clothing geometry. To facilitate the research in this field, we also introduce a high-quality scan
dataset of humans in real-world clothing. Our approach is
validated on two existing datasets and our newly introduced
dataset, showing better clothing deformation results in unseen poses. The project page with code and dataset can be
found at https://www.liuyebin.com/closet.

1. Introduction
Animating 3D clothed humans requires the modeling of
pose-dependent deformations in various poses. The diversity of clothing styles and body poses makes this task extremely challenging. Traditional methods are based on either simple rigging and skinning [4,20,33] or physics-based
simulation [14, 23, 24, 49], which heavily rely on artist efforts or computational resources. Recent learning-based
methods [10, 36, 39, 59] resort to modeling the clothing deformation directly from raw scans of clothed humans. Despite the promising progress, this task is still far from being solved due to the challenges in clothing representations,
generalization to unseen poses, and data acquisition, etc.

Figure 1. Our method learns to decompose garment templates (top
row) and add pose-dependent wrinkles upon them (bottom row).

For the modeling of pose-dependent garment geometry, the representation of clothing plays a vital role in a
learning-based scheme. As the relationship between body
poses and clothing deformations is complex, an effective representation is desirable for neural networks to capture pose-dependent deformations. In the research of this
line, meshes [2, 12, 38], implicit fields [10, 59], and point
clouds [36, 39] have been adopted to represent clothing. In
accordance with the chosen representation, the clothing deformation and geometry features are learned on top of a
fixed-resolution template mesh [8, 38], a 3D implicit sampling space [10,59], or an unfolded UV plane [2,12,36,39].
Among these representations, the mesh is the most efficient
one but is limited to a fixed topology due to its discretization
scheme. The implicit fields naturally enable continuous feature learning in a resolution-free manner but are too flexible
to satisfy the body structure prior, leading to geometry artifacts in unseen poses. The point clouds enjoy the compact
nature and topology flexibility and have shown promising
results in the recent state-of-the-art solutions [36,39] to represent clothing, but the feature learning on UV planes still
leads to discontinuity artifacts between body parts.

501

