This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Image Quality Assessment Dataset for Portraits
Nicolas Chahine1,2 Ana-Stefania Calarasanu1 Davide Garcia-Civiero1
ThÂeo Cayla1 Sira Ferradans1 Jean Ponce2,3
1

DXOMARK 2 DÂepartement d’informatique de l’Ecole normale supÂerieure (ENS-PSL, CNRS, Inria)
3
Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Data Science, New York University

Abstract
Year after year, the demand for ever-better smartphone
photos continues to grow, in particular in the domain of
portrait photography. Manufacturers thus use perceptual
quality criteria throughout the development of smartphone
cameras. This costly procedure can be partially replaced
by automated learning-based methods for image quality assessment (IQA). Due to its subjective nature, it is necessary
to estimate and guarantee the consistency of the IQA process, a characteristic lacking in the mean opinion scores
(MOS) widely used for crowdsourcing IQA. In addition,
existing blind IQA (BIQA) datasets pay little attention to
the difficulty of cross-content assessment, which may degrade the quality of annotations. This paper introduces
PIQ23, a portrait-specific IQA dataset of 5116 images of
50 predefined scenarios acquired by 100 smartphones, covering a high variety of brands, models, and use cases. The
dataset includes individuals of various genders and ethnicities who have given explicit and informed consent for their
photographs to be used in public research. It is annotated
by pairwise comparisons (PWC) collected from over 30 image quality experts for three image attributes: face detail
preservation, face target exposure, and overall image quality. An in-depth statistical analysis of these annotations
allows us to evaluate their consistency over PIQ23. Finally, we show through an extensive comparison with existing baselines that semantic information (image context)
can be used to improve IQA predictions. The dataset along
with the proposed statistical analysis and BIQA algorithms
are available: https://github.com/DXOMARKResearch/PIQ2023

1. Introduction
Social media has made smartphones a vital tool for connecting with people worldwide. Visual media, particularly
portrait photography, has become a crucial aspect of sharing content on these platforms. Portrait photography serves
numerous applications (e.g., advertisements, social media)

and use cases (e.g., anniversaries, weddings). Capturing
a high-quality portrait is a complex exercise that demands
careful consideration of multiple factors, such as scene semantics, compositional rules, image quality, and other subjective properties [46].
Smartphone manufacturers strive to deliver the best visual quality while minimizing production costs to rival professional photography. Achieving this requires implementing complex tuning and optimization protocols to calibrate
image quality in smartphone cameras. These cameras introduce sophisticated non-linear processing techniques such as
multi-image fusion or deep learning-based image enhancement [55], resulting in a combination of authentic (realistic) camera distortions. This makes traditional objective
quality assessment [4, 16, 32, 40] that models digital cameras as linear systems unreliable [9]. Therefore, in addition to objective measurements, the tuning process also includes perceptual evaluations where cameras are assessed
by image quality experts. This procedure requires shooting and evaluating thousands of use cases, which can be
costly, time-consuming, and challenging to reproduce. Automatic image quality assessment (IQA) methods that try to
mimic human perception of quality have been around for
many years, in order to help in the tuning process [14, 36,
37, 39, 48, 57, 60, 64]. Blind IQA (BIQA), in particular, is
a branch of IQA where image quality is evaluated without
the need for undistorted reference images. Learning-based
BIQA methods [15, 24, 25, 27, 52, 59, 62, 67, 69] have shown
good performance on authentic camera distortion datasets
[9, 13, 21, 56, 61, 70], annotated by subjective assessment
of image quality. Annotating these datasets is considered
an ill-posed problem, as the subjective opinions are not deterministic, making it challenging to use BIQA methods as
accurate quality measures. Therefore, there is a need to develop a quantitative and formal framework to evaluate and
compare subjective judgments in an objective manner. In
this paper, we rely on pairwise comparisons performed by
image quality experts along a fixed and relevant set of attributes.
Multiple attributes, including target exposure, dynamic

9968

