This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WIRE: Wavelet Implicit Neural Representations
Vishwanath Saragadam, Daniel LeJeune, Jasper Tan, Guha Balakrishnan,
Ashok Veeraraghavan, Richard G. Baraniuk
Rice University
https://vishwa91.github.io/wire

Nonlinearity for Implicit Neural Representations

Abstract
Implicit neural representations (INRs) have recently advanced numerous vision-related areas. INR performance
depends strongly on the choice of activation function employed in its MLP network. A wide range of nonlinearities
have been explored, but, unfortunately, current INRs designed to have high accuracy also suffer from poor robustness (to signal noise, parameter variation, etc.). Inspired by
harmonic analysis, we develop a new, highly accurate and
robust INR that does not exhibit this tradeoff. Our Wavelet
Implicit neural REpresentation (WIRE) uses as its activation function the complex Gabor wavelet that is wellknown to be optimally concentrated in space–frequency and
to have excellent biases for representing images. A wide
range of experiments (image denoising, image inpainting,
super-resolution, computed tomography reconstruction, image overfitting, and novel view synthesis with neural radiance fields) demonstrate that WIRE defines the new state of
the art in INR accuracy, training time, and robustness.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations (INRs), which learn a
continuous function over a set of points, have emerged as
a promising general-purpose signal processing framework.
An INR consists of a multilayer perceptron (MLP) combining linear layers and element-wise nonlinear activation
functions. Thanks to the MLP, INRs do not share the locality biases that limit the performance of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). Consequently, INRs have advanced the
state of the art in numerous vision-related areas, including
computer graphics [22, 27, 28], image processing [10], inverse problems [42], and signal representations [41].
Currently, INRs still face a number of obstacles that limit
their use. First, for applications with high-dimensional data
such as 3D volumes, training an INR to high accuracy can
still take too long (tens of seconds) for real time applications. Second, INRs are not robust to signal noise or insufficient measurements. Indeed, most works on INRs in the lit-

Approximation accuracy with various nonlinearities
SIREN
Gauss
WIRE
Ground truth
Spatially
spread-out
error

Spatially
compact
but large
error
Error map 0.0

Spatially
compact
and small
error
1.0

Figure 1. Wavelet implicit neural representation (WIRE). We
propose a new nonlinearity for implicit neural representations
(INRs) based on the continuous complex Gabor wavelet that has
high representation capacity for visual signals. The top row shows
two commonly used nonlinearities: SIREN with sinusoidal nonlinearity and Gaussian nonlinearity, and WIRE that uses a continuous complex Gabor wavelet. WIRE benefits from the frequency
compactness of sine, and spatial compactness of a Gaussian nonlinearity. The bottom row shows error maps for approximating
an image with strong edges. SIREN results in global ringing artifacts while Gaussian nonlinearity leads to compact but large error
at edges. WIRE produces results with the smallest and most spatially compact error. This enables WIRE to learn representations
accurately, while being robust to noise and undersampling of data.

erature assume virtually no signal noise and large amounts
of data. We find in our own experiments that current INR
methods are ineffective for tasks such as denoising or superresolution. Finally, INRs still have room for improvement
in representational accuracy for fine details.
In this paper, we develop a new, faster, more accurate,
and robust INR that addresses these issues and takes INR
performance to the next level. To achieve this, we take inspiration from harmonic analysis and reconsider the nonlinear activation function used in the MLP. Recent work has
shown that an INR can be interpreted as a structured signal

18507

