This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointCMP: Contrastive Mask Prediction for Self-supervised Learning
on Point Cloud Videos
Zhiqiang Shen1,2 *, Xiaoxiao Sheng1 *, Longguang Wang3†, Yulan Guo4 , Qiong Liu2 , Xi Zhou2
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
CloudWalk
3
4
Aviation University of Air Force
Sun Yat-sen University
{shenzhiqiang, shengxiaoxiao}@sjtu.edu.cn, wanglongguang15@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Self-supervised learning can extract representations of
good quality from solely unlabeled data, which is appealing for point cloud videos due to their high labelling
cost. In this paper, we propose a contrastive mask prediction (PointCMP) framework for self-supervised learning on point cloud videos. Specifically, our PointCMP employs a two-branch structure to achieve simultaneous learning of both local and global spatio-temporal information.
On top of this two-branch structure, a mutual similarity
based augmentation module is developed to synthesize hard
samples at the feature level. By masking dominant tokens
and erasing principal channels, we generate hard samples
to facilitate learning representations with better discrimination and generalization performance. Extensive experiments show that our PointCMP achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on benchmark datasets and outperforms existing full-supervised counterparts. Transfer learning results
demonstrate the superiority of the learned representations
across different datasets and tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, LiDARs have become increasingly popular in
numerous real-world applications to perceive 3D environments, such as autonomous vehicles and robots. Point
clouds acquired by LiDARs can provide rich geometric information and facilitate the machine to achieve 3D perception. Early works focus on parsing the real world from static
point clouds [9,24,64], while recent researches pay more attention to understanding point cloud videos [14, 16, 54, 55].
Since annotating point clouds is highly time and labor
consuming [1, 57], learning from point cloud videos in
a self-supervised manner draws increasing interest. Although contrastive learning and mask prediction paradigms
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Input

Input

Input
Encoder
Tokens

Augmentation

Masking

Mutual Similarity based
Augmentation

Augmented
Inputs

Masked
Inputs

Masked
Tokens

Negative
Tokens

Encoder
+
Projector

Encoder
+
Decoder

Regressor

Projector

Contrastive
Learning

Masked
Prediction

Masked
Contrastive
Learning

Global
Contrastive
Learning

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1.
A comparison between (a) contrastive learning
paradigm, (b) mask prediction paradigm, and (c) our method.

[6, 19, 21, 22, 58, 63] have shown the effectiveness of selfsupervised learning on images or static point clouds, these
methods cannot be directly extended to point cloud videos
due to the following three challenges:
(i) Multiple-Granularity Information Matters. The
contrastive learning paradigm [3, 4, 6, 19, 22, 63] usually focuses on extracting global semantic information based on
instance-level augmentations. In contrast, the mask prediction paradigm [2, 12, 21, 23, 58] pays more attention to
modeling local structures while ignoring global semantics.
However, since fine-grained understanding of point cloud
videos requires not only local spatio-temporal features but
also global dynamics [16,55], existing paradigms cannot be
directly adopted.
(ii) Sample Generation. The contrastive learning
paradigm is conducted by pulling positive samples while
pushing negative ones [3, 6, 8, 19, 22, 51, 63], and the mask
prediction paradigm learns representations by modeling the
visible parts to infer the masked ones [2, 21, 39, 49, 58, 62].

1212

