This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Skinned Motion Retargeting with
Residual Perception of Motion Semantics & Geometry
Junwu Weng2
Di Kang2
Fang Zhao2
Shaoli Huang2
Jiaxu Zhang1 *
2
2
2
2
Xuefei Zhe
Linchao Bao
Ying Shan
Jue Wang
Zhigang Tu1†
1
2
Wuhan University
Tencent AI Lab
{zjiaxu, tuzhigang}@whu.edu.cn

1. Introduction
As a process of mapping the motion of a source character to a target character without losing plausibility, motion
retargeting is a long-standing problem in the community of
computer vision and computer graphics. It has a wide spectrum of applications in game and animation industry, and
is a cornerstone of the digital avatar and metaverse technologies [25]. In recent years, learning-based retargeting
methods started sparkling in the community. Among them,
the neural motion retargeting [1, 16, 24, 25], which has advantages in intelligent perception and stable inference, be* Most of this work was done during Jiaxu’s internship at Tencent.
† Corresponding author: tuzhigang@whu.edu.cn

Copy

Ours

SAN

8

6
5

Source

Copy

Ours

NKN

PMnet

7

Ours
0

0.5

Motion Retargeting

Source

PMnet*

9

Shape-aware

A good motion retargeting cannot be reached without
reasonable consideration of source-target differences on
both the skeleton and shape geometry levels. In this work,
we propose a novel Residual RETargeting network (R2 ET)
structure, which relies on two neural modification modules,
to adjust the source motions to fit the target skeletons and
shapes progressively. In particular, a skeleton-aware module is introduced to preserve the source motion semantics. A
shape-aware module is designed to perceive the geometries
of target characters to reduce interpenetration and contactmissing. Driven by our explored distance-based losses that
explicitly model the motion semantics and geometry, these
two modules can learn residual motion modifications on
the source motion to generate plausible retargeted motion
in a single inference without post-processing. To balance
these two modifications, we further present a balancing
gate to conduct linear interpolation between them. Extensive experiments on the public dataset Mixamo demonstrate that our R2 ET achieves the state-of-the-art performance, and provides a good balance between the preservation of motion semantics as well as the attenuation of interpenetration and contact-missing. Code is available at
https://github.com/Kebii/R2ET.

10

Interpenetration (%)

Skeleton-aware

Abstract

1

1.5

MSE

2

2.5

Semantics

Geometry

2

Figure 1. Our R ET fully considers the source-target differences
on both the skeleton and shape geometry levels. The retargeted
motion of R2 ET preserves motion semantics, eliminates interpenetration, and keeps self-contact without post-optimizations.

comes a new research trend. The previous learning-based
methods utilize a full-motion mapping structure, which decodes joint rotations of the target skeleton as outputs, with
joint positions [16, 24, 25] or joint rotations [1] as inputs.
However, due to the gap between the Cartesian coordinate
space and the rotation space, the full joint position encoding
unavoidably introduces motion distortion. Meanwhile, the
full joint rotation encoding always leads to discontinuity in
the rotation space [1, 26].
In animation, we observe that artists usually copy the
motion of the source character, and then manually modify it
to preserve motion semantics and avoid translation artifacts,
e.g., interpenetration, during motion reuse in new characters. Inspired by this observation, we design a Residual
RETargeting network (R2 ET) with a residual structure for
motion retargeting. This structure takes the source motion
as initialization and involves neural networks to imitate the
modifications from animators, as illustrated in Figure 1.

13864

