This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GFPose: Learning 3D Human Pose Prior with Gradient Fields
Hai Ci1 , Mingdong Wu2,1 , Wentao Zhu2 , Xiaoxuan Ma2 ,
Hao Dong2 , Fangwei ZhongB3,1 , Yizhou Wang2,4,5
1
Nat’l Key Lab. of GAI & Beijing Institute for GAI (BIGAI)
2
CFCS, Sch’l of CS, 3 Sch’l of IST, 4 Inst. for AI, Peking University
5
Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology
cihai@bigai.ai, {wmingd, wtzhu, maxiaoxuan, hao.dong, zfw, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning 3D human pose prior is essential to humancentered AI. Here, we present GFPose, a versatile framework to model plausible 3D human poses for various applications. At the core of GFPose is a time-dependent score
network, which estimates the gradient on each body joint
and progressively denoises the perturbed 3D human pose
to match a given task specification. During the denoising process, GFPose implicitly incorporates pose priors in
gradients and unifies various discriminative and generative tasks in an elegant framework. Despite the simplicity, GFPose demonstrates great potential in several downstream tasks. Our experiments empirically show that 1) as a
multi-hypothesis pose estimator, GFPose outperforms existing SOTAs by 20% on Human3.6M dataset. 2) as a singlehypothesis pose estimator, GFPose achieves comparable results to deterministic SOTAs, even with a vanilla backbone.
3) GFPose is able to produce diverse and realistic samples
in pose denoising, completion and generation tasks.1

1. Introduction
Modeling 3D human pose is a fundamental problem in
human-centered applications, e.g. augmented reality [34,
43], virtual reality [1, 42, 69], and human-robot collaboration [9, 15, 36]. Considering the biomechanical constraints,
natural human postures lie on a low-dimensional manifold
of the physical space. Learning a good prior distribution
over the valid human poses not only helps to discriminate
the infeasible ones but also enables sampling of rich and
diverse human poses. The learned prior has a wide spectrum of use cases with regard to recovering the 3D human pose under different conditions, e.g., monocular images with depth ambiguities and occlusions [8, 29, 63], inertial measurement unit (IMU) signals with noises [72], or
even partial sensor inputs [23, 65].
1 Project page https://sites.google.com/view/gfpose/

Complete 2D

Incomplete 2D

Noisy 3D

Incomplete 3D

3D Noise

Pose Completion

Pose Generation

GFPose

Multi-Hypothesis 3D Pose Estimation

Pose Denoising

Figure 1. GFPose learns the 3D human pose prior from 3D human pose datasets and represents it as gradient fields for various
applications, e.g., multi-hypothesis 3D pose estimation from 2D
keypoints, correcting noisy poses, completing missing joints, and
generating natural poses from noise.

Previous works explore different ways to model human
pose priors. Pioneers [16, 27] attempt to explicitly build
joint-angle limits based on biomechanics. Unfortunately,
the complete configuration of pose-dependent joint-angle
constraints for the full body is unknown. With the recent
advances in machine learning, a rising line of works seek
to learn the human pose priors from data. Representative methods include modeling the distribution of plausible
poses with GMM [5], VAE [46], GAN [12] or neural implicit functions [61]. These methods learn an independent
probabilistic model or energy function to characterize the
data distribution pdata (x). They usually require additional
optimization process to introduce specific task constraints
when applied to downstream tasks. Therefore extra efforts
such as balancing prior terms and different task objectives
are inevitable. Some methods jointly learn the pose priors
and downstream tasks via adversarial training [24,26] or explicit task conditions [35,48,50] pdata (x|c). These methods
seamlessly integrate priors into learning-based frameworks,
but limit their use to a single given task.

4800

