This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global-to-Local Modeling for Video-based 3D Human Pose and Shape
Estimation
Xiaolong Shen1,2∗ , Zongxin Yang1 , Xiaohan Wang1 , Jianxin Ma2 , Chang Zhou2 , Yi Yang1
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Abstract
Video-based 3D human pose and shape estimations are
evaluated by intra-frame accuracy and inter-frame smoothness. Although these two metrics are responsible for different ranges of temporal consistency, existing state-ofthe-art methods treat them as a unified problem and use
monotonous modeling structures (e.g., RNN or attentionbased block) to design their networks. However, using
a single kind of modeling structure is difficult to balance
the learning of short-term and long-term temporal correlations, and may bias the network to one of them, leading to undesirable predictions like global location shift,
temporal inconsistency, and insufficient local details. To
solve these problems, we propose to structurally decouple the modeling of long-term and short-term correlations
in an end-to-end framework, Global-to-Local Transformer
(GLoT). First, a global transformer is introduced with a
Masked Pose and Shape Estimation strategy for long-term
modeling. The strategy stimulates the global transformer
to learn more inter-frame correlations by randomly masking the features of several frames. Second, a local transformer is responsible for exploiting local details on the human mesh and interacting with the global transformer by
leveraging cross-attention. Moreover, a Hierarchical Spatial Correlation Regressor is further introduced to refine
intra-frame estimations by decoupled global-local representation and implicit kinematic constraints. Our GLoT
surpasses previous state-of-the-art methods with the lowest model parameters on popular benchmarks, i.e., 3DPW,
MPI-INF-3DHP, and Human3.6M. Codes are available at
https://github.com/sxl142/GLoT.

1. Introduction
Automatically recovering a sequence of human meshes
from a monocular video plays a pivotal role in various applications, e.g., AR/VR, robotics, and computer graphics. This
technology can potentially reduce the need for motion cap* This work was done during an internship at Alibaba.

(a) TCMR [4] results. Global location shift, shifting to the left.

(b) MPS-Net [41] results. Insufficient local details.

(c) Our results.

Figure 1. Our motivation. With the help of global-local cooperative modeling, our results avoid the global location shift and
complement local details on intra-frame human meshes.

ture devices and manual 3D annotations, providing human
motion templates for downstream tasks, e.g., the animation of 3D avatars. By utilizing parametric human models
(i.e., SMPL [26]) with well-defined artificial joint and shape
structures, the popular procedure for video-based human
mesh recovery involves indirectly regressing the SMPL parameters. However, effectively integrating deep neural networks with parametric artificial models to leverage multiknowledge representations [42] for better estimation accuracy still remains an open problem.
In video-based human mesh recovery, temporal understanding poses a crucial challenge that necessitates maintaining both intra-frame accuracy and inter-frame smoothness. Previous methods [4, 16, 41] mainly design deep
networks to model long-term and short-term correlations
simultaneously. For instance, VIBE [16] utilizes Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [3] to model correlations.
TCMR [4] and MPS-Net [41] consist of a temporal en-

8887

