This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP2Protect: Protecting Facial Privacy using Text-Guided Makeup via
Adversarial Latent Search
Fahad Shamshad Muzammal Naseer Karthik Nandakumar
Mohamed Bin Zayed University of AI, UAE

Protected

Original

{fahad.shamshad, muzammal.naseer, karthik.nandakumar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

“red lipstick with
purple eyeshadows”

23.81

Original

“no makeup”

58.31

53.69

“pink eyeshadows”

“clown makeup”

69.62

35.97

TIP-IM [70] AMT-GAN [22]

Proposed

“big eyebrows with
pink eyeshadows”

“tanned makeup with
black lipstick”

66.08

63.87

Original

“tanned makeup with
purple lipstick”

71.53

TIP-IM [70] AMT-GAN [22]

Figure 1. The proposed approach crafts “naturalistic” and transferable text-guided adversarial faces to deceive black-box
face recognition systems. First row shows original images that need to be protected and second row shows corresponding
protected images along with the user-defined makeup text prompts that guide the adversarial search. Comparison against
existing methods is shown in the third row. The yellow text represents the confidence score (higher is better) output by a
commercial API (Face++), when matching the protected image against the target identity shown in the bottom right. The
reference image used by [22] for makeup transfer is shown at the bottom corner of the corresponding adversarial image.

Abstract
The success of deep learning based face recognition systems has given rise to serious privacy concerns due to their
ability to enable unauthorized tracking of users in the digital world. Existing methods for enhancing privacy fail
to generate “naturalistic” images that can protect facial
privacy without compromising user experience. We propose a novel two-step approach for facial privacy protection
that relies on finding adversarial latent codes in the lowdimensional manifold of a pretrained generative model. The
first step inverts the given face image into the latent space
and finetunes the generative model to achieve an accurate
reconstruction of the given image from its latent code. This
step produces a good initialization, aiding the generation

Proposed

Target

of high-quality faces that resemble the given identity. Subsequently, user-defined makeup text prompts and identitypreserving regularization are used to guide the search for
adversarial codes in the latent space. Extensive experiments demonstrate that faces generated by our approach
have stronger black-box transferability with an absolute
gain of 12.06% over the state-of-the-art facial privacy protection approach under the face verification task. Finally,
we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach
for commercial face recognition systems. Our code is available at https://github.com/fahadshamshad/Clip2Protect.

1. Introduction
Deep learning based face recognition (FR) systems [43,
61] have found widespread usage in multiple applications,

20595

