This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Dark Side of Dynamic Routing Neural Networks: Towards Efficiency
Backdoor Injection

1

Simin Chen1 Hanlin Chen2 Mirazul Haque1 Cong Liu3 Wei Yang1
University of Texas at Dallas 2 Purdue University 3 University of California, Riverside

{simin.chen, mirazul.haque, wei.yang}@utdallas.edu, chen1368@purdue.edu, congl@ucr.edu

Abstract
Recent advancements in deploying deep neural networks
(DNNs) on resource-constrained devices have generated interest in input-adaptive dynamic neural networks (DyNNs).
DyNNs offer more efficient inferences and enable the deployment of DNNs on devices with limited resources, such
as mobile devices. However, we have discovered a new vulnerability in DyNNs that could potentially compromise their
efficiency. Specifically, we investigate whether adversaries
can manipulate DyNNs’ computational costs to create a
false sense of efficiency. To address this question, we propose EfficFrog, an adversarial attack that injects universal efficiency backdoors in DyNNs. To inject a backdoor
trigger into DyNNs, EfficFrog poisons only a minimal
percentage of the DyNNs’ training data. During the inference phase, EfficFrog can slow down the backdoored
DyNNs and abuse the computational resources of systems
running DyNNs by adding the trigger to any input. To evaluate EfficFrog, we tested it on three DNN backbone architectures (based on VGG16, MobileNet, and ResNet56)
using two popular datasets (CIFAR-10 and Tiny ImageNet).
Our results demonstrate that EfficFrog reduces the efficiency of DyNNs on triggered input samples while keeping
the efficiency of clean samples almost the same.

1. Introduction
The requirement of higher accuracy in deploying deep
neural networks(DNNs) leads to the trend of increasing layers for the neural network, according to the “going deeper”
[41] strategy proposed in 2015: the higher number of layers
within the neural network, the more complex representations it can learn from the same input data. Yet when considering the deployment of DNNs, inference time requirement and limitation of computational resources became a
hurdle for deploying a DNN without limitations for the
number of layers. Such limitations can occur in applications that have inherent limited computational resources, for

example, edge computing [30]. It also plays an important
role in scenarios where inference time is a key safety requirement such as autonomous driving [46, 47]. Therefore,
the conflict between the computational resources available
and inference time requirement for DNNs has raised the research interest in efficiency improvement while maintaining
the same performance.
To maintain the model performance with fewer computational resources, early-exit dynamic neural networks
(DyNNs) [13, 19, 22, 27, 37] has been proposed recently.
Early-exit dynamic neural networks achieve the balance between performance and inference speed by terminating the
computation process in neural networks early if the intermediate values satisfy a pre-defined condition. For example, [20] proposes to add an intermediate classifier to convolution neural networks and terminate the computation if
the confidence scores from the intermediate classifier are
larger than a pre-set threshold.
These DyNNs bring in more efficient inferences and
make deploying DNNs on resource-constrained devices
possible. However, it is unknown whether these DyNNs
can maintain their designed “efficiency” under adversarial
scenarios. Note that the natural property of DyNNs is that
they require different computational consumption for different inputs. This discloses a potential vulnerability of
DyNN models, i.e. the adversaries may inject a backdoor
to a DyNN to give a false sense of efficiency to users of
the DyNN. Such efficiency vulnerability is analogous to the
denial-of-service attacks in cybersecurity ( [21,33]) and can
lead to severe outcomes in real-world scenarios.
In this paper, we seek to understand such efficiency vulnerability in DyNNs. Specifically, we aim to answer the
following research question:
Can we inject efficiency backdoors into DyNNs that
only affect DyNNs’ computational efficiency on triggered inputs, while keeping DyNNs’ behavior in
terms of accuracy and efficiency unchanged on benign inputs?

24585

