This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DART: Diversify-Aggregate-Repeat Training
Improves Generalization of Neural Networks
Samyak Jain * ⋄ ‡ Sravanti Addepalli *
Pawan Kumar Sahu ∓ § ‡ Priyam Dey ∓ R.Venkatesh Babu
Vision and AI Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Abstract
Generalization of Neural Networks is crucial for deploying them safely in the real world. Common training strategies to improve generalization involve the use of data augmentations, ensembling and model averaging. In this work,
we first establish a surprisingly simple but strong benchmark for generalization which utilizes diverse augmentations within a training minibatch, and show that this can
learn a more balanced distribution of features. Further,
we propose Diversify-Aggregate-Repeat Training (DART)
strategy that first trains diverse models using different augmentations (or domains) to explore the loss basin, and further Aggregates their weights to combine their expertise and
obtain improved generalization. We find that Repeating the
step of Aggregation throughout training improves the overall optimization trajectory and also ensures that the individual models have sufficiently low loss barrier to obtain
improved generalization on combining them. We theoretically justify the proposed approach and show that it indeed generalizes better. In addition to improvements in InDomain generalization, we demonstrate SOTA performance
on the Domain Generalization benchmarks in the popular
DomainBed framework as well. Our method is generic and
can easily be integrated with several base training algorithms to achieve performance gains. Our code is available
here: https://github.com/val-iisc/DART.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have outperformed classical
methods in several fields and applications owing to their remarkable generalization. Classical Machine Learning theory assumes that test data is sampled from the same distribution as train data. This is referred to as the problem of
In-Domain (ID) generalization [15, 18, 29, 32, 48], where
* Equal Contribution. ∓ Equal contribution second authors. Correspondence to Samyak Jain <samyakjain.cse18@itbhu.ac.in>, Sravanti Addepalli <sravantia@iisc.ac.in>. ⋄ Indian Institute of Technology, Varanasi
§ Indian Institute of Technology, Dhanbad. ‡ Work done during internship
at Vision and AI Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

the goal of the model is to generalize to samples within
same domain as the train dataset. This is often considered
to be one of the most important requirements and criteria
to evaluate models. However, in several cases, the test distribution may be different from the train distribution. For
example, surveillance systems are expected to work well at
all times of the day, under different lighting conditions and
when there are occlusions, although it may not be possible
to train models using data from all these distributions. It
is thus crucial to train models that are robust to distribution
shifts, i.e., with better Out-of-Domain (OOD) Generalization [25]. In this work, we consider the problems of InDomain generalization and Out-of-Domain Generalization
of Deep Networks. For the latter, we consider the popular setting of Domain Generalization [4, 23, 41], where the
training data is composed of several source domains and the
goal is to generalize to an unseen target domain.
The problem of generalization is closely related to the
Simplicity Bias of Neural Networks, due to which models
have a tendency to rely on simpler features that are often
spurious correlations to the labels, when compared to the
harder robust features [55]. For example, models tend to
rely on weak features such as background, rather than more
robust features such as shape, causing a drop in object classification accuracy when background changes [22, 72]. A
common strategy to alleviate this is to use data augmentations [8–10, 27, 42, 53, 75, 77] or data from several domains
during training [23], which can result in invariance to several spurious correlations, improving the generalization of
models. Shen et al. [57] show that data augmentations enable the model to give higher importance to harder-to-learn
robust features by delaying the learning of spurious features. We extend their observation by showing that training
on a combination of several augmentation strategies (which
we refer to as Mixed augmentation) can result in the learning of a balanced distribution of diverse features. Using
this, we obtain a strong benchmark for ID generalization as
shown in Table-1. However, as shown in prior works [1],
the impact of augmentations in training is limited by the
capacity of the network in being able to generalize well to

16048

