This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeCo : Decomposition and Reconstruction for Compositional Temporal
Grounding via Coarse-to-Fine Contrastive Ranking
Lijin Yang1∗ ,Quan Kong2 , Hsuan-Kung Yang2 , Wadim Kehl2 , Yoichi Sato1 , Norimasa Kobori2
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 Woven by Toyota
{yang-lj, ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{quan.kong, hsuan-kung.yang, wadim.kehl, norimasa.kobori}@woven-planet.global

Abstract
Understanding dense action in videos is a fundamental challenge towards the generalization of vision models.
Several works show that compositionality is key to achieving generalization by combining known primitive elements,
especially for handling novel composited structures. Compositional temporal grounding is the task of localizing dense
action by using known words combined in novel ways in the
form of novel query sentences for the actual grounding. In
recent works, composition is assumed to be learned from
pairs of whole videos and language embeddings through
large scale self-supervised pre-training. Alternatively, one
can process the video and language into word-level primitive elements, and then only learn fine-grained semantic
correspondences. Both approaches do not consider the granularity of the compositions, where different query granularity
corresponds to different video segments. Therefore, a good
compositional representation should be sensitive to different
video and query granularity. We propose a method to learn a
coarse-to-fine compositional representation by decomposing
the original query sentence into different granular levels,
and then learning the correct correspondences between the
video and recombined queries through a contrastive ranking constraint. Additionally, we run temporal boundary
prediction in a coarse-to-fine manner for precise grounding boundary detection. Experiments are performed on two
datasets, Charades-CG and ActivityNet-CG, showing the
superior compositional generalizability of our approach.

1. Introduction
Over the last years, robust results have been shown for
the detection of predefined, simpler action classes in video
[11, 38, 41, 48]. On the other hand, the detection of dense action, e.g. action contents described by a rich description, still
poses a significant challenge due to the large diversity of possible language descriptions and semantic associations [16].
* Work done while Lijin Yang was an Intern at Woven by Toyota.

Recent work in this area treats complex actions as monolithic
events via end-to-end predictions [27, 44]. They produce
a single label to densely describe a long video sequence,
and they are difficult to scale up to more varied patterns.
Fundamentally, most complex actions consist of a series of
simpler events, and thus a dense action can be treated as a
composition of known event primitives [13, 25, 26]. Such a
compositional representation can allow for a higher degree
of model generalization. By learning from a finite number of
action composites, and recombining their constituent event
primitives in novel ways for unseen action descriptions, the
representation can expand to large numbers of novel scenarios that have not been observed in the original action
space. In this case, the action description is not treated as a
single label but as a language modality that allows to learn
finer-grained video and language correspondence.
The task of temporal video grounding concentrates on the
described setting. Given a video and an action-related query
sentence, the model has to output the start and end times
of the specific moment that semantically corresponds to the
given query sentence.
On top of temporal grounding, Compositional Temporal
Grounding is a new task for testing whether the model can
generalize to sentences that contain novel compositions of
seen words. Several recent methods [12, 47, 50] encode both
sentence and video segments into unstructured global representations and then devise specific cross-modal interaction
modules to fuse them for final prediction. Unfortunately,
such global representations fail to explicitly model video
structure and language compositions, and fail for cases where
higher granularity is required. Similar to the above approach
of correspondence learning via global information, composite representations learn from paired monolithic video and
language respectively, through large-scale self-supervised
pre-training [32]. In either case, the main challenge of utilizing datasets of limited action size to achieve generalization
towards novel actions remains challenging due to its combinatorial complexity.
Differently to the global representation approaches,
VISA [17] introduces a compositional method toward the

23130

