This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Introducing Competition to Boost the Transferability of
Targeted Adversarial Examples through Clean Feature Mixup
Junyoung Byun Myung-Joon Kwon Seungju Cho Yoonji Kim Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{bjyoung, kwon19, joyga, yoonjikim, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep neural networks are widely known to be susceptible to adversarial examples, which can cause incorrect
predictions through subtle input modifications. These adversarial examples tend to be transferable between models, but targeted attacks still have lower attack success
rates due to significant variations in decision boundaries.
To enhance the transferability of targeted adversarial examples, we propose introducing competition into the optimization process. Our idea is to craft adversarial perturbations in the presence of two new types of competitor noises: adversarial perturbations towards different target classes and friendly perturbations towards the correct
class. With these competitors, even if an adversarial example deceives a network to extract specific features leading to the target class, this disturbance can be suppressed
by other competitors. Therefore, within this competition,
adversarial examples should take different attack strategies
by leveraging more diverse features to overwhelm their interference, leading to improving their transferability to different models. Considering the computational complexity,
we efficiently simulate various interference from these two
types of competitors in feature space by randomly mixing up
stored clean features in the model inference and named this
method Clean Feature Mixup (CFM). Our extensive experimental results on the ImageNet-Compatible and CIFAR-10
datasets show that the proposed method outperforms the existing baselines with a clear margin. Our code is available
at https://github.com/dreamflake/CFM .

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have excelled in various
computer vision tasks such as image classification [10, 12]
and object detection [19, 22], they are vulnerable to maliciously crafted inputs called adversarial examples [8, 37].
These adversarial examples are generated by optimizing imperceptible perturbations to mislead a model to incorrect

predictions. Intriguingly, these adversarial examples tend
to be transferable between models, and this unique characteristic allows adversaries to attempt adversarial attacks
on a black-box model without knowing its interior. However, targeted adversarial attacks, which have a specific target class, still have lower attack success rates due to significant differences in decision boundaries [17, 37]. Nevertheless, targeted attacks can pose more serious risks as they
can deceive models into predicting a specific harmful target
class. Therefore, preemptive research on developing a novel
transfer-based attack is crucial because it can assist service
providers in preparing their models for these forthcoming
risks and evaluating their models’ robustness.
In this work, we aim to further improve the transferability of targeted adversarial examples by introducing competition into their optimization. Our approach involves crafting adversarial perturbations in the presence of two new
types of noises: (a) adversarial perturbations towards different target classes; and (b) friendly perturbations towards
the correct class. With these competitors and a source
model, even if an adversarial example deceives the source
model into extracting certain features that lead to the target class, this disturbance may be suppressed by interference from competitors. Consequently, adversarial perturbations should take various attack strategies, leveraging a
wider range of features to overcome interference, which enhances their transferability to different models. In the following, we will further discuss why employing a diverse set
of features for attack can boost the transferability of targeted
adversarial examples.
In image classification, deep learning models extract
a variety of features from images across multiple layers
and comprehensively evaluate them to calculate prediction
probabilities for each class. As numerous features can contribute to the final output, even when two images are recognized as the same class, the contributing features can significantly differ. Taking this into account, optimizing adversarial examples to utilize as many distinct feature combinations
as possible would effectively enhance their transferability.
Conversely, in existing frameworks, an adversarial ex-

24648

