This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-bridging with Adversarial Noise Generation for Domain Adaptive rPPG
Estimation
Jingda Du∗ , Si-Qi Liu*, Bochao Zhang, Pong C. Yuen
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
csjddu, siqiliu, csbczhang, pcyuen @comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract

Source
D

The remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) technique
can estimate pulse-related metrics (e.g. heart rate and respiratory rate) from facial videos and has a high potential
for health monitoring. The latest deep rPPG methods can
model in-distribution noise due to head motion, video compression, etc., and estimate high-quality rPPG signals under similar scenarios. However, deep rPPG models may
not generalize well to the target test domain with unseen
noise and distortions. In this paper, to improve the generalization ability of rPPG models, we propose a dual-bridging
network to reduce the domain discrepancy by aligning intermediate domains and synthesizing the target noise in the
source domain for better noise reduction. To comprehensively explore the target domain noise, we propose a novel
adversarial noise generation in which the noise generator
indirectly competes with the noise reducer. To further improve the robustness of the noise reducer, we propose hard
noise pattern mining to encourage the generator to learn
hard noise patterns contained in the target domain features.
We evaluated the proposed method on three public datasets
with different types of interferences. Under different crossdomain scenarios, the comprehensive results show the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
With the development of rPPG technology, physiological metrics such as heart rate [27], heart rate variability [34], respiratory rate [21] can also be estimated from facial videos. Deep learning-based rPPG methods overcome
non-physiological intensity variations [30, 49] and model
noise in training samples [24, 28]. Despite the high accuracy under intra-dataset evaluations, the deep rPPG models
may not be able to generalize well to unseen interferences
in the test domain. The domain gap is mainly from unseen
non-physiological interferences such as lighting conditions,
* Equal contribution

Rand

G

Real
or
Fake

Noise

Target

SYN
G|NR

(a) GAN-based Noise Modeling

Pull

NR

GT-PPG

Source

Target

Source

Source
or
D
Target
NR

DT

(b) Intuitive UDA Solution

SYN

Pull

DT
HM

(c) Dual-bridging with Adversarial
Noise Generation (Ours)

Figure 1. The comparison between (a) typical intra-dataset adversarial rPPG noise modeling, (b) an intuitive UDA framework
for rPPG feature alignment, and (c) our proposed dual-bridging
network with adversarial noise modeling and hard noise pattern
mining (HM ). Here SYN denotes synthetic data, DT is for the
denoised target domain, G, D, and N R denotes the generator, domain classifier, and noise reducer, respectively.

camera sensors, video compression algorithms, facial expressions, etc. They can induce distortions in estimated
rPPG signals and reduce both the accuracy and the reliability of pulse-related metrics estimation. Considering it is
hard to cover all interferences during the training stage, to
improve the usability of rPPG in realistic applications, one
main challenge is how to boost the generalizability of rPPG
models to unseen scenarios.
In recent research of rPPG, both deep learning-based
frameworks and mechanisms [45, 46, 49] are proposed to
overcome the non-physiological intensity variations. GANbased disentanglement learning has also been adopted to reduce the noise from pseudo [28] or synthesized [24] noisy
features. We summarize this approach in Figure 1 (a) where
a discriminator is employed to distinguish the generated
feature (SYN in figure) from the original one. These methods can perform well under intra-dataset evaluation settings
since the in-distribution noise patterns are thoroughly investigated with a large number of adversarial learning iterations. However, they may fail when encountering unseen

10355

