This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Conceptional Contrastive Learning for
Generalized Category Discovery
Nan Pu Zhun Zhong∗ Nicu Sebe
The Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
{nan.pu, zhun.zhong, niculae.sebe}@unitn.it

Abstract
Generalized category discovery (GCD) is a recently proposed open-world problem, which aims to automatically
cluster partially labeled data. The main challenge is that
the unlabeled data contain instances that are not only from
known categories of the labeled data but also from novel
categories. This leads traditional novel category discovery (NCD) methods to be incapacitated for GCD, due to
their assumption of unlabeled data are only from novel
categories. One effective way for GCD is applying selfsupervised learning to learn discriminate representation for
unlabeled data. However, this manner largely ignores underlying relationships between instances of the same concepts (e.g., class, super-class, and sub-class), which results in inferior representation learning. In this paper,
we propose a Dynamic Conceptional Contrastive Learning (DCCL) framework, which can effectively improve clustering accuracy by alternately estimating underlying visual conceptions and learning conceptional representation.
In addition, we design a dynamic conception generation
and update mechanism, which is able to ensure consistent conception learning and thus further facilitate the optimization of DCCL. Extensive experiments show that DCCL
achieves new state-of-the-art performances on six generic
and fine-grained visual recognition datasets, especially on
fine-grained ones. For example, our method significantly
surpasses the best competitor by 16.2% on the new classes
for the CUB-200 dataset. Code is available at https:
//github.com/TPCD/DCCL

1. Introduction
Learning recognition models (e.g., image classification)
from labeled data has been widely studied in the field of
machine learning and deep learning [13, 18, 31]. In spite
of their tremendous success, supervised learning techniques
* Corresponding Author.

Rabbit
Bus

Animals

Porcupine

Labbelled
Feature
Unlabbelled
Feature
Super-class
Representation

Bicycle

Transportation

Whale

Pushing
Representation

Train
Yellow
Train

White
Train

Pulling Feature

Class
Distribution
Sub-Class
Distribution
Sub-class
Representation

Figure 1. Diagram of the proposed Dynamic Conceptional Contrastive Learning (DCCL). Samples from the conceptions should
be close to each other. For example, samples from the same classes
(bus) at the class level, samples belonging to the transportation
(bus and bicycle) at the super-class level, and samples from trains
with different colors at the sub-class level. Our DCCL potentially
learns the underlying conceptions in unlabeled data and produces
more discriminative representations.

rely heavily on huge annotated data, which is not suitable for open-world applications. Thus, the researchers
recently have paid much effort on learning with labelimperfection data, such as semi-supervised learning [23,
33], self-supervised learning [12, 42], weakly-supervised
learning [41,45], few-shot learning [32,38], open-set recognition [30] and learning with noisy labels [40], etc.
Recently, inspired by the fact that Humans can easily
and automatically learn new knowledge with the guidance
of previously learned knowledge, novel category discovery (NCD) [9, 11, 28, 44, 47] is introduced to automatically
cluster unlabeled data of unseen categories with the help of
knowledge from seen categories. However, the implementation of NCD is under a strong assumption that all the unlabeled instances belong to unseen categories, which is not
practical in real-world applications. To address this limitation, Vaze et al. [35] extend NCD to the generalized category discovery (GCD) [35], where unlabeled images are

7579

