This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Unsupervised StyleGAN Image Restoration
Yohan Poirier-Ginter• , Jean-François Lalonde•

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, • Université Laval
https://lvsn.github.io/RobustUnsupervised/

Figure 1. Our unsupervised StyleGAN image restoration method is robust and effective across a variety of tasks (left, top to bottom:
upsampling, denoising, deartifacting, and inpainting) and a wide range of degradation levels. Since it avoids the need for task-specific
hyperparameter tuning, it can directly handle combinations of such degradations, e.g., pairs (center) or even all four (right).

Abstract
GAN-based image restoration inverts the generative
process to repair images corrupted by known degradations. Existing unsupervised methods must be carefully
tuned for each task and degradation level. In this work,
we make StyleGAN image restoration robust: a single
set of hyperparameters works across a wide range of
degradation levels. This makes it possible to handle
combinations of several degradations, without the need
to retune. Our proposed approach relies on a 3-phase
progressive latent space extension and a conservative
optimizer, which avoids the need for any additional regularization terms. Extensive experiments demonstrate
robustness on inpainting, upsampling, denoising, and
deartifacting at varying degradations levels, outperforming other StyleGAN-based inversion techniques. Our
approach also favorably compares to diffusion-based
restoration by yielding much more realistic inversion
results. Code is available at the above URL.

1. Introduction
Image restoration, the task of recovering a high quality
image from a degraded input, is a long-standing problem
in image processing and computer vision. Since different restoration tasks—such as denoising, upsampling,

deartifacting, etc.—can be quite distinct, many recent
approaches [9, 10, 37, 54, 61, 62] propose to solve them
in a supervised learning paradigm by leveraging curated
datasets specifically designed for the task at hand. Unfortunately, designing task-specific approaches requires
retraining large networks on each task separately.
In parallel, the advent of powerful generative models
has enabled the emergence of unsupervised restoration
methods [42], which do not require task-specific training.
The idea is to invert the generative process to recover
a clean image. Assuming a known (or approximate)
degradation model, the optimization procedure therefore attempts to recover an image that both: 1) closely
matches the target degraded image after undergoing a
similar degradation model (fidelity); and 2) lies in the
space of realistic images learned by the GAN (realism).
In the recent literature, StyleGAN [29–31] has been
found to be particularly effective for unsupervised image
restoration [13–15, 39, 40] because of the elegant design
of its latent space. Indeed, these approaches leverage
style inversion techniques [3, 4] to solve for a latent vector that, when given to the generator, creates an image
close to the degraded target. Unfortunately, this only
works when such a match actually exists in the model
distribution, which is rarely the case in practice. Hence,
effective methods extend the learned latent space to cre-

1
22292

