This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Super-CLEVR: A Virtual Benchmark to
Diagnose Domain Robustness in Visual Reasoning
Zhuowan Li1
Xingrui Wang2
Elias Stengel-Eskin 1
3, 4
1
Adam Kortylewski
Wufei Ma
Benjamin Van Durme1
Alan Yuille1
1
2
Johns Hopkins University
University of Southern California
3
4
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
University of Freiburg

Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) models often perform
poorly on out-of-distribution data and struggle on domain
generalization. Due to the multi-modal nature of this task,
multiple factors of variation are intertwined, making generalization difficult to analyze. This motivates us to introduce a virtual benchmark, Super-CLEVR, where different factors in VQA domain shifts can be isolated in order that their effects can be studied independently. Four
factors are considered: visual complexity, question redundancy, concept distribution and concept compositionality.
With controllably generated data, Super-CLEVR enables us
to test VQA methods in situations where the test data differs
from the training data along each of these axes. We study
four existing methods, including two neural symbolic methods NSCL [45] and NSVQA [59], and two non-symbolic
methods FiLM [50] and mDETR [29]; and our proposed
method, probabilistic NSVQA (P-NSVQA), which extends
NSVQA with uncertainty reasoning. P-NSVQA outperforms
other methods on three of the four domain shift factors. Our
results suggest that disentangling reasoning and perception,
combined with probabilistic uncertainty, form a strong VQA
model that is more robust to domain shifts. The dataset and
code are released at https://github.com/Lizw14/
Super-CLEVR.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is a challenging task
that assesses the reasoning ability of models to answer questions based on both visual and linguistic inputs. Current
VQA methods are typically developed on standard benchmarks like VQAv2 [16] or GQA [25], with the implicit assumption that testing data comes from the same underlying
distribution as training data. However, as has been widely
studied in computer vision [15, 36, 51], algorithms trained
on one domain often fail to generalize to other domains.

Moreover, having learned the distributional prior of training
data, models often struggle on out-of-distribution tests. This
has been studied in VQA from the perspective of domain
transfer [8,57,62], dataset bias [2,11,48], counter-factual diagnosis [9, 47], and out-of-distribution benchmarking [30].
The multi-modal nature of VQA gives rise to multiple intertwined factors of variation, making domain shift an especially difficult problem to study. For example, [8] suggests
that VQA domain shifts are a combination of differences
in images, questions or answers; and [39] reveals a gap between synthetic and real VQA datasets by differences in the
over-specification of questions and the underlying distribution of concepts. However, despite a wealth of research on
domain generalization in VQA [3,26,57,62], there is no systematic analysis of the contributing factors in domain shifts.
To this end, we introduce a virtual benchmark, SuperCLEVR, which enables us to test VQA algorithms in situations where the test data differs from the training data.
We decompose the domain shift into a set of isolated contributing factors, so that their effects can be diagnosed independently. We study four factors: visual complexity, question redundancy, concept distribution, and concept compositionality. These are illustrated in Fig. 1 and described in
Sec. 3.1. With controllable data generation using our SuperCLEVR virtual benchmark, we are able to isolate the different factors in VQA domain shifts so that their effects can be
studied independently. Compared with the original CLEVR
dataset [27], Super-CLEVR contains more complicated visual components and has better controllability over the domain shift factors. As shown in Fig. 1, the Super-CLEVR
dataset contains images rendered from 3D graphical vehicle
models in the UDA-Part dataset [40], paired with questions
and answers automatically generated from templates. The
objects and questions are sampled based on the specified underlying probability distribution, which can be controlled to
produce distribution shifts in different factors.
With Super-CLEVR, we diagnose the domain robustness of current VQA models. Four representative models are studied: for the classic two-stream feature fusing

14963

