This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Graph Learning with Content-guided Spatial-Frequency Relation
Reasoning for Deepfake Detection
Yuan Wang1,2,4 Kun Yu2 Chen Chen1 * Xiyuan Hu3 Silong Peng1,4,5
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Alibaba Group
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Beijing Visystem Co.Ltd
{wangyuan2020, chen.chen}@ia.ac.cn

yukun.yk@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Spat.

With the springing up of face synthesis techniques, it
is prominent in need to develop powerful face forgery detection methods due to security concerns. Some existing
methods attempt to employ auxiliary frequency-aware information combined with CNN backbones to discover the
forged clues. Due to the inadequate information interaction with image content, the extracted frequency features are thus spatially irrelavant, struggling to generalize well on increasingly realistic counterfeit types. To address this issue, we propose a Spatial-Frequency Dynamic
Graph method to exploit the relation-aware features in spatial and frequency domains via dynamic graph learning. To
this end, we introduce three well-designed components: 1)
Content-guided Adaptive Frequency Extraction module to
mine the content-adaptive forged frequency clues. 2) Multiple Domains Attention Map Learning module to enrich the
spatial-frequency contextual features with multiscale attention maps. 3) Dynamic Graph Spatial-Frequency Feature
Fusion Network to explore the high-order relation of spatial and frequency features. Extensive experiments on several benchmark show that our proposed method sustainedly
exceeds the state-of-the-arts by a considerable margin.

xiyuan.hu@foxmail.com

SFDG-Detector

Spat.

Freq.

Freq.

漏a漐SFDG Framework

漏b漐Correlation H t
eatmap

漏c漐Graph Reasoning

Figure 1. The motivation of our proposed approach. Our SFDG
method (a) delves into the high-order relationships (b) of spatial
and frequency domain via cross-domain graph reasoning (c).

licious intentions to make pornographic movies, fake news
and political rumors. In the circumstances, it is desperately
in need to develop powerful forgery detection methods.
Early face forgery detection methods [7,30, 52] treat this
challenge as vanilla dichotomy tasks in the prevailing view.
They use off-the-shelf backbones to extract the global feature of faces and a binary classiﬁer follow-up to identify
the real and counterfeit faces. However, as the counterfeits become increasingly realistic, it is intractable for these
methods to spot subtle and local forgery traces. One recent
study [50] reformulates deepfake detection as a ﬁne-grained
classiﬁcation task and designs a multi-attentional framework to extract local discriminative features from multiple
attention maps. It is susceptible to common disturbances
and the generalized features remain therefore poorly understood. Some other works resort to speciﬁc forgery patterns to encourage better classiﬁcation such as DCT [24,28],
SRM [25] and steganalysis features [45]. Although promising advances have been achieved by these previous works,

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the continuous advances in
deepfake creation [11, 27, 36]. Utilizing booming opensource tools such as Deepfakes [41], novices can readily
manipulate the expression and identity of faces to generate
visually untraceable videos. Face forgery technology has
stimulated many applications [12, 14, 44, 46] with wide acceptance. These techniques can whereas be abused by ma* Chen Chen is the corresponding author. This work is supported by
the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2021YFF0602101,
Alibaba Group through Alibaba Research Intern Program.

7278

