This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Generalization of Meta-learning with
Inverted Regularization at Inner-level
Lianzhe Wang1∗
1

Shiji Zhou1 * Shanghang Zhang2†

Tsinghua University

2

Xu Chu1

Heng Chang1

Wenwu Zhu1†

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University.

{wanglz20,zsj17,changh17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
shanghang@pku.edu.cn, {chu xu,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the broad interest in meta-learning, the generalization problem remains one of the significant challenges
in this field. Existing works focus on meta-generalization
to unseen tasks at the meta-level by regularizing the metaloss, while ignoring that adapted models may not generalize to the task domains at the adaptation level. In this paper, we propose a new regularization mechanism for metalearning – Minimax-Meta Regularization, which employs
inverted regularization at the inner loop and ordinary regularization at the outer loop during training. In particular,
the inner inverted regularization makes the adapted model
more difficult to generalize to task domains; thus, optimizing the outer-loop loss forces the meta-model to learn metaknowledge with better generalization. Theoretically, we
prove that inverted regularization improves the meta-testing
performance by reducing generalization errors. We conduct
extensive experiments on the representative scenarios, and
the results show that our method consistently improves the
performance of meta-learning algorithms.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning has been proven to be a powerful
paradigm for extracting well-generalized knowledge from
previous tasks and quickly learning new tasks [47]. It has
received increasing attention in many machine learning settings such as few-shot learning [10, 45, 46, 50] and robust
learning [27, 39, 42], and can be deployed in many practical
applications [7, 21, 29, 54]. The key idea of meta-learning is
to improve the learning ability of agents through a learningto-learn process. In recent years, optimization-based algorithms have emerged as a popular approach for realizing the learning-to-learn process in meta-learning [10, 28].
These methods formulate the problem as a bi-level optimization problem and have demonstrated impressive per* Equal contributions

† Corresponding authors

formance across various domains, leading to significant attention from the research community. The primary focus of
our paper is to further advance this line of research.
The training process of meta-learning takes place at two
levels [10, 19]. At the inner-level, a base model, which
is initialized using the meta-model’s parameters, adapts to
each task by taking gradient descent steps over the support
set. At the outer-level, a meta-training objective is optimized to evaluate the generalization capability of the initialization on all meta-training tasks over the query set, helping to ensure that the model is effectively optimized for the
desired goal. With this learning-to-learn process, the final
trained meta-model could be regarded as the model with
good initialization to adapt to new tasks.
Despite the success of meta-learning, the additional level
of learning also introduces a new source of potential overfitting [36], which poses a significant challenge to the generalization of the learned initialization. This generalization
challenge is twofold: first, the meta-model must generalize to unseen tasks (meta-generalization); and second, the
adapted model must generalize to the domain of a specific
task, which we refer to as adaptation-generalization. As
the primary objective of meta-learning is to achieve strong
performance when adapting to new tasks, the ability of the
meta-model to generalize well is critical. Recent works
aim to address the meta-generalization problem by metaregularizations, such as constraining the meta-initialization
space [52], enforcing the performance similarity of the
meta-model on different tasks [20], and augmenting metatraining data [33, 36, 51]. These approaches are verified to
enhance generalization to unseen tasks. However, they do
not address the problem of adaptation-generalization to the
data distribution of meta-testing tasks.
To address this issue, we propose Minimax-Meta Regularization, a novel regularization mechanism that improves
both adaptation-generalization and meta-generalization.
Specifically, our approach particularly employs inverted
regularization at the inner-level to hinder the adapted
model’s generalizability to the task domain. This forces the

7826

