This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PoseExaminer: Automated Testing of Out-of-Distribution Robustness
in Human Pose and Shape Estimation
Qihao Liu1
1

Johns Hopkins University

Adam Kortylewski2,3
2

Alan Yuille1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

3

University of Freiburg

Abstract
Human pose and shape (HPS) estimation methods
achieve remarkable results. However, current HPS benchmarks are mostly designed to test models in scenarios that
are similar to the training data. This can lead to critical situations in real-world applications when the observed
data differs significantly from the training data and hence
is out-of-distribution (OOD). It is therefore important to
test and improve the OOD robustness of HPS methods. To
address this fundamental problem, we develop a simulator that can be controlled in a fine-grained manner using interpretable parameters to explore the manifold of images of human pose, e.g. by varying poses, shapes, and
clothes. We introduce a learning-based testing method,
termed PoseExaminer, that automatically diagnoses HPS
algorithms by searching over the parameter space of human pose images to find the failure modes. Our strategy for exploring this high-dimensional parameter space
is a multi-agent reinforcement learning system, in which
the agents collaborate to explore different parts of the parameter space. We show that our PoseExaminer discovers a variety of limitations in current state-of-the-art models that are relevant in real-world scenarios but are missed
by current benchmarks. For example, it finds large regions
of realistic human poses that are not predicted correctly,
as well as reduced performance for humans with skinny
and corpulent body shapes. In addition, we show that
fine-tuning HPS methods by exploiting the failure modes
found by PoseExaminer improve their robustness and even
their performance on standard benchmarks by a significant
margin. The code are available for research purposes at
https://github.com/qihao067/PoseExaminer.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the computer vision community has
made significant advances in 3D human pose and shape
(HPS) estimation. But despite the high performance on
standard benchmarks, current methods fail to give reliable
predictions for configurations that have not been trained on

Figure 1. PoseExaminer is an automatic testing tool used to study
the performance and robustness of HPS methods in terms of articulated pose, shape, global rotation, occlusion, etc. It systematically explores the parameter space and discovers a variety of
failure modes. (a) illustrates three failure modes in PARE [18] and
(b) shows the efficacy of training with PoseExaminer.

or in difficult viewing conditions such as when humans are
significantly occluded [18] or have unusual poses or clothing [34]. This lack of robustness in such out-of-distribution
(OOD) situations, which typically would not fool a human
observer, is generally acknowledged and is a fundamental
open problem for HPS methods that should be addressed.
The main obstacle, however, to testing the robustness of
HPS methods is that test data is limited, because it is expensive to collect and annotate. One way to address this
problem is to diagnose HPS systems by generating large
synthetic datasets that randomly generate images of humans
in varying poses, clothing, and background [4, 34]. These
studies suggest that the gap between synthetic and real do-

672

