This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIP-Net: Patch-Based Intuitive Prototypes for Interpretable Image Classification
Meike Nauta
University of Twente, the Netherlands
University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany

Jörg Schlötterer
University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany
joerg.schloetterer@uni-due.de

m.nauta@utwente.nl

Maurice van Keulen
University of Twente, the Netherlands

Christin Seifert
University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany

m.vankeulen@utwente.nl

christin.seifert@uni-due.de

Abstract
Interpretable methods based on prototypical patches recognize various components in an image in order to explain
their reasoning to humans. However, existing prototypebased methods can learn prototypes that are not in line with
human visual perception, i.e., the same prototype can refer
to different concepts in the real world, making interpretation
not intuitive. Driven by the principle of explainability-bydesign, we introduce PIP-Net (Patch-based Intuitive Prototypes Network): an interpretable image classification model
that learns prototypical parts in a self-supervised fashion
which correlate better with human vision. PIP-Net can
be interpreted as a sparse scoring sheet where the presence of a prototypical part in an image adds evidence for a
class. The model can also abstain from a decision for out-ofdistribution data by saying “I haven’t seen this before”. We
only use image-level labels and do not rely on any part annotations. PIP-Net is globally interpretable since the set of
learned prototypes shows the entire reasoning of the model.
A smaller local explanation locates the relevant prototypes
in one image. We show that our prototypes correlate with
ground-truth object parts, indicating that PIP-Net closes
the “semantic gap” between latent space and pixel space.
Hence, our PIP-Net with interpretable prototypes enables
users to interpret the decision making process in an intuitive,
faithful and semantically meaningful way. Code is available
at https://github.com/M-Nauta/PIPNet.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are dominant in computer vision,
but there is a high demand for understanding the reasoning of
such complex models [23,30]. Consequently, interpretability
and explainability have grown in importance. In contrast to
the common post-hoc explainability that reverse-engineers

a black box, we argue that we should take interpretability
as a design starting point for in-model explainability. The
recognition-by-components theory [1] describes how humans recognize objects by segmenting them into multiple
components. We mimic this intuitive line of reasoning in
an intrinsically interpretable image classifier. Specifically,
our PIP-Net (Patch-based Intuitive Prototypes Network) automatically identifies semantically meaningful components,
while only having access to image-level class labels and
not relying on additional part annotations. The components
are “prototypical parts” (prototypes) visualized as image
patches, since exemplary natural images are more informative to humans than generated synthetic images [2]. PIP-Net
is globally interpretable and designed to be highly intuitive
as it uses simple scoring-sheet reasoning: the more relevant
prototypical parts for a specific class are present in an image,
the more evidence for that class is found, and the higher its
score. When no relevant prototypes are present in the image,
with e.g. out-of-distribution data, PIP-Net will abstain from a
decision. PIP-Net is therefore able to say “I haven’t seen this
before” (see Fig. 2). Additionally, following the principle
of isolation of functional properties for aligning human and
machine vision [5], the reasoning of PIP-Net is separated
into multiple steps. This simplifies human identification of
reasons for (mis)classification.
Recent interpretable part-prototype models are ProtoPNet [3], ProtoTree [24], ProtoPShare [29] and ProtoPool [28].
These part-prototype models are only designed for finegrained image recognition tasks (birds and car types) and
lack “semantic correspondence” [17] between learned prototypes and human concepts. This “semantic gap” in prototypebased methods between similarity in latent space and input
space was also found by others [9, 14]. We hypothesize that
the main cause of the semantic gap is the fact that existing part-prototype models only regularize interpretability on
class-level, since their underlying assumption is that (parts

2744

