This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Low-Data Instance Segmentation by Unsupervised Pre-training with
Saliency Prompt
Hao Li1,3 , Dingwen Zhang1 *, Nian Liu2 , Lechao Cheng3 ,Yalun Dai4
Chao Zhang5 , Xinggang Wang6 , Junwei Han1
1
Brain and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 3 Zhejiang Lab
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 NetEase 6 Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Abstract

Saliency Prompt

40.1

Inspired by DETR variants, query-based end-to-end instance segmentation (QEIS) methods have recently outperformed CNN-based models on large-scale datasets. Yet
they would lose efficacy when only a small amount of
training data is available since it’s hard for the crucial
queries/kernels to learn localization and shape priors. To
this end, this work offers a novel unsupervised pre-training
solution for low-data regimes. Inspired by the recent
success of the Prompting technique, we introduce a new
pre-training method that boosts QEIS models by giving
Saliency Prompt for queries/kernels. Our method contains
three parts: 1) Saliency Masks Proposal is responsible
for generating pseudo masks from unlabeled images based
on the saliency mechanism. 2) Prompt-Kernel Matching
transfers pseudo masks into prompts and injects the corresponding localization and shape priors to the best-matched
kernels. 3) Kernel Supervision is applied to supply supervision at the kernel level for robust learning. From a practical perspective, our pre-training method helps QEIS models
achieve a similar convergence speed and comparable performance with CNN-based models in low-data regimes. Experimental results show that our method significantly boosts
several QEIS models on three datasets.1

1. Introduction
Modern CNN models address the instance segmentation
task in an indirect way, by defining the localization problem on a large set of proposals [16], window centers [6,10],
or location-based masks [30, 33, 35]. A typical example
is Mask-RCNN [16], which generates candidate bounding boxes using a well-designed region proposal network.
Although this paradigm makes localization learning eas* Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/lifuguan/saliency prompt

ImageNet Supervised

37.1
5.8
24.9

4.4
23.5
19.1
K-Net
Mask-RCNN
COCO-full

K-Net
Mask-RCNN
COCO 10%

34.5

30
24.8
9.7
K-Net

Mask-RCNN

Cityscapes

K-Net
Mask-RCNN
CTW1500

Figure 1. Performance comparison between K-Net and MaskRCNN. K-Net can outperform Mask-RCNN on large-scale
datasets (COCO-full). However, on small datasets (the right
three), it can not perform as well as Mask-RCNN since it’s hard
to learn localization and shape priors. Our proposed unsupervised
pre-training method based on saliency prompt not only boosts the
vanilla K-Net significantly, but also helps to achieve comparable
performance compared with Mask-RCNN.

ily optimized, it still relies on the manually-designed nonmaximum suppression (NMS) as post-processing to remove
duplicated predictions.
Based on a state-of-the-art object detection model,
DETR [27], a few Query-based End-to-end Instance Segmentation (QEIS) models [7, 8, 15, 18, 32, 41] have been
proposed to perform instance segmentation in a new way.
Unlike CNN-based methods which usually require a large
set of proposals, QEIS models use dynamic queries/kernels
to automatically encode object localization knowledge with
different locations and object shapes. This design effectively eliminates hand-crafted anchors and post-processing
like NMS. However, due to the intrinsic dynamic attribute,
the kernels are forced to learn general object spatial distribution and shape priors in a data-driven manner so that
they can fit any input image. This makes QEIS models require a much larger amount of training data and a much
longer training time to achieve competitive performance
with CNN-based methods. Once in low-data regimes [1],
QEIS models will encounter much more significant performance drops than CNN-based methods, as shown in Fig-

15485

