This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaFusion: Infrared and Visible Image Fusion via Meta-Feature Embedding
from Object Detection
Wenda Zhao1 , Shigeng Xie1 , Fan Zhao2∗, You He3 , Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Liaoning Normal University, China
3
Tsinghua University, China
zhaowenda@dlut.edu.cn; xieshigeng@mail.dlut.edu.cn
Fan Zhao20@163.com; youhe nau@163.com; lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Fusing infrared and visible images can provide more texture details for subsequent object detection task. Conversely, detection task furnishes object semantic information to
improve the infrared and visible image fusion. Thus, a joint
fusion and detection learning to use their mutual promotion
is attracting more attention. However, the feature gap between these two different-level tasks hinders the progress.
Addressing this issue, this paper proposes an infrared and
visible image fusion via meta-feature embedding from object detection. The core idea is that meta-feature embedding
model is designed to generate object semantic features according to fusion network ability, and thus the semantic features are naturally compatible with fusion features. It is optimized by simulating a meta learning. Moreover, we further
implement a mutual promotion learning between fusion and
detection tasks to improve their performances. Comprehensive experiments on three public datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. Code and model are available
at: https://github.com/wdzhao123/MetaFusion.

1. Introduction
Multi-modality sensor technology has promoted the application of multi-modality images in different areas. Among them, infrared images and visible images have been
utilized commonly, as the information contained in these
two modalities is complementary. Specifically, infrared images can supply object thermal structures without being affected by illumination. But they are short of texture details. On the contrary, visible images can catch the texture
information for the scene. But they are severely affected by
light. Thus, many methods [15,25,35,43–45,47] focus on s-

z   ( x, y; f )

IVIF
Network 

min L f (  ( x , y ;  f ))

OD
Network 

min Ld (  ( z ;  d ))

f

d

(a) Separate optimization method
IVIF
Network 

z   ( x, y; f )

OD
Network 

min L f (  ( x , y ;  f ))  Ld (  ( z ;  d ))
f

(b) Cascaded optimization method
IVIF

Network

z   ( x, y; f )

OD

Network

min L f (  ( x , y ;  f ))  L g ( Fi f ,  ( Fi f , Fi d ;  m ))
f

min L f (  ( x , y ;  f ))
m

Data flow
Gradient flow

Meta-feature

Embedding

(c) Meta-feature embedding method

Figure 1. Different joint learning methods of infrared and visible
image fusion (IVIF) and object detection (OD). (a) Separate optimization method: IVIF network Ψ is firstly optimized by fusion
loss Lf . Then, fusion result z is generated by Ψ from the input
infrared and visible image pair x, y. Finally, OD network Φ is optimized by detection loss Ld using z. (b) Cascaded optimization
method: OD network Φ is treated as a constraint to optimize IVIF
network Ψ by the loss Lf and Ld . (c) Meta-feature embedding
method: Meta-feature embedding Γ is optimized to learn how to
guide Ψ to have a low Lf . Then, Γ generates meta feature from
detection feature Fid and fusion feature Fid . Finally, the meta feature is used to guide Ψ by the loss Ld .

tudying pixel-level infrared and visible image fusion (IVIF),
thereby helping high-level tasks improve performance, e.g.,
object detection (OD) [20, 34].

∗ Corresponding author

IVIF and OD can greatly benefit form each other. IVIF

13955

