This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harmonious Teacher for Cross-domain Object Detection
Jinhong Deng1 incons
Dongli
Xu2 Wen Li3 * Lixin Duan3,4
v3
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 University of Sydney
3
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC 4 Sichuan Provincial People’s Hospital, UESTC
{jhdengvision, dongliixu, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com

Abstract
Self-training approaches recently achieved promising results in cross-domain object detection, where people iteratively generate pseudo labels for unlabeled target domain samples with a model, and select high-confidence
samples to refine the model. In this work, we reveal that
the consistency of classification and localization predictions are crucial to measure the quality of pseudo labels,
and propose a new Harmonious Teacher approach to improve the self-training for cross-domain object detection.
In particular, we first propose to enhance the quality of
pseudo labels by regularizing the consistency of the classification and localization scores when training the detection model. The consistency losses are defined for both
labeled source samples and the unlabeled target samples.
Then, we further remold the traditional sample selection
method by a sample reweighing strategy based on the consistency of classification and localization scores to improve
the ranking of predictions. This allows us to fully exploit all instance predictions from the target domain without abandoning valuable hard examples. Without bells
and whistles, our method shows superior performance in
various cross-domain scenarios compared with the stateof-the-art baselines, which validates the effectiveness of
our Harmonious Teacher. Our codes will be available at
https://github.com/kinredon/Harmonious-Teacher.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims to recognize and localize objects
in images simultaneously. As one of the fundamental tasks
in computer vision, it plays an important role in many
downstream vision tasks, including face recognition [33],
person re-identification [42], instance segmentation [11],
action recognition [8] and so on. With the development of
deep convolution neural network (DCNN) [12,32], we have
witnessed a performance breakthrough of object detection
* The corresponding author

Score=0.78
IoU=0.83
Score=0.82
IoU=0.55

Classification Score

Harmony Measure
Score=0.78
IoU=0.83

Score=0.82
IoU=0.55

Figure 1. Comparison of pseudo labels selection using classification score and our proposed harmony measure. Object detection models often produce inconsistent predictions, e.g., bounding boxes with low classification score but high localization IoU
(blue box) or with high classification score but low localization
IoU (red box) with ground truth box (green box). Existing selftraining methods [6, 13, 22] usually adopt classification scores to
rank the predictions and are easily biased to low-quality prediction. In contrast, we use the harmony measure to consider the
consistency of the classification and localization scores and prefer
the accurate bounding box.

in recent years [1, 11, 27, 28, 36]. One important driving
force for such an advance is the availability of large-scale
annotated training data. However, collecting and annotating
those data are often extremely expensive in both time and
fund, which even has been a major challenge for many realworld applications, for example, face authentication [39],
autonomous driving [4], etc.
Cross-domain Object Detection (CDOD) [4, 6, 7, 13, 17–
19,22,30] has been proposed to address this problem, where
the goal is to adapt an object detector from a labeled source
domain to a novel unlabeled target domain. In this way,
great efforts can be saved from annotating training data in
the target domain. Recently, researchers have reported that
the self-training strategy achieves promising results in the
CDOD task. Generally, in the self-training framework, people use an existing object detection model to predict the ob-

23829

