This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BAAM: Monocular 3D pose and shape reconstruction with bi-contextual
attention module and attention-guided modeling
Hyo-Jun Lee1†

Hanul Kim3†
Su-Min Choi2
Seong-Gyun Jeong2
1
2
Chungnam National University
42dot Inc.
3
Seoul National University of Science and Technology

Yeong Jun Koh1∗

gywns6287@gmail.com, hukim@seoultech.ac.kr, sumin.choi@42dot.ai,
seonggyun.jeong@42dot.ai, yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr

Abstract
3D traffic scene comprises various 3D information about
car objects, including their pose and shape. However,
most recent studies pay relatively less attention to reconstructing detailed shapes. Furthermore, most of them treat
each 3D object as an independent one, resulting in losses
of relative context inter-objects and scene context reflecting road circumstances. A novel monocular 3D pose and
shape reconstruction algorithm, based on bi-contextual attention and attention-guided modeling (BAAM), is proposed
in this work. First, given 2D primitives, we reconstruct
3D object shape based on attention-guided modeling that
considers the relevance between detected objects and vehicle shape priors. Next, we estimate 3D object pose
through bi-contextual attention, which leverages relationcontext inter objects and scene-context between an object
and road environment. Finally, we propose a 3D nonmaximum suppression algorithm to eliminate spurious objects based on their Bird-Eye-View distance. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed BAAM yields
state-of-the-art performance on ApolloCar3D. Also, they
show that the proposed BAAM can be plugged into any
mature monocular 3D object detector on KITTI and significantly boost their performance. Code is available at
https://github.com/gywns6287/BAAM.

1. Introduction
3D traffic scene understanding provides enriched descriptions of the dynamic objects, e.g., 3D shape, pose,
and location, compared to representing objects as bounding
boxes. 3D visual perception is crucial for the autonomous
driving system to develop downstream tasks such as motion prediction and planning, and aids to faithfully recon∗ Corresponding author
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

Input image

3D Scene

Figure 1. Reconstructed 3D scene with rough bounding box (right
up) and with detailed shape (right down). For better 3D reconstruction, detailed 3D shapes are needed rather than the simple 3D
bounding boxes.

struct the traffic scene from recorded data. To acquire precise 3D information, some prior arts have relied on specific
devices such as LiDAR [3,10,42] and stereo vision [26,44].
However, as the system becomes complex and costly, it
quickly reaches the limit to scalability. To contrary, areas
of study about 3D perception using monocular vision have
been receiving attention due to its simplicity and cost efficiency [4, 7, 19, 29, 33, 50, 51].
Monocular 3D perception is an ill-posed problem in that
projective geometry inherently loses depth information. In
particular, traffic scene contains partially observable objects, and shows fine-grained classes which are visually
confusing. Pseudo-LiDAR [49] presents a feasible solution
of the image based 3D object detection. To reconstruct 3D
poses of the objects, many studies [25, 27, 30, 33, 40, 41, 50,
51] focus on using geometry constraints between 2D and
3D. Yet, it is less studied in the line of research that leverage
relative context among the objects and global scene context
depending on road environment.
Figure 1 compares the reconstructed 3D scene with 3D
bounding boxes and detailed 3D shapes. With a detailed 3D
shape, we render the traffic scene in realistic and provide
intuitive representations of the objects. Despite scale ambiguity of the monocular 3D perception, 3D mesh provides a

9011

