This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Graph Reprogramming
Yongcheng Jing1 , Chongbin Yuan2 , Li Ju2 , Yiding Yang2 , Xinchao Wang2 , Dacheng Tao1
1
The University of Sydney, Australia, 2 National University of Singapore, Singapore
xinchao@nus.edu.sg, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the explosive growth of graph data, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have been deployed across increasingly
wider areas [18, 20, 55, 57, 58], such as recommendation
system [48] and autonomous driving [32, 45, 47]. However,
the favorable performance for such applications generally
comes at the expense of tremendous training efforts and
high memory loads, precluding the deployment of GNNs
on the edge side. As such, reusing pre-trained GNNs to
alleviate training costs has recently emerged as a trending
research topic [7, 11, 19, 21, 39, 53, 54, 56, 69].
Pioneered by the work of [56] that generalize knowledge distillation [14,31,34,59–61] to the non-Euclidean do-

Node
Classification
Results
(0 1 2 3)

Graph Neural
Network

Deep Graph
Reprogramming

In this paper, we explore a novel model reusing task tailored for graph neural networks (GNNs), termed as “deep
graph reprogramming”. We strive to reprogram a pretrained GNN, without amending raw node features nor
model parameters, to handle a bunch of cross-level downstream tasks in various domains. To this end, we propose
an innovative Data Reprogramming paradigm alongside a
Model Reprogramming paradigm. The former one aims to
address the challenge of diversified graph feature dimensions for various tasks on the input side, while the latter
alleviates the dilemma of fixed per-task-per-model behavior on the model side. For data reprogramming, we specifically devise an elaborated Meta-FeatPadding method to
deal with heterogeneous input dimensions, and also develop a transductive Edge-Slimming as well as an inductive Meta-GraPadding approach for diverse homogenous
samples. Meanwhile, for model reprogramming, we propose a novel task-adaptive Reprogrammable-Aggregator,
to endow the frozen model with larger expressive capacities in handling cross-domain tasks. Experiments on fourteen datasets across node/graph classification/regression,
3D object recognition, and distributed action recognition,
demonstrate that the proposed methods yield gratifying results, on par with those by re-training from scratch.

Pre-trained Task

Downstream Task #1

Downstream Task #2

Downstream Task #3

Graph Neural
Network

Graph Neural
Network

Graph Neural
Network

Bacteria

[ 2.262,
-1.354 ]

Node Classification Results
(0 1 2)

Graph Classification Results

Graph Regression Results

⋯
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋯

Figure 1. Illustrations of the proposed task of deep graph reprogramming (G ARE) that aims to reuse pre-trained GNNs to handle
plenty of cross-level tasks with heterogeneous graph feature dimensions, without changing model architectures nor parameters.

main, almost all existing approaches on reusing GNNs are
achieved by following the distillation pipeline in [56]. Despite the encouraging results, the distilling-based scheme is
limited to the per-task-per-distillation setting, where a distilled model can only tackle the same task as the teacher
can, leading to considerable storage and computation burdens, especially for the deployment of multiple tasks.
Meanwhile, the distillation mechanism rests upon the
hypothesis that abundant pre-trained models are available
in the target domains, which indeed holds for image-based
areas that always take data in the regular RGB form, thereby
readily allowing for per-model-multiple-dataset reusing.
However, such an assumption is typically not satisfied in the
non-Euclidean domain: on the input side, irregular graph
samples have heterogeneous feature dimensions, as shown
with the color bars in Fig. 1; on the task side, graph analysis
takes various task levels and settings, such as graph-, node-,
and edge-level learning, as well as transductive and inductive scenarios. Such nature of topological diversities leads
to inadequate pre-trained GNNs that fit the target downstream tasks.
In this paper, we strive to take one step towards generalized and resource-efficient GNN reusing, by studying a
novel deep graph reprogramming (G ARE) task. Our goal is

24345

