This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HuManiFlow: Ancestor-Conditioned Normalising Flows on SO(3) Manifolds for
Human Pose and Shape Distribution Estimation
Akash Sengupta
Ignas Budvytis
Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge
{as2562, ib255, rc10001}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Monocular 3D human pose and shape estimation is an illposed problem since multiple 3D solutions can explain a 2D
image of a subject. Recent approaches predict a probability
distribution over plausible 3D pose and shape parameters
conditioned on the image. We show that these approaches
exhibit a trade-off between three key properties: (i) accuracy
- the likelihood of the ground-truth 3D solution under the predicted distribution, (ii) sample-input consistency - the extent
to which 3D samples from the predicted distribution match
the visible 2D image evidence, and (iii) sample diversity - the
range of plausible 3D solutions modelled by the predicted
distribution. Our method, HuManiFlow, predicts simultaneously accurate, consistent and diverse distributions. We use
the human kinematic tree to factorise full body pose into
ancestor-conditioned per-body-part pose distributions in an
autoregressive manner. Per-body-part distributions are implemented using normalising flows that respect the manifold
structure of SO(3), the Lie group of per-body-part poses.
We show that ill-posed, but ubiquitous, 3D point estimate
losses reduce sample diversity, and employ only probabilistic
training losses. HuManiFlow outperforms state-of-the-art
probabilistic approaches on the 3DPW and SSP-3D datasets.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose and shape from a single RGB
image is an inherently ill-posed [25, 47] computer vision
task. Many 3D solutions can correspond to an input 2D observation, due to depth ambiguity, occlusion and truncation.
Thus, several recent approaches [1, 2, 23, 42, 43] use deep
neural networks to predict a probability distribution over
3D pose and shape, conditioned on the 2D input. In theory,
this has a few advantages over deterministic single-solution
predictors [18, 20, 21, 27, 55] - such as the quantification of
prediction uncertainty, sampling of multiple plausible 3D
solutions, and usage in downstream tasks such as multi-input
fusion [43, 44] or as a prior in parametric model fitting [23].
To fully realise the advantages of probabilistic 3D pose

Figure 1. Comparison between pose and shape distributions from
HuManiFlow and ProHMR [23]. 3D samples from HuManiFlow
are consistent with the visible 2D evidence, while being more diverse than samples from ProHMR. Per-vertex sample variances
along the x/y/z-axes highlight interpretable uncertainty due to occlusion/truncation (all axes), and depth ambiguity (z-axis-specific).

and shape estimation in practice, we suggest that predicted distributions should exhibit three properties: accuracy,
sample-input consistency and sample diversity. Accuracy denotes the likelihood of the ground-truth (GT) 3D pose and
shape under the distribution. Sample-input consistency measures the extent to which 3D samples from the distribution
match the 2D input. In particular, after projection to the image plane, samples should agree with any pose and shape
information visible in the image. Sample diversity refers to
the range of 3D poses and shapes modelled by the distribution. The GT pose and shape is but one 3D solution - the
predicted distribution should model several plausible solutions when ill-posedness arises due to occlusion, truncation
and depth ambiguity in the 2D input. More diverse samples
enable better estimates of prediction uncertainty.
We show that recent probabilistic approaches suffer from
a trade-off between accuracy, consistency and diversity.

4779

