This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continuous Sign Language Recognition with Correlation Network
Lianyu Hu, Liqing Gao, Zekang Liu, Wei Feng
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
Code : https://github.com/hulianyuyy/CorrNet

Abstract
Human body trajectories are a salient cue to identify
actions in the video. Such body trajectories are mainly
conveyed by hands and face across consecutive frames in
sign language. However, current methods in continuous
sign language recognition (CSLR) usually process frames
independently, thus failing to capture cross-frame trajectories to effectively identify a sign. To handle this limitation, we propose correlation network (CorrNet) to explicitly capture and leverage body trajectories across frames to
identify signs. In specific, a correlation module is first proposed to dynamically compute correlation maps between
the current frame and adjacent frames to identify trajectories of all spatial patches. An identification module is
then presented to dynamically emphasize the body trajectories within these correlation maps. As a result, the generated features are able to gain an overview of local temporal movements to identify a sign. Thanks to its special attention on body trajectories, CorrNet achieves new
state-of-the-art accuracy on four large-scale datasets, i.e.,
PHOENIX14, PHOENIX14-T, CSL-Daily, and CSL. A comprehensive comparison with previous spatial-temporal reasoning methods verifies the effectiveness of CorrNet. Visualizations demonstrate the effects of CorrNet on emphasizing human body trajectories across adjacent frames.

1. Introduction
Sign language is one of the most widely-used communication tools for the deaf community in their daily life.
However, mastering this language is rather difficult and
time-consuming for the hearing people, thus hindering direct communications between two groups. To relieve this
problem, isolated sign language recognition tries to classify
a video segment into an independent gloss1 . Continuous
sign language recognition (CSLR) progresses by sequentially translating images into a series of glosses to express a
sentence, more prospective toward real-life deployment.
1 Gloss is the atomic lexical unit to annotate sign languages.

Left frame

Right frame

Figure 1. Visualization of correlation maps with Grad-CAM [39].
It’s observed that without extra supervision, our method could well
attend to informative regions in adjacent left/right frames to identify human body trajectories.

Human body trajectories are a salient cue to identify actions in human-centric video understanding [44]. In sign
language, such trajectories are mainly conveyed by both
manual components (hand/arm gestures), and non-manual
components (facial expressions, head movements, and body
postures) [10,35]. Especially, both hands move horizontally
and vertically across consecutive frames quickly, with finger twisting and facial expressions to express a sign. To
track and leverage such body trajectories is of great importance to understanding sign language.
However, current CSLR methods [5, 6, 16, 33, 34, 36, 54]
usually process each frame separately, thus failing to exploit
such critical cues in the early stage. Especially, they usually
adopt a shared 2D CNN to capture spatial features for each
frame independently. In this sense, frames are processed
individually without interactions with adjacent neighbors,
thus inhibited to identify and leverage cross-frame trajectories to express a sign. The generated features are thus
not aware of local temporal patterns and fail to perceive
the hand/face movements in expressing a sign. To handle this limitation, well-known 3D convolution [4] or its
(2+1)D variants [42, 49] are potential candidates to capture short-term temporal information to identify body trajectories. Other temporal methods like temporal shift [30]
or temporal convolutions [31] can also attend to short-term
temporal movements. However, it’s hard for them to aggregate beneficial information from distant informative spatial
regions due to their limited spatial-temporal receptive field.

2529

