This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Customized Visual Models with Retrieval-Augmented Knowledge
Haotian Liu†§♠

Kilho Son‡ Jianwei Yang‡ Ce Liu‡ Jianfeng Gao‡ Yong Jae Lee†¶
†
‡
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Microsoft

{lht,yongjaelee}@cs.wisc.edu

Chunyuan Li‡¶♠

{kilhoson,jianwyan,ce.liu,jfgao,chunyl}@microsoft.com

https://react-vl.github.io

Abstract
Image-text contrastive learning models such as CLIP
have demonstrated strong task transfer ability. The high
generality and usability of these visual models is achieved
via a web-scale data collection process to ensure broad concept coverage, followed by expensive pre-training to feed
all the knowledge into model weights. Alternatively, we
propose R EACT, REtrieval-Augmented CusTomization, a
framework to acquire the relevant web knowledge to build
customized visual models for target domains. We retrieve the
most relevant image-text pairs (∼3% of CLIP pre-training
data) from the web-scale database as external knowledge
and propose to customize the model by only training new
modularized blocks while freezing all the original weights.
The effectiveness of R EACT is demonstrated via extensive
experiments on classification, retrieval, detection and segmentation tasks, including zero, few, and full-shot settings.
Particularly, on the zero-shot classification task, compared
with CLIP, it achieves up to 5.4% improvement on ImageNet
and 3.7% on the E LEVATER benchmark (20 datasets).

1. Introduction
It has been a fundamental research problem in computer
vision (CV) to build a transferable visual system that can
easily adapt to a wide range of downstream tasks. With
remarkable advances in deep learning, a de facto solution
to achieve this is to train deep neural networks on a large
amount of data to pursue the so-called generic visual representations. This dates back to the standard supervised training on ImageNet [10], whose superb representation power
is further demonstrated in BiT [23]/ViT [12] by scaling up
the training to JFT300M [50]. Along the way, recent efforts
have been applied to the popular image self-supervised learning [6, 16, 17] to reduce the demand for labeled data. The
♠ core contribution; ¶ equal advising; § work initiated during an
internship at Microsoft.

third approach is image-text contrastive learning trained on
billion-scale web-crawled image-text pairs. Such models,
like CLIP [43] and ALIGN [20], are able to achieve great
performance on different downstream domains, without the
need of any human labels.
Excellent empirical performance has been achieved with
the above three pre-training methods, by following the well
established two-stage pre-training then adaptation pipeline:
model pre-training from scratch on large data, then model
adaptation directly on downstream tasks. Specifically, the
pre-trained models are adapted to downstream tasks by considering the available task-specific samples only: either evaluated in a zero-shot task transfer manner, or updated using
linear probing (LP) [43], finetuning (FT) [27], or prompt tuning [44,71]. Following this two-stage pipeline, most research
has reverted to the faith that building transferable visual systems is equivalent to developing more generic visual models
by feeding all knowledge in the model pre-training stage.
Therefore, the community has been witnessing a trend in
exploring scaling success of pre-training model and data size
with less care on the target domain, hoping that the model
can adapt to any downstream scenario.
In this paper, we argue that the conventional two-stage
pipeline above is over-simplified and less efficient, in achieving the goal of building a transferable visual system in realworld settings. Instead, we propose a customization stage in
between the pre-training and adaptation, where customization is implemented by systematically leveraging retrieved
external knowledge. The inspiration comes from how humans are specialized in society for better generalization:
instead of trying to memorize all concepts, humans are
trained/prepared in a relevant subject to master a certain
skill, while maintaining the basic skills in pre-training.
To this end, we explore a systematic approach to acquire
and learn with external knowledge sources from a large
image-text corpus for model customization. The process of
collecting external image-text knowledge is fully automatic
without extra human annotation. The acquired knowledge
typically contains richer information about the concept: relevant images that never appear in the downstream training

15148

