This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Heterogeneous Continual Learning
Divyam Madaan1,2 * , Hongxu Yin1 , Wonmin Byeon1 , Jan Kautz1 , Pavlo Molchanov1
1

NVIDIA, 2 New York University

divyam.madaan@nyu.edu, {dannyy, wbyeon, jkautz, pmolchanov}@nvidia.com

Abstract
We propose a novel framework and a solution to tackle
the continual learning (CL) problem with changing network
architectures. Most CL methods focus on adapting a single
architecture to a new task/class by modifying its weights.
However, with rapid progress in architecture design, the
problem of adapting existing solutions to novel architectures
becomes relevant. To address this limitation, we propose
Heterogeneous Continual Learning (HCL), where a wide
range of evolving network architectures emerge continually
together with novel data/tasks. As a solution, we build on
top of the distillation family of techniques and modify it
to a new setting where a weaker model takes the role of a
teacher; meanwhile, a new stronger architecture acts as a
student. Furthermore, we consider a setup of limited access
to previous data and propose Quick Deep Inversion (QDI) to
recover prior task visual features to support knowledge transfer. QDI significantly reduces computational costs compared
to previous solutions and improves overall performance. In
summary, we propose a new setup for CL with a modified
knowledge distillation paradigm and design a quick data
inversion method to enhance distillation. Our evaluation
of various benchmarks shows a significant improvement on
accuracy in comparison to state-of-the-art methods over
various networks architectures.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, we have seen a plethora of innovations in deep neural networks (DNNs) that have led to
remarkable improvement in performance on several applications [34, 35, 40]. AlexNet [24] was the first breakthrough
showing the potential of deep learning on the ImageNet
benchmark [12], it was followed by various architectural
advances such as VGG [46], Inception [48], ResNet and its
variants [15, 53, 58], efficient architectures [18, 49], and applications of Transformer [52] in computer vision [14, 32];
however, all these architectures are trained from scratch and
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

compared on ImageNet classification [12]. In real-world scenarios, the dataset size is not constant, yet storage of billions
of data instances and retraining the model representations
from scratch is computationally expensive and infeasible.
Further, access to old datasets is often not available due to
data privacy. Thus, it is crucial to transfer the knowledge
learned by the previous model representations to the recent
state-of-the-advances without forgetting knowledge and accessing prior datasets.
Continual learning (CL) [50] is a common way to train
representations on a data stream without forgetting the
learned knowledge. However, all prior CL techniques [1, 4,
33, 41, 42, 43, 59] continually adapt a fixed representation
structure – a fully-connected network with two hidden layers for MNIST [26] and standard ResNet-18 [15] for all the
other datasets (see Figure 1). While recent works investigate the effect of depth and width [37] on continual learning,
to our knowledge, no work has focused on the real problem of learning on sequentially arriving tasks with changing
network architectures. Moreover, most works assume the
weight transfer with the same architecture [43, 56], in case
of the previous model being available only as black box,
these methods are not applicable.
In this work, we argue that maintaining the same network structure during training is not a realistic assumption
for practical applications such as autonomous driving, clinical applications, and recommendation systems. Instead,
constant upgrades to stronger models with the best-known
architecture are vital for the best customer experience and
competitive advantage, and all streams of previous data are
not only large but difficult to store, transfer, manage, and
protect against security breach. As a motivating example,
consider the tasks of clinical diagnosis and segmentation
using medical images, where it is essential to continually
update the model on arriving data to adapt to the changing
environment. However, continually adapting the old model
architectures can potentially hurt the current and future task
performance. Also, it is often not allowed to retain the previous patients’ data to update to the new model due to privacy
concerns. Based on this motivation, our goal is to continually
update the state-of-the-art deep learning architectures with-

15985

