This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FFHQ-UV: Normalized Facial UV-Texture Dataset for 3D Face Reconstruction
Haoxian Zhang2
Jinshan Pan1† Linchao Bao2
Haoran Bai1 * Di Kang2
1
2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
Tencent AI Lab

Figure 1. Examples of the proposed FFHQ-UV dataset. From left-to-right and top-to-bottom are the normalized face images after
editing, the produced texture UV-maps, and the rendered images under different lighting conditions. The proposed dataset is derived from
FFHQ and preserves the most variations in FFHQ. The facial texture UV-maps in the proposed dataset are with even illuminations, neutral
expressions, and cleaned facial regions (e.g. no eyeglasses and hair), which are ready for realistic renderings.

Abstract
We present a large-scale facial UV-texture dataset that
contains over 50,000 high-quality texture UV-maps with
even illuminations, neutral expressions, and cleaned facial
regions, which are desired characteristics for rendering realistic 3D face models under different lighting conditions.
The dataset is derived from a large-scale face image dataset
namely FFHQ, with the help of our fully automatic and robust UV-texture production pipeline. Our pipeline utilizes
the recent advances in StyleGAN-based facial image editing
approaches to generate multi-view normalized face images
from single-image inputs. An elaborated UV-texture extraction, correction, and completion procedure is then applied
to produce high-quality UV-maps from the normalized face
images. Compared with existing UV-texture datasets, our
dataset has more diverse and higher-quality texture maps.
We further train a GAN-based texture decoder as the nonlinear texture basis for parametric fitting based 3D face reconstruction. Experiments show that our method improves the
* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding author.

reconstruction accuracy over state-of-the-art approaches,
and more importantly, produces high-quality texture maps
that are ready for realistic renderings. The dataset, code,
and pre-trained texture decoder are publicly available at
https://github.com/csbhr/FFHQ-UV .

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D shape and texture of a face from
single or multiple images is an important and challenging
task in both computer vision and graphics communities.
Since the seminal work by Blanz and Vetter [3] showed that
the reconstruction can be effectively achieved by parametric
fitting with a linear statistical model, namely 3D Morphable
Model (3DMM), it has received active research efforts in
the past two decades [14]. While most 3DMM-based reconstruction approaches focused on improving the shape estimation accuracy, only a few works addressed the problem
on texture UV-map recovery [2, 15, 23, 24, 26, 35, 41].
There are two key aspects that deserve attention in the
texture map recovery problem, which are the fidelity and the
quality of the acquired texture maps. In order to recover a

362

