This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object Detection with Self-Supervised Scene Adaptation
Zekun Zhang1
1

Minh Hoai1,2

Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
2
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{zekzhang,minhhoai}@cs.stonyrbook.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel method to improve the performance of a trained object detector on scenes with fixed
camera perspectives based on self-supervised adaptation.
Given a specific scene, the trained detector is adapted using
pseudo-ground truth labels generated by the detector itself
and an object tracker in a cross-teaching manner. When
the camera perspective is fixed, our method can utilize the
background equivariance by proposing artifact-free object
mixup as a means of data augmentation, and utilize accurate background extraction as an additional input modality. We also introduce a large-scale and diverse dataset
for the development and evaluation of scene-adaptive object detection. Experiments on this dataset show that our
method can improve the average precision of the original
detector, outperforming the previous state-of-the-art selfsupervised domain adaptive object detection methods by
a large margin. Our dataset and code are published at
https://github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/scenes100.

1. Introduction
The need to detect objects in video streams from stationary cameras arises in many computer vision applications,
including video surveillance and autonomous retail. In general, different applications require the detection of different
object categories, and each computer-vision-based product
will have its own detector. However, for a specific product,
there is typically a single detector that will be used for many
cameras/scenes. For example, a typical video surveillance
product would use the same detector to detect pedestrians
and vehicles for network cameras installed at different locations. Unfortunately, a single detector might not work well
for all scenes, leading to trivial and unforgiving mistakes.
This fundamental problem of many computer vision
products stems from the limited generalization power of a
single model, due to limited training data, limited model capacity, or both. One can attempt to address this problem by

using more training data, but it will incur additional cost for
data collection and annotation. Furthermore, in many cases,
due to the low latency requirement or the limited computing resources for inference, a product is forced to use a very
lightweight network, and this network will have limited representation capacity to generalize across many scenes.
In this paper, instead of having a single scene-generic
detector, we propose using scene-specific detectors. This
yields higher detection performance as each detector is
customized for a specific scene, and allows us to use a
lightweight model without sacrificing accuracy as each detector is only responsible for one scene.
Obtaining scene-specific detectors, however, is very
challenging. A trivial approach is to train a detector for
each scene separately, but this requires an enormous amount
of annotated training data. Instead, we propose a selfsupervised method to adapt a pre-trained detector to each
scene. Our method records the unlabeled video frames
in the past, uses the trained detector to detect objects in
those frames, and generates augmented training data based
on those detections. Although the detections made by the
pre-trained model can be noisy, they can still be useful for
generating pseudo annotated data. We further extend those
pseudo bounding boxes by applying object tracking [2, 57]
along the video timeline, aiming to propagate the detections
to adjacent frames to recover some of the false negatives not
returned by the detector. We also use multiple detectors to
obtain the pseudo labels and train the detector in a crossteaching manner, taking the advantage of the ensemble of
models [13, 24].
Exploiting the stationary nature of the camera, we propose two additional techniques to boost the detection performance: location-aware mixup and background-augmented
input. The former is to generate more samples during training through object mixup [76] that contains less artifacts,
based on the aforementioned pseudo boxes generated from
detection and tracking. The latter involves estimating the
background image and fusing it with the detector’s input.
In short, the main contribution of our paper is a novel
framework that utilizes self-supervision, location-aware ob-

21589

