This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Meta-Learning Approach to Predicting Performance and Data Requirements
Achin Jain1 *

Gurumurthy Swaminathan1

Avinash Ravichandran1†

Hrayr Harutyunyan1,2†

Bernt Schiele1
1

Paolo Favaro1
Alessandro Achille1

Ashwin Swaminathan1

Hao Yang1
Onkar Dabeer1

Stefano Soatto1

AWS AI Labs, 2 University of Southern California

{achij,gurumurs,pffavaro,haoyng,aachille,onkardab,bschiel,swashwin,soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose an approach to estimate the number of samples required for a model to reach a target performance.
We find that the power law, the de facto principle to estimate model performance, leads to a large error when using
a small dataset (e.g., 5 samples per class) for extrapolation. This is because the log-performance error against the
log-dataset size follows a nonlinear progression in the fewshot regime followed by a linear progression in the highshot regime. We introduce a novel piecewise power law
(PPL) that handles the two data regimes differently. To
estimate the parameters of the PPL, we introduce a random forest regressor trained via meta learning that generalizes across classification/detection tasks, ResNet/ViT based
architectures, and random/pre-trained initializations. The
PPL improves the performance estimation on average by
37% across 16 classification and 33% across 10 detection
datasets, compared to the power law. We further extend the
PPL to provide a confidence bound and use it to limit the
prediction horizon that reduces over-estimation of data by
76% on classification and 91% on detection datasets.

1. Introduction
More data translates to better performance, on average, but higher cost. As data requirements scale, there
is a natural desire to predict the cost to train a model
and what performance it may achieve, as a function of
cost, without training. Towards this goal, neural scaling
laws [3, 4, 9, 19, 20, 40] have been proposed that suggest
that the performance of a model trained on a given dataset
size follows a linear fit when plotted on a logarithmic scale
(power law in linear scale).
In practice, however, the power law provides only a family of functions and its parameters must be fitted to each
specific case for performance prediction. A common use
* Corresponding author. † Work done at AWS.

Figure 1. Performance estimation curves using the powerlaw and
piecewise power law (PPL) with estimated confidence. The PPL
reduces over-estimation of the power law from 12⇥ to 1.9⇥ in 1
step, and further to 1.2⇥ in 2 steps using the estimated confidence
bounds to limit the prediction horizon n(1) in the first step.

case is one where a small initial dataset is made available
and can be used to obtain small-scale performance statistics
that are relatively inexpensive to obtain and can be used to
fit the power law parameters. Then, the fitted function is
used to predict the performance for any dataset size training through extrapolation. This approach is found empirically to generalize across several datasets and deep learning
models [40]. However, most applications of power law are
done in the high-shot regime. The few-shot regime (e.g., 5
samples/class) is particularly useful given the prevalence of
pre-trained initializations available for model training. In
the few-shot regime, the performance curve exhibits a nonlinear progression followed by a linear progression, see Figure 1. Thus, data requirements based on the power law can
lead to significant errors incurring additional cost for acquiring data.
In this paper, we propose a piecewise power law (PPL)
that models the performance as a quadratic curve in the fewshot regime and a linear curve in the high-shot regime in

3623

