This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

K-Planes: Explicit Radiance Fields in Space, Time, and Appearance
Sara Fridovich-Keil*
UC Berkeley

Giacomo Meanti*
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

Frederik Rahbæk Warburg
Technical University of Denmark

sfk@berkeley.edu

giacomo.meanti@iit.it

frwa@dtu.dk

Benjamin Recht
UC Berkeley

Angjoo Kanazawa
UC Berkeley

brecht@berkeley.edu

kanazawa@berkeley.edu

Higher
Dimensions
xz
xy
yz

xz

xz

xy

xy

t

yz

yz

zt
xy
yt

xt

Memory:
a) 2D Images

b) 3D Static Volumes c) 3D Volume w. Varying Appearance d) 4D Dynamic Volumes

Figure 1. Planar factorization of d-dimensional spaces. We propose a simple planar factorization for volumetric rendering that naturally
extends to arbitrary-dimensional spaces, and that scales gracefully with dimension in both optimization time and model size. We show the
advantages of our approach on 3D static volumes, 3D photo collections with varying appearances, and 4D dynamic videos.

Abstract
We introduce k-planes, a white-box model for radiance

fields in arbitrary dimensions. Our model uses d2 (“dchoose-2”) planes to represent a d-dimensional scene, providing a seamless way to go from static (d = 3) to dynamic
(d = 4) scenes. This planar factorization makes adding
dimension-specific priors easy, e.g. temporal smoothness
and multi-resolution spatial structure, and induces a natural decomposition of static and dynamic components of a
scene. We use a linear feature decoder with a learned color
basis that yields similar performance as a nonlinear blackbox MLP decoder. Across a range of synthetic and real,
static and dynamic, fixed and varying appearance scenes,
k-planes yields competitive and often state-of-the-art reconstruction fidelity with low memory usage, achieving 1000x
compression over a full 4D grid, and fast optimization with
a pure PyTorch implementation. For video results and code,
please see sarafridov.github.io/K-Planes.
* equal contribution

1. Introduction
Recent interest in dynamic radiance fields demands representations of 4D volumes. However, storing a 4D volume directly is prohibitively expensive due to the curse of
dimensionality. Several approaches have been proposed to
factorize 3D volumes for static radiance fields, but these do
not easily extend to higher dimensional volumes.
We propose a factorization of 4D volumes that is simple,
interpretable, compact, and yields fast training and rendering. Specifically, we use six planes to represent a 4D volume, where the first three represent space and the last three
represent space-time changes, as illustrated in Fig. 1(d).
This decomposition of space and space-time makes our
model interpretable, i.e. dynamic objects are clearly visible
in the space-time planes, whereas static objects only appear
in the space planes. This interpretability enables dimensionspecific priors in time and space.
More generally, our approach yields a straightforward,
prescriptive way to select a factorization of any dimension
with 2D planes. For a d-dimensional space, we use k = d2
(“d-choose-2”) k-planes, which represent every pair of di-

12479

