This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Approximation Error in 3D Surface Fitting for Point Cloud
Normal Estimation
Hang Du*, Xuejun Yan* , Jingjing Wang, Di Xie†, and Shiliang Pu
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{duhang, yanxuejun, wangjingjing9, xiedi, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Most existing approaches for point cloud normal estimation aim to locally fit a geometric surface and calculate the normal from the fitted surface. Recently, learningbased methods have adopted a routine of predicting pointwise weights to solve the weighted least-squares surface
fitting problem. Despite achieving remarkable progress,
these methods overlook the approximation error of the fitting problem, resulting in a less accurate fitted surface. In
this paper, we first carry out in-depth analysis of the approximation error in the surface fitting problem. Then, in
order to bridge the gap between estimated and precise surface normals, we present two basic design principles: 1) applies the Z-direction Transform to rotate local patches for
a better surface fitting with a lower approximation error;
2) models the error of the normal estimation as a learnable term. We implement these two principles using deep
neural networks, and integrate them with the state-of-theart (SOTA) normal estimation methods in a plug-and-play
manner. Extensive experiments verify our approaches bring
benefits to point cloud normal estimation and push the frontier of state-of-the-art performance on both synthetic and
real-world datasets. The code is available at https://
github.com/hikvision-research/3DVision.

1. Introduction
Surface normal estimation on point clouds can offer additional local geometric information for numerous applications, such as denoising [11, 23, 24], segmentation [28–30],
registration [9, 17, 27, 33], and surface reconstruction [10,
15, 18, 25, 41]. However, raw-scanned point clouds tend to
be incomplete, noisy, and non-uniform, which poses a challenge in accurately estimating surface normals amidst noise,
density variations, and missing structures.
Normal estimation on point clouds is a long-standing re* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The error heatmap of point cloud normal estimation. The
first row is produced by three SOTA surface fitting methods, while
the second row shows the results of integrating our method with
them. The bottom values indicate the corresponding normal angle
root mean square error (RMSE) . Both quantitative and qualitative
results demonstrate that our proposed method provides more precise normal estimation.

search topic. The majority of traditional methods [6, 8, 12,
15, 20] aim to fit a local geometric surface (e.g., plane, jet
and spherical) around a specific point, and infer the normal
from the fitted surface. However, these methods require to
carefully tune the setting of parameters, such as point neighborhood sizes, which is sensitive to noise and outliers. With
the power of deep neural networks, many learning-based
approaches [4, 5, 13, 14, 31, 37, 40] have been proposed to
regress surface normal vectors directly, achieving promising
performance improvements over traditional methods. However, these approaches exhibit limited generalization capability when applied to real-world point clouds.
More recently, several approaches [3, 21, 42] have generalized the truncated Taylor expansion (n-jet) surface

9486

