This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human Pose Estimation in Extremely Low-Light Conditions
Sohyun Lee1∗
1

Jaesung Rim1∗
Haechan Lee1

Boseung Jeong2
Sunghyun Cho1,2†
2

Graduate School of AI, POSTECH

Geonu Kim2
Suha Kwak1,2†

Byungju Woo2

Dept. of CSE, POSTECH

http://cg.postech.ac.kr/research/ExLPose

Well-lit image

Low-light image & its scaled version

Abstract
We study human pose estimation in extremely low-light
images. This task is challenging due to the difficulty of
collecting real low-light images with accurate labels, and
severely corrupted inputs that degrade prediction quality
significantly. To address the first issue, we develop a dedicated camera system and build a new dataset of real lowlight images with accurate pose labels. Thanks to our camera system, each low-light image in our dataset is coupled
with an aligned well-lit image, which enables accurate pose
labeling and is used as privileged information during training. We also propose a new model and a new training strategy that fully exploit the privileged information to learn representation insensitive to lighting conditions. Our method
demonstrates outstanding performance on real extremely
low-light images, and extensive analyses validate that both
of our model and dataset contribute to the success.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks [6, 55, 56, 64, 66] trained with
large-scale datasets [1, 18, 30, 35, 38] have driven dramatic
advances in human pose estimation recently. However, their
success demands high-quality inputs taken in controlled environments while in real-world applications images are often corrupted by low-light conditions, adverse weather conditions, sensor noises, motion blur, etc. Indeed, a precondition for human pose estimation in the wild is robustness
against such adverse conditions.
Motivated by this, we study pose estimation under ex∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

Our result

tremely low-light conditions using a single sRGB image, in
which humans can barely see anything. The task is highly
practical as its solution enables nighttime applications of
pose estimation without raw-RGB data or additional devices like IR cameras. It is at the same time challenging
due to the following two reasons. The first is the difficulty
of data collection. Manual annotation of human poses in
low-light images is often troublesome due to their limited
visibility. The second is the difficulty of pose estimation
on low-light images. The poor quality of low-light images in terms of visibility and signal-to-noise ratio largely
degrades prediction accuracy of common pose estimation
models. A naı̈ve way to mitigate the second issue is to apply low-light image enhancement [5, 28, 41, 42, 62] to input
images. However, image enhancement is in general highly
expensive in both computation and memory. Also, it is not
aware of downstream recognition tasks and thus could be
sub-optimal for pose estimation in low-light conditions.
To tackle this challenging problem, we first present a
new dataset of real extremely low-light images with groundtruth pose labels. The key feature of our dataset is that
each low-light image is coupled with a well-lit image of
the same content. The advantage of using the well-lit images is two-fold. First, they enable accurate labeling for
their low-light counterparts thanks to their substantially better visibility. Second, they can be utilized as privileged information [13, 32, 40, 57, 58], i.e., additional input data that
are more informative than the original ones (low-light images in our case) but available only in training, to further
improve performance on low-light images. Such benefits
of paired training images have also been validated in other
robust recognition tasks [9, 34, 46–49]. The beauty of our
dataset is that pairs of low-light and well-lit images are all

704

