This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bias in Pruned Vision Models: In-Depth Analysis and Countermeasures
Eugenia Iofinova

Alexandra Peste

Dan Alistarh

IST Austria

IST Austria

IST Austria & Neural Magic

Abstract
Pruning—that is, setting a significant subset of the parameters of a neural network to zero—is one of the most
popular methods of model compression. Yet, several recent
works have raised the issue that pruning may induce or exacerbate bias in the output of the compressed model. Despite existing evidence for this phenomenon, the relationship between neural network pruning and induced bias is
not well-understood. In this work, we systematically investigate and characterize this phenomenon in Convolutional
Neural Networks for computer vision. First, we show that
it is in fact possible to obtain highly-sparse models, e.g.
with less than 10% remaining weights, which do not decrease in accuracy nor substantially increase in bias when
compared to dense models. At the same time, we also
find that, at higher sparsities, pruned models exhibit higher
uncertainty in their outputs, as well as increased correlations, which we directly link to increased bias. We propose easy-to-use criteria which, based only on the uncompressed model, establish whether bias will increase with
pruning, and identify the samples most susceptible to biased predictions post-compression. Our code can be found
at https://github.com/IST-DASLab/prunedvision-model-bias.

1. Introduction
The concept of “bias” in machine learning models spans
a range of considerations in terms of statistical, performance, and social metrics. Different definitions can lead
to different relationships between bias and accuracy. For
instance, if bias is defined in terms of accuracy disparity
between identity groups, then accuracy in the “stronger”
group may have to be reduced in order to reduce model
bias. Several sources of bias have been identified in this
context. For example, bias in datasets commonly used to
train machine learning models [4,5,53] can severely impact
outputs, and may be difficult or even impossible to correct
during training. The choice of model architecture, training
methods, evaluation, and deployment can create or exacerbate bias [2, 42, 43].
One potential source of bias which is relatively less in-

vestigated is the fact that machine learning models, and
in particular deep neural networks, are often compressed
for efficiency before being deployed. Seminal work by
Hooker et al. [29] and its follow-ups, e.g. [28, 38] provided examples where model compression, and in particular
pruning, can exacerbate bias by leading models to perform
poorly on “unusual” data, which can frequently coincide
with marginalized groups. Given the recent popularity of
compression methods in deployment settings [13,18,19,27]
and the fact that, for massive models, compression is often
necessary to enable model deployment, these findings raise
the question of whether the bias due to compression can be
exactly characterized, and in particular whether bias is an
inherent side-effect of the model compression process.
In this paper, we perform an in-depth analysis of bias in
compressed vision models, providing new insights on this
phenomenon, as well as a set of practical, effective criteria for identifying samples susceptible to biased predictions,
which can be used to significantly attenuate bias.
Our work starts from a common setting to study bias
and bias mitigation [28, 29, 40, 50]: we study properties of
sparse residual convolutional neural networks [25], in particular ResNet18, applied for classification on the CelebA
dataset [41]. Then, we validate our findings across other
CNN architectures and other datasets. To study the impact
of sparsity, we train highly accurate models with sparsity
ranging from 80% to 99.5%, using the standard gradual
magnitude pruning (GMP) approach [18, 21, 22, 55]. We
consider bias in dense and sparse models from two perspectives: systematic bias, which refers to consistent errors in
the model output, and category bias, which refers to violations of fairness metrics associated with protected groups.
On the positive side, our analysis shows that the GMP
approach can produce models that are highly sparse, i.e. 9095% of pruned weights, without significant increase in any
bias-related metrics. Yet, this requires care: we show that
shared, jointly-trained representations are significantly less
susceptible to bias, and so careful choices of training procedure are needed for good results. On the other hand, at
very high sparsities (95%-99.5%) we do observe non-trivial
increase in category bias for the sparse models, for specific
protected attributes. We perform an in-depth study of this

24364

