This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Map Sparsification Based on 2D and 3D Discretized Grids
Xiaoyu Zhang
Yun-Hui Liu
T Stone Robotics Institute, Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong Centre for Logistics Robotics
zhang.xy@link.cuhk.edu.hk

yhliu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Localization in a pre-built map is a basic technique for
robot autonomous navigation. Existing mapping and localization methods commonly work well in small-scale environments. As a map grows larger, however, more memory is required and localization becomes inefficient. To
solve these problems, map sparsification becomes a practical necessity to acquire a subset of the original map for
localization. Previous map sparsification methods add a
quadratic term in mixed-integer programming to enforce a
uniform distribution of selected landmarks, which requires
high memory capacity and heavy computation. In this paper, we formulate map sparsification in an efficient linear
form and select uniformly distributed landmarks based on
2D discretized grids. Furthermore, to reduce the influence
of different spatial distributions between the mapping and
query sequences, which is not considered in previous methods, we also introduce a space constraint term based on 3D
discretized grids. The exhaustive experiments in different
datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed methods in both efficiency and localization performance. The
relevant codes will be released at https://github.
com/fishmarch/SLAM_Map_Compression.

1. Introduction
To realize autonomous navigation for robots, localization in a pre-built map is a basic technique. Lots of algorithms have been proposed for mapping and localization using different sensors, including camera [20] and lidar [27].
These algorithms commonly work well in some small-scale
environments now. When applied in large-scale environments or in long-term, however, new challenges appear and
need to be settled for practical applications. Some of these
problems are time and memory consuming.
When using cameras, visual simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) is a commonly used method to build
maps. In visual SLAM, redundant features are extracted
from images and then constructed as landmarks in a map,

Figure 1. Localization results in a compact map. The original
map is constructed from sequence 00 of the KITTI dataset [14].
The original map consists of 141K landmarks, indicated by gray
points; while the compact map consists of only 5K landmarks,
indicated by blue points. 96.15% of the query images are localized
successfully in the compact map, indicted by green poses.

such that camera poses can be tracked robustly and accurately. These redundant landmarks promise good localization results in small-scale environments. As more and more
images are received when working in large-scale environments or in long-term, however, memory consumption is
increasing unboundedly. Localizing in such large maps will
also be more time-consuming. These problems are especially severe for some low-cost robots.
Actually, not all landmarks are necessary for robots to
localize in pre-built maps. In theory, even only 4 matched
landmarks can determine a camera pose using EPnP [16]
(more landmarks are commonly used for robust and accurate estimation). This reveals that maps can be compressed and still retain comparable performance for localization. Map compression can be classified into two types:
descriptor compression [5, 18, 22] and landmark sparsification [17, 23]. The research of this paper falls in the latter

12470

