This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Making Vision Transformers Efficient from A Token Sparsification View
Shuning Chang1 * Pichao Wang2†‡ Ming Lin2‡ Fan Wang2 David Junhao Zhang1
Rong Jin2 Mike Zheng Shou1†
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 Alibaba Group

Abstract
The quadratic computational complexity to the number
of tokens limits the practical applications of Vision Transformers (ViTs). Several works propose to prune redundant
tokens to achieve efficient ViTs. However, these methods
generally suffer from (i) dramatic accuracy drops, (ii) application difficulty in the local vision transformer, and (iii)
non-general-purpose networks for downstream tasks. In
this work, we propose a novel Semantic Token ViT (STViT),
for efficient global and local vision transformers, which can
also be revised to serve as backbone for downstream tasks.
The semantic tokens represent cluster centers, and they are
initialized by pooling image tokens in space and recovered
by attention, which can adaptively represent global or local
semantic information. Due to the cluster properties, a few
semantic tokens can attain the same effect as vast image tokens, for both global and local vision transformers. For instance, only 16 semantic tokens on DeiT-(Tiny,Small,Base)
can achieve the same accuracy with more than 100% inference speed improvement and nearly 60% FLOPs reduction; on Swin-(Tiny,Small,Base), we can employ 16 semantic tokens in each window to further speed it up by around
20% with slight accuracy increase. Besides great success
in image classification, we also extend our method to video
recognition. In addition, we design a STViT-R(ecovery) network to restore the detailed spatial information based on
the STViT, making it work for downstream tasks, which is
powerless for previous token sparsification methods. Experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve competitive results compared to the original networks in object
detection and instance segmentation, with over 30% FLOPs
reduction for backbone.

1. Introduction
In contrast to standard Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) approaches which process images pixel-by-pixel,
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
† Equal corresponding authors.
‡ Work done at Alibaba Group, and now affiliated with Amazon.

Vision Transformers (ViTs) [15, 26, 35, 36, 43] treat an image as a sequence of patch/image tokens, and have shown
promising performance in prevalent visual recognition scenarios. However, these superior performances do not come
for free: the quadratic computational complexity to the
number of image tokens limits their application in practice.
Previous works [33, 56] have illustrated the large amount
of redundancy in the image tokens and also shown the effect of filtering out unimportant tokens normally according
to predefined scoring mechanism. However, these methods face the following challenges. Firstly, the predefined
scoring mechanisms for filtering are generally imprecise.
In Figure 1, on the left we visualize the class token values in different layers which are commonly used to score
the token importance [16, 24, 45]. Different layers have different value distributions, thus using these imprecise scores
for filtering would lead to unsatisfactory performance. For
example, EViT [24] has an accuracy drop of 1.3% when
saving 50% FLOPs on DeiT-S [35]. Secondly, the remaining tokens do not distribute evenly in space any more, making them hard to work in local vision transformers1 . Finally,
large-scale token pruning tremendously damages the spatial
structure and positional information, and causes difficulties
when applied to downstream tasks, which they do not propose a solution to deal with.
To solve these problems, we propose Semantic Token
ViT (STViT), for efficient global and local vision transformers, which also can be revised to serve as backbone for
downstream tasks. The proposed approach is based on the
following observations: (i) unlike local CNNs which learn
spatial structure of images, vision transformer discretizes
feature map as tokens for global feature exploration, relieving the requirements for maintaining the whole image
structure and information; (ii) discrete tokens are more beneficial for optimization [38]; (iii) in Figure 1, on the right
shows the attention maps in different transformer layers,
and there are only several vertical lines in the deep layers, which means that only a few tokens with global se1 In this paper, we define the vision transformer with global selfattention (like DeiT) as global vision transformer and the vision transformer with local self-attention (like Swin) as local vision transformer.

6195

