This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AutoLabel: CLIP-based framework for Open-set Video Domain Adaptation
Giacomo Zara1 , Subhankar Roy3 , Paolo Rota1 , Elisa Ricci1,2
1
University of Trento, Italy 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
3
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut polytechnique de Paris, France
{giacomo.zara,paolo.rota,e.ricci}@unitn.it, subhankar.roy@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Open-set Unsupervised Video Domain Adaptation (OUVDA) deals with the task of adapting an action recognition
model from a labelled source domain to an unlabelled target domain that contains “target-private” categories, which
are present in the target but absent in the source. In this
work we deviate from the prior work of training a specialized open-set classifier or weighted adversarial learning by proposing to use pre-trained Language and Vision
Models (CLIP). The CLIP is well suited for OUVDA due
to its rich representation and the zero-shot recognition capabilities. However, rejecting target-private instances with
the CLIP’s zero-shot protocol requires oracle knowledge
about the target-private label names. To circumvent the
impossibility of the knowledge of label names, we propose
AutoLabel that automatically discovers and generates
object-centric compositional candidate target-private class
names. Despite its simplicity, we show that CLIP when
equipped with AutoLabel can satisfactorily reject the
target-private instances, thereby facilitating better alignment between the shared classes of the two domains. The
code is available1 .

1. Introduction
Recognizing actions in video sequences is an important
task in the field of computer vision, which finds a wide
range of applications in human-robot interaction, sports,
surveillance, and anomalous event detection, among others.
Due to its high importance in numerous practical applications, action recognition has been heavily addressed using
deep learning techniques [32, 44, 58]. Much of the success
in action recognition have noticeably been achieved in the
supervised learning regime [6, 17, 49], and more recently
shown to be promising in the unsupervised regime [20, 34,
56] as well. As constructing large scale annotated and curated action recognition datasets is both challenging and expensive, focus has shifted towards adapting a model from a
source domain, having a labelled source dataset, to an un1 https://github.com/gzaraunitn/autolabel

labelled target domain of interest. However, due to the discrepancy (or domain shift) between the source and target
domains, naive usage of a source trained model in the target
domain leads to sub-optimal performance [51].
To counter the domain shift and and improve the transfer of knowledge from a labelled source dataset to an unlabelled target dataset, unsupervised video domain adaptation
(UVDA) methods [7, 9, 42] have been proposed in the literature. Most of the prior literature in UVDA are designed
with the assumption that the label space in the source and
target domain are identical. This is a very strict assumption,
which can easily become void in practice, as the target domain may contain samples from action categories that are
not present in the source dataset [43]. In order to make
UVDA methods more useful for practical settings, openset unsupervised video domain adaptation (OUVDA) methods have recently been proposed [5, 8]. The main task in
OUVDA comprise in promoting the adaptation between the
shared (or known) classes of the two domains by excluding
the action categories that are exclusive to the target domain,
also called as target-private (or unknown) classes. Existing OUVDA prior arts either train a specialized open-set
classifier [5] or weighted adversarial learning strategy [8]
to exclude the target-private classes.
Contrarily, we address OUVDA by tapping into the very
rich representations of the open-sourced foundation Language and Vision Models (LVMs). In particular, we use
CLIP (Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training) [45], a
foundation model that is trained on web-scale image-text
pairs, as the core element of our framework. We argue that
the LVMs (e.g., CLIP) naturally lend themselves well to
OUVDA setting due to: (i) the representation learned by
LVMs from webly supervised image-caption pairs comes
encoded with an immense amount of prior about the realworld, which is (un)surprisingly beneficial in narrowing the
shift in data distributions, even for video data; (ii) the zeroshot recognition capability of such models facilitates identification and separation of the target-private classes from the
shared ones, which in turn ensures better alignment between
the known classes of the two domains.

11504

