This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HGFormer: Hierarchical Grouping Transformer for Domain Generalized
Semantic Segmentation
Jian Ding1,2,3 , Nan Xue1 , Gui-Song Xia1,2 *, Bernt Schiele3 , Dengxin Dai3
1
NERCMS, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University, China
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{jian.ding, xuenan, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, {schiele, ddai}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Current semantic segmentation models have achieved
great success under the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) condition. However, in real-world applications, test data might come from a different domain than
training data. Therefore, it is important to improve model
robustness against domain differences. This work studies semantic segmentation under the domain generalization
setting, where a model is trained only on the source domain
and tested on the unseen target domain. Existing works
show that Vision Transformers are more robust than CNNs
and show that this is related to the visual grouping property
of self-attention. In this work, we propose a novel hierarchical grouping transformer (HGFormer) to explicitly group
pixels to form part-level masks and then whole-level masks.
The masks at different scales aim to segment out both parts
and a whole of classes. HGFormer combines mask classification results at both scales for class label prediction.
We assemble multiple interesting cross-domain settings by
using seven public semantic segmentation datasets. Experiments show that HGFormer yields more robust semantic
segmentation results than per-pixel classification methods
and flat-grouping transformers, and outperforms previous
methods significantly. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/dingjiansw101/HGFormer.

1. Introduction
Research in semantic image segmentation has leaped forward in the past years due to the development of deep neural
network. However, most of these models assume that the
training and testing data follow the same distribution. In the
real-world, we frequently encounter testing data that is out
of distribution. The generalization ability of models under
distribution shift is crucial for applications related to safety,
* Corresponding author

With Gaussian Noise

Whole-level masks (Mask2former)

Semantic results (Mask2former)

Part-level masks (Ours)

Whole-level masks (Ours)

Semantic results (Ours)

With Snow

Whole-level masks (Mask2former)

Semantic results (Mask2former)

Part-level masks (Ours)

Whole-level masks (Ours)

Semantic results (Ours)

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation can be considered as partitioning an image into classification units (regions), then classifying the
units. The units can range from pixels to large masks. Intuitively,
mask classification is more robust than per-pixel classification, as
masks allow to aggregate features over large image regions of the
same class to predict a ‘global’ label. Despite this promise, the
process of grouping pixels into whole-level masks directly from
pixels is very challenging under the distribution shift (e.g., Gaussian Noise). In order to tackle this problem, we present a hierarchical grouping paradigm to group pixels to part-level masks first
and then to group part-level masks to whole-level masks to get reliable masks. Then we combine both part-level and whole-level
mask classification for robust semantic segmentation, given that
the masks at the two levels capture complementary information.

such as self-driving. In domain generalization setting, models are trained only on source domains and tested on target domains, where the distributions of source domains and
target domains are different. Unlike the domain adaptation [25, 56], target data is not accessible / needed during
training, making the task challenging but practically useful.
Recently, Vision Transformers have been shown to be
significantly more robust than traditional CNNs in the outof-distribution generalization [21, 25, 42, 58, 60, 70]. Some
works interpret self-attention as a kind of visual group15413

