This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Micron-BERT: BERT-based Facial Micro-Expression Recognition
Xuan-Bac Nguyen1 , Chi Nhan Duong2 , Xin Li3 , Susan Gauch1 , Han-Seok Seo4 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas, USA 2 Concordia University, Canada
3
West Virginia University, USA 4 Dep. of Food Science, University of Arkansas, USA
1

{xnguyen, sgauch, hanseok, khoaluu}@uark.edu, 2 {dcnhan@ieee.org}, 3 xin.li@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Micro-expression recognition is one of the most challenging topics in affective computing. It aims to recognize tiny facial movements difficult for humans to perceive in a brief period, i.e., 0.25 to 0.5 seconds. Recent advances in pre-training deep Bidirectional Transformers (BERT) have significantly improved self-supervised
learning tasks in computer vision. However, the standard
BERT in vision problems is designed to learn only from
full images or videos, and the architecture cannot accurately detect details of facial micro-expressions. This paper presents Micron-BERT (µ-BERT), a novel approach to
facial micro-expression recognition. The proposed method
can automatically capture these movements in an unsupervised manner based on two key ideas. First, we employ Diagonal Micro-Attention (DMA) to detect tiny differences between two frames. Second, we introduce a
new Patch of Interest (PoI) module to localize and highlight micro-expression interest regions and simultaneously
reduce noisy backgrounds and distractions. By incorporating these components into an end-to-end deep network,
the proposed µ-BERT significantly outperforms all previous work in various micro-expression tasks. µ-BERT can
be trained on a large-scale unlabeled dataset, i.e., up to
8 million images, and achieves high accuracy on new unseen facial micro-expression datasets. Empirical experiments show µ-BERT consistently outperforms state-of-theart performance on four micro-expression benchmarks, including SAMM, CASME II, SMIC, and CASME3, by significant margins. Code will be available at https://
github.com/uark-cviu/Micron-BERT

1. Introduction
Facial expressions are a complex mixture of conscious
reactions directed toward given stimuli. They involve experiential, behavioral, and physiological elements. Because they are crucial to understanding human reactions,
this topic has been widely studied in various application domains [5]. In general, facial expression problems can be
classified into two main categories, macro-expression, and

Figure 1. Given two frames from a high-speed video, the proposed
µ-BERT method can localize and highlight the regions of micromovements. Best viewed in color.

micro-expression. The main differences between the two
are facial expression intensities, and duration [2]. In particular, macro-expressions happen spontaneously, cover large
movement areas in a given face, e.g., mouth, eyes, cheeks,
and typically last from 0.5 to 4 seconds. Humans can
usually recognize these expressions. By contrast, microexpressions are involuntary occurrences, have low intensity, and last between 5 milliseconds and half a second. Indeed, micro-expressions are challenging to identify and are
mostly detectable only by experts. Micro-expression understanding is essential in numerous applications, primarily lie
detection, which is crucial in criminal analysis.
Micro-expression identification requires both semantics
and micro-movement analysis. Since they are difficult to
observe through human eyes, a high-speed camera, usually with 200 frames per second (FPS) [6, 15, 51], is typically used to capture the required video frames. Previous
work [11] tried to understand this micro information using
MagNet [29] to amplify small motions between two frames,
e.g., onset and apex frames. However, these methods still
have limitations in terms of accuracy and robustness. In
summary, the contributions of this work are four-fold:
• A novel Facial Micro-expression Recognition (MER)
via Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers
approach (Micron-BERT or µ-BERT) is presented to

1482

