This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CODA-Prompt: COntinual Decomposed Attention-based Prompting for
Rehearsal-Free Continual Learning
James Seale Smith1,2 Leonid Karlinsky2,4 Vyshnavi Gutta1 Paola Cascante-Bonilla2,3
Donghyun Kim2,4 Assaf Arbelle4 Rameswar Panda2,4 Rogerio Feris2,4 Zsolt Kira1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

3

Rice University

4

Abstract

v2

k3

v3

…

kM

vM

key

value

prompt

Model
gradient flow
from model
separate
optimization

Prior Work
α1
α2

Query

Attention

α3
αM

weight

×

c1

𝚺

c3

c2

prompt

Model

…

For a computer vision model to succeed in the real world,
it must overcome brittle assumptions that the concepts it
will encounter after deployment will match those learned
a-priori during training. The real world is indeed dynamic
and contains continuously emerging objects and categories.
Once deployed, models will encounter a range of differences from their training sets, requiring us to continuously

learned in separate
optimization without
model gradients

v1

…

1. Introduction

Query

k1
k2

…

Computer vision models suffer from a phenomenon
known as catastrophic forgetting when learning novel concepts from continuously shifting training data. Typical solutions for this continual learning problem require extensive
rehearsal of previously seen data, which increases memory
costs and may violate data privacy. Recently, the emergence of large-scale pre-trained vision transformer models has enabled prompting approaches as an alternative
to data-rehearsal. These approaches rely on a key-query
mechanism to generate prompts and have been found to
be highly resistant to catastrophic forgetting in the wellestablished rehearsal-free continual learning setting. However, the key mechanism of these methods is not trained
end-to-end with the task sequence. Our experiments show
that this leads to a reduction in their plasticity, hence sacrificing new task accuracy, and inability to benefit from expanded parameter capacity. We instead propose to learn a
set of prompt components which are assembled with inputconditioned weights to produce input-conditioned prompts,
resulting in a novel attention-based end-to-end key-query
scheme. Our experiments show that we outperform the current SOTA method DualPrompt on established benchmarks
by as much as 4.5% in average final accuracy. We also
outperform the state of art by as much as 4.4% accuracy
on a continual learning benchmark which contains both
class-incremental and domain-incremental task shifts, corresponding to many practical settings. Our code is available at https://github.com/GT-RIPL/CODA-Prompt

IBM Research

cM

component

Our Work
Figure 1. Prior work [65] learns a pool of key-value pairs to select
learnable prompts which are inserted into several layers of a pretrained ViT (the prompting parameters are unique to each layer).
Our work introduces a decomposed prompt which consists of
learnable prompt components that assemble to produce attentionconditioned prompts. Unlike prior work, ours is optimized in an
end-to-end fashion (denoted with thick, green lines).

update them to avoid stale and decaying performance.
One way to update a model is to collect additional training data, combine this new training data with the old training data, and then retrain the model from scratch. While
this will guarantee high performance, it is not practical for
large-scale applications which may require lengthy training
times and aggressive replacement timelines, such as models
for self-driving cars or social media platforms. This could
incur high financial [26] and environmental [33] costs if the
replacement is frequent. We could instead update the model
by only training on the new training data, but this leads to
a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting [46] where
the model overwrites existing knowledge when learning the
new data, a problem known as continual learning.
The most effective approaches proposed by the continual

11909

