This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled Semantic Prototypes enable learning from diverse annotation types
for semi-weakly segmentation in expert-driven domains
Simon Reiß1 Constantin Seibold1 Alexander Freytag2 Erik Rodner3 Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 Carl Zeiss AG 3 University of Applied Sciences Berlin
{simon.reiss, constantin.seibold, rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu,
alexander.freytag@zeiss.com, erik.rodner@htw-berlin.de

Abstract
A vast amount of images and pixel-wise annotations allowed our community to build scalable segmentation solutions for natural domains. However, the transfer to expertdriven domains like microscopy applications or medical
healthcare remains difficult as domain experts are a critical
factor due to their limited availability for providing pixelwise annotations. To enable affordable segmentation solutions for such domains, we need training strategies which
can simultaneously handle diverse annotation types and are
not bound to costly pixel-wise annotations. In this work, we
analyze existing training algorithms towards their flexibility
for different annotation types and scalability to small annotation regimes. We conduct an extensive evaluation in the
challenging domain of organelle segmentation and find that
existing semi- and semi-weakly supervised training algorithms are not able to fully exploit diverse annotation types.
Driven by our findings, we introduce Decoupled Semantic
Prototypes (DSP) as a training method for semantic segmentation which enables learning from annotation types as
diverse as image-level-, point-, bounding box-, and pixelwise annotations and which leads to remarkable accuracy
gains over existing solutions for semi-weakly segmentation.

1. Introduction
Modern semantic segmentation pipelines like [11,24,64]
enable a wide range of segmentation applications in domains like urban scenes [13, 41] or natural images [19, 37,
73]. Besides recent progress in supervised training and
network architectures, an (even more?) important reason
for this success was the availability of large budgets for
the creation of training datasets. A significant portion of
these budgets is usually spent on human labor for creating pixel-wise annotation masks. Motivated by cost reduction, crowd-sourced annotation with briefly instructed

Figure 1. The availability of domain experts for annotating data is
often the major bottleneck in expert-driven domains. Can we give
experts the freedom to provide diverse annotation types based on
their available time, and still train models successfully?

annotators became a popular choice, e.g., for the creation
of MSCoco [37] or OpenImages [7]. However, this is often not possible for application domains where extensively
trained experts need to provide annotations. As an example,
Guay et al. highlighted in [23] that “Cell biologists have
used [...] segmentations of cellular structures to provide
rich [...] new insights into cellular processes”, but annotation “required nine months’ work from two in-lab annotators and represented a small fraction of all imaged cells.”.
For such expert-driven domains (Fig. 1), the time of
skilled annotators needs to be used more efficiently, as their
number can not be easily scaled up. Hence, training algorithms should not rely on naively extending collections
of pixel-wise masks. Instead, training algorithms should
be flexible towards the annotation-granularity which an expert has time to and is willing to provide (expert-centrism)
and should still efficiently exploit small quantities of pixel-

15495

