This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relational Space-Time Query in Long-Form Videos
Xitong Yang1

Fu-Jen Chu1
1

Matt Feiszli1
2

Meta AI

Activity-Query Template:

Raghav Goyal1,2

Lorenzo Torresani1

University of British Columbia
Object-Query Example:

Activity-Query Example:

Q: What activities did I do when I interacted with object 𝑜
fefduring [𝑠, 𝑒] ?
A: A subset of 𝐶 pre-defined activities 𝒜 ⊆ 1, … , 𝐶

Q: What activities did I do with {

Q: What objects did I interacted with when I was
“washing dishes” during [20:00 -- 30:00] ?

}

A:

during [00:00 -- 15:00] ?

Object-Query Template:

A: “Making tea”

Q: What objects did I interact with when I was doing activity
fef𝑎 during [𝑠, 𝑒] ?

Du Tran1

…

A: Spatio-temporal locations of the interacted objects
fe 𝑡! , 𝑥! , 𝑦! , 𝑤! , ℎ! $
!"#

…
…

…

Time-Query Template:
Q: When did I do activity 𝑎 that involves interaction with
fefobject 𝑜 ?
A: Temporal locations of the corresponding activity
fef [𝑠! , 𝑒! ] %
!"#

Time-Query Example:
Q: When did I “take pills”
Feafefaefefefef.

with {

}?

A: [18:31 – 20:15]
00:00

05:00

10:00

15:00

20:00

25:00

30:00

Figure 1. Illustration of the three types of queries in our Relational Space-Time Query (ReST) framework. Given a long video spanning
up to 30 minutes, a set of queries are provided to assess a model’s ability to understand activities, objects, and their interactions in the
video. All queries and answers are generated in the form of pre-defined templates (top-left) to avoid the ambiguity and bias introduced
by language input / output. Note that ReST is a holistic framework that supports constructing queries with different levels of complexity
beyond the three basic types described in this paper.

Abstract
Egocentric videos are often available in the form of uninterrupted, uncurated long videos capturing the camera
wearers’ daily life activities.Understanding these videos requires models to be able to reason about activities, objects,
and their interactions. However, current video benchmarks
study these problems independently and under short, curated clips. In contrast, real-world applications, e.g. AR
assistants, require bundling these problems for both model
development and evaluation. In this paper, we propose to
study these problems in a joint framework for long video
understanding. Our contributions are three-fold. First,
we propose an integrated framework, namely Relational
Space-Time Query (ReST), for evaluating video understanding models via templated spatiotemporal queries. Second, we introduce two new benchmarks, ReST-ADL and
ReST-Ego4D 1 , which augment the existing egocentric video
datasets with abundant query annotations generated by the
ReST framework. Finally, we present a set of baselines and
1 The latest version of our benchmark and models will be available here.

in-depth analysis on the two benchmarks and provide insights about the query tasks. We view our integrated framework and benchmarks as a step towards comprehensive,
multi-step reasoning in long videos, and believe it will facilitate the development of next generations of video understanding models.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the advances of modern, massive parallel
hardware, e.g. GPUs, and the availability of large datasets,
significant progress has been made in the last few years
with large language models (e.g., GPT-3 [6], BERT [11])
and image / video generative models (e.g., DALLE [40],
Imagen [41], Make-A-Video [46]). Meanwhile, current
video understanding models mostly focus on processing
short video clips [12, 13, 52] and solving basic perception
tasks such as action recognition [16, 28, 31, 44, 48] and detection [7, 19]. One may ask the questions for video understanding research: “How far are current models progressing
to a human-level performance on video understanding?”, or

6398

