This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Safe Latent Diffusion:
Mitigating Inappropriate Degeneration in Diffusion Models
Patrick Schramowski1,2,3,6 *
Manuel Brack3 *
Björn Deiseroth2,3,5
Kristian Kersting1,2,3,4
1
2
3
DFKI, Hessian.AI, Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt
4
Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, 5 Aleph Alpha, 6 LAION
{schramowski, brack, deiseroth, kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Text-conditioned image generation models have recently
achieved astonishing results in image quality and text alignment and are consequently employed in a fast-growing number of applications. Since they are highly data-driven, relying on billion-sized datasets randomly scraped from the
internet, they also suffer, as we demonstrate, from degenerated and biased human behavior. In turn, they may
even reinforce such biases. To help combat these undesired side effects, we present safe latent diffusion (SLD).
Specifically, to measure the inappropriate degeneration due
to unfiltered and imbalanced training sets, we establish
a novel image generation test bed—inappropriate image
prompts (I2P)—containing dedicated, real-world image-totext prompts covering concepts such as nudity and violence.
As our exhaustive empirical evaluation demonstrates, the
introduced SLD removes and suppresses inappropriate image parts during the diffusion process, with no additional
training required and no adverse effect on overall image
quality or text alignment.1
Warning: This paper contains sexually explicit imagery,
discussions of pornography, racially-charged terminology,
and other content that some readers may find disturbing,
distressing, and/or offensive.

1. Introduction
The primary reasons for recent breakthroughs in textconditioned generative diffusion models (DM) are the quality of pre-trained backbones’ representations and their multimodal training data. They have even been shown to learn
and reflect the underlying syntax and semantics. In turn,
they retain general knowledge implicitly present in the data
[27]. Unfortunately, while they learn to encode and re* Equal contribution
1 Code available at https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/api/pipelines/

stable diffusion safe

RIIP

DM generations

Safety
Guidance

20%

veins on an arm
forming a rose
60%

man committing
armed robbery from the perspective of the bodega cat
the four
horsewomen of the
apocalypse, painting…

80%

Figure 1. Mitigating inappropriate degeneration in diffusion models. I2P (left) is a new testbed for evaluating neural text-to-image
generations and their inappropriateness. Percentages represent the
portion of inappropriate images this prompt generates using Stable Diffusion (SD). SD may generate inappropriate content (middle), both for prompts explicitly implying such material as well as
prompts not mentioning it all, hence generating inappropriate content unexpectedly. Our safe latent diffusion (SLD, right) is able to
suppress inappropriate content. (Best viewed in color)

flect general information, systems trained on large-scale unfiltered data may suffer from degenerated and biased behavior. While these profound issues are not completely
surprising—since many biases are human-like [6,8]—many
concerns are grounded in the data collection process failing to report its own bias [14]. The resulting models, including DMs, end up reflecting them and, in turn, have
the potential to replicate undesired behavior [1, 3–5, 13, 18].
Birhane et al. [5] pinpoint numerous implications and concerns of datasets scraped from the internet, in particular,
LAION-400M [37], a predecessor of LAION-5B [36], and
subsequent downstream harms of trained models.
We analyze the open-source latent diffusion model Stable Diffusion (SD), which is trained on subsets of LAION5B [36] and find a significant amount of inappropriate
content generated which, viewed directly, might be offensive, ignominious, insulting, threatening, or might otherwise cause anxiety. To systematically measure the risk
of inappropriate degeneration by pre-trained text-to-image

22522

