This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Similarity Maps for Self-Training Weakly-Supervised Phrase Grounding
Tal Shaharabany
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University

shaharabany@mail.tau.ac.il

wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
A phrase grounding model receives an input image and
a text phrase and outputs a suitable localization map. We
present an effective way to refine a phrase ground model
by considering self-similarity maps extracted from the latent representation of the model’s image encoder. Our
main insights are that these maps resemble localization
maps and that by combining such maps, one can obtain
useful pseudo-labels for performing self-training. Our results surpass, by a large margin, the state of the art in
weakly supervised phrase grounding. A similar gap in performance is obtained for a recently proposed downstream
task called WWbL, in which only the image is input, without
any text. Our code is available at https://github.
com/talshaharabany/Similarity-Maps-forSelf-Training-Weakly-Supervised-PhraseGrounding.

1. Introduction
The most important technological foundation of the ongoing revolution in the field of jointly processing images
with text is that of computing a similarity score between an
image and a text phrase. Models such as CLIP [27] are able
to learn powerful similarity functions based on large datasets
that contain pairs of images and suitable captions. Building upon this technology, endless possibilities opened up
for zero-shot and few-shot learning applications, including
image captioning [19, 35], image editing [6, 13, 23, 25, 41],
and image recognition [24, 40].
Phrase grounding is a related image-text task, in which,
given an image and a text phrase, the method identifies
the image region described by the phrase. One can train a
phrase grounding network in a weakly supervised manner,
by employing the CLIP similarity. Such a model would
learn to produce masks that create a foreground region that
is similar to the phrase and a background region that is not.
To avoid trivial solutions, in which the mask includes the
entire image, one should also include a regularization term.

Recently, Shaharabany et al. have obtained state-of-theart results in phrase grounding using this scheme with the
addition of a constraint that considers also the explainability
map of Chefer et al. [8], when applied to the CLIP model.
This map is expected to focus on foreground regions and can,
therefore, provide an additional training cue.
In this work, we focus on the output of the image encoder
of the phrase grounding network of [32]. This encoder creates a spatial image representation that is aligned with the
text encoding of CLIP. In other words, each spatial location
of the tensor that the image encoder outputs is associated
with a vector that is correlated with a representation of the
textual description of the corresponding image location.
As a result, spatial locations that are associated with the
same image object have similar encoding and vice versa.
Building upon this insight, we compute for each image location, the cosine-similarity to the local encoding of all other
locations. These similarity maps (one per location) are textagnostic since they involve only the image input of the phrase
grounding network.
As we demonstrate, these maps capture different objects
in the image, i.e., the similarity map that is obtained by
correlating the image embedding at the spatial location (x, y)
provides a delineation of the object that can be found at this
image location. This is a type of semantic “seed fill” effect,
in which all image regions that are associated with the same
object in the seed location are highlighted. These regions do
not need to be connected, i.e., multiple persons in the image
would be highlighted by a seed placed on one of them.
This localization-map effect is reminiscent of the emergence of segmentation maps in self-supervised transformer
networks [5]. The two effects are, however, different. First,
the effect in the transformer case relies on the attention maps,
which do not exist in the networks we employ. Second, the
attention maps rely on a single CLS token, and our effect is
true to every spatial location. Third, the type of supervision
and the task are both different.
The effect described is also different than the relevancy
maps obtained by explainability methods such as GradCAM [31] or recent transformer explainability methods [8].

6925

