This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Images Are Counterfactual Samples for Robust Fine-tuning
Yao Xiao

Ziyi Tang

Pengxu Wei *
Cong Liu
Sun Yat-sen University

{xiaoy99,tangzy27}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Liang Lin

{weipx3, liucong3}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
Deep learning models are challenged by the distribution shift between the training data and test data. Recently, the large models pre-trained on diverse data have
demonstrated unprecedented robustness to various distribution shifts. However, fine-tuning these models can lead
to a trade-off between in-distribution (ID) performance and
out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness. Existing methods for
tackling this trade-off do not explicitly address the OOD robustness problem. In this paper, based on causal analysis
of the aforementioned problems, we propose a novel finetuning method, which uses masked images as counterfactual
samples that help improve the robustness of the fine-tuning
model. Specifically, we mask either the semantics-related or
semantics-unrelated patches of the images based on class
activation map to break the spurious correlation, and refill
the masked patches with patches from other images. The
resulting counterfactual samples are used in feature-based
distillation with the pre-trained model. Extensive experiments verify that regularizing the fine-tuning with the proposed masked images can achieve a better trade-off between
ID and OOD performance, surpassing previous methods on
the OOD performance. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Coxy7/robust-finetuning.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has made impressive advances in various
tasks on computer vision. Despite the remarkable performance achieved on benchmark datasets, deep models are
often challenged by the distribution shift between the training data and test data [5,15,16,33]. It is commonly assumed
that the training and test samples follow the same distribution, which may not hold in real-world applications due to
the unpredictable change of lighting conditions, viewpoints,
backgrounds, etc. Although there are attempts to improve
the robustness of deep models to the distribution shift (or
OOD robustness), it is still rather under-explored [29, 38].
* Corresponding author.

CAM-based
Masking

What is the
semantics?

Vanilla Fine-tuned
Model

Pre-trained
Robust Model

Robust Fine-tuned
Model (ours)

Red admiral butterfly.

A bunch of flowers.

Flowers.

learning from

Figure 1. Illustration of our work. Vanilla fine-tuned models tend
to learn spurious correlations that degrade the OOD robustness. To
tackle this issue, our model learns from the pre-trained model on
the counterfactual CAM-based masked images.

Recently, large-scale models pre-trained on diverse data
have demonstrated unprecedented robustness to various distribution shifts [8, 19, 32]. Fine-tuning these pre-trained
models on downstream tasks can be a promising approach
to building robust models for different applications. However, it is found that while fine-tuning improves the performance on in-distribution (ID) data, it may reduce that
on out-of-distribution (OOD) data [23, 43]. To tackle this
trade-off, several methods [23, 42, 43] have been proposed
to improve both ID and OOD performance in fine-tuning.
However, they do not explicitly address the OOD robustness problem; instead, they implicitly preserve the robustness of the pre-trained model by constraining the distortion
of pre-trained weights or using model ensembles.
In this paper, we revisit the issue of robustness degradation in fine-tuning from a causal perspective. A large-scale
pre-trained model somewhat shows properties in causality
and stays robust to OOD samples [41]. However, when
fine-tuning on downstream tasks, a majority of the model
parameters tend to be adjusted for the downstream task in
fine-tuning due to the highly entangled representation of

20301

