This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BoxTeacher: Exploring High-Quality Pseudo Labels for Weakly Supervised
Instance Segmentation
Tianheng Cheng1,⋆ , Xinggang Wang1 , Shaoyu Chen1,⋆ , Qian Zhang2 , Wenyu Liu1,†
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
000000377486
2
Horizon Robotics

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation, aiming at recognizing and segmenting objects in images, is a fairly challenging task in
computer vision. Fortunately, the rapid development of
object detection methods [7, 40, 50] has greatly advanced
the emergence of numbers of successful methods [5, 6, 23,
49, 54, 55] for effective and efficient instance segmenta⋆ This work was done when Tianheng Cheng and Shaoyu Chen were
interns at Horizon Robotics. † Wenyu Liu is the corresponding author:
liuwy@hust.edu.cn

Mask AP

31.8
31.0

ns
t

30.7

Ground Truth

(a)

Se
lfT

BoxInst, 30.7 AP

34.2

1× Schedule
3× Schedule

Bo
xI

Labeling objects with pixel-wise segmentation requires a
huge amount of human labor compared to bounding boxes.
Most existing methods for weakly supervised instance segmentation focus on designing heuristic losses with priors
from bounding boxes. While, we find that box-supervised
methods can produce some fine segmentation masks and we
wonder whether the detectors could learn from these fine
masks while ignoring low-quality masks. To answer this
question, we present BoxTeacher, an efficient and end-toend training framework for high-performance weakly supervised instance segmentation, which leverages a sophisticated teacher to generate high-quality masks as pseudo
labels. Considering the massive noisy masks hurt the training, we present a mask-aware confidence score to estimate the quality of pseudo masks, and propose the noiseaware pixel loss and noise-reduced affinity loss to adaptively optimize the student with pseudo masks. Extensive
experiments can demonstrate effectiveness of the proposed
BoxTeacher. Without bells and whistles, BoxTeacher remarkably achieves 35.0 mask AP and 36.5 mask AP with
ResNet-50 and ResNet-101 respectively on the challenging
COCO dataset, which outperforms the previous state-ofthe-art methods by a significant margin and bridges the gap
between box-supervised and mask-supervised methods.

35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28

32.6
31.3

ng
Bo
xT
ea
ch
er

Abstract

Ground Truth

ra
in
i

https://github.com/hustvl/BoxTeacher
BoxInst, 30.7 AP

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Segmentation Masks from BoxInst. BoxInst
(ResNet-50 [24]) can produce some fine segmentation masks with
weak supervisions from bounding boxes and images. (b) SelfTraining with Pseudo Masks on COCO val. We explore the
self-training to train a CondInst [49] with the pseudo labels generated by BoxInst. However, the improvements are limited

tion. With the fine-grained human annotations, recent instance segmentation methods can achieve impressive results on challenging the COCO dataset [34]. Nevertheless,
labeling instance-level segmentation is much complicated
and time-consuming, e.g., labeling an object with polygonbased masks requires 10.3× more time than that with a 4point bounding box [11].
Recently, a few works [25,31–33,51,53] explore weakly
supervised instance segmentation with box annotations or
low-level colors. These weakly supervised methods can effectively train instance segmentation methods [23, 49, 55]
without pixel-wise or polygon-based annotations and obtain fine segmentation masks. As shown in Fig. 1(a), BoxInst [51] can output a few high-quality segmentation masks
and segment well on the object boundary, e.g., the person,
even performs better than the ground-truth mask in details
though other objects may be badly segmented. Naturally,
we wonder if the generated masks of box-supervised methods, especially the high-quality masks, could be qualified
as pseudo segmentation labels to further improve the performance of weakly supervised instance segmentation.
To answer this question, we first employ the naive

3145

