This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Importance of Accurate Geometry Data for Dense 3D Vision Tasks
HyunJun Jung∗1 , Patrick Ruhkamp∗1,2 , Guangyao Zhai1 , Nikolas Brasch1 , Yitong Li1 ,
Yannick Verdie1,3 , Jifei Song3 , Yiren Zhou3 , Anil Armagan3 , Slobodan Ilic1,4 ,
Ales Leonardis3 , Nassir Navab1 , Benjamin Busam1,2
1

Technical University of Munich, 2 3Dwe.ai, 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 4 Siemens AG, ∗ Equal Contribution
hyunjun.jung@tum.de, p.ruhkamp@tum.de, guangyao.zhai@tum.de, b.busam@tum.de

Abstract
Learning-based methods to solve dense 3D vision problems typically train on 3D sensor data. The respectively
used principle of measuring distances provides advantages
and drawbacks. These are typically not compared nor
discussed in the literature due to a lack of multi-modal
datasets. Texture-less regions are problematic for structure
from motion and stereo, reflective material poses issues for
active sensing, and distances for translucent objects are intricate to measure with existing hardware. Training on inaccurate or corrupt data induces model bias and hampers
generalisation capabilities. These effects remain unnoticed
if the sensor measurement is considered as ground truth
during the evaluation. This paper investigates the effect of
sensor errors for the dense 3D vision tasks of depth estimation and reconstruction. We rigorously show the significant
impact of sensor characteristics on the learned predictions
and notice generalisation issues arising from various technologies in everyday household environments. For evaluation, we introduce a carefully designed dataset1 comprising measurements from commodity sensors, namely D-ToF,
I-ToF, passive/active stereo, and monocular RGB+P. Our
study quantifies the considerable sensor noise impact and
paves the way to improved dense vision estimates and targeted data fusion.

1. Introduction
Our world is 3D. Distance measurements are essential
for machines to understand and interact with our environment spatially. Autonomous vehicles [23, 30, 50, 58] need
this information to drive safely, robot vision requires distance information to manipulate objects [15, 62, 72, 73], and
AR realism benefits from spatial understanding [6, 31].
A variety of sensor modalities and depth predic1 dataset available at https://github.com/Junggy/HAMMER-dataset

Figure 1. Other datasets for dense 3D vision tasks reconstruct the
scene as a whole in one pass [8,12,56], resulting in low quality and
accuracy (cf. red boxes). On the contrary, our dataset scans the
background and every object in the scene separately a priori and
annotates them as dense and high-quality 3D meshes. Together
with precise camera extrinsics from robotic forward-kinematics,
this enables a fully dense rendered depth as accurate pixel-wise
ground truth with multimodal sensor data, such as RGB with polarization, D-ToF, I-ToF and Active Stereo. Hence, it allows quantifying different downstream 3D vision tasks such as monocular
depth estimation, novel view synthesis, or 6D object pose estimation.

tion pipelines exist. The computer vision community
thereby benefits from a wide diversity of publicly available
datasets [23, 51, 52, 57, 60, 61, 65], which allow for evaluation of depth estimation pipelines. Depending on the setup,
different sensors are chosen to provide ground truth (GT)
depth maps, all of which have their respective advantages
and drawbacks determined by their individual principle of
distance reasoning. Pipelines are usually trained on the data
without questioning the nature of the depth sensor used for
supervision and do not reflect areas of high or low confidence of the GT.
Popular passive sensor setups include multi-view stereo
cameras where the known or calibrated spatial relationship

780

