This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EC2 : Emergent Communication for Embodied Control
Yao Mu1 , Shunyu Yao 2 , Mingyu Ding 1 , Ping Luo1 , Chuang Gan3,4
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Princeton University 3 UMass Amherst, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
ymu, myding, pluo@cs.hku.hk shunyuy@princeton.edu ganchuang@csail.mit.edu

Abstract

Demonstration Video
Actions

Perceptual

1. Introduction
We study the problem of few-shot embodied control,
where an embodied agent needs to execute language instructions or follow video demonstrations given only a few
examples in a new environment. Such a capability of fast
adaption is key to practical robotic deployment, as it is nonscalable and expensive to collect extensive action-labeled

Policy Net

Link

EC Language
[1777, 1965, 2403, 1329, 319,
1526, 1526, 2277, 0]

Natural Language
Pick up the box in the drawer then
Symbolic close the drawer

Language Model
Prompt

❄

Observations

(a) Emergent language for embodied control.
Overall Success Rate

Embodied control requires agents to leverage multimodal pre-training to quickly learn how to act in new environments, where video demonstrations contain visual and
motion details needed for low-level perception and control,
and language instructions support generalization with abstract, symbolic structures. While recent approaches apply contrastive learning to force alignment between the two
modalities, we hypothesize better modeling their complementary differences can lead to more holistic representations for downstream adaption. To this end, we propose
Emergent Communication for Embodied Control (EC2 ), a
novel scheme to pre-train video-language representations
for few-shot embodied control. The key idea is to learn an
unsupervised “language” of videos via emergent communication, which bridges the semantics of video details and
structures of natural language. We learn embodied representations of video trajectories, emergent language, and
natural language using a language model, which is then
used to finetune a lightweight policy network for downstream control. Through extensive experiments in Metaworld and Franka Kitchen embodied benchmarks, EC2
is shown to consistently outperform previous contrastive
learning methods for both videos and texts as task inputs.
Further ablations confirm the importance of the emergent
language, which is beneficial for both video and language
learning, and significantly superior to using pre-trained
video captions. We also present a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the emergent language and discuss future directions toward better understanding and leveraging
emergent communication in embodied tasks.

60
40
20
0

UniLearn[10/25 demos] R3M[10/25 demos]
BC-Z[10/25 demos]
(b) Performance comparison on overall success rate across all tasks.

Figure 1. Overview of EC2 . The key idea of EC2 is to build
the link between perceptual grounding and symbolic concept via
emergent communication (EC) language. We learn to extract embodied representation via language model utilizing emergent language or natural language as prompt and visual observation as input for downstream embodied control tasks. The actions are generated by a lightweight policy network containing a few MLP [51]
layers that map the learned frozen embodied representation into
action space. Extensive experiments show that EC2 outperforms
existing methods in Metaworld [60] and Franka Kitchen [17]
benchmarks.

trajectories for each new application scenario. Instead,
agents need to leverage pre-trained video and language representations to quickly learn how to act, and generalize
across high-level concepts (e.g. object and verb types) as
well as low-level visual features.
How can we pre-train multi-modal representations of
videos and texts for downstream embodied control in different domains? Inspired by the success of image-text
models such as CLIP [47], recent work has investigated
contrastive representation learning approaches using paired
video-language data, with application toward robotic manipulation and control tasks [24, 38]. However, simply
aligning video and language pairs in the embedding space
omits the difference between these two modalities: while

6704

