This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-shot Geometry-Aware Keypoint Localization
Xingzhe He1 *

Gaurav Bharaj2
1

David Ferman2

University of British Columbia

Helge Rhodin1
2

Pablo Garrido2

Flawless AI

Abstract
Supervised keypoint localization methods rely on large
manually labeled image datasets, where objects can deform,
articulate, or occlude. However, creating such large keypoint
labels is time-consuming and costly, and is often error-prone
due to inconsistent labeling. Thus, we desire an approach
that can learn keypoint localization with fewer yet consistently annotated images. To this end, we present a novel
formulation that learns to localize semantically consistent
keypoint definitions, even for occluded regions, for varying
object categories. We use a few user-labeled 2D images as
input examples, which are extended via self-supervision using a larger unlabeled dataset. Unlike unsupervised methods,
the few-shot images act as semantic shape constraints for
object localization. Furthermore, we introduce 3D geometryaware constraints to uplift keypoints, achieving more accurate 2D localization. Our general-purpose formulation
paves the way for semantically conditioned generative modeling and attains competitive or state-of-the-art accuracy
on several datasets, including human faces, eyes, animals,
cars, and never-before-seen mouth interior (teeth) localization tasks, not attempted by the previous few-shot methods.
Project page: https://xingzhehe.github.io/FewShot3DKP/
Image

1. Introduction
Keypoint localization is a long-standing problem in computer vision with applications in classification [7, 8], image
generation [45, 66], character animation [64, 65], 3D modeling [15,55], and anti-spoofing [9], among others. Traditional
supervised keypoint localization approaches require a large
dataset of annotated images with balanced data distributions
to train robust models that generalize to unseen observations [18, 84, 87]. However, annotating keypoints in images
and videos is expensive, and usually requires several annotators with domain expertise [44, 80, 83]. Manual annotations
can be inaccurate due to low resolution imagery [5] and temporal variations in illumination and appearance [29, 79], or
even subjective, especially in presence of external occlusions
* Work was done while interning at Flawless AI

Keypoints Uncertainty

Structure

Figure 1. All results are obtained by 10-shot learning except Tigers
where 20 examples are used. The left/right/middle keypoints are
marked in red/blue/green. Using only a few shots, the model learns
semantically consistent and human interpretable keypoints. Uncertainty modeling helps us identify occlusions and ambiguous
boundaries, as shown in the mouth, eye, and car example.

[38, 89] and image blur effects [68, 96]. Besides, modeling
self-occluded object parts is proven to be an ambiguous task
since 3D consistent keypoint annotations are needed [97]. As
a consequence, supervised approaches are prone to learning
suboptimal models from noisy training data.
Unsupervised keypoint detection methods can predict consistent keypoint structures [19–21, 27, 43, 98], but they lack
human interpretability or may be insufficient, e.g., for editing
tasks requiring detailed manipulation of object parts. Jakab

21337

