This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Bridging the Performance Gaps of Joint Energy-based Models
Xiulong Yang, Qing Su, and Shihao Ji
Georgia State University
{xyang22,qsu3,sji}@gsu.edu

Abstract
Can we train a hybrid discriminative-generative model
with a single network? This question has recently been
answered in the affirmative, introducing the field of Joint
Energy-based Model (JEM) [17, 48], which achieves high
classification accuracy and image generation quality simultaneously. Despite recent advances, there remain two
performance gaps: the accuracy gap to the standard softmax classifier, and the generation quality gap to state-ofthe-art generative models. In this paper, we introduce a
variety of training techniques to bridge the accuracy gap
and the generation quality gap of JEM. 1) We incorporate
a recently proposed sharpness-aware minimization (SAM)
framework to train JEM, which promotes the energy landscape smoothness and the generalization of JEM. 2) We
exclude data augmentation from the maximum likelihood
estimate pipeline of JEM, and mitigate the negative impact of data augmentation to image generation quality. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate our
SADA-JEM achieves state-of-the-art performances and outperforms JEM in image classification, image generation,
calibration, out-of-distribution detection and adversarial
robustness by a notable margin. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sndnyang/SADAJEM .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-ofthe-art performances in a wide range of learning tasks, including image classification, image generation, object detection, and language understanding [21, 30]. Among them,
energy-based models (EBMs) have seen a flurry of interest recently, partially inspired by the impressive results of
IGEBM [10] and JEM [17], which exhibit the capability of
training generative models within a discriminative framework. Specifically, JEM [17] reinterprets the standard softmax classifier as an EBM and achieves impressive performances in image classification and generation simultaneously. Furthermore, these EBMs enjoy improved performance on out-of-distribution detection, calibration, and ad-

versarial robustness. The follow-up works (e.g., [18, 48])
further improve the training in terms of speed, stability and
accuracy.
Despite the recent advances and the appealing property
of training a single network for hybrid modeling, training
JEM is still challenging on complex high-dimensional data
since it requires an expensive MCMC sampling. Furthermore, models produced by JEM still have an accuracy gap
to the standard softmax classifier and a generation quality
gap to the GAN-based approaches.
In this paper, we introduce a few simple yet effective
training techniques to bridge the accuracy gap and generation quality gap of JEM. Our hypothesis is that both performance gaps are the symptoms of lack of generalization
of JEM trained models. We therefore analyze the trained
models under the lens of loss geometry. Figure 1 visualizes the energy landscapes of different models by the
technique introduced in [34]. Since different models are
trained with different loss functions, visualizing their loss
functions is meaningless for the purpose of comparison.
Therefore, the LSE energy functions (i.e., Eq. 4) of different models are visualized. Comparing Figure 1(a) and
(b), we find that JEM converges to extremely sharp local maxima of the energy landscape as manifested by the
significantly large y-axis scale. By incorporating the recently proposed sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) [12]
to JEM, the energy landscape of trained model (JEM+SAM)
becomes much smoother as shown in Figure 1(c). This
also substantially improves the image classification accuracy and generation quality. To further improve the energy landscape smoothness, we exclude data augmentation
from the maximum likelihood estimate pipeline of JEM,
and visualize the energy landscape of SADA-JEM in Figure 1(d), which achieves the smoothest landscape among all
the models considered. This further improves image generation quality dramatically while retaining or sometimes
improving classification accuracy. Since our method improves the performance of JEM primarily in the framework
of sharpness-aware optimization, we refer it as SADA-JEM,
a Sharpness-Aware Joint Energy-based Model with single
branched Data Augmentation.

15732

