This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Temporal Interpolation Is All You Need for Dynamic Neural Radiance Fields
Sungheon Park, Minjung Son, Seokhwan Jang, Young Chun Ahn, Ji-Yeon Kim, Nahyup Kang
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
{sh2019.park, minjungs.son, swan.jang, ychun.ahn, jiyeon31.kim, nahyup.kang}@samsung.com

,

...

Dynamic-MLP

...
Static-MLP

Dynamic feature

…
NeRF
MLP

Static feature

High-quality dynamic NeRF

,

...

4D Hash-grid

Dynamic feature
NeRF
MLP

Input Sequences

3D Hash-grid

Static feature

1

3

5 Training
Time (min)

Fast-trained dynamic NeRF

Figure 1. We propose simple yet effective feature interpolation methods for training neural radiance fields of dynamic scenes based on temporal interpolation. We provide two different feature vector representations, neural representation (top) and grid representation (bottom),
both of which are the concatenation of static feature vectors and temporally-interpolated dynamic feature vectors. The neural representation exhibits high-quality rendering performance with small-sized models while the grid representation shows competitive rendering results
with astonishingly fast training speed.

Abstract
Temporal interpolation often plays a crucial role to learn
meaningful representations in dynamic scenes. In this paper, we propose a novel method to train spatiotemporal neural radiance fields of dynamic scenes based on temporal
interpolation of feature vectors. Two feature interpolation
methods are suggested depending on underlying representations, neural networks or grids. In the neural representation, we extract features from space-time inputs via multiple neural network modules and interpolate them based on
time frames. The proposed multi-level feature interpolation
network effectively captures features of both short-term and
long-term time ranges. In the grid representation, spacetime features are learned via four-dimensional hash grids,
which remarkably reduces training time. The grid representation shows more than 100× faster training speed than
the previous neural-net-based methods while maintaining

the rendering quality. Concatenating static and dynamic
features and adding a simple smoothness term further improve the performance of our proposed models. Despite the
simplicity of the model architectures, our method achieved
state-of-the-art performance both in rendering quality for
the neural representation and in training speed for the grid
representation.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction and photo-realistic rendering have
been long-lasting problems in the fields of computer vision
and graphics. Along with the advancements of deep learning, differentiable rendering [11, 14] or neural rendering,
has emerged to bridge the gap between the two problems.
Recently proposed Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [18] has
finally unleashed the era of neural rendering. Using NeRF,

4212

