This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PROB: Probabilistic Objectness for Open World Object Detection
Orr Zohar, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Serena Yeung
Stanford University
{orrzohar, wangkua1, syyeung}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Open World Object Detection (OWOD) is a new and
challenging computer vision task that bridges the gap between classic object detection (OD) benchmarks and object detection in the real world. In addition to detecting
and classifying seen/labeled objects, OWOD algorithms are
expected to detect novel/unknown objects - which can be
classified and incrementally learned. In standard OD, object proposals not overlapping with a labeled object are
automatically classified as background. Therefore, simply
applying OD methods to OWOD fails as unknown objects
would be predicted as background. The challenge of detecting unknown objects stems from the lack of supervision in
distinguishing unknown objects and background object proposals. Previous OWOD methods have attempted to overcome this issue by generating supervision using pseudolabeling - however, unknown object detection has remained
low. Probabilistic/generative models may provide a solution for this challenge. Herein, we introduce a novel probabilistic framework for objectness estimation, where we alternate between probability distribution estimation and objectness likelihood maximization of known objects in the
embedded feature space - ultimately allowing us to estimate
the objectness probability of different proposals. The resulting Probabilistic Objectness transformer-based open-world
detector, PROB, integrates our framework into traditional
object detection models, adapting them for the open-world
setting. Comprehensive experiments on OWOD benchmarks
show that PROB outperforms all existing OWOD methods
in both unknown object detection (∼ 2× unknown recall)
and known object detection (∼ 10% mAP). Our code is
available at https://github.com/orrzohar/PROB.

1. Introduction
Object detection (OD) is a fundamental computer vision task that has a myriad of real-world applications, from
autonomous driving [18, 25], robotics [4, 32] to healthcare [6, 12]. However, like many other machine learning
systems, generalization beyond the training distribution re-

Figure 1. Comparison of PROB with other open world object detectors. (a) Query embeddings are extracted from an image via
the deformable DETR model. (b) other open-world detectors attempt to directly distinguish between unlabeled ‘hidden’ objects
and background without supervision (red). (c) PROB’s scheme of
probabilistic objectness training and revised inference, which performs alternating optimization of (i) Embeddings distribution estimation and (ii) likelihood maximization of embeddings that represent known objects. (d) Qualitative examples of the improved
unknown object detection of PROB on the MS-COCO test set.

mains challenging [5] and limits the applicability of existing OD systems. To facilitate the development of machine
learning methods that maintain their robustness in the real
world, a new paradigm of learning was developed – Open
World Learning (OWL) [8–10, 16, 17, 21, 27, 29–31, 34]. In
OWL, a machine learning system is tasked with reason-

11444

