This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-supervised Parametric Real-world Image Harmonization
Ke Wang1,2 , Michaël Gharbi1 , He Zhang1 , Zhihao Xia1 , Eli Shechtman1
1
Adobe Inc.
2
EECS, University of California, Berkeley
{kewang, mgharbi, hezhan, zxia, elishe}@adobe.com
kewang@berkeley.edu

Fully supervised (previous work)

Composite

IHT

Harmonizer

Dual-stream semi-supervised (Ours)

Ours

Parametric curves
& shading map

Figure 1. Visual comparisons between state-of-the-art harmonization methods IHT [9], Harmonizer [14], and ours. Our model is
fully parametric. This gives artists full posterior control over the final composite, makes runtime efficient for high-resolution real-world
inputs and regularizes training. Our model predicts global RGB curves and a local shading map (right). Benefiting from the novel dualstream semi-supervised training strategy, our method (right) produces more realistic harmonized images on real-world composites (left).
This new training strategy, together with the shading map, makes it the first harmonization method to address local tonal adjustments, such
as shading the face according to the sun’s direction (top) or selectively darkening the part of the dog inside the cave (bottom).

Abstract
Learning-based image harmonization techniques are usually trained to undo synthetic random global transformations applied to a masked foreground in a single ground
truth photo. This simulated data does not model many of
the important appearance mismatches (illumination, object
boundaries, etc.) between foreground and background in
real composites, leading to models that do not generalize
well and cannot model complex local changes. We propose
a new semi-supervised training strategy that addresses this
problem and lets us learn complex local appearance harmonization from unpaired real composites, where foreground
and background come from different images. Our model is
fully parametric. It uses RGB curves to correct the global
colors and tone and a shading map to model local variations. Our method outperforms previous work on established benchmarks and real composites, as shown in a user

study, and processes high-resolution images interactively.
Code, and project page available at:
https://kewang0622.github.io/sprih/.

1. Introduction
Image harmonization [12, 22, 23, 26, 28, 32] aims to iron
out visual inconsistencies created when compositing a foreground subject onto a background image that was captured
under different conditions [18, 32], by altering the foreground’s colors, tone, etc., to make the composite more realistic. Despite significant progress, the practicality of today’s most sophisticated learning-based image harmonization techniques [3, 4, 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 32] is limited by a severe domain gap between the synthetic data they are trained
on and real-world composites.
As shown in Figure 2, the standard approach to generating synthetic training composites applies global transforms

5927

