This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EDICT: Exact Diffusion Inversion via Coupled Transformations
Bram Wallace
Salesforce Research

Akash Gokul
Salesforce Research

Nikhil Naik
Salesforce Research

b.wallace@salesforce.com

agokul@salesforce.com

nnaik@salesforce.com

Abstract
Finding an initial noise vector that produces an input
image when fed into the diffusion process (known as inversion) is an important problem in denoising diffusion models
(DDMs), with applications for real image editing. The standard approach for real image editing with inversion uses
denoising diffusion implicit models (DDIMs [29]) to deterministically noise the image to the intermediate state along
the path that the denoising would follow given the original
conditioning. However, DDIM inversion for real images
is unstable as it relies on local linearization assumptions,
which result in the propagation of errors, leading to incorrect image reconstruction and loss of content. To alleviate
these problems, we propose Exact Diffusion Inversion via
Coupled Transformations (EDICT), an inversion method
that draws inspiration from affine coupling layers. EDICT
enables mathematically exact inversion of real and modelgenerated images by maintaining two coupled noise vectors
which are used to invert each other in an alternating fashion. Using Stable Diffusion [25], a state-of-the-art latent
diffusion model, we demonstrate that EDICT successfully
reconstructs real images with high fidelity. On complex image datasets like MS-COCO, EDICT reconstruction significantly outperforms DDIM, improving the mean square error of reconstruction by a factor of two. Using noise vectors
inverted from real images, EDICT enables a wide range of
image edits—from local and global semantic edits to image
stylization—while maintaining fidelity to the original image
structure. EDICT requires no model training/finetuning,
prompt tuning, or extra data and can be combined with any
pretrained DDM.

1. Introduction
Using the iterative denoising diffusion principle, denoising diffusion models (DDMs) trained with web-scale data
can generate highly realistic images conditioned on input
text, layouts, and scene graphs [24, 25, 27]. After image generation, the next important application of DDMs
being explored by the research community is that of im-

age editing. Models such as DALL-E-2 [24] and Stable
Diffusion [25] can perform inpainting, allowing users to
edit images through manual annotation. Methods such as
SDEdit [20] have demonstrated that both synthetic and real
images can be edited using stroke or composite guidance via
DDMs. However, the goal of holistic image editing tools
that can edit any real/artificial image using purely text is
still a field of active research.
The generative process of DDMs starts with an initial
noise vector (xT ) and performs iterative denoising (typically with a guidance signal e.g. in the form of textconditional denoising), ending with a realistic image sample (x0 ). Reversing this generative process is key in solving
this image editing problem for one family of approaches.
Formally, this problem is known as “inversion” i.e., finding
the initial noise vector that produces the input image when
passed through the diffusion process.
A naı̈ve approach for inversion is to add Gaussian noise
to the input image and perform a predefined number of
diffusion steps, which typically results in significant distortions [7]. A more robust method is adapting Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIMs) [29]. Unlike the
commonly used Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) [9], the generative process in DDIMs is defined
in a non-Markovian manner, which results in a deterministic denoising process. DDIM can also be used for inversion,
deterministically noising an image to obtain the initial noise
vector (x0 → xT ).
DDIM inversion has been used for editing real images
through text methods such as DDIBs [30] and Prompt-toPrompt (P2P) image editing [7]. After DDIM inversion,
P2P edits the original image by running the generative process from the noise vector and injecting conditioning information from a new text prompt through the cross-attention
layers in the diffusion model, thus generating an edited image that maintains faithfulness to the original content while
incorporating the edit. However, as noted in the original
P2P work [7], the DDIM inversion is unstable in many
cases—encoding from x0 to xT and back often results in
inexact reconstructions of the original image as in Fig. 2.
These distortions limit the ability to perform significant ma-

22532

