This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointCert: Point Cloud Classification with Deterministic
Certified Robustness Guarantees
Jinghuai Zhang1

Jinyuan Jia2 Hongbin Liu1 Neil Zhenqiang Gong1
Duke University1
UIUC2

{jinghuai.zhang, hongbin.liu, neil.gong}@duke.edu,
{jinyuan}@illinois.edu,

Abstract
Point cloud classification is an essential component in
many security-critical applications such as autonomous
driving and augmented reality. However, point cloud classifiers are vulnerable to adversarially perturbed point clouds.
Existing certified defenses against adversarial point clouds
suffer from a key limitation: their certified robustness guarantees are probabilistic, i.e., they produce an incorrect certified robustness guarantee with some probability. In this
work, we propose a general framework, namely PointCert,
that can transform an arbitrary point cloud classifier to be
certifiably robust against adversarial point clouds with deterministic guarantees. PointCert certifiably predicts the
same label for a point cloud when the number of arbitrarily
added, deleted, and/or modified points is less than a threshold. Moreover, we propose multiple methods to optimize the
certified robustness guarantees of PointCert in three application scenarios. We systematically evaluate PointCert on
ModelNet and ScanObjectNN benchmark datasets. Our results show that PointCert substantially outperforms stateof-the-art certified defenses even though their robustness
guarantees are probabilistic.

1. Introduction
Point cloud classification [11,29,30,38,44,50] has many
safety-critical applications, including but not limited to, autonomous driving and augmented reality. However, various studies [12, 16, 22, 32, 40, 43, 46, 51, 52] showed that
point cloud classification is vulnerable to adversarial point
clouds. In particular, an attacker can carefully add, delete,
and/or modify a small number of points in a point cloud to
make it misclassified by a point cloud classifier.
Existing defenses against adversarial point clouds can be
categorized into empirical defenses [7, 21, 33, 41, 46, 49, 53]
and certified defenses [5, 6, 23]. The key limitation of empirical defenses is that they cannot provide formal guaran-

tees, and thus are often broken by advanced, adaptive attacks [34]. Therefore, we focus on certified defenses in
this work. Randomized smoothing [5] and PointGuard [23]
are two state-of-the-art certified defenses against adversarial point clouds. In particular, randomized smoothing adds
random noise (e.g., Gaussian noise) to a point cloud, while
PointGuard randomly subsamples a point cloud. Due to the
randomness, their certified robustness guarantees are probabilistic, i.e., they produce incorrect robustness guarantees
with some probability (called error probability). For instance, when the error probability is 0.001, they produce incorrect robustness guarantees for 1 out of 1,000 point-cloud
classifications on average. Such probabilistic guarantees are
insufficient for security-critical applications that frequently
classify point clouds.
In this work, we propose PointCert, the first certified defense that has deterministic robustness guarantees against
adversarial point clouds. PointCert can transform an arbitrary point cloud classifier f (called base point cloud classifier) to be certifiably robust against adversarial point clouds.
Specifically, given a point cloud and a base point cloud classifier f , PointCert first divides the point cloud into multiple
disjoint sub-point clouds using a hash function, then uses f
to predict a label for each sub-point cloud, and finally takes
a majority vote among the predicted labels as the predicted
label for the original point cloud. We prove that PointCert
certifiably predicts the same label for a point cloud when the
number of arbitrarily added, deleted, and/or modified points
is no larger than a threshold, which is known as certified
perturbation size. Moreover, we also prove that our derived
certified perturbation size is tight, i.e., without making assumptions on the base point cloud classifier f , it is theoretically impossible to derive a certified perturbation size for
PointCert that is larger than ours.
We consider three scenarios about how PointCert could
be applied in practice and propose methods to optimize the
performance of PointCert in these scenarios. In particular,
we consider two parties: model provider and customer. A
model provider (e.g., Google, Meta) has enough labeled

9496

