This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DualRel: Semi-Supervised Mitochondria Segmentation from
A Prototype Perspective
Huayu Mai1∗

Rui Sun1 *
Tianzhu Zhang1,2,3†
Zhiwei Xiong1,2
Feng Wu1,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Deep Space Exploration Lab

{mai556, issunrui}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, zwxiong, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic mitochondria segmentation enjoys great popularity with the development of deep learning. However,
existing methods rely heavily on the labor-intensive manual
gathering by experienced domain experts. And naively applying semi-supervised segmentation methods in the natural
image field to mitigate the labeling cost is undesirable. In
this work, we analyze the gap between mitochondrial images and natural images and rethink how to achieve effective semi-supervised mitochondria segmentation, from the
perspective of reliable prototype-level supervision. We propose a novel end-to-end dual-reliable (DualRel) network,
including a reliable pixel aggregation module and a reliable
prototype selection module. The proposed DualRel enjoys
several merits. First, to learn the prototypes well without
any explicit supervision, we carefully design the referential
correlation to rectify the direct pairwise correlation. Second, the reliable prototype selection module is responsible
for further evaluating the reliability of prototypes in constructing prototype-level consistency regularization. Extensive experimental results on three challenging benchmarks
demonstrate that our method performs favorably against
state-of-the-art semi-supervised segmentation methods. Importantly, with extremely few samples used for training, DualRel is also on par with current state-of-the-art fully supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Mitochondria, as one of the crucial organelles, are the
primary energy providers for cell activities and are essential for metabolism. Quantification of mitochondrial morphology can not only promote basic scientific research (e.g.,
cellular physiology [1, 5]), but also provide new insight for
clinical diagnosis (e.g., neurodegenerative diseases [20] and
diabetes [24]). Recently, with the development of deep
learning, semantic segmentation [2, 14, 18, 27, 30, 33] enables in-depth exploration of mitochondrial morphology
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Confusion Density: 0.06

Confusion Density: 0.21

(a)

Referential Correlations Similarity : 0.8

Referential Correlations Similarity : 0.2

Foreground prototype

Pixel-Prototype Correlation

Correlation of
and : 0.8
Correlation of
and : 0.9

Reference
Points

(b)

Foreground pixel

Pixel-Reference Correlation

Background pixel

Prototype-Reference Correlation

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) shows the confusion
map and density (i.e., the expected inverse confidence per pixel)
of mitochondrial and natural images. (b) shows the unreliability
caused by direct pairwise prototype-pixel correlation that is conditioned only on visual similarity. (c) shows how to construct pixelreference correlation to rectify the direct pairwise correlation in a
referential correlation manner.

from high-resolution electron microscopy (EM) images and
make conspicuous achievements. However, their flexibility and scalability are limited in the actual deployment because the numerous cluttered irrelevant organelles that require labor-intensive manual discrimination and gathering
by experienced domain experts [10, 21]. Therefore, we begin to turn attention to semi-supervised segmentation with
the assumption that enormous unlabeled data is accessible,
aiming to alleviate the data-hungry issue.
Semi-supervised segmentation enjoys great popularity in
the field of natural images, and representative works such as
CPS [3], which imposes pixel-level consistency regularization and establishes state-of-the-art performance. It naturally comes into mind to directly apply a CPS-like method
to semi-supervised mitochondria segmentation. However,
there exist a large gap between mitochondrial and natural images. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), we observe that the
confusion density (i.e., the expected inverse confidence per
pixel) in mitochondrial images significantly surpasses counterpart in natural images, implying that directly employing

19617

