This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structured Sparsity Learning for Efficient Video Super-Resolution
Bin Xia 1 , Jingwen He 2 , Yulun Zhang 3 , Yitong Wang 4 ,
Yapeng Tian 5 , Wenming Yang 1 *, and Luc Van Gool 3
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 ETH Zürich,
4
ByteDance Inc, 5 University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract
The high computational costs of video super-resolution
(VSR) models hinder their deployment on resource-limited
devices, e.g., smartphones and drones. Existing VSR models contain considerable redundant filters, which drag down
the inference efficiency. To prune these unimportant filters, we develop a structured pruning scheme called Structured Sparsity Learning (SSL) according to the properties
of VSR. In SSL, we design pruning schemes for several key
components in VSR models, including residual blocks, recurrent networks, and upsampling networks. Specifically,
we develop a Residual Sparsity Connection (RSC) scheme
for residual blocks of recurrent networks to liberate pruning restrictions and preserve the restoration information.
For upsampling networks, we design a pixel-shuffle pruning scheme to guarantee the accuracy of feature channelspace conversion. In addition, we observe that pruning
error would be amplified as the hidden states propagate
along with recurrent networks. To alleviate the issue, we
design Temporal Finetuning (TF). Extensive experiments
show that SSL can significantly outperform recent methods
quantitatively and qualitatively. The code is available at
https://github.com/Zj-BinXia/SSL.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to generate a
high-resolution (HR) video from its corresponding lowresolution (LR) observation by filling in missing details.
With the popularity of intelligent edge devices such as
smartphones and small drones, performing VSR on these
devices is in high demand. Although a variety of VSR networks [20, 24, 29, 44, 51] can achieve great performance,
these models are usually difficult to be deployed on edge
devices with limited computation and memory resources.
To alleviate this issue, we explore a new direction for
effective and efficient VSR. To reduce the redundancy of
Conv kernels [4, 5, 36, 38] obtaining a more efficient VSR
network, we develop a neural network pruning scheme for
the VSR task for the first time. Since structured pruning [14, 23, 46, 57] (focusing on filter pruning) can achieve
* Corresponding Author

an actual acceleration [41,46] superior to unstructured pruning [11,12] (focusing on weight-element pruning), we adopt
structured pruning principle to develop our VSR pruning
scheme. Given a powerful VSR network, our pruning
scheme can find submodels under presetting pruning rate
without significantly compromising performance.
Structured pruning is a general concept, and designing
a concrete pruning scheme for VSR networks is challenging. (1) Recurrent networks are widely used in VSR models
to extract temporal features, consisting of residual blocks
(e.g., BasicVSR [2] has 60 residual blocks). However, it
is hard to prune the residual blocks because the skip and
residual connections ought to share the same indices [23]
(Fig. 1 (a)). As shown in Fig. 1 (b), quite a few structured
pruning schemes [23,34] do not prune the last Conv layer of
the residual blocks, which restricts the pruning space. Recently, as shown in Fig. 1 (c), ASSL [57] and SRPN [58]
introduce regularization and prune the same indices on skip
and residual connections to keep channel alignment (local
pruning scheme,i.e., each layer pruning the same ratio of
filters). However, ASSL and SRPN still cannot achieve the
potential of pruning residual blocks on recurrent networks.
The recurrent networks take the previous output as later input (Fig. 2 (a)). This requires the pruned indices of the
first and last Convs in recurrent networks to be the same.
But ASSL and SRPN cannot guarantee filter indices are
aligned. Besides, many SR methods [45, 56] have shown
that the information contained in front Conv layers can help
the restoration feature extraction of later Conv layers. Thus,
we design a Residual Sparsity Connection (RSC) for VSR
recurrent networks, which preserves all channels of the input and output feature maps and selects the important channels for operation (Fig. 1 (d)). Compared with other pruning
schemes [57, 58], RSC does not require the pruned indices
of the first and last Convs of recurrent networks to be the
same, can preserve the information contained in all layers,
and liberates the pruning space of the last Conv of the residual blocks without adding extra calculations. Notably, RSC
can prune residual blocks globally (i.e., the filters in various
layers are compared together to remove unimportant ones).

22638

