This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Polynomial Implicit Neural Representations For Large Diverse Datasets
Rajhans Singh
Ankita Shukla
Pavan Turaga
Geometric Media Lab, Arizona State University
{rsingh70, ashukl20, pavan.turaga}@asu.edu

Figure 1. Samples generated by our Poly-INR model on the ImageNet dataset at various resolutions. Our model generates images with high
fidelity without using convolution, upsample, or self-attention layers, i.e., no interaction between the pixels.

Abstract
Implicit neural representations (INR) have gained significant popularity for signal and image representation for
many end-tasks, such as superresolution, 3D modeling, and
more. Most INR architectures rely on sinusoidal positional
encoding, which accounts for high-frequency information in
data. However, the finite encoding size restricts the model’s
representational power. Higher representational power is
needed to go from representing a single given image to representing large and diverse datasets. Our approach addresses
this gap by representing an image with a polynomial function
and eliminates the need for positional encodings. Therefore,
to achieve a progressively higher degree of polynomial representation, we use element-wise multiplications between
features and affine-transformed coordinate locations after
every ReLU layer. The proposed method is evaluated qualitatively and quantitatively on large datasets like ImageNet.
The proposed Poly-INR model performs comparably to stateof-the-art generative models without any convolution, normalization, or self-attention layers, and with far fewer trainable parameters. With much fewer training parameters and
higher representative power, our approach paves the way

for broader adoption of INR models for generative modeling tasks in complex domains. The code is available at
https://github.com/Rajhans0/Poly_INR

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based generative models are a very active area of research with numerous advancements in recent
years [8, 13, 24]. Most widely, generative models are based
on convolutional architectures. However, recent developments such as implicit neural representations (INR) [29, 43]
represent an image as a continuous function of its coordinate
locations, where each pixel is synthesized independently.
Such a function is approximated by using a deep neural
network. INR provides flexibility for easy image transformations and high-resolution up-sampling through the use of a
coordinate grid. Thus, INRs have become very effective for
3D scene reconstruction and rendering from very few training images [3, 27–29, 56]. However, they are usually trained
to represent a single given scene, signal, or image. Recently,
INRs have been implemented as a generative model to generate entire image datasets [1,46]. They perform comparably to
CNN-based generative models on perfectly curated datasets

2041

