This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeepVecFont-v2:
Exploiting Transformers to Synthesize Vector Fonts with Higher Quality
Yuqing Wang1,2 , Yizhi Wang1 , Longhui Yu2 , Yuesheng Zhu2 , Zhouhui Lian1 *
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
{wyq,yulonghui}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {wangyizhi,zhuys,lianzhouhui}@pku.edu.cn,

(a) DeepVecFont w/o refinement

Abstract
Vector font synthesis is a challenging and ongoing problem in the fields of Computer Vision and Computer Graphics. The recently-proposed DeepVecFont [27] achieved
state-of-the-art performance by exploiting information of
both the image and sequence modalities of vector fonts.
However, it has limited capability for handling long sequence data and heavily relies on an image-guided outline
refinement post-processing. Thus, vector glyphs synthesized
by DeepVecFont still often contain some distortions and artifacts and cannot rival human-designed results. To address
the above problems, this paper proposes an enhanced version of DeepVecFont mainly by making the following three
novel technical contributions. First, we adopt Transformers instead of RNNs to process sequential data and design a
relaxation representation for vector outlines, markedly improving the model’s capability and stability of synthesizing
long and complex outlines. Second, we propose to sample
auxiliary points in addition to control points to precisely
align the generated and target Bézier curves or lines. Finally, to alleviate error accumulation in the sequential generation process, we develop a context-based self-refinement
module based on another Transformer-based decoder to remove artifacts in the initially synthesized glyphs. Both qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate that the proposed method effectively resolves those intrinsic problems
of the original DeepVecFont and outperforms existing approaches in generating English and Chinese vector fonts
with complicated structures and diverse styles.

* Zhouhui Lian is the corresponding author.
This work was supported by National Language Committee of China
(Grant No.: ZDI135-130), Project 2020BD020 supported by PKU-Baidu
Fund, Center For Chinese Font Design and Research, and Key Laboratory
of Science, Technology and Standard in Press Industry (Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Press Media Technology).

(b) DeepVecFont w/ refinement

(c) Ours

(d) Ground Truth

Figure 1. Visualization of the vector glyphs synthesized by DeepVecFont and Ours, where different colors denote different drawing
commands. (a) DeepVecFont w/o refinement suffers from location
shift. (b) DeepVecFont w/ refinement has both over-smoothness
(see green circles) and under-smoothness (see blue circles). (c)
Our method can directly synthesize visually-pleasing results with
compact and coordinated outlines. Zoom in for better inspection.

1. Introduction
Vector fonts, in the format of Scalable Vector Graphics (SVGs), are widely used in displaying documents, arts,
and media contents. However, designing high-quality vector fonts is time-consuming and costly, requiring extensive
experience and professional skills from designers. Automatic font generation aims to simplify and facilitate the font
designing process: learning font styles from a small set of
user-provided glyphs and then generating the complete font
library. until now, there still exist enormous challenges due
to the variety of topology structures, sequential lengths, and
styles, especially for some writing systems such as Chinese.
Recent years have witnessed significant progress [5, 17]
made by deep learning-based methods for vector font generation. Nevertheless, vector fonts synthesized by these
existing approaches often contain severe distortions and
are typically far from satisfactory. More recently, Wang

18320

