This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient View Synthesis and 3D-based Multi-Frame Denoising
with Multiplane Feature Representations
Thomas Tanay

Aleš Leonardis
Matteo Maggioni
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{thomas.tanay,ales.leonardis,matteo.maggioni}@huawei.com

Noisy
inputs

Abstract
While current multi-frame restoration methods combine
information from multiple input images using 2D alignment techniques, recent advances in novel view synthesis
are paving the way for a new paradigm relying on volumetric scene representations. In this work, we introduce
the first 3D-based multi-frame denoising method that significantly outperforms its 2D-based counterparts with lower
computational requirements. Our method extends the multiplane image (MPI) framework for novel view synthesis
by introducing a learnable encoder-renderer pair manipulating multiplane representations in feature space. The
encoder fuses information across views and operates in a
depth-wise manner while the renderer fuses information
across depths and operates in a view-wise manner. The
two modules are trained end-to-end and learn to separate
depths in an unsupervised way, giving rise to Multiplane
Feature (MPF) representations. Experiments on the Spaces
and Real Forward-Facing datasets as well as on raw burst
data validate our approach for view synthesis, multi-frame
denoising, and view synthesis under noisy conditions.

1. Introduction
Multi-frame denoising is a classical problem of computer vision where a noise process affecting a set of images
must be inverted. The main challenge is to extract consistent information across images effectively and the current state of the art relies on optical flow-based 2D alignment [3, 7, 45]. Novel view synthesis, on the other hand, is
a classical problem of computer graphics where a scene is
viewed from one or more camera positions and the task is
to predict novel views from target camera positions. This
problem requires to reason about the 3D structure of the
scene and is typically solved using some form of volumetric
representation [28, 32, 55]. Although the two problems are
traditionally considered distinct, some novel view synthesis approaches have recently been observed to handle noisy

Noisy inputs

Depth-wise
Encoder

Multiplane Feature
Representation

IBRNet [48]

View-wise
Renderer

NAN [31]

Synthesized
outputs

MPFER (ours)

Figure 1. Top: Our Multiplane Features Encoder-Renderer
(MPFER) reimagines the MPI pipeline by moving the multiplane
representation to feature space. Bottom: MPFER significantly outperforms existing methods in multiple challenging scenarios, including here, novel view synthesis from 8 highly degraded inputs.

inputs well, and to have a denoising effect in synthesized
views by discarding inconsistent information across input
views [18,26]. This observation opens the door to 3D-based
multi-frame denoising, by recasting the problem as a special
case of novel view synthesis where the input views are noisy
and the target views are the clean input views [26, 31].
Recently, novel view synthesis has been approached as
an encoding-rendering process where a scene representation is first encoded from a set of input images and an arbitrary number of novel views are then rendered from this
scene representation. In the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
framework for instance, the scene representation is a radiance field function encoded by training a neural network on
the input views. Novel views are then rendered by querying
and integrating this radiance field function over light rays
originating from a target camera position [2, 24, 28]. In the
Multiplane Image (MPI) framework on the other hand, the
scene representation is a stack of semi-transparent colored
layers arranged at various depths, encoded by feeding the
input views to a neural network trained on a large number
of scenes. Novel views are then rendered by warping and
overcompositing the semi-transparent layers [8, 41, 55].

20898

