This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Graphics Capsule: Learning Hierarchical 3D Face Representations
from 2D Images
Chang Yu1,2 , Xiangyu Zhu1,2∗, Xiaomei Zhang1,2 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3 , Zhen Lei1,2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chang.yu, xiangyu.zhu, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{zhangxiaomei2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The function of constructing the hierarchy of objects is
important to the visual process of the human brain. Previous studies have successfully adopted capsule networks to
decompose the digits and faces into parts in an unsupervised manner to investigate the similar perception mechanism of neural networks. However, their descriptions are
restricted to the 2D space, limiting their capacities to imitate the intrinsic 3D perception ability of humans. In this
paper, we propose an Inverse Graphics Capsule Network
(IGC-Net) to learn the hierarchical 3D face representations
from large-scale unlabeled images. The core of IGC-Net is
a new type of capsule, named graphics capsule, which represents 3D primitives with interpretable parameters in computer graphics (CG), including depth, albedo, and 3D pose.
Specifically, IGC-Net first decomposes the objects into a set
of semantic-consistent part-level descriptions and then assembles them into object-level descriptions to build the hierarchy. The learned graphics capsules reveal how the neural
networks, oriented at visual perception, understand faces as
a hierarchy of 3D models. Besides, the discovered parts can
be deployed to the unsupervised face segmentation task to
evaluate the semantic consistency of our method. Moreover,
the part-level descriptions with explicit physical meanings
provide insight into the face analysis that originally runs in
a black box, such as the importance of shape and texture
for face recognition. Experiments on CelebA, BP4D, and
Multi-PIE demonstrate the characteristics of our IGC-Net.

∗ Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
A path toward autonomous machine intelligence is to enable machines to have human-like perception and learning
abilities [19]. As humans, by only observing the objects,
we can easily decompose them into a set of part-level components and construct their hierarchy even though we have
never seen these objects before. This phenomenon is supported by the psychological studies that the visual process
of the human brain is related to the construction of the hierarchical structural descriptions [11,22,23,29]. To investigate the similar perception mechanism of neural networks,
previous studies [18, 35] incorporate the capsule networks,
which are designed to present the hierarchy of objects and
describe each entity with interpretable parameters. After
observing a large-scale of unlabeled images, these methods successfully decompose the digits or faces into a set of
parts, which provide insight into how the neural networks
understand the objects. However, their representations are
limited in the 2D space. Specifically, these methods follow
the analysis-by-synthesis strategy in model training and try
to reconstruct the image by the decomposed parts. Since the
parts are represented by 2D templates, the reconstruction
becomes estimating the affine transformations to warp the
templates and put them in the right places, which is just like
painting with stickers. This strategy performs well when
the objects are intrinsically 2D, like handwritten digits and
frontal faces, but has difficulty in interpreting 3D objects in
the real world, especially when we want a view-independent
representation like humans [2].
How to represent the perceived objects is the core research topic in computer vision [3, 25]. One of the most
popular theories is the Marr’s theory [22, 23]. He believed
that the purpose of the vision is to build the descriptions

20981

