This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Selective Visual Question Answering by Learning from Your Peers
Corentin Dancette1,3†∗ Spencer Whitehead1∗ Rishabh Maheshwary1 Ramakrishna Vedantam1
Stefan Scherer2 Xinlei Chen1 Matthieu Cord3,4 Marcus Rohrbach1
1

FAIR, Meta AI

2

Reality Labs Research, Meta

3

Sorbonne Université

4

Valeo.ai

SotA VQA Model
Q: What color is the face
of the sheep on the left?

Abstract

Grountruth A: black

ID

Despite advances in Visual Question Answering (VQA),
the ability of models to assess their own correctness remains
under-explored. Recent work has shown that VQA models, out-of-the-box, can have difficulties abstaining from answering when they are wrong. The option to abstain, also
called Selective Prediction, is highly relevant when deploying systems to users who must trust the system’s output (e.g.,
VQA assistants for users with visual impairments). For such
scenarios, abstention can be especially important as users
may provide out-of-distribution (OOD) or adversarial inputs that make incorrect answers more likely. In this work,
we explore Selective VQA in both in-distribution (ID) and
OOD scenarios, where models are presented with mixtures
of ID and OOD data. The goal is to maximize the number
of questions answered while minimizing the risk of error on
those questions. We propose a simple yet effective Learning
from Your Peers (LYP) approach for training multimodal
selection functions for making abstention decisions. Our
approach uses predictions from models trained on distinct
subsets of the training data as targets for optimizing a Selective VQA model. It does not require additional manual
labels or held-out data and provides a signal for identifying examples that are easy/difficult to generalize to. In our
extensive evaluations, we show this benefits a number of
models across different architectures and scales. Overall,
for ID, we reach 32.92% in the selective prediction metric
coverage at 1% risk of error (C@1%) which doubles the
previous best coverage of 15.79% on this task. For mixed
ID/OOD, using models’ softmax confidences for abstention
decisions performs very poorly, answering <5% of questions at 1% risk of error even when faced with only 10%
OOD examples, but a learned selection function with LYP
can increase that to 25.38% C@1%.

* Equal contribution.
† Work primarily done during internship at FAIR.

Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/selective- vqa_ood

A: black
SotA VQA Model + LYP

A: black

OOD
Q: What color will the
light be when the vehicle
has permission to
proceed?
Groundtruth A: green

SotA VQA Model

A: red
SotA VQA Model + LYP

A: [abstain]

Figure 1. VQA Models are able to answer straightforward ID
questions, as in the top example where a SotA model [62] with
and without our Learning from Your Peers (LYP) approach answers correctly. However, difficult OOD examples can arise, like
the bottom example. With LYP, the model is able to abstain from
answering to avoid outputting the incorrect answer, whereas the
existing model is overconfident and outputs the answer anyways.

1. Introduction
Recent successes of deep learning models for multimodal tasks have created the potential for many exciting
real-world applications that require a large degree of reliability, such as providing assistance to users with visual impairments [23, 51]. However, with these novel, high-stakes
applications come responsibilities towards the users, as well
as the need to revise problem setups and the general approach to evaluating model performance. One particularly
important consideration when developing models for realworld applications is reliability, i.e., the ability of the model
to avoid making errors when facing uncertainty.
One way to approach reliability is to frame the problem
as a selective prediction task [9, 14, 63]. In selective prediction, models are able to either output an answer or abstain
from answering (i.e., effectively saying “I don’t know”)
based on the model’s confidence/uncertainty in order to
avoid making incorrect predictions. A prevalent cause of
such incorrect predictions in real-world settings is distribution shifts [13, 20, 42], where the test environment may
differ from the training environment and models could encounter a wide variety of input examples at test time that

24049

