This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-Aware Multi-Class Image-to-Image Translation with NeRFs
Senmao Li1

Joost van de Weijer2

Fahad Shahbaz Khan3,4
1
3

Yaxing Wang1 *

Meiqin Liu5

Jian Yang1

VCIP,CS, Nankai University, 2 Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, 4 Linkoping University, 5 Beijing Jiaotong University
senmaonk@gmail.com {yaxing,csjyang}@nankai.edu.cn joost@cvc.uab.es
fahad.khan@liu.se mqliu@bjtu.edu.cn
Output(female)

Input

Output(cat)

Input

Output(male)

Output(dog)

Output(wildlife)

AFHQ

CelebA-HQ

Input

Figure 1. 3D-aware I2I translation: given a view-consistent 3D scene (the input), our method maps it into a high-quality target-specific
image. Our approach produces consistent results across viewpoints.

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D-aware generative models (3Daware GANs) combined with Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) have achieved impressive results. However no prior
works investigate 3D-aware GANs for 3D consistent multiclass image-to-image (3D-aware I2I) translation. Naively
using 2D-I2I translation methods suffers from unrealistic
shape/identity change. To perform 3D-aware multi-class
I2I translation, we decouple this learning process into a
multi-class 3D-aware GAN step and a 3D-aware I2I trans* The corresponding author.

lation step. In the first step, we propose two novel techniques: a new conditional architecture and an effective
training strategy. In the second step, based on the welltrained multi-class 3D-aware GAN architecture, that preserves view-consistency, we construct a 3D-aware I2I translation system. To further reduce the view-consistency problems, we propose several new techniques, including a Unet-like adaptor network design, a hierarchical representation constrain and a relative regularization loss. In extensive experiments on two datasets, quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that we successfully perform 3Daware I2I translation with multi-view consistency. Code is

12652

