This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Panoptic Lifting for 3D Scene Understanding with Neural Fields
Yawar Siddiqui1,2 Lorenzo Porzi2 Samuel Rota Bulò2
Norman Müller1,2 Matthias Nießner1 Angela Dai1 Peter Kontschieder2
Technical University of Munich1

Meta Reality Labs Zurich2

Figure 1. Given only RGB images of an in-the-wild scene as input, our method optimizes a panoptic radiance field which can be queried
for color, depth, semantics, and instances for any point in space. We obtain poses for input images with COLMAP [32], and 2D panoptic
segmentation masks using a pretrained off-the-shelf network [6]. During training, our method lifts these 2D segmentation masks, which
are often noisy and view-inconsistent, into a consistent 3D panoptic radiance field. Once trained, our model is able to render images and
their corresponding panoptic segmentation masks from both existing and novel viewpoints.

Abstract
We propose Panoptic Lifting, a novel approach for learning panoptic 3D volumetric representations from images of
in-the-wild scenes. Once trained, our model can render
color images together with 3D-consistent panoptic segmentation from novel viewpoints. Unlike existing approaches
which use 3D input directly or indirectly, our method requires only machine-generated 2D panoptic segmentation
masks inferred from a pre-trained network. Our core contribution is a panoptic lifting scheme based on a neural field
representation that generates a unified and multi-view consistent, 3D panoptic representation of the scene. To account for inconsistencies of 2D instance identifiers across
views, we solve a linear assignment with a cost based on
the model’s current predictions and the machine-generated
segmentation masks, thus enabling us to lift 2D instances
to 3D in a consistent way. We further propose and ablate
contributions that make our method more robust to noisy,
machine-generated labels, including test-time augmentations for confidence estimates, segment consistency loss,
bounded segmentation fields, and gradient stopping. Experimental results validate our approach on the challenging Hypersim, Replica, and ScanNet datasets, improving by
8.4, 13.8, and 10.6% in scene-level PQ over state of the art.

1. Introduction
Robust panoptic 3D scene understanding models are key
to enabling applications such as VR, robot navigation, or
self-driving, and more. Panoptic image understanding – the
task of segmenting a 2D image into categorical “stuff” areas
and individual “thing” instances – has experienced tremendous progress over the past years. These advances can be attributed to continuously improved model architectures and
the availability of large-scale labeled 2D datasets, leading to
state-of-the-art 2D panoptic segmentation models [6,19,43]
that generalize well to unseen images captured in the wild.
Single-image panoptic segmentation, unfortunately, is
still insufficient for tasks requiring coherency and consistency across multiple views. In fact, panoptic masks often
contain view-specific imperfections and inconsistent classifications, and single-image 2D models naturally lack the
ability to track unique object identities across views (see
Fig. 2). Ideally, such consistency would stem from a full,
3D understanding of the environment, but lifting machinegenerated 2D panoptic segmentations into a coherent 3D
panoptic scene representation remains a challenging task.
Project page: nihalsid.github.io/panoptic-lifting/

9043

