This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Universal Fake Image Detectors that
Generalize Across Generative Models
Utkarsh Ojha*

Yuheng Li*

Yong Jae Lee

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
With generative models proliferating at a rapid rate,
there is a growing need for general purpose fake image
detectors. In this work, we first show that the existing
paradigm, which consists of training a deep network for
real-vs-fake classification, fails to detect fake images from
newer breeds of generative models when trained to detect
GAN fake images. Upon analysis, we find that the resulting classifier is asymmetrically tuned to detect patterns that
make an image fake. The real class becomes a ‘sink’ class
holding anything that is not fake, including generated images from models not accessible during training. Building upon this discovery, we propose to perform real-vs-fake
classification without learning; i.e., using a feature space
not explicitly trained to distinguish real from fake images.
We use nearest neighbor and linear probing as instantiations of this idea. When given access to the feature space of
a large pretrained vision-language model, the very simple
baseline of nearest neighbor classification has surprisingly
good generalization ability in detecting fake images from a
wide variety of generative models; e.g., it improves upon the
SoTA [50] by +15.07 mAP and +25.90% acc when tested
on unseen diffusion and autoregressive models. Our code,
models, and data can be found at https://github.
com/Yuheng-Li/UniversalFakeDetect

1. Introduction
The digital world finds itself being flooded with many
kinds of fake images these days. Some could be natural
images that are doctored using tools like Adobe Photoshop
[1, 49], while others could have been generated through a
machine learning algorithm. With the rise and maturity of
deep generative models [22,29,42], fake images of the latter
kind have caught our attention. They have raised excitement
because of the quality of images one can generate with ease.
They have, however, also raised concerns about their use
for malicious purposes [4]. To make matters worse, there
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Using images from just one generative model, can we
detect images from a different type of generative model as fake?

is no longer a single source of fake images that needs to
be dealt with: for example, synthesized images could take
the form of realistic human faces generated using generative
adversarial networks [29], or they could take the form of
complex scenes generated using diffusion models [42, 45].
One can be almost certain that there will be more modes
of fake images coming in the future. With such a diversity,
our goal in this work is to develop a general purpose fake
detection method which can detect whether any arbitrary
image is fake, given access to only one kind of generative
model during training; see Fig. 1.
A common paradigm has been to frame fake image detection as a learning based problem [10, 50], in which a
training set of fake and real images are assumed to be available. A deep network is then trained to perform real vs fake
binary classification. During test time, the model is used
to detect whether a test image is real or fake. Impressively,
this strategy results in an excellent generalization ability of
the model to detect fake images from different algorithms
within the same generative model family [50]; e.g., a classifier trained using real/fake images from ProGAN [28] can
accurately detect fake images from StyleGAN [29] (both
being GAN variants). However, to the best of our knowledge, prior work has not thoroughly explored generalizability across different families of generative models, especially
to ones not seen during training; e.g., will the GAN fake
classifier be able to detect fake images from diffusion models as well? Our analysis in this work shows that existing
methods do not attain that level of generalization ability.
Specifically, we find that these models work (or fail to
work) in a rather interesting manner. Whenever an image
contains the (low-level) fingerprints [25, 50, 52, 53] particu-

24480

