This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Switchable Representation Learning Framework with Self-compatibility
Shengsen Wu1,2 , Yan Bai2 , Yihang Lou3 , Xiongkun Linghu4 , Jianzhong He3 , Ling-Yu Duan1,2, *
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China; 2 Peking University, China;
3
Huawei Technologies; 4 Tsinghua University, China
{sswu, yanbai, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn,
{louyihang1,jianzhong.he}@huawei.com, lhxk20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world visual search systems involve deployments
on multiple platforms with different computing and storage resources. Deploying a unified model that suits the
minimal-constrain platforms leads to limited accuracy. It is
expected to deploy models with different capacities adapting to the resource constraints, which requires features extracted by these models to be aligned in the metric space.
The method to achieve feature alignments is called “compatible learning”. Existing research mainly focuses on the
one-to-one compatible paradigm, which is limited in learning compatibility among multiple models. We propose a
Switchable representation learning Framework with SelfCompatibility (SFSC). SFSC generates a series of compatible sub-models with different capacities through one training process. The optimization of sub-models faces gradients
conflict, and we mitigate this problem from the perspective
of the magnitude and direction. We adjust the priorities
of sub-models dynamically through uncertainty estimation
to co-optimize sub-models properly. Besides, the gradients
with conflicting directions are projected to avoid mutual interference. SFSC achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the evaluated datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual search systems are widely deployed, which recall
the nearest neighbors in gallery features according to their
distances to the query feature. Real-world visual search
systems consist of multiple models deployed on different
platforms [17, 38, 45] (e.g. clouds, mobiles, smart cameras), where different platforms interact with each other by
visual features. Typically, as for person re-identification
systems, images are captured and processed into features
on edge sides. And such features are sent to the cloud
side to compare with the database features for identifying
* Corresponding author.

a specific person by feature similarities. As diverse platforms meet different computing and storage resource limitations, deploying the unified model which suits the minimalconstrain platforms leads to a waste of resources on other
platforms and limited accuracy. To make better use of resources and achieve higher accuracy, it is expected to deploy
models with different capacities which adapt to the resource
limitations. Such a solution requires compatibility among
the models to satisfy their interaction requirements, which
means that the similar data processed by different models
are close to each other in the feature space while dissimilar
data are far apart.
To achieve compatibility, compatible learning methods
have been proposed. Existing research focuses on the oneto-one compatible paradigm [6,49,62], which constrains the
learned features of a latter (learnable) model to be compatible with its previous (fixed) version. They are limited in
achieving many-to-many compatibilities, which means any
two in a series of models are compatible with each other.
In this work, we propose a Switchable representation
learning Framework with Self-Compatibility (SFSC) to
achieve many-to-many compatibilities. As shown in Figure
1, SFSC can deploy different sub-models to suit the diverse
computing and storage resource limitation of different platforms. The compatibility between any two sub-models can
be achieved, termed as “self-compatibility”. However, there
are gradients conflicts between sub-models as they are cooptimized during the training process. We summarize such
conflicts into the gradient magnitude and gradient direction. Specifically, a gradient of a large magnitude will dominate the optimization process, which may lead to the overfitting of its corresponding sub-model and impair the improvements of other sub-models. To solve this problem, we
estimate the uncertainty of different sub-models to weight
the gradient, denoting the optimization priorities. Besides,
as the sub-models may produce gradients in various directions, there is mutual interference between them. Thus the
improvement in different sub-models may be overestimated

15943

