This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeAT: Learning Neural Implicit Surfaces with Arbitrary Topologies
from Multi-view Images
Xiaoxu Meng
Weikai Chen
Bo Yang
Digital Content Technology Center, Tencent Games
{xiaoxumeng,weikaichen,brandonyang}@global.tencent.com

Recon

Ours

Ours

Ours

NeuS
Input
Images

NeuS

...

...

NeuS
...

Figure 1. We show three groups of surface reconstruction from multi-view images. The front and back faces are rendered in blue and
yellow respectively. Our method (left) is able to reconstruct high-fidelity and intricate surfaces of arbitrary topologies, including those
non-watertight structures, e.g. the thin single-layer shoulder strap of the top (middle). In comparison, the state-of-the-art NeuS [48] method
(right) can only generate watertight surfaces, resulting in thick, double-layer geometries.

Abstract
Recent progress in neural implicit functions has set new
state-of-the-art in reconstructing high-fidelity 3D shapes
from a collection of images. However, these approaches are
limited to closed surfaces as they require the surface to be
represented by a signed distance field. In this paper, we propose NeAT, a new neural rendering framework that can learn
implicit surfaces with arbitrary topologies from multi-view
images. In particular, NeAT represents the 3D surface as a
level set of a signed distance function (SDF) with a validity
branch for estimating the surface existence probability at the
query positions. We also develop a novel neural volume rendering method, which uses SDF and validity to calculate the
volume opacity and avoids rendering points with low validity. NeAT supports easy field-to-mesh conversion using the
classic Marching Cubes algorithm. Extensive experiments
on DTU [20], MGN [4], and Deep Fashion 3D [19] datasets
indicate that our approach is able to faithfully reconstruct
both watertight and non-watertight surfaces. In particular,
NeAT significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods

in the task of open surface reconstruction both quantitatively
and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from multi-view images is a fundamental problem in computer vision and computer graphics.
Recent advances in neural implicit functions [26, 36, 48, 55]
have brought impressive progress in achieving high-fidelity
reconstruction of complex geometry even with sparse views.
They use differentiable rendering to render the inferred implicit surface into images which are compared with the input
images for network supervision. This provides a promising alternative of learning 3D shapes directly from 2D images without 3D data. However, existing neural rendering methods represent surfaces as signed distance function
(SDF) [27, 55] or occupancy field [36, 38], limiting their
output to closed surfaces. This leads to a barrier in reconstructing a large variety of real-world objects with open
boundaries, such as 3D garments, walls of a scanned 3D
scene, etc. The recently proposed NDF [10], 3PSDF [6]

248

