This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-guided Person Re-Identification via Sparse-Dense
Complementary Learning
Chengzhi Cao1 , Xueyang Fu1∗ , Hongjian Liu1 , Yukun Huang1 ,
Kunyu Wang1 , Jiebo Luo2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
University of Rochester, USA
{chengzhicao@mail., xyfu@, jeffeey@mail., kevinh@mail., kunyuwang@mail.}ustc.edu.cn,
jluo@cs.rochester.edu, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video-based person re-identification (Re-ID) is a prominent computer vision topic due to its wide range of video
surveillance applications. Most existing methods utilize
spatial and temporal correlations in frame sequences to
obtain discriminative person features. However, inevitable
degradation, e.g., motion blur contained in frames, leading
to the loss of identity-discriminating cues. Recently, a new
bio-inspired sensor called event camera, which can asynchronously record intensity changes, brings new vitality to
the Re-ID task. With the microsecond resolution and low
latency, it can accurately capture the movements of pedestrians even in the degraded environments. In this work, we
propose a Sparse-Dense Complementary Learning (SDCL)
Framework, which effectively extracts identity features by
fully exploiting the complementary information of dense
frames and sparse events. Specifically, for frames, we build
a CNN-based module to aggregate the dense features of
pedestrian appearance step by step, while for event streams,
we design a bio-inspired spiking neural network (SNN)
backbone, which encodes event signals into sparse feature
maps in a spiking form, to extract the dynamic motion cues
of pedestrians. Finally, a cross feature alignment module
is constructed to fuse motion information from events and
appearance cues from frames to enhance identity representation learning. Experiments on several benchmarks show
that by employing events and SNN into Re-ID, our method
significantly outperforms competitive methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/ChengzhiCao/SDCL.
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National
Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2020AAA0105702, the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 62225207,
62276243 and U19B2038, the University Synergy Innovation Program of
Anhui Province under Grant GXXT-2019-025.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Visual examples of learned feature maps. From top to
bottom: (a) original images, (b) corresponding events, (c) feature
maps of events, (d) feature maps of frames in PSTA [49] (w/o
events), (e) feature maps of frames in our network (w/ events).

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) identifies a specific person in non-overlapping camera networks and is used in a
variety of surveillance applications [15, 31, 32]. Due to the
availability of video data, video-based person Re-ID has attracted considerable attention. Compared with image-based
Re-ID methods, video sequences contain numerous detailed

17990

