This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Good is Bad: Causality Inspired Cloth-debiasing for
Cloth-changing Person Re-identiﬁcation
Zhengwei Yang1,2,3 , Meng Lin1,2,3 , Xian Zhong4 , Yu Wu1,2 , Zheng Wang1,2,3, *
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
3
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
4
School of Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology
Camera #1

Abstract

Entangled

Entangled

Non-ID

Entangled representation of clothing and identity (ID)intrinsic clues are potentially concomitant in conventional
person Re-IDentiﬁcation (ReID). Nevertheless, eliminating
the negative impact of clothing on ID remains challenging
due to the lack of theory and the difﬁculty of isolating the
exact implications. In this paper, a causality-based AutoIntervention Model, referred to as AIM1 , is ﬁrst proposed to
mitigate clothing bias for robust cloth-changing person ReID
(CC-ReID). Speciﬁcally, we analyze the effect of clothing
on the model inference and adopt a dual-branch model to
simulate causal intervention. Progressively, clothing bias
is eliminated automatically with model training. AIM is
encouraged to learn more discriminative ID clues that are
free from clothing bias. Extensive experiments on two standard CC-ReID datasets demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed AIM over other state-of-the-art methods.

Camera #2
ID

ID

match

Non-ID

(Clothing, et al.)

(Clothing, et al.)

Latent space
Person #1
Probe

(a) Entangled representation of clothing and ID

Person #1

Gallery

ID classification
0.8

match

0.6
0.4
0.2

ID C

ID A

ID B

ID C

(b) Clothing affect person recognition

Figure 1. Illustration of the entangled representation of clothing
and ID and how clothing bias affects model prediction.

which leads to a growing need felt by the research community to study CC-ReID task.
As one of the accompanying objects of people, clothing
is an essential factor in social life. There are two possible
responses when people identify others: confusing the perception of identity (ID) or clearly distinguishing different
IDs through immutable visual appearance (faces or softbiometrics). The former manifests as the mix-up of IDs due
to the similarity in ﬂexible visual appearance (e.g., clothing) of people, while the latter is caused by the high-level
semantic (e.g., ID-clues) perceived by humans, transcending
the similarity that comes with clothing. The above reactions
reﬂect that the relevance of clothing to ID is a double-edged
sword. Traditionally, clothing is a helpful characteristic for
ReID, where people wearing the same clothes are likely
to have the same ID. However, entangled representation of
clothing and ID leads the statistical-based neural networks
to converge towards shallow clothing features that can be
easily distinguished. This statistical association gives the
ReID model a faulty perception that there is a strong relation between clothing and ID, which would undermine the
ultimate prediction for seeking robust and sensible results.
Recent years have witnessed numerous deep learning attempts to model discriminative clues for person distinguishable learning. However, plenty of misleading information
exists in these attempts, as some non-ID areas (e.g., clothing

1. Introduction
Short-term person Re-IDentiﬁcation (ReID) aims to
match a person within limited time and space conditions,
under the assumption that each individual maintains clothing
consistency. Of both traditional and deep learning methods,
the best way to deceive current ReID models is by having
pedestrians alter their clothing. This highlights the inadequacy of existing short-term ReID methods [4, 42, 45]. To
solve this issue, Cloth-Changing person ReID (CC-ReID) [2]
has been recently explored, which is increasingly critical in
public security systems for tracking down disguised criminal
suspects. For example, witnesses typically provide descriptive details (e.g., clothing, color, and stature) when describing suspects, but it is unlikely that criminals will wear the
same clothes upon their reappearance. It follows that clothing information will disrupt the existing ReID system [40],
* Corresponding author: wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn. 1 Codes will publicly
available at https://github.com/BoomShakaY/AIM-CCReID.

1472

