This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revealing the Dark Secrets of Masked Image Modeling
Zhenda Xie*13 , Zigang Geng∗23 , Jingcheng Hu13 , Zheng Zhang3 , Han Hu3 , Yue Cao3†
1
Tsinghua University 2 University of Science and Technology of China 3 Microsoft Research Asia
{t-zhxie, t-ziganggeng, v-jingchu, zhez, hanhu, yuecao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Masked image modeling (MIM) as pre-training is shown
to be effective for numerous vision downstream tasks, but
how and where MIM works remain unclear. In this paper,
we compare MIM with the long-dominant supervised pretrained models from two perspectives, the visualizations and
the experiments, to uncover their key representational differences. From the visualizations, we find that MIM brings
locality inductive bias to all layers of the trained models,
but supervised models tend to focus locally at lower layers
but more globally at higher layers. That may be the reason why MIM helps Vision Transformers that have a very
large receptive field to optimize. Using MIM, the model
can maintain a large diversity on attention heads in all layers. But for supervised models, the diversity on attention
heads almost disappears from the last three layers and less
diversity harms the fine-tuning performance. From the experiments, we find that MIM models can perform significantly
better on geometric and motion tasks with weak semantics
or fine-grained classification tasks, than their supervised
counterparts. Without bells and whistles, a standard MIM
pre-trained SwinV2-L could achieve state-of-the-art performance on pose estimation (78.9 AP on COCO test-dev and
78.0 AP on CrowdPose), depth estimation (0.287 RMSE on
NYUv2 and 1.966 RMSE on KITTI), and video object tracking (70.7 SUC on LaSOT). For the semantic understanding
datasets where the categories are sufficiently covered by the
supervised pre-training, MIM models can still achieve highly
competitive transfer performance. With a deeper understanding of MIM, we hope that our work can inspire new and solid
research in this direction. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/zdaxie/MIM-DarkSecrets.

1. Introduction
Pre-training of effective and general representations applicable to a wide range of tasks in a domain is the key to
the success of deep learning. In computer vision, supervised
* Equal Contribution. The work is done when Zhenda Xie, Zigang Geng,
and Jingcheng Hu are interns at Microsoft Research Asia. † Contact person.

classification on ImageNet [14] has long been the dominant
pre-training task which is manifested to be effective on a
wide range of vision tasks, especially on the semantic understanding tasks, such as image classification [17, 18, 36,
38, 51], object detection [23, 29, 61, 63], semantic segmentation [53, 69], video action recognition [7, 52, 65, 67] and so
on. Over the past several years, “masked signal modeling”,
which masks a portion of input signals and tries to predict
these masked signals, serves as a universal and effective selfsupervised pre-training task for various domains, including
language, vision, and speech. After (masked) language modeling repainted the NLP field [15, 49], recently, such task
has also been shown to be a competitive challenger to the supervised pre-training in computer vision [3, 8, 18, 27, 74, 80].
That is, masked image modeling (MIM) pre-trained models
achieve very high fine-tuning accuracy on a wide range of
vision tasks of different nature and complexity.
However, there still remain several questions:
1. What are the key mechanisms that contribute to the
excellent performance of MIM?
2. How transferable are MIM and supervised models
across different types of tasks, such as semantic understanding, geometric and motion tasks?
To investigate these questions, we compare MIM with supervised models from two perspectives, the visualization
perspective and the experimental perspective, trying to uncover key representational differences between these two
pre-training tasks and deeper understand the behaviors of
MIM pre-training.
We start with studying the attention maps of the pretrained models. Firstly, we visualize the averaged attention
distance in MIM models, and we find that masked image
modeling brings locality inductive bias to the trained
model, that the models tend to aggregate near pixels in
part of the attention heads, and the locality strength is
highly correlated with the masking ratio and masked patch
size in the pre-training stage. But the supervised models tend
to focus locally at lower layers but more globally at higher
layers.

14475

