This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Graph-based Spatial Consistency for Robust Non-rigid
Point Cloud Registration

1

Zheng Qin1 Hao Yu2 Changjian Wang1 Yuxing Peng1 Kai Xu1 *
National University of Defense Technology 2 Technical University of Munich

Abstract
We study the problem of outlier correspondence pruning
for non-rigid point cloud registration. In rigid registration,
spatial consistency has been a commonly used criterion to
discriminate outliers from inliers. It measures the compatibility of two correspondences by the discrepancy between
the respective distances in two point clouds. However, spatial consistency no longer holds in non-rigid cases and outlier rejection for non-rigid registration has not been well
studied. In this work, we propose Graph-based Spatial Consistency Network (GraphSCNet) to filter outliers for nonrigid registration. Our method is based on the fact that nonrigid deformations are usually locally rigid, or local shape
preserving. We first design a local spatial consistency measure over the deformation graph of the point cloud, which
evaluates the spatial compatibility only between the correspondences in the vicinity of a graph node. An attentionbased non-rigid correspondence embedding module is then
devised to learn a robust representation of non-rigid correspondences from local spatial consistency. Despite its
simplicity, GraphSCNet effectively improves the quality of
the putative correspondences and attains state-of-the-art
performance on three challenging benchmarks. Our code
and models are available at https://github.com/
qinzheng93/GraphSCNet.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid point cloud registration is a fundamental and
critical problem in computer graphics, computer vision, and
robotics. It aims at recovering the non-rigid warping function that transforms a source point cloud to a target one. In
practice, the two point clouds are usually incomplete and
share partial and even low overlap, which considerably increases the difficulty of registration.
Estimating the warping function relies on extracting accurate correspondences. Benefiting from the recent advances in deep point representation [46,53,56,57], learningbased matching methods [13, 17, 20, 24, 31, 45, 47, 55, 58]
* Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com.

Rej
N-ICP w/o Outlier

ction

AccS: 28.3, AccR: 45.6

PointDSC

Inlier ratio: 60.5

N-ICP

Prec: 72.1, Recall: 86.3

Our G
raph
SCNe
t

AccS: 46.2, AccR: 62.4

N-ICP

Prec: 96.1, Recall: 97.9

AccS: 80.2, AccR: 98.2

Figure 1. GraphSCNet Overview. Given a set of putative correspondences for non-rigid registration, GraphSCNet can accurately
prune the outliers among them while preserve the inliers, which
contributes to significantly better registration results.

have obtained significantly high quality of putative correspondences. However, similar success has yet to be
achieved in deformable cases. Under significant deformation, these methods are inevitably prone to outliers, which
can drastically degrade the accuracy of registration.
Outlier rejection is a common technique for robust point
cloud registration. However, most existing methods focus
on rigid registration. An effective method of outlier pruning for non-rigid registration has so far been missing. On
the one hand, a rigid transformation can be pinned down
by a small set of inlier correspondences (e.g., a rotation can
be determined by 3 non-colinear inliers) such that sampling
consensus methods (e.g., RANSAC [19]) can effectively remove the outliers and recover the alignment transformation
in a hypothesize-and-verify manner. However, non-rigid
registration requires dense and thoroughly-distributed correspondences to precisely describe the deformation, thus
preventing the application of sampling consensus methods.
On the other hand, rigid transformations preserve Euclidean
distance between every pair of points. This spatial consis-

5394

