This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Learning with Data-Agnostic Distribution Fusion
Jian-hui Duan, Wenzhong Li ,* Derun Zou, Ruichen Li, Sanglu Lu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Nanjing, China
djhbarca@163.com, lwz@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning has emerged as a promising distributed machine learning paradigm to preserve data
privacy. One of the fundamental challenges of federated
learning is that data samples across clients are usually not
independent and identically distributed (non-IID), leading
to slow convergence and severe performance drop of the
aggregated global model. To facilitate model aggregation
on non-IID data, it is desirable to infer the unknown
global distributions without violating privacy protection
policy. In this paper, we propose a novel data-agnostic
distribution fusion based model aggregation method called
FedFusion to optimize federated learning with nonIID local datasets, based on which the heterogeneous
clients’ data distributions can be represented by a global
distribution of several virtual fusion components with
different parameters and weights. We develop a Variational
AutoEncoder (VAE) method to learn the optimal parameters
of the distribution fusion components based on limited
statistical information extracted from the local models, and
apply the derived distribution fusion model to optimize
federated model aggregation with non-IID data. Extensive
experiments based on various federated learning scenarios
with real-world datasets show that FedFusion achieves
significant performance improvement compared to the
state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a novel
distributed machine learning paradigm that allows a global
deep neural network (DNN) model to be trained by
multiple participanting clients collaboratively. In such
a paradigm, multiple clients train their local models
based on datasets generated by edge devices such as
sensors and smartphones, and the server is responsible
* The corresponding author is Wenzhong Li (lwz@nju.edu.cn).

to aggregate the parameters from the local models to
form a global model without transferring local data to
the central server. Nowadays federated learning has been
drawn much attention in mobile-edge computing [21, 39]
with its advantages in preserving data privacy [17, 49] and
enhancing communication efficiency [30, 38, 43].
The de facto standard algorithm for federated learning
is FedAvg [30], where parameters of local models are
averaged element-wise with weights proportional to sizes
of the client datasets. Based on FedAvg, a lot of algorithms
have been proposed to improve the resource allocation
fairness, communication efficiency, and convergence rate
for federated learning [16, 29], which include LAG [3],
Zeno [45], AFL [31], FedMA [43], etc.
One of the fundamental challenges of federated learning
is the non-IID data sampling from heterogeneous clients. In
real-world federated learning scenarios, local datasets are
typically non-IID, and the local models trained on them
are significantly different from each other. It was reported
in [48] that the accuracy of a convolutional neural network
(CNN) model trained by FedAvg reduces by up to 55% for
a highly skewed non-IID dataset. The work in [43] showed
that the accuracy of VGG model trained with FedAvg and
its variants dropped from 61% to under 50% when the client
number increases from 5 to 20 on heterogeneous data.
Several efforts have been made to address the non-IID
challenges. FedProx [26] modified FedAvg by adding
a dissimilarity bound on local datasets and a proximal
term on the local model parameter to tackle heterogeneity.
However, it poses restrictions on the local updates to be
closer to the initial global model, which may lead to model
bias. Zhao et al. [48] proposed a data sharing strategy
to improve training on non-IID data by creating a small
subset of data to share between all clients. However,
data sharing could weaken the privacy requirement of
federated learning. Several works [5, 28, 32] adopted data
augmentation and model bias correction to deal with nonIID data. The clustered federated learning [2, 6, 7, 46]
tackled non-IID settings by partitioning client models into
clusters and performed model aggregation in cluster level.

8074

