This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parts2Words: Learning Joint Embedding of Point Clouds and Texts by
Bidirectional Matching between Parts and Words
Chuan Tang1
1

Xi Yang1,4∗

Zhizhong Han3

School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
3

4

Bojian Wu2

2

Yi Chang1,4 *

Zhejiang University

The Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, USA

Engineering Research Center of Knowledge-Driven Human-Machine Intelligence, MoE, China

Abstract
Shape-Text matching is an important task of high-level
shape understanding. Current methods mainly represent a
3D shape as multiple 2D rendered views, which obviously
can not be understood well due to the structural ambiguity caused by self-occlusion in the limited number of views.
To resolve this issue, we directly represent 3D shapes as
point clouds, and propose to learn joint embedding of point
clouds and texts by bidirectional matching between parts
from shapes and words from texts. Specifically, we first segment the point clouds into parts, and then leverage optimal
transport method to match parts and words in an optimized
feature space, where each part is represented by aggregating features of all points within it and each word is abstracted by its contextual information. We optimize the feature space in order to enlarge the similarities between the
paired training samples, while simultaneously maximizing
the margin between the unpaired ones. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves a significant improvement
in accuracy over the SOTAs on multi-modal retrieval tasks
under the Text2Shape dataset. Codes are available at here.

1. Introduction
Interaction scenarios, such as metaverse, and computeraided design (CAD), create a larger number of 3D shapes
and text descriptions. To enable a more intelligent process
of interaction, it is important to bridge the gap between 3D
data and linguistic data. Recently, 3D shapes with rich geometric details have been available in large-scale 3D deep
learning benchmark datasets [5, 34]. Beyond 3D shapes
themselves, text descriptions can also provide additional information. However, it is still hard to jointly understand 3D
shapes and texts, since representing different modalities in
a common semantic space is still very challenging.
The existing methods aim at learning a joint embedded

space to connect various 3D representations with texts, such
as voxel grids [6] and multi-view rendered images [11, 12].
However, due to the low resolution and self-occlusions, it
is hard for those methods mentioned above to improve the
ability of joint understanding of shapes and texts. On the
other hand, previous shape-text matching methods [6, 12,
37] usually take the global features of the entire 3D shape
for text matching, making it challenging to capture the local
geometries, and thus are not suitable for matching detailed
geometric descriptions.
Regional-based matching approaches are commonly
employed in the image-text matching task [21–23, 27],
whereby visual-text alignment is established at the semantic level to enhance the performance of retrieval. These
models compute the local similarities between regions and
words and then aggregate the local information to obtain
the global metrics between the heterogeneous pairs. However, these two-stage methods based on the pre-trained segmentation networks split the connection between matching
embeddings and segmentation prior information.
In this paper, we introduce an optimal transport based
shape-text matching method to achieve fine-grained alignment and retrieval of 3D shapes and texts, as shown in Figure 1. To mitigate the influence of low-resolution or selfocclusions, we directly represent the shape as point clouds
and learn a part-level segmentation prior. Afterward, we
leverage optimal transport to build the regional cross-modal
correspondences and achieve more precise retrieval results.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel end-to-end network framework
to learn the joint embedding of point clouds and
texts, which enables the bidirectional matching between parts from point clouds and words from texts.
• We leverage optimal transport theory to obtain the
best matches between parts and words and incorporate
Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) to describe the matching score.
• To the best of our knowledge, our proposed network

* Corresponding authors.

6884

