This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Test-Time Adaptation in Dynamic Scenarios
Longhui Yuan Binhui Xie Shuang Li
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
{longhuiyuan,binhuixie,shuangli}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

Test data stream
Fully TTA

Test-time adaptation (TTA) intends to adapt the pretrained model to test distributions with only unlabeled test
data streams. Most of the previous TTA methods have
achieved great success on simple test data streams such as
independently sampled data from single or multiple distributions. However, these attempts may fail in dynamic scenarios of real-world applications like autonomous driving,
where the environments gradually change and the test data
is sampled correlatively over time. In this work, we explore such practical test data streams to deploy the model
on the fly, namely practical test-time adaptation (PTTA).
To do so, we elaborate a Robust Test-Time Adaptation
(RoTTA) method against the complex data stream in PTTA.
More specifically, we present a robust batch normalization
scheme to estimate the normalization statistics. Meanwhile,
a memory bank is utilized to sample category-balanced data
with consideration of timeliness and uncertainty. Further, to
stabilize the training procedure, we develop a time-aware
reweighting strategy with a teacher-student model. Extensive experiments prove that RoTTA enables continual testtime adaptation on the correlatively sampled data streams.
Our method is easy to implement, making it a good choice
for rapid deployment. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/BIT-DA/RoTTA

1. Introduction
In recent years, many machine learning problems have
made considerable headway with the success of deep neural networks [13, 22, 33, 38]. Unfortunately, the performance of deep models drops significantly when training
data and testing data come from different distributions [59],
which limits their utility in real-world applications. To reduce the distribution shift, a handful of works focus on
transfer learning field [56], in particular, domain adaptation (DA) [17, 42, 45, 48, 69, 72] or domain generalization
(DG) [40, 41, 52, 71, 83], in which one or more different but
Corresponding author

Continual TTA
Non-i.i.d. TTA
Practical TTA
Category

Distribution

Correlation
sampling

Distribution
changing

Figure 1. We consider the practical test-time adaptation (TTA)
setup and compare it with related ones. First, Fully TTA [70]
adapts models on a fixed test distribution with an independently
sampled test stream. Then, on this basis, Continual TTA [73] takes
the continually changing distributions into consideration. Next,
Non-i.i.d. TTA [19] tries to tackle the correlatively sampled test
streams on a single test distribution, where the label distribution
among a batch of data deviates from that of the test distribution.
To be more practical, Practical TTA strives to connect both worlds:
distribution changing and correlation sampling.

related labeled datasets (a.k.a. source domain) are collected
to help the model generalize well to unlabeled or unseen
samples in new datasets (a.k.a. target domain).
While both DA and DG have extensively studied the
problem of distribution shifts, they typically assume accessibility to the raw source data. However, in many practical
scenarios like personal consumption records, the raw data
should not be publicly available due to data protection regulations. Further, existing methods have to perform heavy
backward computation, resulting in unbearable training
costs. Test-time adaptation (TTA) [3,11,16,24,26,54,65,81]
attempts to address the distribution shift online at test time
with only unlabeled test data streams. Unequivocally, TTA
has drawn widespread attention in a variety of applications,
e.g., 2D/3D visual recognition [2, 29, 49, 65, 82], multimodality [63, 64] and document understanding [15].
Prior TTA studies [7, 20, 70, 73] mostly concentrate on
a simple adaptation scenario, where test samples are independently sampled from a fixed target domain. To name a
few, Sun et al. [65] adapt to online test samples drawn from
a constant or smoothly changing distribution with an auxiliary self-supervised task. Wang et al. [70] adapt to a fixed

15922

