This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On Data Scaling in Masked Image Modeling
Zhenda Xie13 , Zheng Zhang3† , Yue Cao3† , Yutong Lin23 , Yixuan Wei13 , Qi Dai3 , Han Hu3
1
Tsinghua University 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Microsoft Research Asia
{t-zhxie, zhez, yuecao, t-yutonglin, t-yixuanwei, qi.dai, hanhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Scaling properties have been one of the central issues
in self-supervised pre-training, especially the data scalability, which has successfully motivated the large-scale selfsupervised pre-trained language models and endowed them
with significant modeling capabilities. However, scaling
properties seem to be unintentionally neglected in the recent trending studies on masked image modeling (MIM),
and some arguments even suggest that MIM cannot benefit from large-scale data. In this work, we try to break
down these preconceptions and systematically study the scaling behaviors of MIM through extensive experiments, with
data ranging from 10% of ImageNet-1K to full ImageNet22K, model parameters ranging from 49-million to onebillion, and training length ranging from 125K to 500K
iterations. And our main findings can be summarized in
two folds: 1) masked image modeling remains demanding large-scale data in order to scale up computes and
model parameters; 2) masked image modeling cannot benefit from more data under a non-overfitting scenario, which
diverges from the previous observations in self-supervised
pre-trained language models or supervised pre-trained vision models. In addition, we reveal several intriguing properties in MIM, such as high sample efficiency in large MIM
models and strong correlation between pre-training validation loss and transfer performance. We hope that our
findings could deepen the understanding of masked image modeling and facilitate future developments on largescale vision models. Code and models will be available at
https://github.com/microsoft/SimMIM .

1. Introduction
Masked Image Modeling (MIM) [3, 18, 44], which has
recently emerged in the field of self-supervised visual pretraining, has attracted widespread interest and extensive applications throughout the community for unleashing the superior modeling capacity of attention-based Transformer
The work is done when Zhenda Xie, Yutong Lin, and Yixuan Wei are
interns at Microsoft Research Asia. † Project co-leaders.

architectures [13, 26] and demonstrating excellent sample
efficiency and impressive transfer performance on a variety of vision tasks. However, most recent practices are
focused on the design of MIM methods, while the study
of scaling properties of MIM is unintentionally neglected,
especially the data scaling property, which successfully motivated the large-scale self-supervised pre-trained language
models and endowed them with significant modeling capabilities. Although previous works [8, 10, 17, 37, 45] have
explored several conclusions about the scaling properties of
vision models, most of their findings were obtained under a
supervised pre-training scheme or under a contrastive learning framework, so the extent to which these findings could
be transferred to MIM still needs to be investigated.
Meanwhile, with the emergence of Transformers [41] and
masked language modeling (MLM) [12, 31], the systematic
studies of scaling laws have already been explored in natural
language processing field [21, 23, 35], which provided ample
guidance for large models in recent years. The core finding
drawn from scaling laws [21] for neural language models
is that the performance has a power-law relationship with
each of the three scale factors – model parameters N, size of
dataset D, and amount of compute C respectively – when not
bottlenecked by the other two. This conclusion implies that
better performance can be obtained by scaling up these three
factors to the extent that the scaling laws are in effect, which
led to the subsequent developments of large scale language
models [16, 28, 29, 32, 33] that exhibit excellent modeling capabilities [4] on most language tasks. Therefore, it is natural
to ask whether MIM possesses the same scaling signatures
for vision models as the MLM method for language models,
so that the scaling up of vision models can catch up with
language models.
Though masked image modeling and masked language
modeling both belong to masked signal prediction, their property differences are also non-negligible due to the different
nature of vision and language. That is, the images are highly
redundant raw signals and words/sentences are semantically
rich tokens, which may result in different abilities of data
utilization, and it is thus debatable whether the observations
from language models could be reproduced in vision models.

10365

