This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoHuman: Animatable Human Neural Field from Monocular Video
Zhengming Yu1 , Wei Cheng1,2 , Xian Liu3 , Wayne Wu2 , Kwan-Yee Lin2, 3
1

SenseTime Research
3

Shanghai AI Laboratory

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

yuhuaijin36@gmail.com
alvinliu@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

2

chengwei@sensetime.com

wuwenyan0503@gmail.com

junyilin@cuhk.edu.hk

Animation

Novel view synthesis

Input: Monocular Video

Output: Animatable Avatar

Figure 1. Overview of MonoHuman. We present MonoHuman, which learns an animatable human neural field from monocular videos.
With monocular video input, our method can create an animatable human avatar that supports novel view synthesis and novel pose animation. Our code, models and demos are available at https://yzmblog.github.io/projects/MonoHuman.

Abstract
Animating virtual avatars with free-view control is crucial for various applications like virtual reality and digital entertainment. Previous studies have attempted to utilize the representation power of the neural radiance field
(NeRF) to reconstruct the human body from monocular
videos. Recent works propose to graft a deformation network into the NeRF to further model the dynamics of the human neural field for animating vivid human motions. However, such pipelines either rely on pose-dependent representations or fall short of motion coherency due to frameindependent optimization, making it difficult to generalize
to unseen pose sequences realistically. In this paper, we
propose a novel framework MonoHuman, which robustly
renders view-consistent and high-fidelity avatars under arbitrary novel poses. Our key insight is to model the deformation field with bi-directional constraints and explicitly leverage the off-the-peg keyframe information to reason
the feature correlations for coherent results. Specifically,
we first propose a Shared Bidirectional Deformation module, which creates a pose-independent generalizable deformation field by disentangling backward and forward deformation correspondences into shared skeletal motion weight
and separate non-rigid motions. Then, we devise a Forward
Correspondence Search module, which queries the correspondence feature of keyframes to guide the rendering net-

work. The rendered results are thus multi-view consistent
with high fidelity, even under challenging novel pose settings. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed MonoHuman over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Rendering a free-viewpoint photo-realistic view synthesis of a digital avatar with explicit pose control is an important task that will bring benefits to AR/VR applications, virtual try-on, movie production, telepresence, etc.
However, previous methods [32, 33, 58] usually require
carefully-collected multi-view videos with complicated systems and controlled studios, which limits the usage in general and personalized scenarios applications. Therefore,
though challenging, it has a significant application value
to directly recover and animate the digital avatar from a
monocular video.
Previous rendering methods [33] can synthesize realistic novel view images of the human body, but hard to animate the avatar in unseen poses. To address this, some recent methods deform the neural radiance fields (NeRF [27])
[32, 49] to learn a backward skinning weight of parametric models depending on the pose or individual frame index. They can animate the recovered human in novel poses
with small variations to the training set. However, as the

16943

