This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAT: LoCalization and IdentificAtion Cascade Detection Transformer
for Open-World Object Detection
Shuailei Ma 1 * Yuefeng Wang1 * Ying Wei1 2† Jiaqi Fan1
Thomas H. Li3 Hongli Liu4 Fanbing Lv4
1 Northeast University, Shenyang, China 2 Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University
3 School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
4 Changsha Hisense Intelligent System Research Institute Co., Ltd

Abstract
Open-world object detection (OWOD), as a more general and challenging goal, requires the model trained from
data on known objects to detect both known and unknown
objects and incrementally learn to identify these unknown
objects. The existing works which employ standard detection framework and fixed pseudo-labelling mechanism
(PLM) have the following problems: (𝑖) The inclusion of detecting unknown objects substantially reduces the model’s
ability to detect known ones. (𝑖𝑖) The PLM does not adequately utilize the priori knowledge of inputs. (𝑖𝑖𝑖) The
fixed selection manner of PLM cannot guarantee that the
model is trained in the right direction. We observe that humans subconsciously prefer to focus on all foreground objects and then identify each one in detail, rather than localize and identify a single object simultaneously, for alleviating the confusion. This motivates us to propose a
novel solution called CAT: LoCalization and IdentificAtion
Cascade Detection Transformer which decouples the detection process via the shared decoder in the cascade decoding way. In the meanwhile, we propose the self-adaptive
pseudo-labelling mechanism which combines the modeldriven with input-driven PLM and self-adaptively generates
robust pseudo-labels for unknown objects, significantly improving the ability of CAT to retrieve unknown objects. Experiments on two benchmarks, 𝑖.𝑒., MS-COCO and PASCAL VOC, show that our model outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods. The code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/xiaomabufei/CAT.

1. Introduction
Open-world object detection (OWOD) is a more practical detection problem in computer vision, making artifi* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Unknown

Unknown
Bee
Unknown

Flower

Frog
Unknown
Squirrel

Unknown
Cat

Bear

Figure 1. When faced with new scenes in open world, humans subconsciously focus on all foreground objects and then identify them
in detail in order to alleviate the confusion between the known and
unknown objects and get a clear view. Motivated by this, our CAT
utilizes the shared decoder to decouple the localization and identification process in the cascade decoding way, where the former
decoding process is used for localization and the latter for identification.

cial intelligence (AI) smarter to face more difficulties in real
scenes. Within the OWOD paradigm, the model’s life-span
is pushed by iterative learning process. At each episode, the
model trained only by known objects needs to detect known
objects while simultaneously localizing unknown objects
and identifying them into the unknown class. Human annotators then label a few of these tagged unknown classes
of interest gradually. The model given these newly-added
annotations will continue to incrementally update its knowledge without retraining from scratch.
Recently, Joseph et al. [21] proposed an open-world object detector, ORE, based on the two-stage Faster R-CNN
[38] pipeline. ORE utilized an auto-labelling step to obtain
pseudo-unknowns for training model to detect unknown objects and learned an energy-based binary classifier to distinguish the unknown class from known classes. However,
its success largely relied on a held-out validation set which

19681

