This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CIRCLE: Capture In Rich Contextual Environments
João Pedro Araújo1 , Jiaman Li1 , Karthik Vetrivel1 , Rishi Agarwal1 , Jiajun Wu1 ,
Deepak Gopinath2 , Alexander Clegg2 , C. Karen Liu1
1
Stanford University, 2 Meta AI

Figure 1. Example poses from CIRCLE captured from real human motion in a virtual environment.

Abstract
Synthesizing 3D human motion in a contextual, ecological environment is important for simulating realistic activities people perform in the real world. However, conventional optics-based motion capture systems are not suited
for simultaneously capturing human movements and complex scenes. The lack of rich contextual 3D human motion
datasets presents a roadblock to creating high-quality generative human motion models. We propose a novel motion
acquisition system in which the actor perceives and operates in a highly contextual virtual world while being motion captured in the real world. Our system enables rapid
collection of high-quality human motion in highly diverse
scenes, without the concern of occlusion or the need for
physical scene construction in the real world. We present
CIRCLE, a dataset containing 10 hours of full-body reaching motion from 5 subjects across nine scenes, paired with
ego-centric information of the environment represented in
various forms, such as RGBD videos. We use this dataset
to train a model that generates human motion conditioned
on scene information. Leveraging our dataset, the model
learns to use ego-centric scene information to achieve nontrivial reaching tasks in the context of complex 3D scenes.

To download the data please visit our website.

1. Introduction
Humans excel at interacting with complex environments,
effortlessly engaging in everyday tasks such as getting out
of a car while carrying a backpack or plugging a power cord
into an outlet behind a cabinet. The remarkably flexible and
compliant human body enables access to narrow or cluttered spaces where clear paths are not available. Synthesizing 3D human motion that reflects this ability to navigate
in highly contextual, ecological environments, such as our
homes, grocery stores, or hospital operating rooms, will significantly impact applications in Embodied AI, Computer
Animation, Robotics, and AR/VR.
Machine learning models have significantly advanced
the creation of 3D human motion and behaviors in recent
years. However, the success of the ML-approach hinges on
one condition—the human motion data for training models
must be of high quality, volume, and diversity. Traditional
motion capture (mocap) techniques focus on the “human
movement” itself, rather than the state of the environment in
which the motion takes place. While mocap can faithfully
record human kinematics, capturing humans in a contextual

21211

