This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Balanced Spherical Grid for Egocentric View Synthesis
Changwoon Choi1 , Sang Min Kim1 , Young Min Kim1,2
1
2

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University

𝜎(𝐱)

𝒢%

𝑐(𝐱, 𝐝)

tiny 𝑓()*

Render

=

Optimize

𝒢!

Ⓒ Ricoh

+
(a) Capturing 360° Video

𝒢!"#$ , 𝒢%"#$

"&$'

𝒢!

"&$'

, 𝒢%

(b) Balanced Spherical Feature Grid

(c) Free Viewpoint Rendering

Figure 1. We propose a practical solution to reconstruct large-scale scenes from a short egocentric video. (a) Our scalable capturing setup
observes the holistic environment by casually swiping a selfie stick with an omnidirectional camera attached. (b) Then we optimize our
balanced spherical feature grids which are tailored for the outward-looking setup. (c) EgoNeRF can quickly train and render high-quality
images at nearby positions. Project page: https://changwoon.info/publications/EgoNeRF

Abstract
We present EgoNeRF, a practical solution to reconstruct
large-scale real-world environments for VR assets. Given
a few seconds of casually captured 360 video, EgoNeRF
can efficiently build neural radiance fields. Motivated by
the recent acceleration of NeRF using feature grids, we
adopt spherical coordinate instead of conventional Cartesian coordinate. Cartesian feature grid is inefficient to represent large-scale unbounded scenes because it has a spatially uniform resolution, regardless of distance from viewers. The spherical parameterization better aligns with the
rays of egocentric images, and yet enables factorization for
performance enhancement. However, the naı̈ve spherical
grid suffers from singularities at two poles, and also cannot
represent unbounded scenes. To avoid singularities near
poles, we combine two balanced grids, which results in a
quasi-uniform angular grid. We also partition the radial
grid exponentially and place an environment map at infinity to represent unbounded scenes. Furthermore, with our
resampling technique for grid-based methods, we can increase the number of valid samples to train NeRF volume.
We extensively evaluate our method in our newly introduced
synthetic and real-world egocentric 360 video datasets, and
it consistently achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
With the recent advance in VR technology, there exists an increasing need to create immersive virtual environments. While a synthetic environment can be created by expert designers, various applications also require transferring
a real-world environment. Spherical light fields [4–6,26,28]
can visualize photorealistic rendering of the real-world environment with the help of dedicated hardware with carefully calibrated multiple cameras. A few works [3, 16] also
attempt to synthesize novel view images by reconstructing
an explicit mesh from an egocentric omnidirectional video.
However, their methods consist of complicated multi-stage
pipelines and require pretraining for optical flow and depth
estimation networks.
In this paper, we build a system that can visualize a largescale scene without sophisticated hardware or neural networks trained with general scenes. We utilize panoramic
images, as suggested in spherical light fields. However,
we acquire input with a commodity omnidirectional camera
with two fish-eye lenses instead of dedicated hardware. As
shown in Fig. 1 (a), the environment can be captured with
the omnidirectional camera attached to a selfie stick within
less than five seconds. Then the collected images observe
a large-scale scene that surrounds the viewpoints. We introduce new synthetic and real-world datasets of omnidirec-

16590

