This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Human Keypoints Estimation from Point Clouds in the Wild
without Human Labels
Zhenzhen Weng1 * Alexander S. Gorban2 Jingwei Ji2
Yin Zhou2 Dragomir Anguelov2
1 Stanford University

Mahyar Najibi2

2 Waymo

Abstract

Keypoint locations learned with

1. Introduction
Estimation of human pose in 3D is an important problem in computer vision and it has a wide range of applications including AR/VR, AI-assisted healthcare, and autonomous driving [4, 29, 32]. For autonomous systems, being able to perceive human poses from sensor data (e.g. LiDAR point clouds) is particularly essential to reason about
the surrounding environment and make safe maneuvers.
Despite the high level of interest in human pose estimation in the wild, only few papers approached outdoor 3D
keypoint detection using point cloud. A main reason is that
* Work done as an intern at Waymo.

In-the-wild
Point Cloud

Small amount
of labeled
point clouds

MLP

Downstream Fine-tuning

Pre-trained
Backbone

Training a 3D human keypoint detector from point
clouds in a supervised manner requires large volumes of
high quality labels. While it is relatively easy to capture
large amounts of human point clouds, annotating 3D keypoints is expensive, subjective, error prone and especially
difficult for long-tail cases (pedestrians with rare poses,
scooterists, etc.). In this work, we propose GC-KPL Geometry Consistency inspired Key Point Leaning, an approach for learning 3D human joint locations from point
clouds without human labels. We achieve this by our novel
unsupervised loss formulations that account for the structure and movement of the human body. We show that by
training on a large training set from Waymo Open Dataset
[21] without any human annotated keypoints, we are able
to achieve reasonable performance as compared to the fully
supervised approach. Further, the backbone benefits from
the unsupervised training and is useful in downstream fewshot learning of keypoints, where fine-tuning on only 10 percent of the labeled training data gives comparable performance to fine-tuning on the entire set. We demonstrated that
GC-KPL outperforms by a large margin over SoTA when
trained on entire dataset and efficiently leverages large volumes of unlabeled data.

Transformer
Encoder

Unsupervised Losses

3D keypoints

Figure 1. We present GC-KPL, a novel method for learning 3D human
keypoints from in-the-wild point clouds without any human labels. We
propose to learn keypoint locations using unsupervised losses that account
for the structure and movement of the human body. The backbone learns
useful semantics from unsupervised learning and can be used in downstream fine-tuning tasks to boost the performance of 3D keypoint estimation.

training a pedestrian pose estimation model requires large
amount of high quality in-the-wild data with ground truth
labels. Annotating 3D human keypoints on point cloud data
is expensive, time consuming and error prone. Although
there are a few existing point cloud datasets with ground
truth human poses [11, 13, 21], they are limited in terms
of the quantity of the 3D annotations and diversity of the
data. Therefore, fully-supervised human keypoint detectors
trained on such datasets do not generalize well for long tail
cases. For this reason, previous approaches on pedestrian
3D keypoint estimation have mainly focused on utilizing 2D
weak supervision [4, 32] which is easier to obtain, or leveraging signals from others modalities (e.g. RGB, depth) [29].
Nonetheless, there is a lot of useful information in the large
amount of unlabeled LiDAR data that previous works on
human pose estimation have not made an effort to utilize.

1158

