This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReLight My NeRF: A Dataset for
Novel View Synthesis and Relighting of Real World Objects
Marco Toschi*, Riccardo De Matteo∗,⋄ , Riccardo Spezialetti∗ , Daniele De Gregorio
Eyecan.ai
{marco.toschi, riccardo.spezialetti, daniele.degregorio}@eyecan.ai

Luigi Di Stefano, Samuele Salti
University of Bologna

Figure 1. A random subset of scenes from our dataset. Our dataset enables the study of joint novel view synthesis and relighting from
real images, as it provides scenes framed from the same viewpoint under varying light positions (shown along rows) as well as captured
from different viewpoints under the same light position (shown along columns).

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the problem of rendering novel
views from a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) under unobserved light conditions. To this end, we introduce a novel
dataset, dubbed ReNe (Relighting NeRF), framing real
world objects under one-light-at-time (OLAT) conditions,
annotated with accurate ground-truth camera and light
poses. Our acquisition pipeline leverages two robotic arms
holding, respectively, a camera and an omni-directional
point-wise light source. We release a total of 20 scenes
depicting a variety of objects with complex geometry and
challenging materials. Each scene includes 2000 images,
acquired from 50 different points of views under 40 different
OLAT conditions. By leveraging the dataset, we perform an
ablation study on the relighting capability of variants of the
vanilla NeRF architecture and identify a lightweight architecture that can render novel views of an object under novel
light conditions, which we use to establish a non-trivial
baseline for the dataset. Dataset and benchmark are available at https://eyecan-ai.github.io/rene.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering [29, 47, 52, 73] addresses the problem
of estimating the physical attributes of an object, such as its
geometry, material properties and lighting conditions, from
a set of images or even just a single one. This task is a
longstanding problem for the vision and graphics communities, since it unlocks the creation of novel renderings of
an object from arbitrary viewpoints and under unobserved
lighting conditions. An effective and robust solution to this
problem would have significant value for a wide range of
applications in gaming, robotics and augmented reality.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [36] has contributed tremendously to the novel view synthesis sub-task
of inverse rendering pipelines. By mapping an input 5D
vector (3D position and 2D viewing direction) to a 4D continuous field of volume density and color by means of a neural network, NeRF learns the geometry and appearance of a
single scene from a set of posed images. The appealing results in novel view synthesis have attracted a lot of attention
from the research community and triggered many follow-up
∗ Joint first authorship. ⋄ Work done while at Eyecan.ai

20762

