This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring and Utilizing Pattern Imbalance
Shibin Mei, Chenglong Zhao, Shengchao Yuan, Bingbing Ni*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
{adair327, cl-zhao, sc yuan, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we identify pattern imbalance from several aspects, and further develop a new training scheme to
avert pattern preference as well as spurious correlation. In
contrast to prior methods which are mostly concerned with
category or domain granularity, ignoring the potential finer
structure that existed in datasets, we give a new definition
of seed category as an appropriate optimization unit to distinguish different patterns in the same category or domain.
Extensive experiments on domain generalization datasets of
diverse scales demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, the rise of deep neural networks
(DNNs) has promoted the rapid development of various artificial intelligence communities [13, 20, 22]. Despite the
remarkable success, DNNs tend to take shortcuts to learn
spurious features [24, 27]. The causal correlation between
these spurious features and ground truth only exists in the
training set, which hinders the generalization of DNN models. This phenomenon is also known as domain shift. Moreover, due to the incomplete distribution of training data, the
learned model may have a preference for gender, race, and
skin color, which will lead to serious ethical problems.
To tackle these problems, various methods have been
proposed to discuss the failure modes of out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization [18, 30, 32, 43]. Some researchers focus on encouraging the model to learn domain invariant features. Ganin et al. [9] simultaneously optimize a standard
classifier and a domain classifier through adversarial training, where the features extracted by DNN can be used for
original classification but failed on domain recognition to
inhibit domain characteristics learning. Arjovsky et al. [1]
restrict the learned representations to be classified by similar optimal linear classifiers in different domains. Other
researchers start by avoiding spurious features. Zhang et
* Corresponding author.

al. [42] argue that there exist sub-networks with preferable
domain generalization ability in the model and represent the
sub-network through a learnable mask. Nam et al. [28] assume that the spurious features are generally embodied in
the texture or style of the image. They design SagNet to
decouple the content and style of the image, impelling the
feature extractor to pay more attention to the content information. Most of the above methods manually design specific model structures to handle domain generalization.
Instead of designing specific networks, we are more
concerned about solving domain generalization by exploring the character of the dataset. In particular, suppose a simple handwritten digit recognition scenario, where
a large amount of digit 0 possesses the red background and
digit 1 possesses the green background. The dataset with
only the above two patterns cannot be effectively learned,
since the model has no idea whether the task is to classify
the digits or the background color. Therefore, in a given
learnable data set, there must exist a minority of digit 0
with green background and digit 1 with red background.
These samples play a significant role in establishing the true
causal relationship between images and labels but have not
been paid enough attention. We call pattern imbalance the
phenomenon that different patterns in the same class appear imbalanced, thus leading to model learning preference.
Based on the above observations, we attribute the domain
generalization problem to the mining of hard or minority
patterns under imbalanced patterns. First of all, we identify the pattern imbalance in the dataset from several perspectives. We note that even though a model has achieved
favorable performance on average, Achilles’heel still exists
on some weak patterns. To alleviate the influence caused by
imbalance patterns, we pay more attention to these samples
of minority patterns and propose a training scheme based on
dynamic distribution. To this end, we define a new concept,
seed category, that is, the inherent pattern to distinguish, to
promote model training by paying full attention to various
patterns in the data set. Specifically, for samples of the same
class, the seed category is divided based on the distance of
the samples in the embedding space as a more fine-grained
weight allocation unit than previous methods [19, 32, 39].

7569

