This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

pCON: Polarimetric Coordinate Networks for Neural Scene Representations
Henry Peters∗,1 , Yunhao Ba∗,2 , Achuta Kadambi1,2
1
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, UCLA
hpeters@ucla.edu, yhba@ucla.edu, achuta@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Neural scene representations have achieved great success in parameterizing and reconstructing images, but current state of the art models are not optimized with the
preservation of physical quantities in mind. While current
architectures can reconstruct color images correctly, they
create artifacts when trying to fit maps of polar quantities. We propose polarimetric coordinate networks (pCON),
a new model architecture for neural scene representations
aimed at preserving polarimetric information while accurately parameterizing the scene. Our model removes artifacts created by current coordinate network architectures
when reconstructing three polarimetric quantities of interest. All code and data can be found at this link: https:
//visual.ee.ucla.edu/pcon.htm.

1. Introduction
Neural scene representations are a popular and useful
tool in many computer vision tasks, but these models are
optimized to preserve visual content, not physical information. Current state-of-the-art models create artifacts due to
the presence of a large range of spatial frequencies when reconstructing polarimetric data. Many tasks in polarimetric
imaging rely on precise measurements, and thus even small
artifacts are a hindrance for downstream tasks that would
like to leverage neural reconstructions of polarization images. In this work we present pCON, a new architecture for
neural scene representations. pCON leverages images’ singular value decompositions to effectively allocate network
capacity to learning the more difficult spatial frequencies
at each pixel. Our model reconstructs polarimetric images
without the artifacts introduced by state-of-the-art models.
The polarization of light passing through a scene contains a wealth of information, and while current neural representations can represent single images accurately, but they
produce noticeable visual artifacts when trying to represent

multiple polarimetric quantities concurrently.
We propose a new architecture for neural scene representations that can effectively reconstruct polarimetric images without artifacts. Our model reconstructs color images
accurately while also ensuring the quality of three important polarimetric quantities, the degree (ρ) and angle (ϕ) of
linear polarization (DoLP and AoLP), and the unpolarized
intensity Iun . This information is generally captured using
images of a scene taken through linear polarizing filters at
four different angles. Instead of learning a representation
of these images, our model operates directly on the DoLP,
AoLP and unpolarized intensity maps. When learning to
fit these images, current coordinate network architectures
produce artifacts in the predicted DoLP and unpolarized intensity maps. To alleviate this issue, we take inspiration
from traditional image compression techniques and fit images using their singular value decompositions. Images can
be compressed by reconstructing them using only a subset
of their singular values [28]. By utilizing different, nonoverlapping sets of singular values to reconstruct an image,
the original image can be recovered by summing the individual reconstructions together. Our model is supervised in
a coarse-to-fine manner, which helps the model to represent
both the low and and high frequency details present in maps
of polarimetric quantities without introducint noise or tiling
artifacts. A demonstration of the efficacy our model can be
seen in Fig. 1 and Table 1. Furthermore, our model is capable of representing images at varying levels of detail, creating a tradeoff between performance and model size without
retraining.

1.1. Contributions
To summarize, the contributions of our work include:
• a coordinate network architecture for neural scene representations of polarimetric images;
• a training strategy for our network which learns a series of representations using different sets of singular
values, allowing for a trade-off between performance
and model size without retraining;

* Equal contribution.

16579

