This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Ray: Learning a Generalizable Semantic Field with
Cross-Reprojection Attention
Fangfu Liu1,3 , Chubin Zhang2 , Yu Zheng2 , Yueqi Duan1†
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
1

{liuff19,zhangcb19,zhengyu19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, duanyueqi@tsinghua.edu.cn

Training Scenes

Semantic-NeRF

Semantic-Ray (Ours)
Scene K+1 Scene K+2

Scene 1

Scene K+3

Model 1

…

…

…

S-Ray

…

Scene K

⋯

⋯

⋯

Scene 1

Scene 1

Model K
Novel View Synthesis

Unseen Scenes

Ground Truth

Unseen Scenes Generalization

Scene K

S-Ray w/o ft

…

Scene K

Novel View Synthesis

S-NeRF w/o ft

S-Ray w/ 2k-iters ft

S-NeRF w/ 100k-iters ft

Figure 1. Top: Comparisons between Semantic-NeRF [61] and our method Semantic-Ray. Semantic-NeRF (S-NeRF for short) needs
to train one specific model for each scene, while our Semantic-Ray (S-Ray for short) trains one unified model on multiple scenes and
generalizes to unseen scenes. Bottom: Experimental comparisons between S-Ray and S-NeRF on generalization ability. We observe that
our network S-Ray can effectively fast generalize across diverse unseen scenes while S-NeRF fails in a new scene. Moreover, our result can
be improved by fine-tuning on more images for only 10 min (2k iterations), which achieves comparable quality with the Semantic-NeRF’s
result for 100k iterations per-scene optimization.

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to learn a semantic radiance field
from multiple scenes that is accurate, efficient and generalizable. While most existing NeRFs target at the tasks of
neural scene rendering, image synthesis and multi-view reconstruction, there are a few attempts such as Semantic† Corresponding author.

NeRF that explore to learn high-level semantic understanding with the NeRF structure. However, Semantic-NeRF simultaneously learns color and semantic label from a single
ray with multiple heads, where the single ray fails to provide rich semantic information. As a result, Semantic NeRF
relies on positional encoding and needs to train one specific
model for each scene. To address this, we propose Semantic
Ray (S-Ray) to fully exploit semantic information along the
ray direction from its multi-view reprojections. As directly

17386

