This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All in One: Exploring Unified Video-Language Pre-training
Jinpeng Wang1 , Yixiao Ge2 , Rui Yan1 , Yuying Ge4 , Kevin Qinghong Lin1 , Satoshi Tsutsui1 ,
Xudong Lin5 , Guanyu Cai1,6 , Jianping Wu7 , Ying Shan2 , Xiaohu Qie3 , Mike Zheng Shou1 *
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 ARC Lab,3 Tencent PCG
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 Columbia University 6 Tongji University 7 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Mainstream Video-Language Pre-training (VLP) models [10, 26, 64] consist of three parts, a video encoder, a
text encoder, and a video-text fusion Transformer. They
pursue better performance via utilizing heavier unimodal
encoders or multimodal fusion Transformers, resulting in
increased parameters with lower efficiency in downstream
tasks. In this work, we for the first time introduce an endto-end VLP model, namely all-in-one Transformer, that embeds raw video and textual signals into joint representations
using a unified backbone architecture. We argue that the
unique temporal information of video data turns out to be
a key barrier hindering the design of a modality-agnostic
Transformer. To overcome the challenge, we introduce a
novel and effective token rolling operation to encode temporal representations from video clips in a non-parametric
manner. The careful design enables the representation
learning of both video-text multimodal inputs and unimodal
inputs using a unified model. Our pre-trained all-in-one
Transformer is transferred to various downstream videotext tasks after fine-tuning, including text-video retrieval,
video-question answering, multiple choice and video captioning. State-of-the-art performances with the minimal
model FLOPs on ten datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method compared to the competitive counterparts. The code and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/showlab/all-in-one.

1. Introduction
Science advances rather steadily for most of the time,
but sometimes has a disruptive episode, where “an older
paradigm is replaced in whole or in part by an incompatible new one.” [24] In this regard, Video-Language Pretraining (VLP) models have recently experienced steady
progress, where joint representations are generally produced with a multimodal fusion network after extracting
* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Compare to mainstream video-language pre-training
methods. (a). Conventional methods [3, 10, 26, 64] use deep features from separate encoders before fusion. The fusion layer can
be light [3] or heavy [10,26,64]. (b). Ours All-in-one Transformer
learns video and text joint representations end-to-end from their
raw inputs. We also support fast retrieval by feeding unimodal inputs during inference. (c). Comparison of FLOPs and retrieval
performance on MSRVTT [53]. Our All-in-one brings excellent
results with modest computational cost.

the visual and language features through unimodal encoders
[10,26,50,64]. We are here to break it and replace them with
“an incompatible new one” that has NO unimodal encoders.
The pre-train and then fine-tune scheme, has become
a standard paradigm to learn transferable video-language
representations for a wide range of downstream video-text
tasks [6, 15, 52, 52, 53, 61]. Mainstream methods attempt to
boost the pre-training in two ways: i. adopting more expensive video/text encoders to obtain more powerful unimodal
features [3, 10] ii. designing heavier fusion networks to enhance the association between modalities [61, 64].
Instead of following these trends, we fundamentally rethink design decisions and develop the simplest and most
lightweight architecture that learns video-language representations from their raw inputs in an end-to-end manner.
Our model does not need any unimodal encoders (e.g., object detector in [64] or ResNet visual encoder in [26]) or
complex fusion layers, but embeds visual and text signals in
a unified manner, termed as All-in-one Transformer in our
paper. Our design is inspired by recent studies [1, 21, 37]

6598

