This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Finding Geometric Models by Clustering in the Consensus Space
Daniel Barath1 , Denys Rozumnyi2,1 , Ivan Eichhardt3,4 , Levente Hajder3 , Jiri Matas2
1
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zurich, Switzerland,
2
VRG, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, CTU in Prague, Czech Republic,
3
TMEIC Corporation Americas, Roanoke, VA, USA 4 Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary

Abstract
We propose a new algorithm for finding an unknown
number of geometric models, e.g., homographies. The
problem is formalized as finding dominant model instances
progressively without forming crisp point-to-model assignments. Dominant instances are found via a RANSAC-like
sampling and a consolidation process driven by a model
quality function considering previously proposed instances.
New ones are found by clustering in the consensus space.
This new formulation leads to a simple iterative algorithm
with state-of-the-art accuracy while running in real-time
on a number of vision problems – at least two orders of
magnitude faster than the competitors on two-view motion
estimation. Also, we propose a deterministic sampler reflecting the fact that real-world data tend to form spatially
coherent structures. The sampler returns connected components in a progressively densified neighborhood-graph.
We present a number of applications where the use of multiple geometric models improves accuracy. These include
pose estimation from multiple generalized homographies;
trajectory estimation of fast-moving objects; and we also
propose a way of using multiple homographies in global
SfM algorithms. Source code: https://github.com/
danini/clustering-in-consensus-space.

1. Introduction
Robust multi-instance model fitting is the problem of interpreting a set of data points as a mixture of noisy observations stemming from multiple instances of geometric
models. Examples for such a problem are the estimation
of plane-to-plane correspondences (i.e., homography matrices) in two images, and the retrieval of rigid motions in a
dynamic scene captured by a moving camera. In the stateof-the-art algorithms, finding an unknown number of model
instances is achieved by clustering the data points into disjoint sets, each representing a particular model instance.
Robustness is achieved by considering an outlier model.

Figure 1. Multi-homography fitting with the proposed method in
0.04 secs (left), and with Prog-X [4] in 1.48 secs (right). Prog-X
is one of the fastest SOTA algorithm. Outliers are not drawn.

Multi-instance model fitting has been studied since the
early sixties. The Hough-transform [22, 23] is perhaps the
first popular method for finding multiple instances of a single class [18, 37, 44, 67]. The RANSAC [16] algorithm was
as well extended to deal with finding multiple instances. Sequential RANSAC [25, 60] detects instances in a sequential
manner by repeatedly running RANSAC to recover a single instance and, then, removing its inliers from the point
set. The greedy approach that makes RANSAC a powerful
tool for recovering a single instance becomes its drawback
when estimating multiple ones. Points are assigned not to
the best but to the first instance, typically the one with the
largest support, for which they cannot be deemed outliers.
MultiRANSAC [71] forms compound hypotheses about n
instances. In each iteration, MultiRANSAC draws samples
of size n times m, where m is the number of points required
for estimating a model instance, e.g., m = 4 for homographies. Besides requiring the number n of the instances to be
known a priori, the increased sample size affects the problem complexity and, thus, the processing time severely.
Modern approaches for multi-model fitting [1, 3, 24, 32–
34, 40, 62, 66] follow a two-step procedure. First, they gen-

5414

