This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MELTR: Meta Loss Transformer for
Learning to Fine-tune Video Foundation Models
Dohwan Ko1 * Joonmyung Choi1 * Hyeong Kyu Choi1
Kyoung-Woon On2 Byungseok Roh2 Hyunwoo J. Kim1†
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University

2

Kakao Brain

{ikodoh, pizard, imhgchoi, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
{kloud.ohn, peter.roh}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Foundation models have shown outstanding performance and generalization capabilities across domains.
Since most studies on foundation models mainly focus on
the pretraining phase, a naive strategy to minimize a single task-specific loss is adopted for fine-tuning. However,
such fine-tuning methods do not fully leverage other losses
that are potentially beneficial for the target task. Therefore, we propose MEta Loss TRansformer (MELTR), a
plug-in module that automatically and non-linearly combines various loss functions to aid learning the target task
via auxiliary learning. We formulate the auxiliary learning as a bi-level optimization problem and present an efficient optimization algorithm based on Approximate Implicit Differentiation (AID). For evaluation, we apply our
framework to various video foundation models (UniVL,
Violet and All-in-one), and show significant performance
gain on all four downstream tasks: text-to-video retrieval,
video question answering, video captioning, and multimodal sentiment analysis. Our qualitative analyses demonstrate that MELTR adequately ‘transforms’ individual loss
functions and ‘melts’ them into an effective unified loss.
Code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/
MELTR.

1. Introduction
Large-scale models trained on a huge amount of data
have gained attention due to their adaptability to a wide
range of downstream tasks. As introduced in [1], deep
learning models with the generalizability are referred to
as foundation models. In recent years, several foundation
models for various domains have been proposed (e.g., [2, 3]
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

for natural language processing, [4, 5] for images and language, and [6–8] for videos) and they mainly focus on pretrain the model often with various multiple pretext tasks.
On the other hand, strategies for fine-tuning on downstream
tasks are less explored. For instance, a recently proposed
video foundation model UniVL [7] is pretrained with a linear combination of several pretext tasks such as text-video
alignment, masked language/frame modeling, and caption
generation. However, like other domains, fine-tuning is
simply performed by minimizing a single target loss. Other
potentially beneficial pretext tasks have remained largely
unexplored for fine-tuning.
Auxiliary learning is a natural way to utilize multiple
pretext task losses for learning. Contrary to multi-task
learning that aims for generalization across tasks, auxiliary
learning focuses only on the primary task by taking advantage of several auxiliary tasks. Most auxiliary learning
frameworks [9,10] manually selected auxiliary tasks, which
require domain knowledge and may not always be beneficial for the primary task. To automate task selection, meta
learning was integrated into auxiliary learning [11–13].
Here, the model learns to adaptively leverage multiple auxiliary tasks to assist learning of the primary task. Likewise,
the pretext task losses can be unified into a single auxiliary
loss to be optimized in a way that helps the target downstream task.
To this end, we propose Meta Loss Transformer
(MELTR), a plug-in module that automatically and nonlinearly transforms various auxiliary losses into a unified
loss. MELTR built on Transformers [14] takes the target task loss as well as pretext task losses as input and
learns their relationship via self-attention. In other words,
MELTR learns to fine-tune a foundation model by combining the primary task with multiple auxiliary tasks, and this
can be viewed as a meta-learning (or ‘learning-to-learn’)
problem. Similar to meta-learning-based auxiliary learning
frameworks [13,15], this can be formulated as a bi-level op-

20105

