This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoxFormer: Sparse Voxel Transformer for Camera-based
3D Semantic Scene Completion
Yiming Li1 Zhiding Yu2∗ Christopher Choy2 Chaowei Xiao2,3
Jose M. Alvarez2 Sanja Fidler2,4,5 Chen Feng1 Anima Anandkumar2,6
1
NYU 2 NVIDIA 3 ASU 4 University of Toronto 5 Vector Institute 6 Caltech

Abstract
Humans can easily imagine the complete 3D geometry of
occluded objects and scenes. This appealing ability is vital
for recognition and understanding. To enable such capability in AI systems, we propose VoxFormer, a Transformerbased semantic scene completion framework that can output complete 3D volumetric semantics from only 2D images.
Our framework adopts a two-stage design where we start
from a sparse set of visible and occupied voxel queries from
depth estimation, followed by a densification stage that generates dense 3D voxels from the sparse ones. A key idea of
this design is that the visual features on 2D images correspond only to the visible scene structures rather than the
occluded or empty spaces. Therefore, starting with the featurization and prediction of the visible structures is more
reliable. Once we obtain the set of sparse queries, we apply a masked autoencoder design to propagate the information to all the voxels by self-attention. Experiments on
SemanticKITTI show that VoxFormer outperforms the state
of the art with a relative improvement of 20.0% in geometry and 18.1% in semantics and reduces GPU memory during training to less than 16GB. Our code is available on
https://github.com/NVlabs/VoxFormer.

1. Introduction
Holistic 3D scene understanding is an important problem
in autonomous vehicle (AV) perception. It directly affects
downstream tasks such as planning and map construction.
However, obtaining accurate and complete 3D information
of the real world is difficult, since the task is challenged by
the lack of sensing resolution and the incomplete observation due to the limited field of view and occlusions.
To tackle the challenges, semantic scene completion
(SSC) [1] was proposed to jointly infer the complete scene
geometry and semantics from limited observations. An SSC
solution has to simultaneously address two subtasks: scene
reconstruction for visible areas and scene hallucination for
* Corresponding author: Zhiding Yu (zhidingy@nvidia.com)

Self-Attention

Cross-Attention

Output

Input: 2D Images

Query Proposals

Mask Token

3D Semantic Voxels

(a) A high-level architecture diagram of VoxFormer

75.9%

70.2%
49.6%

50.7%
20.0%

18.1%

(b) A comparison with the state of the art

Figure 1. (a) A diagram of VoxFormer for camera-based semantic scene completion that predicts complete 3D geometry and
semantics given only 2D images. After obtaining voxel query
proposals based on depth, VoxFormer generates semantic voxels
via an MAE-like architecture [3]. (b) A comparison against
the state-of-the-art MonoScene [4] in different ranges on SemanticKITTI [5]. VoxFormer performs much better in safetycritical short-range areas, while MonoScene performs indifferently at three distances. The relative gains are marked by red.

occluded regions. This task is further backed by the fact
that humans can naturally reason about scene geometry and
semantics from partial observations. However, there is still
a significant performance gap between state-of-the-art SSC
methods [2] and human perception in driving scenes.
Most existing SSC solutions consider LiDAR a primary modality to enable accurate 3D geometric measurement [6–9]. However, LiDAR sensors are expensive and
less portable, while cameras are cheaper and provide richer
visual cues of the driving scenes. This motivated the study
of camera-based SSC solutions, as first proposed in the pioneering work of MonoScene [4]. MonoScene lifts 2D image
inputs to 3D using dense feature projection. However, such
a projection inevitably assigns 2D features of visible regions
to the empty or occluded voxels. For example, an empty
voxel occluded by a car will still get the car’s visual feature.
As a result, the generated 3D features contain many ambi-

9087

