This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeuralUDF: Learning Unsigned Distance Fields
for Multi-view Reconstruction of Surfaces with Arbitrary Topologies
Xiaoxiao Long1,2† Cheng Lin2∗ Lingjie Liu3 Yuan Liu1 Peng Wang1
Christian Theobalt3 Taku Komura1 Wenping Wang4∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent Games
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics 4 Texas A&M University

Abstract
We present a novel method, called NeuralUDF, for reconstructing surfaces with arbitrary topologies from 2D images via volume rendering. Recent advances in neural rendering based reconstruction have achieved compelling results. However, these methods are limited to objects with
closed surfaces since they adopt Signed Distance Function
(SDF) as surface representation which requires the target
shape to be divided into inside and outside. In this paper, we propose to represent surfaces as the Unsigned Distance Function (UDF) and develop a new volume rendering
scheme to learn the neural UDF representation. Specifically, a new density function that correlates the property of
UDF with the volume rendering scheme is introduced for
robust optimization of the UDF fields. Experiments on the
DTU and DeepFashion3D datasets show that our method
not only enables high-quality reconstruction of non-closed
shapes with complex typologies, but also achieves comparable performance to the SDF based methods on the reconstruction of closed surfaces. Visit our project page at
https://www.xxlong.site/NeuralUDF/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing high-quality surfaces from multi-view
images is a long-standing problem in computer vision and
computer graphics. Neural implicit fields have become
an emerging trend in recent advances due to its superior
capability of representing surfaces of complex geometry.
NeRF [35] and its variants [2, 26, 27, 36, 40, 52] have recently achieved compelling results in novel view synthesis.
For each point in the 3D space, NeRF-based methods learn
two neural implicit functions based on volume rendering: a
volume density function and a view-dependent color function. Despite their successes in novel view synthesis, NeRFbased methods still struggle to faithfully reconstruct the ac* Corresponding authors.
† This work was conducted during an internship at Tencent Games.

Reference Images
Ours
NeuS [46]
Figure 1. We show three groups of multi-view reconstruction results generated by our proposed NeuralUDF and NeuS [46] respectively. Our method is able to faithfully reconstruct the highquality geometries for both the closed and open surfaces, while
NeuS can only model shapes as closed surfaces, thus leading to
inconsistent typologies and erroneous geometries.

curate scene geometry from multi-view inputs, because of
the difficulty in extracting high-quality surfaces from the
representation of volume density.
VolSDF [49] and NeuS [46] incorporate the Signed Distance Function (SDF) into volume rendering to facilitate
high-quality surface reconstruction in a NeRF framework.
However, as a continuous function with clearly defined inside/outside, SDF is limited to modeling only closed watertight surfaces. Although there have been efforts to modify
the SDF representation by learning an additional truncation
function (e.g., 3PSDF [5], TSDF [44]), their surface representations are still built upon the definition of SDF, thus
they are not suitable for representing complex topologies.
We therefore propose to employ the Unsigned Distance
Function (UDF) to represent surfaces in volume rendering.

20834

