This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clothed Human Performance Capture with a Double-layer Neural Radiance
Fields
Kangkan Wang∗1,2 , Guofeng Zhang3 , Suxu Cong1 , Jian Yang1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
2
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
3
State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, China
Abstract

This paper addresses the challenge of capturing performance for the clothed humans from sparse-view or monocular videos. Previous methods capture the performance of
full humans with a personalized template or recover the
garments from a single frame with static human poses.
However, it is inconvenient to extract cloth semantics and
capture clothing motion with one-piece template, while single frame-based methods may suffer from instable tracking
across videos. To address these problems, we propose a
novel method for human performance capture by tracking
clothing and human body motion separately with a doublelayer neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRFs). Speciﬁcally, we propose a double-layer NeRFs for the body and garments, and
track the densely deforming template of the clothing and
body by jointly optimizing the deformation ﬁelds and the
canonical double-layer NeRFs. In the optimization, we introduce a physics-aware cloth simulation network which
can help generate physically plausible cloth dynamics and
body-cloth interactions. Compared with existing methods, our method is fully differentiable and can capture both
the body and clothing motion robustly from dynamic videos.
Also, our method represents the clothing with an independent NeRFs, allowing us to model implicit ﬁelds of general
clothes feasibly. The experimental evaluations validate its
effectiveness on real multi-view or monocular videos.

1. Introduction
Performance capture for clothed humans is one of the
essential problems in the metaverse, and it not only captures the inner human body motion but also recovers the
outer clothing motion which has many promising applications such as virtual try-on, video editing, and telepresence.
From sparse-view or monocular videos of a moving human
∗ Corresponding author: wangkangkan@njust.edu.cn

21098

in general clothes, its goal is to recover the dynamic 3D
shape sequence of the human body and clothing simultaneously that are consistent with the observed frames in both
human shape and motion. This is a very challenging problem since the dynamic human could be with arbitrary motions and with complex non-rigid cloth deformations, and
the clothing in motion is difﬁcult to maintain physically
plausible interactions with the body.
Previous systems [4, 21, 38, 39] reconstruct 3D clothed
humans by using depth sensors or ﬁtting a personalized
template [9, 10, 37] to the image observations (e.g., body
joints and silhouettes). Only recovering one-piece geometry which uniﬁes the human body and clothes, these systems
fail to track the motion of the clothing and achieve clothing
editing on 3D humans, which are the prerequisites in many
VR/AR applications like virtual dressing. On the contrary,
cloth can be extracted and tracked from depth scans [26,40]
accurately by ﬁtting pre-built cloth templates to the scans
which have limited applications when 3D data are unavailable. Existing garment estimation methods [3, 12, 43, 44]
from color images require the person facing the camera and
in static poses. When the human is moving and the clothing is deforming, these methods may recover the 3D garments unreliably. Recent methods [16, 31] track body and
clothing motion simultaneously from videos, but they need
to re-build cloth template for a new performer and the running efﬁciency is very low due to online cloth simulation or
computationally-exhaustive optimization, which prohibits
them from being widely deployed for daily applications.
Recent works [20, 34, 41] adopt dynamic human NeRFs to capture human motion and obtain impressive tracking
results. By capturing the temporally-varying appearance in
the videos, dynamic NeRFs [34] can provide dense photometric constraints to track the deforming geometry of the
performer. However, they represent the human with a single NeRFs without modeling cloth, and the clothing motion
cannot be extracted. In this paper, we aim to track the cloth-

