This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

F2 -NeRF: Fast Neural Radiance Field Training with Free Camera Trajectories
Zhaoxi Chen2
Lingjie Liu3
Peng Wang1,2∗
Yuan Liu1 *
Ziwei Liu2
Taku Komura1
Christian Theobalt3
Wenping Wang4
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics 4 Texas A&M University

Abstract
NDC
warp

2

This paper presents a novel grid-based NeRF called F NeRF (Fast-Free-NeRF) for novel view synthesis, which
enables arbitrary input camera trajectories and only costs
a few minutes for training. Existing fast grid-based NeRF
training frameworks, like Instant-NGP, Plenoxels, DVGO,
or TensoRF, are mainly designed for bounded scenes and
rely on space warping to handle unbounded scenes. Existing
two widely-used space-warping methods are only designed
for the forward-facing trajectory or the 360◦ object-centric
trajectory but cannot process arbitrary trajectories. In this
paper, we delve deep into the mechanism of space warping to
handle unbounded scenes. Based on our analysis, we further
propose a novel space-warping method called perspective
warping, which allows us to handle arbitrary trajectories
in the grid-based NeRF framework. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that F2 -NeRF is able to use the same perspective warping to render high-quality images on two standard
datasets and a new free trajectory dataset collected by us.
Project page: totoro97.github.io/ projects/ f2-nerf .

(a) Forward-facing (LLFF)

…

Inv. sphere
Warp

…
(b) 360°, object-centric (NeRF-360)

…

…
(c) Free trajectory

1. Introduction
The research progress of novel view synthesis has advanced drastically in recent years since the emergence of the
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [24, 42]. Once the training
is done, NeRF is able to render high-quality images from
novel camera poses. The key idea of NeRF is to represent
the scene as a density field and a radiance field encoded
by Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) networks, and optimize
the MLP networks with the differentiable volume rendering
technique. Though NeRF is able to achieve photo-realistic
rendering results, training a NeRF takes hours or days due to
the slow optimization of deep neural networks, which limits
its application scopes.
Recent works demonstrate that grid-based methods, such
as Plenoxels [57], DVGO [38], TensoRF [6], and Instant* Equal contribution.

DVGO

Plenoxels

Instant-NGP

F2-NeRF

Ground truth

Figure 1. Top: (a) Forward-facing camera trajectory. (b) 360◦
object-centric camera trajectory. (c) Free camera trajectory. In
(c), the camera trajectory is long and contains multiple foreground
objects, which is extremely challenging. Bottom: Rendered images
of the state-of-the-art fast NeRF training methods and F2 -NeRF on
a scene with a free trajectory.

NGP [25], enable fast training a NeRF within a few minutes.
However, the memory consumption of such grid-based rep-

4150

