This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ANetQA: A Large-scale Benchmark for Fine-grained Compositional Reasoning
over Untrimmed Videos
Zhou Yu1

Lixiang Zheng1

Zhou Zhao2

Fei Wu2

Jianping Fan1, 3

Kui Ren4

Jun Yu1∗

1

2

School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China.
Colledge of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
3
AI Lab at Lenovo Research, China
4
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China

{yuz, lxzheng, yujun}@hdu.edu.cn, {zhaozhou, wufei, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn, jfan1@lenovo.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have enabled machines
to tackle complicated video-language tasks that involve
∗ Jun Yu is the corresponding author

blue

water

diver

jumping into

object
ocean
blue

person

black
headwear

wearing

black

diving gear

people suit up in diving
gear then jump into water
beginning of the video

in

swimming
sea turtle

blue
green
swimming
green

attribute

relationship

ocean
in

swimming

wrack
eating

crossing

green

sea turtle

identical
sea turtles graze and swim in the ocean
various fish are seen swimming through the reef

action
manta ray

fish
black
and
white

chasing

manta ray

reef

on

reef

a manta ray swims in the
ocean over a reef.
end of the video

Example QA pairs

similar templates

Building benchmarks to systemically analyze different
capabilities of video question answering (VideoQA) models
is challenging yet crucial. Existing benchmarks often
use non-compositional simple questions and suffer from
language biases, making it difficult to diagnose model
weaknesses incisively. A recent benchmark AGQA [8] poses
a promising paradigm to generate QA pairs automatically
from pre-annotated scene graphs, enabling it to measure
diverse reasoning abilities with granular control. However,
its questions have limitations in reasoning about the finegrained semantics in videos as such information is absent
in its scene graphs. To this end, we present ANetQA, a
large-scale benchmark that supports fine-grained compositional reasoning over the challenging untrimmed videos
from ActivityNet [4]. Similar to AGQA, the QA pairs
in ANetQA are automatically generated from annotated
video scene graphs. The fine-grained properties of ANetQA
are reflected in the following: (i) untrimmed videos with
fine-grained semantics; (ii) spatio-temporal scene graphs
with fine-grained taxonomies; and (iii) diverse questions
generated from fine-grained templates. ANetQA attains 1.4
billion unbalanced and 13.4 million balanced QA pairs,
which is an order of magnitude larger than AGQA with
a similar number of videos. Comprehensive experiments
are performed for state-of-the-art methods. The best model
achieves 44.5% accuracy while human performance tops
out at 84.5%, leaving sufficient room for improvement.

ANetQA (ours)

Q1: Is the diver jumping into the water before sea turtles graze
A: yes
and swim in the ocean?
Q2: What is the black object that the person is wearing before
A: diving gear
various fish are seen swimming through the reef?
Q3: What color is the swimming sea turtle before it is eating the wrack? A: green
Q4: What is the occupation of the person with black headwear?

A: diver

AGQA
Example QA pairs
Q1: Did the person twist the bottle after taking a picture?

A: yes

Q2: What did the person hold after putting a phone down?

A: bottle

Figure 1. Comparisons of ANetQA and AGQA [8]. The QA
pairs in both benchmarks are automatically generated from spatiotemporal scene graphs by using handcrafted question templates.
Benefiting from the untrimmed long videos and fine-grained
scene graphs, our questions require more fine-grained reasoning
abilities than those in AGQA when similar templates are applied.
Moreover, the newly introduced attribute annotations allow us to
design many fine-grained question templates that are not supported
in AGQA (e.g., “what color” and “what is the occupation”).

both video and language clues, e.g., video-text retrieval,
video captioning, video temporal grounding, and video
question answering. Among these tasks, video question
answering (VideoQA) is one of the most challenging tasks
as it verifies multiple skills simultaneously. Taking the
question “What is the black object that the person is
wearing before various fish are seen swimming through the
reef?” in Figure 1 as an example, it requires a synergistic
understanding of both the video and question, together with
spatio-temporal reasoning to predict an accurate answer.

23191

