This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Common Rationale to Improve Self-Supervised Representation for
Fine-Grained Visual Recognition Problems
Yangyang Shu

Anton van den Hengel

Lingqiao Liu*

School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide

1. Introduction
Recently, self-supervised representations Learning
(SSL) has been shown to be effective for transferring
the learned representations to different downstream
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Centre for Augmented Reasoning.
1 The source code will be publicly available at: https://github.
com/GANPerf/LCR

MoCo v2
VICReg

Self-supervised learning (SSL) strategies have demonstrated remarkable performance in various recognition
tasks. However, both our preliminary investigation and
recent studies suggest that they may be less effective in
learning representations for fine-grained visual recognition
(FGVR) since many features helpful for optimizing SSL objectives are not suitable for characterizing the subtle differences in FGVR. To overcome this issue, we propose learning an additional screening mechanism to identify discriminative clues commonly seen across instances and classes,
dubbed as common rationales in this paper. Intuitively,
common rationales tend to correspond to the discriminative
patterns from the key parts of foreground objects. We show
that a common rationale detector can be learned by simply exploiting the GradCAM induced from the SSL objective without using any pre-trained object parts or saliency
detectors, making it seamlessly to be integrated with the
existing SSL process. Specifically, we fit the GradCAM
with a branch with limited fitting capacity, which allows
the branch to capture the common rationales and discard
the less common discriminative patterns. At the test stage,
the branch generates a set of spatial weights to selectively
aggregate features representing an instance. Extensive experimental results on four visual tasks demonstrate that the
proposed method can lead to a significant improvement in
different evaluation settings.1

Ours

Abstract

Image

{yangyang.shu,anton.vandenhengel,lingqiao.liu}@adelaide.edu.au

Figure 1. GradCAM [30] visualization for MoCo v2 [18], VICReg [4] and our method on the CUB-200-2011, Stanford
Cars and FGVC Aircraft datasets. Compared with the existing method MoCo v2 and VICReg, which are prone to be distracted by background patterns, our method can identify features
from the foreground and potentially the key parts of the object.

tasks [2, 4, 5, 14, 18].
Methods such as contrastive
learning [7, 9, 16, 18] have demonstrated state-of-the-art
feature learning capability and have been intensively
studied recently. However, recent studies [11] suggest
that contrastive learning may have a “coarse-grained bias”
and could be less effective for fine-grained classification
problems whose goal is to distinguish visually similar
subcategories of objects under the basic-level category.
This phenomenon is rooted in fine-grained visual recognition (FGVR) properties and the training objective of SSL.
SSL tries to minimize a pretext task, e.g., contrastive learning minimizes the distance between same-instance features
while maximizing the distance among different-instance
features, and any visual patterns that could contribute to
loss minimization will be learned. On the other hand, the
discriminative patterns for FGVR can be subtle. It is more
likely to reside on key object parts. Thus, the feature learned

11392

