This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Factorized Metric Learning
Chengkun Wang1,2, * Wenzhao Zheng1,2, * Junlong Li1,2 Jie Zhou1,2 Jiwen Lu1,2,†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{wck20,zhengwz18,junlong-20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {jzhou,lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning a generalizable and comprehensive similarity
metric to depict the semantic discrepancies between images
is the foundation of many computer vision tasks. While existing methods approach this goal by learning an ensemble
of embeddings with diverse objectives, the backbone network still receives a mix of all the training signals. Differently, we propose a deep factorized metric learning (DFML)
method to factorize the training signal and employ different
samples to train various components of the backbone network. We factorize the network to different sub-blocks and
devise a learnable router to adaptively allocate the training
samples to each sub-block with the objective to capture the
most information. The metric model trained by DFML capture different characteristics with different sub-blocks and
constitutes a generalizable metric when using all the subblocks. The proposed DFML achieves state-of-the-art performance on all three benchmarks for deep metric learning including CUB-200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford Online Products. We also generalize DFML to the image classification task on ImageNet-1K and observe consistent improvement in accuracy/computation trade-off. Specifically,
we improve the performance of ViT-B on ImageNet (+0.2%
accuracy) with less computation load (-24% FLOPs). 1

1. Introduction
Learning good representations for images has always
been the core of computer vision, yet measuring the similarity between representations after obtaining them is an
equally important problem. Focusing on this, metric learning aims to learn a discriminative similarity metric under which the interclass distances are large and the intraclass distances are small. Using a properly learned similarity metric can improve the performance of downstream
tasks and has been employed in many applications such
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/wangck20/DFML.

Ensemble-based DML
Diverse
Objectives

Backbone

DFML
……

Factorized Metrics

Figure 1. Comparisons between ensemble-based deep metric
learning methods and DFML. Ensemble-based DML learns an
ensemble of embeddings where diverse objectives are employed.
Differently, DFML factorizes the backbone and learns a certain
routine for each sample to achieve the diversity of features, which
further boosts the generalization ability of the model on unseen
classes. (Best viewed in color.)

as semantic instance segmentation [7, 21, 37], remote sensing [5, 10, 31], and room layout estimation [77].
Modern metric learning methods [44, 55, 56, 78] usually
exploit deep neural networks to map an image to a single
embedding and use the Euclidean distance or cosine similarity between embeddings to measure the similarity. As a
single embedding might not be able to fully characterize an
image, a number of methods [1, 43, 47, 49, 72, 79, 80] begin
to explore using an ensemble of embeddings to represent
an image, where each embedding describes one attribute
of the image. The key to ensemble-based methods lies in
how to enforce diversity in the ensemble of embeddings so
that they can capture more characteristics. They achieve
this by using a diversity loss [47, 49], selecting different
samples [53, 72, 80], and adopting various tasks [43, 79],
etc. Most existing methods adopt a shared backbone network to extract a common feature and only apply a single
fully connected layer to obtain each specialized embedding.

7672

