This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFVS: Neural Radiance Fields for Free View Synthesis
via Geometry Scaffolds
Chen Yang1* , Peihao Li3 , Zanwei Zhou1 , Shanxin Yuan2 , Bingbing Liu2 ,
Xiaokang Yang1 , Weichao Qiu2 , Wei Shen1†
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Tsinghua University
{ycyangchen,SJTU19zzw,xkyang,wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn; lph21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
{shanxin.yuan,liu.bingbing,qiuweichao1}@huawei.com

Training View
Trajectory

…

Ours: 28.66

Ours: 24.79

NeRF: 28.16

NeRF: 18.91

Interpolation

Extrapolation

Training Views

Interpolation

Extrapolation

Figure 1. Illustration of the free view synthesis task. Free view synthesis aims at synthesizing photo-realistic images on both interpolation
and extrapolation setting. In this paper, we propose a novel method, NeRFVS, based on the neural radiance field (NeRF) [12] to achieve
indoor scene free view synthesis. Our NeRFVS significantly reduces the distortions and floaters (as also evidenced by the PSNR numbers),
producing high-quality images on interpolation and extrapolation setting.

Abstract
We present NeRFVS, a novel neural radiance fields
(NeRF) based method to enable free navigation in a room.
NeRF achieves impressive performance in rendering images for novel views similar to the input views while suffering for novel views that are significantly different from the
training views. To address this issue, we utilize the holistic priors, including pseudo depth maps and view coverage
information, from neural reconstruction to guide the learning of implicit neural representations of 3D indoor scenes.
Concretely, an off-the-shelf neural reconstruction method is
leveraged to generate a geometry scaffold. Then, two loss
functions based on the holistic priors are proposed to improve the learning of NeRF: 1) A robust depth loss that can
tolerate the error of the pseudo depth map to guide the ge* Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding Author.

ometry learning of NeRF; 2) A variance loss to regularize
the variance of implicit neural representations to reduce the
geometry and color ambiguity in the learning procedure.
These two loss functions are modulated during NeRF optimization according to the view coverage information to
reduce the negative influence brought by the view coverage
imbalance. Extensive results demonstrate that our NeRFVS
outperforms state-of-the-art view synthesis methods quantitatively and qualitatively on indoor scenes, achieving highfidelity free navigation results.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing an indoor scene from a collection of images and enabling users to navigate inside it freely is a core
component for many downstream applications. It is the
most challenging novel-view-synthesis (NVS) task, since it
requires high fidelity synthesis from any view, including not

16549

