This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weak-shot Object Detection through Mutual Knowledge Transfer
Xuanyi Du* , Weitao Wan*†, Chong Sun, Chen Li
WeChat, Tencent
{duxuanyi93, wanweitao1}@gmail.com, {waynecsun, chaselli}@tencent.com

Abstract
Weak-shot Object Detection methods exploit a fullyannotated source dataset to facilitate the detection performance on the target dataset which only contains imagelevel labels for novel categories. To bridge the gap between these two datasets, we aim to transfer the object
knowledge between the source (S) and target (T) datasets
in a bi-directional manner. We propose a novel Knowledge
Transfer (KT) loss which simultaneously distills the knowledge of objectness and class entropy from a proposal generator trained on the S dataset to optimize a multiple instance learning module on the T dataset. By jointly optimizing the classification loss and the proposed KT loss, the
multiple instance learning module effectively learns to classify object proposals into novel categories in the T dataset
with the transferred knowledge from base categories in the
S dataset. Noticing the predicted boxes on the T dataset can
be regarded as an extension for the original annotations on
the S dataset to refine the proposal generator in return, we
further propose a novel Consistency Filtering (CF) method
to reliably remove inaccurate pseudo labels by evaluating
the stability of the multiple instance learning module upon
noise injections. Via mutually transferring knowledge between the S and T datasets in an iterative manner, the detection performance on the target dataset is significantly improved. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks validate that the proposed method performs favourably against
the state-of-the-art methods without increasing the model
parameters or inference computational complexity.

1. Introduction
Recent rapid development of supervised object detection
models [17, 20, 22, 23] largely relies on massive humanannotated bounding boxes and category labels. Since obtaining these annotations, especially the bounding boxes,
are expensive and time-consuming on large-scale datasets,
it motivates the researches of alternative algorithms with
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed Mutual Knowledge Transfer
scheme for the weak-shot object detection task.

less annotation cost. Weakly Supervised Object Detection
(WSOD) methods [1,8,12,13,24,26,34] only require imagelevel object category labels to train an object detector on
a target dataset. Though the annotation cost is considerably reduced, a prominent performance gap exists between
WSOD and full-supervised models.
While noticing class-invariant visual evidence can be
transferred from base categories to unseen ones [14, 30],
researches [3, 15, 18, 32, 36] show that the WSOD performance can be further improved by utilizing an additional
source dataset with fully annotated data. This learning
paradigm is referred to as the Weak-shot Object Detection
(WSHOD) [21], for which a widely adopted model architecture is the combination of a proposal generator (PG)
trained on the source (S) dataset and a multiple instance
learning (MIL) module trained on the target (T) dataset.
The S dataset contains both object category and bounding
box annotations, while the T dataset has only image-level
category labels and the object categories are not overlapped
with those in the S dataset.
Although a well-trained PG on a full-annotated S dataset
can assist the training of the MIL module on the T dataset,
it is still essential to bridge the gap between these two
datasets for handling non-overlapping categories. Previous
efforts to address this issue mainly focus on transferring
the knowledge about base categories from the S dataset to
the T dataset by post-processing the predicted boxes [15]
or designing various transferring scores [18, 32]. Zhong et
al. [36] constrain the training of the MIL module by an ob-

19671

