This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Memory-friendly Scalable Super-resolution via Rewinding
Lottery Ticket Hypothesis
Jin Lin1 ,* Xiaotong Luo1 ,* Ming Hong1 , Yanyun Qu1†, Yuan Xie2†, Zongze Wu3
1 School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
2 School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3 School of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
{linjin, xiaotluo, mingh}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn,
yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, zzwu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

Model Scalability

Scalable deep Super-Resolution (SR) models are increasingly in demand, whose memory can be customized
and tuned to the computational recourse of the platform.
The existing dynamic scalable SR methods are not memoryfriendly enough because multi-scale models have to be
saved with a ﬁxed size for each model. Inspired by the success of Lottery Tickets Hypothesis (LTH) on image classiﬁcation, we explore the existence of unstructured scalable
SR deep models, that is, we ﬁnd gradual shrinkage subnetworks of extreme sparsity named winning tickets. In this
paper, we propose a Memory-friendly Scalable SR framework (MSSR). The advantage is that only a single scalable
model covers multiple SR models with different sizes, instead of reloading SR models of different sizes. Concretely,
MSSR consists of the forward and backward stages, the former for model compression and the latter for model expansion. In the forward stage, we take advantage of LTH with
rewinding weights to progressively shrink the SR model and
the pruning-out masks that form nested sets. Moreover,
stochastic self-distillation (SSD) is conducted to boost the
performance of sub-networks. By stochastically selecting
multiple depths, the current model inputs the selected features into the corresponding parts in the larger model and
improves the performance of the current model based on
the feedback results of the larger model. In the backward
stage, the smaller SR model could be expanded by recovering and ﬁne-tuning the pruned parameters according to
the pruning-out masks obtained in the forward. Extensive
experiments show the effectiveness of MMSR. The smallestscale sub-network could achieve the sparsity of 94% and
outperforms the compared lightweight SR methods.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

14398

20% sparsest sub-model

Model Deployment

L

40% sparse sub-model

M
H

*KVRU_

80% sparse sub-model
:S_n

:M_n
:S_w

100% whole model
:Cur_n
:M_w

:Free_n
:Cur_w

L :<20%

M :40%-80%

H :80%-100%

Figure 1. The ﬂowchart of scalable SR network. S n and S w
denote the neurons and the neural connections (weights) of the
simplest subnetwork; M n and M w denote the intermediate neurons and neural connections; Cur n and Cur w denote the speciﬁc
neurons and neural connections belonging to the current subnetwork. Free n denotes the pruning-out neurons. The ﬁnal model
(with 100% recovered parameters) reaches the original size. The
scalable model is adjustable to the memory resource allocation.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) aims to reconstruct
a high-resolution (HR) image from the corresponding lowresolution (LR) one. With the rising of deep learning, deep
SR methods have made incredible progress. However, the
existing SR models mostly require computational and memory resources, so they do not favor resource-limited devices
such as mobile phones, robotics, and some edge devices.
The lightweight SR methods are attracting more attention for better application to resource-limited devices.
The existing lightweight SR methods mainly focus on designing compact architectures [17, 20] with a ﬁxed size,
such as multi-scale pyramid [20], multiple-level receptive
ﬁelds [17, 18], and recursive learning [19]. However, most
lightweight SR models with ﬁxed sizes are not ﬂexible in
applications. If one model does not match the resources of

