This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Paint by Example: Exemplar-based Image Editing with Diffusion Models
Binxin Yang1 *
1

Shuyang Gu2
Xiaoyan Sun1

Bo Zhang2†
Ting Zhang2
Dong Chen2
Fang Wen2

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Xuejin Chen1

Microsoft Research Asia

Figure 1. Paint by Example. Users are able to edit a scene by painting with a conditional image. Our approach can automatically alter the
reference image and merge it into the source image, and achieve a high-quality result.

Abstract
Language-guided image editing has achieved great success recently. In this paper, we investigate exemplar-guided
image editing for more precise control. We achieve this
goal by leveraging self-supervised training to disentangle
and re-organize the source image and the exemplar. However, the naive approach will cause obvious fusing artifacts.
We carefully analyze it and propose a content bottleneck
and strong augmentations to avoid the trivial solution of directly copying and pasting the exemplar image. Meanwhile,
to ensure the controllability of the editing process, we design an arbitrary shape mask for the exemplar image and
leverage the classiﬁer-free guidance to increase the similarity to the exemplar image. The whole framework involves
a single forward of the diffusion model without any iterative optimization. We demonstrate that our method achieves
an impressive performance and enables controllable editing on in-the-wild images with high ﬁdelity. The code and
* Work is done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

pretrained models are available at https://github.
com/Fantasy-Studio/Paint-by-Example.

1. Introduction
Creative editing for photos has become a ubiquitous need
due to the advances in a plethora of social media platforms. AI-based techniques [37] signiﬁcantly lower the
barrier of fancy image editing that traditionally requires
specialized software and labor-intensive manual operations.
Deep neural networks can now produce compelling results for various low-level image editing tasks, such as image inpainting [61, 68], composition [41, 67, 72], colorization [53,71,74] and aesthetic enhancement [7,11], by learning from richly available paired data. A more challenging scenario, on the other hand, is semantic image editing,
which intends to manipulate the high-level semantics of image content while preserving image realism. Tremendous
efforts [2, 5, 36, 49, 55, 57] have been made along this way,
mostly relying on the semantic latent space of generative
models, e.g., GANs [16, 28, 70], yet the majority of existing
works are limited to speciﬁc image genres.

18381

