This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Human-to-Robot Handovers from Point Clouds
Sammy Christen1,2∗
Otmar Hilliges1
1

ETH Zurich

Wei Yang2
Dieter Fox2,3
2

NVIDIA

3

Claudia Pérez-D’Arpino2
Yu-Wei Chao2

University of Washington

{sammy.christen, otmar.hilliges}@inf.ethz.ch {weiy, claudiap, dieterf, ychao}@nvidia.com

Train in Simulation (Bullet)
Camera
Human Hand

t

Test

Transfer + Test

Camera Input

Egocentric PoV

Depth + Segmentation

Point Cloud

Test in Sim (Bullet)

Sim-to-Sim (Isaac Gym)

Sim-to-Real

Figure 1. We introduce a framework to learn human-to-robot handover policies from point cloud input. Our policies take input from a wrist
mounted camera and directly generate action output for the robot’s end effector. We train our policies in a simulated handover environment,
and evaluate on unseen handover motion and poses. We further transfer the model across physics simulators and to a real robotic platform.

Abstract
We propose the first framework to learn control policies
for vision-based human-to-robot handovers, a critical task
for human-robot interaction. While research in Embodied
AI has made significant progress in training robot agents in
simulated environments, interacting with humans remains
challenging due to the difficulties of simulating humans.
Fortunately, recent research has developed realistic simulated environments for human-to-robot handovers. Leveraging this result, we introduce a method that is trained with
a human-in-the-loop via a two-stage teacher-student framework that uses motion and grasp planning, reinforcement
learning, and self-supervision. We show significant performance gains over baselines on a simulation benchmark,
sim-to-sim transfer and sim-to-real transfer. Video and code
are available at https://handover-sim2real.github.io.

1. Introduction
Handing over objects between humans and robots is an
important tasks for human-robot interaction (HRI) [35]. It
* This work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.

allows robots to assist humans in daily collaborative activities, such as helping to prepare a meal, or to exchange tools
and parts with human collaborators in manufacturing settings. To complete these tasks successfully and safely, intricate coordination between human and robot is required.
This is challenging, because the robot has to react to human
behavior, while only having access to sparse sensory inputs
such as a single camera with limited field of view. Therefore, a need for methods that solve interactive tasks such as
handovers purely from vision input arises.
Bootstrapping robot training in the real world can be unsafe and time-consuming. Therefore, recent trends in Embodied AI have focused on training agents to act and interact
in simulated (sim) environments [11, 12, 19, 43, 45, 46, 51].
With advances in rendering and physics simulation, models
have been trained to map raw sensory input to action output, and can even be directly transferred from simulation to
the real world [2, 42]. Many successes have been achieved
particularly around the suite of tasks of robot navigation,
manipulation, or a combination of both. In contrast to these
areas, little progress has been made around tasks pertained
to HRI. This is largely hindered by the challenges in embedding realistic human agents in these environments, since

9654

