This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientSCI: Densely Connected Network with Space-time Factorization for
Large-scale Video Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Lishun Wang 1,2,∗ , Miao Cao 3,4, * , and Xin Yuan 3,†
Chengdu Institute of Computer Application Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 Westlake University, 4 Zhejiang University
1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Traditional high-speed camera imaging methods usually
suffer from high hardware and storage transmission cost.
Inspired by compressed sensing (CS) [5, 9], video snapshot
compressive imaging (SCI) [45] provides an elegant solution. As shown in Fig. 2, video SCI consists of a hardware
encoder and a software decoder. In the encoder part, multiple raw video frames are modulated by different masks and
* Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author

PSNR (dB)

Video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) uses a twodimensional detector to capture consecutive video frames
during a single exposure time. Following this, an efficient reconstruction algorithm needs to be designed to reconstruct the desired video frames. Although recent deep
learning-based state-of-the-art (SOTA) reconstruction algorithms have achieved good results in most tasks, they
still face the following challenges due to excessive model
complexity and GPU memory limitations: 1) these models
need high computational cost, and 2) they are usually unable to reconstruct large-scale video frames at high compression ratios. To address these issues, we develop an efficient network for video SCI by using dense connections
and space-time factorization mechanism within a single
residual block, dubbed EfficientSCI. The EfficientSCI network can well establish spatial-temporal correlation by using convolution in the spatial domain and Transformer in
the temporal domain, respectively. We are the first time to
show that an UHD color video with high compression ratio can be reconstructed from a snapshot 2D measurement
using a single end-to-end deep learning model with PSNR
above 32 dB. Extensive results on both simulation and real
data show that our method significantly outperforms all previous SOTA algorithms with better real-time performance.
The code is at https://github.com/ucaswangls/
EfficientSCI.git.

Testing time (s)
Figure 1. Comparison of reconstruction quality (average PSNR in
dB on 6 benchmark grayscale datasets) and testing time of several
SOTA deep learning based algorithms. Our proposed EfficientSCI
achieves higher reconstruction quality with fewer parameters and
shorter testing time.

then integrated by the camera to get a compressed measurement, giving low-speed cameras the ability to capture highspeed scenes. For the decoding part, the desired high-speed
video is retrieved by the reconstruction algorithm using the
captured measurement and masks.
So far, many mature SCI imaging systems [14, 24, 31]
have been built, but for the decoding part, there are still
many challenges. In particular, although the model-based
methods [21, 43, 44] have good flexibility and can reconstruct videos with different resolutions and compression
rates, they require long reconstruction time and can only
achieve poor reconstruction quality. In order to improve the
reconstruction quality and running speed, PnP-FFDNet [46]
and PnP-FastDVDnet [47] integrate the pre-trained denoising network into an iterative optimization algorithm. However, they still need a long reconstruction time on largescale datasets, e.g., PnP-FastDVDNet takes hours to reconstruct a UHD video from a single measurement.
By contrast, deep learning based methods [28,30,35,40]

18477

