This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diverse Embedding Expansion Network and Low-Light Cross-Modality
Benchmark for Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification
Yukang Zhang1,2 , Hanzi Wang1,2,3 *
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, 200232, China.
1

Abstract

Embeddings
CNN

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match a given
person with gallery images captured by different cameras
[3, 9, 52]. Most existing ReID methods [22, 24, 30, 38, 50]
only focus on matching RGB images captured by visible
cameras at daytime. However, these methods may fail
* Corresponding author.

VIS image

0

IR image

VIS image
IR image

dimension

(a) Feature Learning without the proposed DEEN
Embeddings

CNN
with DEEN

VIS image

IR image

amplitude

For the visible-infrared person re-identification
(VIReID) task, one of the major challenges is the
modality gaps between visible (VIS) and infrared (IR)
images. However, the training samples are usually limited, while the modality gaps are too large, which leads
that the existing methods cannot effectively mine diverse
cross-modality clues. To handle this limitation, we propose
a novel augmentation network in the embedding space,
called diverse embedding expansion network (DEEN).
The proposed DEEN can effectively generate diverse embeddings to learn the informative feature representations
and reduce the modality discrepancy between the VIS
and IR images. Moreover, the VIReID model may be
seriously affected by drastic illumination changes, while
all the existing VIReID datasets are captured under sufficient illumination without significant light changes. Thus,
we provide a low-light cross-modality (LLCM) dataset,
which contains 46,767 bounding boxes of 1,064 identities
captured by 9 RGB/IR cameras. Extensive experiments
on the SYSU-MM01, RegDB and LLCM datasets show
the superiority of the proposed DEEN over several other
state-of-the-art methods. The code and dataset are released
at: https://github.com/ZYK100/LLCM

amplitude

zhangyk@stu.xmu.edu.cn, hanzi.wang@xmu.edu.cn

0

VIS image
IR image

dimension

(b) Feature Learning with the proposed DEEN

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed DEEN, which aims to generate diverse embeddings to make the network focus on learning
with the informative feature representations to reduce the modality
gaps between the VIS and IR images.

to achieve encouraging results when visible cameras cannot effectively capture person’s information under complex
conditions, such as at night or low-light environments. To
solve this problem, some visible (VIS)-infrared (IR) person re-identification (VIReID) methods [15,39,41,48] have
been proposed to retrieve the VIS (IR) images according to
the corresponding IR (VIS) images.
Compared with the widely studied person ReID task,
the VIReID task is much more challenging due to the additional cross-modality discrepancy between the VIS and
IR images [33, 45, 49, 51]. Typically, there are two popular types of methods to reduce this modality discrepancy.
One type is the feature-level methods [5, 11, 16, 35, 40, 42],
which try to project the VIS and IR features into a common
embedding space, where the modality discrepancy can be
minimized. However, the large modality discrepancy makes
these methods difficult to project the cross-modality images
into a common feature space directly. The other type is the
image-level methods [4,28,29,32], which aim to reduce the
modality discrepancy by translating an IR (or VIS) image
12153

