This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Weakly Supervised Temporal Action Localization
by Bridging Train-Test Gap in Pseudo Labels
Jingqiu Zhou 1 Linjiang Huang1,2 * Liang Wang4 Si Liu5 Hongsheng Li1,2,3
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence, Hong Kong
3
Xidian Uniersity
4
Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of Science
5
Beihang University
1155167063@link.cuhk.edu.hk, ljhuang524@gmail.com, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The task of weakly supervised temporal action localization targets at generating temporal boundaries for actions
of interest, meanwhile the action category should also be
classified. Pseudo-label-based methods, which serve as
an effective solution, have been widely studied recently.
However, existing methods generate pseudo labels during
training and make predictions during testing under different pipelines or settings, resulting in a gap between training and testing. In this paper, we propose to generate
high-quality pseudo labels from the predicted action boundaries. Nevertheless, we note that existing post-processing,
like NMS, would lead to information loss, which is insufficient to generate high-quality action boundaries. More
importantly, transforming action boundaries into pseudo
labels is quite challenging, since the predicted action instances are generally overlapped and have different confidence scores. Besides, the generated pseudo-labels can be
fluctuating and inaccurate at the early stage of training. It
might repeatedly strengthen the false predictions if there is
no mechanism to conduct self-correction. To tackle these
issues, we come up with an effective pipeline for learning better pseudo labels. Firstly, we propose a Gaussian
weighted fusion module to preserve information of action
instances and obtain high-quality action boundaries. Second, we formulate the pseudo-label generation as an optimization problem under the constraints in terms of the confidence scores of action instances. Finally, we introduce
the idea of ∆ pseudo labels, which enables the model with
the ability of self-correction. Our method achieves superior performance to existing methods on two benchmarks,
THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.3, achieving gains of 1.9%
on THUMOS14 and 3.7% on ActivityNet1.3 in terms of average mAP. Our code is available at https://github.

* Corresponding author.

com/zhou745/GauFuse_WSTAL.git.

1. Introduction
The task of temporal action localization seeks to identify the action boundaries and to recognize action categories
that are performed in the video. Action localization can
contribute to video understanding, editing, etc. Previous
works [3, 19, 20, 43, 51] mainly solved this task in the fully
supervised setting, which requires both video-level labels
and frame-wise annotations. However, frame-wisely annotating videos is labor-intensive and time-consuming. To reduce the annotation cost, researchers start to focus on the
weakly supervised setting. Considering the rich video resources from various video websites and apps, weakly supervised setting would save tremendous annotation efforts.
Unlike its supervised counterpart, the weakly supervised
temporal action localization task only requires video-level
category labels. The existing works mainly follow the
localization-by-classification pipeline [40, 50], which trains
a video-level classifier with category labels [32], and applies the trained classifier to each video snippet1 . However,
due to the lack of fine-grained annotations, the model may
assign high confidence to incorrect snippets such as the contextual background, which typically has a high correlation
with the video-level labels, or only focus on the salient snippets, leading to incomplete localization results. There are
many studies [21, 23, 25] that tried to address this discrepancy between classification and localization, and one of the
promising solutions is to generate and utilize pseudo labels.
The advantage of using pseudo labels is that snippets
are supervised with snippet-wise labels instead of videolevel labels. Existing works [28, 36, 46, 47] achieve remarkable results by introducing pseudo labels into this prob1 We view snippets as the smallest granularity since the high-level features of consecutive frames vary smoothly over time [12, 42]. In our work,
we treat every 16 frames as a snippet

23003

