This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

M6 Doc: A Large-Scale Multi-Format, Multi-Type, Multi-Layout,
Multi-Language, Multi-Annotation Category Dataset for
Modern Document Layout Analysis
Hiuyi Cheng1 , Peirong Zhang1 , Sihang Wu2 , Jiaxin Zhang1 ,
Qiyuan Zhu2 , Zecheng Xie2 , Jing Li2 , Kai Ding3 , and Lianwen Jin1*
1
South China University of Technology
2
Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd.
3
IntSig Information Co., Ltd.
{eechenghiuyi, eeprzhang, msjxzhang}@mail.scut.edu.cn, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn, danny ding@intsig.net,
{wusihang2, zhuqiyuan2, xiezecheng1, lijing260}@huawei.com

Abstract
Document layout analysis is a crucial prerequisite for
document understanding, including document retrieval and
conversion. Most public datasets currently contain only
PDF documents and lack realistic documents. Models trained on these datasets may not generalize well to
real-world scenarios. Therefore, this paper introduces a
large and diverse document layout analysis dataset called
M 6 Doc. The M 6 designation represents six properties:
(1) Multi-Format (including scanned, photographed, and
PDF documents); (2) Multi-Type (such as scientific articles, textbooks, books, test papers, magazines, newspapers, and notes); (3) Multi-Layout (rectangular, Manhattan,
non-Manhattan, and multi-column Manhattan); (4) MultiLanguage (Chinese and English); (5) Multi-Annotation
Category (74 types of annotation labels with 237,116 annotation instances in 9,080 manually annotated pages);
and (6) Modern documents. Additionally, we propose a
transformer-based document layout analysis method called
TransDLANet, which leverages an adaptive element matching mechanism that enables query embedding to better
match ground truth to improve recall, and constructs a
segmentation branch for more precise document image instance segmentation. We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of M 6 Doc with various layout analysis methods and
demonstrate its effectiveness. TransDLANet achieves stateof-the-art performance on M 6 Doc with 64.5% mAP. The
M 6 Doc dataset will be available at https://github.
com/HCIILAB/M6Doc.

Figure 1. Examples of complex page layouts across different document formats, types, layouts, languages.

1. Introduction
* Corresponding Author.

Document layout analysis (DLA) is a fundamental preprocessing task for modern document understanding and
15138

