This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Curricular Object Manipulation in LiDAR-based Object Detection
Ziyue Zhu1 * Qiang Meng2 * Xiao Wang2 Ke Wang2 Liujiang Yan2 Jian Yang1†
1
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Visual Computing and Intelligent Perception,
College of Computer Science, Nankai University 2 Didi Chuxing
zhuziyue@mail.nankai.edu.cn

irvingmeng@didiglobal.com

Abstract
This paper explores the potential of curriculum learning in LiDAR-based 3D object detection by proposing a
curricular object manipulation (COM) framework. The
framework embeds the curricular training strategy into both
the loss design and the augmentation process. For the
loss design, we propose the COMLoss to dynamically predict object-level difficulties and emphasize objects of different difficulties based on training stages. On top of the
widely-used augmentation technique called GT-Aug in LiDAR detection tasks, we propose a novel COMAug strategy
which first clusters objects in ground-truth database based
on well-designed heuristics. Group-level difficulties rather
than individual ones are then predicted and updated during
training for stable results. Model performance and generalization capabilities can be improved by sampling and augmenting progressively more difficult objects into the training samples. Extensive experiments and ablation studies reveal the superior and generality of the proposed framework.
The code is available at https://github.com/ZZY816/COM.

1. Introduction
LiDAR sensors can provide accurate, high-definition 3D
measurements of the surrounding environment. Such 3D information plays a noninterchangeable role in safety-critical
applications like 3D object detection in self-driving. However, the rich 3D information from LiDAR sensors does not
come without problems. Usually presented in the form of
a point cloud, LiDAR data suffers from (i) non-uniformity:
the point density decreases monotonically as the laser range
increases; (ii) orderless: the geometry of a point cloud remains unchanged even if all of its points are randomly shuffled. (iii) sparsity: when quantized into voxel grids, a significant portion of the voxels are empty;
To build a robust and performant LiDAR object detector,
* The first two authors have equal contribution to this work.
† Jian Yang is the corresponding author (csjyang@nankai.edu.cn).

(a) Early stage.

(b) Later stage.

Figure 1. The proposed Curricular Object Manipulation (COM)
works in an easy-to-hard manner. In early stages, COMAug constrains the augmented objects (highlighted in red) to be easy ones
and COMLoss down-weights losses from difficult objects (marked
in boxes with thin lines). Objects with varying degrees of difficulty are inserted into the point clouds in later stages. On the other
hand, hard objects will contribute more to loss values as training
progresses. Best viewed in color.

different data representations have been explored to alleviate the non-uniformity and orderless challenges. Feature
extraction from the raw orderless point cloud can be made
possible by performing radius search or nearest neighbor
search in the 3D Euclidean space [6, 32, 41, 56]. Another
popular solution is to quantize the input point cloud into a
fixed grid of voxels [61] or pillars of voxels [21]. At the
price of quantization error, later processing can be done efficiently on the regular voxel pillars or grids [52].
But these different data representations do not change
the sparsity of the LiDAR point cloud data. Compared with
image object detection tasks, sparse point clouds contain
much less input stimuli and positive samples for neural network training, as depicted in Figure 1. Thus, effective data
augmentation strategies are critical for faster model convergence and better detection performance [13, 18, 31, 50,
52]. Among them, GT-Aug [52] (see Figure 2) is widely
adopted. GT-Aug first aggregates ground truth labels from
the training dataset into a database. During training, randomly selected samples from the database are inserted into

1125

