This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Filtering, Distillation, and Hard Negatives for Vision-Language Pre-Training
Filip Radenovic1 , Abhimanyu Dubey1⇤ , Abhishek Kadian1⇤ , Todor Mihaylov1⇤ , Simon Vandenhende1⇤
Yash Patel2† , Yi Wen1 , Vignesh Ramanathan1 and Dhruv Mahajan1‡
1
Meta AI 2 CTU in Prague

1. Introduction
An increasingly popular paradigm in multimodal learning is contrastive pre-training [11, 28, 41, 43, 62, 76, 85, 87],
which involves training multimodal models on very largescale noisy datasets of image-text pairs sourced from the
web. It has been shown to be incredibly effective for a variety of vision-language tasks without any task-specific finetuning (i.e., zero-shot), such as image classification [65],
text and image retrieval [45, 59], visual question answering [21], among several others. In this paper, we study
the problem of contrastive pre-training for dual-encoder architectures [62] with the objective of improving image-text
alignment for zero-shot tasks. We revisit three important
aspects of the contrastive pre-training pipeline – noise in
* Equal contribution. † Work done at Meta AI. ‡ Research Lead.

COCO (T2I)

Flickr (T2I)

50

79

75

45

74

Recall@1

Accuracy@1

Vision-language models trained with contrastive learning on large-scale noisy data are becoming increasingly
popular for zero-shot recognition problems. In this paper
we improve the following three aspects of the contrastive
pre-training pipeline: dataset noise, model initialization
and the training objective. First, we propose a straightforward filtering strategy titled Complexity, Action, and Textspotting (CAT) that significantly reduces dataset size, while
achieving improved performance across zero-shot visionlanguage tasks. Next, we propose an approach titled Concept Distillation to leverage strong unimodal representations for contrastive training that does not increase training complexity while outperforming prior work. Finally, we
modify the traditional contrastive alignment objective, and
propose an importance-sampling approach to up-sample
the importance of hard-negatives without adding additional
complexity. On an extensive zero-shot benchmark of 29
tasks, our Distilled and Hard-negative Training (DiHT) approach improves on 20 tasks compared to the baseline. Furthermore, for few-shot linear probing, we propose a novel
approach that bridges the gap between zero-shot and fewshot performance, substantially improving over prior work.
Models are available at github.com/facebookresearch/diht.

ImageNet1K
80

70

40

65
60

Recall@1

Abstract

DiHT
CLIP

B/32

B/16

L/14
@336
Model Complexity

69

35
30

64
B/32

B/16

L/14
@336
Model Complexity

59

B/32

B/16

L/14
@336
Model Complexity

Figure 1. DiHT trained on 438M LAION-CAT samples vs.
CLIP [62] trained on 400M OpenAI samples.

datasets, model initialization, and contrastive training, and
present strategies that significantly improve model performance on a variety of zero-shot benchmarks, see Figure 1.
Most image-text datasets are noisy and poorly-aligned.
Few recent efforts [27] have tried to clean the noise by filtering samples based on alignment scores from an existing
model like CLIP [62]. However, this approach is limited by
the biases and flaws of the model itself. On the other hand,
momentum-based approaches [41] to reduce noise are infeasible for large-scale training due to their increased compute and memory requirements. To this end, we provide a
scalable and effective approach titled Complexity, Action
and Text-spotting (CAT) filtering. CAT is a filtering strategy to select only informative text-image pairs from noisy
web-scale datasets. We show that training on a CAT-filtered
version of large-scale noisy datasets such as LAION [66]
can provide up to 12% relative improvements across visionlanguage tasks despite removing almost 80% of the training
data, see Section 4.2 and Table 1 for more details.
A common strategy [58, 89] to further improve multimodal training is to warm-start it with image and text models pre-trained at large scale on their respective modalities. However, due to the increased noise in image-text
data, fine-tuning the entire model undermines the benefits
of the warm-start. One can alternatively use model freezing
strategies like locked-image tuning [89], but they are unable to adapt to the complex queries present in multimodal
problems (e.g., cross-modal retrieval) and the models perform poorly on retrieval benchmarks (see Section 4.2). We

6967

