This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DropKey for Vision Transformer
Bonan Li* 1 , Yinhan Hu∗1 , Xuecheng Nie2 , Congying Han†1 ,
Xiangjian Jiang3 , Tiande Guo1 , Luoqi Liu2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
MT Lab, Meitu Inc.
3
University of Cambridge
{libonan, hancy, tdguo}@ucas.ac.cn, huyinhan16@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{nxc, llq5}@meitu.com, xj265@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on analyzing and improving the
dropout technique for self-attention layers of Vision Transformer, which is important while surprisingly ignored by
prior works. In particular, we conduct researches on three
core questions: First, what to drop in self-attention layers?
Different from dropping attention weights in literature, we
propose to move dropout operations forward ahead of attention matrix calculation and set the Key as the dropout unit,
yielding a novel dropout-before-softmax scheme. We theoretically verify that this scheme helps keep both regularization and probability features of attention weights, alleviating the overfittings problem to specific patterns and enhancing the model to globally capture vital information; Second,
how to schedule the drop ratio in consecutive layers? In
contrast to exploit a constant drop ratio for all layers, we
present a new decreasing schedule that gradually decreases
the drop ratio along the stack of self-attention layers. We
experimentally validate the proposed schedule can avoid
overfittings in low-level features and missing in high-level
semantics, thus improving the robustness and stableness
of model training; Third, whether need to perform structured dropout operation as CNN? We attempt patch-based
block-version of dropout operation and find that this useful trick for CNN is not essential for ViT. Given exploration
on the above three questions, we present the novel DropKey method that regards Key as the drop unit and exploits
decreasing schedule for drop ratio, improving ViTs in a general way. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of DropKey for various ViT architectures, e.g.
T2T, VOLO, CeiT and DeiT, as well as for various vision
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

tasks, e.g., image classification, object detection, humanobject interaction detection and human body shape recovery.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) [6] has achieved great success for various vision tasks, e.g., image recognition [7, 12,
20, 34, 35], object detection [1], human body shape estimation [18], etc. Prior works mainly focus on researches
of patch division, architecture design and task extension.
However, the dropout technique for self-attention layer,
which plays the essential role to achieve good generalizability, is surprisingly ignored by the community.
Different from the counterpart for Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), the dropout in ViT directly utilizes the
one in original Transformer designed for Natural Language
Processing, which sets attention weights as the manipulation unit with a constant dropout ratio for all layers. Despite
of its simplicity, this vanilla design faces three major problems. First, it breaks the probability distribution of attention weights due to the averaging operation on non-dropout
units after softmax normalization. Although this regularizes
the attention weights, it still overfits specific patterns locally
due to the failure on penalizing score peaks, as shown in
Fig. 1 (a) and (b); Second, the vanilla design is sensitive to
the constant dropout ratio, since high ratio occurs missing
of semantic information in high-level representations while
low ratios overfitting in low-level features, resulting in the
unstable training process; Third, it ignores the structured
characteristic of input patch grid to ViT, which plays an effective role to improve performance with blockwise dropout
in CNNs. These three problems degrade the performance
and limit the generalizability of ViTs.
Motivated by this, we propose to analyze and improve

22700

