This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient On-device Training via Gradient Filtering
Yuedong Yang
Guihong Li
Radu Marculescu
The University of Texas at Austin
{albertyoung, lgh, radum}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Despite its importance for federated learning, continuous learning and many other applications, on-device training remains an open problem for EdgeAI. The problem
stems from the large number of operations (e.g., floating
point multiplications and additions) and memory consumption required during training by the back-propagation algorithm. Consequently, in this paper, we propose a new
gradient filtering approach which enables on-device CNN
model training. More precisely, our approach creates a
special structure with fewer unique elements in the gradient map, thus significantly reducing the computational complexity and memory consumption of back propagation during training. Extensive experiments on image classification
and semantic segmentation with multiple CNN models (e.g.,
MobileNet, DeepLabV3, UPerNet) and devices (e.g., Raspberry Pi and Jetson Nano) demonstrate the effectiveness
and wide applicability of our approach. For example, compared to SOTA, we achieve up to 19× speedup and 77.1%
memory savings on ImageNet classification with only 0.1%
accuracy loss. Finally, our method is easy to implement and
deploy; over 20× speedup and 90% energy savings have
been observed compared to highly optimized baselines in
MKLDNN and CUDNN on NVIDIA Jetson Nano. Consequently, our approach opens up a new direction of research
with a huge potential for on-device training.1

1. Introduction
Existing approaches for on-device training are neither
efficient nor practical enough to satisfy the resource constraints of edge devices (Figure 1). This is because these
methods do not properly address a fundamental problem in
on-device training, namely the computational and memory
complexity of the back-propagation (BP) algorithm. More
precisely, although the architecture modification [6] and
layer freezing [18, 20] can help skipping the BP for some
layers, for other layers, the complexity remains high. Gra1 Code: https://github.com/SLDGroup/GradientFilter-CVPR23

dient quantization [4, 7] can reduce the cost of arithmetic
operations but cannot reduce the number of operations (e.g.,
multiplications); thus, the speedup in training remains limited. Moreover, gradient quantization is not supported
by existing deep-learning frameworks (e.g., CUDNN [9],
MKLDNN [1], PyTorch [25] and Tensorflow [2]). To enable on-device training, there are two important questions
must be addressed:
• How can we reduce the computational complexity of
back propagation through the convolution layers?
• How can we reduce the data required by the gradient
computation during back propagation?
In this paper, we propose gradient filtering, a new research
direction, to address both questions. By addressing the first
question, we reduce the computational complexity of training; by addressing the second question, we reduce the memory consumption.
In general, the gradient propagation through a convolution layer involves multiplying the gradient of the output
variable with a Jacobian matrix constructed with data from
either the input feature map or the convolution kernel. We
aim at simplifying this process with the new gradient filtering approach proposed in Section 3. Intuitively, if the gradient map w.r.t. the output has the same value for all entries,
then the computation-intensive matrix multiplication can be
greatly simplified, and the data required to construct the Jacobian matrix can be significantly reduced. Thus, our gradient filtering can approximate the gradient w.r.t. the output
by creating a new gradient map with a special (i.e., spatial)
structure and fewer unique elements. By doing so, the gradient propagation through the convolution layers reduces to
cheaper operations, while the data required (hence memory)
for the forward propagation also lessens. Through this filtering process, we trade off the gradient precision against
the computation complexity during BP. We note that gradient filtering does not necessarily lead to a worse precision,
i.e., models sometimes perform better with filtered gradients when compared against models trained with vanilla BP.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:

3811

