This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-time 6K Image Rescaling with Rate-distortion Optimization
Chenyang Qi*

Xin Yang∗
Ka Leong Cheng
Ying-Cong Chen
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Qifeng Chen

Abstract
HR

Contemporary image rescaling aims at embedding a
high-resolution (HR) image into a low-resolution (LR)
thumbnail image that contains embedded information for
HR image reconstruction. Unlike traditional image superresolution, this enables high-fidelity HR image restoration
faithful to the original one, given the embedded information in the LR thumbnail. However, state-of-the-art image
rescaling methods do not optimize the LR image file size for
efficient sharing and fall short of real-time performance for
ultra-high-resolution (e.g., 6K) image reconstruction. To
address these two challenges, we propose a novel framework (HyperThumbnail) for real-time 6K rate-distortionaware image rescaling. Our framework first embeds an HR
image into a JPEG LR thumbnail by an encoder with our
proposed quantization prediction module, which minimizes
the file size of the embedding LR JPEG thumbnail while
maximizing HR reconstruction quality. Then, an efficient
frequency-aware decoder reconstructs a high-fidelity HR
image from the LR one in real time. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our framework outperforms previous image rescaling baselines in rate-distortion performance and
can perform 6K image reconstruction in real time.

1. Introduction
With an increasing number of high-resolution (HR) images being produced and shared by users on the internet,
a new challenge has arisen: how can we store and transfer
HR images efficiently? Storing HR images on the cloud,
such as iCloud, is becoming a widely adopted solution that
saves storage on a user’s mobile device (e.g., smartphones)
as only their low-resolution (LR) counterparts are stored on
the mobile device for an instant preview. However, when
a user wants to obtain the full-resolution image, the entire
HR image must be downloaded on the fly from the cloud,
which can result in a poor user experience when the internet
connection is unstable or not available.
Real-time image rescaling can serve as a competitive solution to improving the user experience of cloud photo stor* Equal contribution.

5760x3240,
48.3MB

Cloud Storage

LR

Encoder
Cloud Server

1440x810,
1.37MB
HyperThumbnail

Downsample and compress

Timeout ✘

Real-time
Decoder

PSNR:
34.20
Restored HR

Decompress and upsample

Figure 1. The application of 6K image rescaling in the context of cloud photo storage on smartphones (e.g., iCloud). As
more high-resolution (HR) images are uploaded to cloud storage nowadays, challenges are brought to cloud service providers
(CSPs) in fulfilling latency-sensitive image reading requests (e.g.,
zoom-in) through the internet. To facilitate faster transmission and
high-quality visual content, our HyperThumbnail framework helps
CSPs to encode an HR image into an LR JPEG thumbnail, which
users could cache locally. When the internet is unstable or unavailable, our method can still reconstruct a high-fidelity HR image from the JPEG thumbnail in real time.

age, as shown in Fig. 1. Such a solution can first embed an
HR image (on the cloud) into an LR JPEG thumbnail (on
the mobile device) by an encoder, and the thumbnail provides an instant preview with little storage. When the user
wants to zoom in on the thumbnail, the HR image with fine
details can be reconstructed locally in real time. In addition,
image rescaling has other applications in image sharing, as
it can “bypass” the resolution limitation of some platforms
(e.g., WhatsApp) to reconstruct a high-quality HR image
from an LR one [57]. While modern smartphones and cameras can capture ultra-high-resolution images in 4K (iPhone
13) or even 6K (Blackmagic camera), we are interested in
designing a real-time image rescaling framework for ultrahigh-resolution images (e.g., 4K or 6K), which minimizes
LR file size while maximizing HR and LR image quality.
However, existing image rescaling methods have their
own flaws in practice, as shown in Table 1 where we
compare different image rescaling methods in terms of
their properties. One potential solution is to upsample the
downsampled thumbnail with super-resolution (SR) meth-

14092

