This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VNE: An Effective Method for Improving Deep Representation
by Manipulating Eigenvalue Distribution
Jaeill Kim1 , Suhyun Kang1 , Duhun Hwang1 , Jungwook Shin1 , Wonjong Rhee1,2,3 *
1
Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence (IPAI), Seoul National University
3
Research Institute for Convergence Science, Seoul National University
{jaeill0704, su hyun, yelobean, jungwook.shin, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Since the introduction of deep learning, a wide scope of
representation properties, such as decorrelation, whitening,
disentanglement, rank, isotropy, and mutual information,
have been studied to improve the quality of representation.
However, manipulating such properties can be challenging in terms of implementational effectiveness and general
applicability. To address these limitations, we propose to
regularize von Neumann entropy (VNE) of representation.
First, we demonstrate that the mathematical formulation of
VNE is superior in effectively manipulating the eigenvalues of the representation autocorrelation matrix. Then, we
demonstrate that it is widely applicable in improving stateof-the-art algorithms or popular benchmark algorithms by
investigating domain-generalization, meta-learning, selfsupervised learning, and generative models. In addition, we
formally establish theoretical connections with rank, disentanglement, and isotropy of representation. Finally, we provide discussions on the dimension control of VNE and the
relationship with Shannon entropy. Code is available at:
https://github.com/jaeill/CVPR23-VNE.

1. Introduction
Improving the quality of deep representation by pursuing a variety of properties in the representation has been
adopted as a conventional practice. To learn representations with useful properties, various methods have been
proposed to manipulate the representations. For example,
decorrelation reduces overfitting, enhances generalization
in supervised learning [20, 92], and helps in clustering [79].
Whitening improves convergence and generalization in supervised learning [23, 44, 45, 60], improves GAN stability [76], and helps in domain adaptation [73]. Disentanglement was proposed as a desirable property of representa* Corresponding author

(a) Domain generalization

(b) Meta-learning

(c) Self-supervised learning

(d) GAN

Figure 1. General applicability of VNE: performance of state-ofthe-art algorithms or popular benchmark algorithms can be further
improved by regularizing von Neumann entropy (full result tables
will be provided in Section 3). (a) Domain generalization: relative
improvements over ERM and SWAD (current state-of-the-art). (b)
Meta-learning: relative improvements over six popular benchmark
algorithms. (c) Self-supervised learning: performance comparison against the current state-of-the-art algorithms for COCO detection. (d) GAN: relative improvements in Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) for seven popular benchmark algorithms.

tions [1, 9, 42]. Increasing rank of representations was proposed to resolve the dimensional collapse phenomenon in
self-supervised learning [43, 47]. Isotropy was proposed to
improve the downstream task performance of BERT-based
models in NLP tasks [56,78]. Preventing informational collapse (also known as representation collapse) was proposed
as a successful learning objective in non-contrastive learning [7,96]. In addition, maximizing mutual information was
proposed as a successful learning objective in contrastive
learning [39, 69, 80].

3799

