This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Equivalent Transformation and Dual Stream Network Construction for Mobile
Image Super-Resolution
Jiahao Chao1 , Zhou Zhou1 , Hongfan Gao1 , Jiali Gong1 , Zhengfeng Yang1 *, Zhenbing Zeng2 , Lydia Dehbi1
1
East China Normal University;
2
Chengdu Institute of Computer Applications of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jhchao502, zhouzhou, hfgao, gongjl}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, zfyang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn,
zbzeng@shu.edu.cn, dehbilydia@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct highresolution images (HR) from low-resolution images (LR).
Over the years, numerous deep-learning methods have been
proposed [3, 6, 17, 18, 33, 35, 36] with good fidelity and perceptual quality. However, these methods are not efficient
and lightweight when it comes to mobile platforms where
SR application becomes increasingly ubiquitous. Thus, it is
essential to devise an approach that takes into account the
restrictions of mobile platforms.
Generally, mobile platforms have limitations such as
a restricted amount of RAM, lower memory bandwidth,
* Corresponding author.

33.8

urs)

ETDS (O

33.6
rs)

33.4

(Ou
ECB
SR+
ET

33.2
33.0
32.8

)

rs
ET (Ou

ABPN+

ESPCN

10

ABPN

ECB
SR

PSNR (dB)

In recent years, there has been an increasing demand
for real-time super-resolution networks on mobile devices.
To address this issue, many lightweight super-resolution
models have been proposed. However, these models still
contain time-consuming components that increase inference latency, limiting their real-world applications on mobile devices. In this paper, we propose a novel model for
single-image super-resolution based on Equivalent Transformation and Dual Stream network construction (ETDS).
ET method is proposed to transform time-consuming operators into time-friendly operations, such as convolution
and ReLU, on mobile devices. Then, a dual stream network is designed to alleviate redundant parameters resulting from the use of ET and enhance the feature extraction
ability. Taking full advantage of the advance of ET and
the dual stream network structure, we develop the efficient
SR model ETDS for mobile devices. The experimental results demonstrate that our ETDS achieves superior inference speed and reconstruction quality compared to previous lightweight SR methods on mobile devices. The code is
available at https://github.com/ECNUSR/ETDS.

FSRCNN

15

20
Latency (ms)

25

30

Figure 1. Comparisons of PSNR performance and the inference
latency of different models. The inference latency is tested on Dimensity 8100 SoC, NNAPI driver, INT8 precision and upsampling
from 360 × 640 to 1080 × 1920. PSNR indexes are evaluated on
Set5 [2].

lower computational speed and insufficient support for
many common deep learning layers and operators. To take
the particularities into consideration, the recently proposed
SR models [27, 34] designed for mobile devices adopt a
neat topology [34] as the base model to ensure low inference latency. ABPN [8] further boosted efficiency by employing the repeat operator instead of the time-consuming
nearest neighbor interpolation. Nevertheless, in-depth investigation reveals that some time-consuming components
in current mobile SR models, such as the global residual
connection and clip operator, are indispensable for overall
reconstruction quality. Therefore, to accelerate the inference on mobile devices and achieve a competitive reconstruction quality and inference latency, it is necessary to
seek time-friendly surrogates for these time-consuming operators.
To this end, we propose Equivalent Transformation (ET),
a method that speeds up the model by substituting timeconsuming operators with time-friendly ones without im-

14102

