This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Solving 3D Inverse Problems using Pre-trained 2D Diffusion Models
Hyungjin Chung1,2 * , Dohoon Ryu1∗ , Michael T. Mccann2 , Marc L. Klasky2 , Jong Chul Ye1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology, 2 Los Alamos National Laboratory,
{hj.chung, dh.ryu, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr, {mccann, mklasky}@lanl.gov

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction results with DiffusionMBIR. First row: measurement, second row: our method, third row: ground truth.
Yellow inset: measurement process. Sparse-view tomography: 8-view measurement, Limited-angle tomography: [0 90]◦ out of [0 180]◦
angle measurement, Compressed-sensing MRI: 1D uniform sub-sampling of ×2 acceleration. (In-distribution): test data aligned with
training data, (Out-of-distribution): test data vastly different from training data.

Abstract
Diffusion models have emerged as the new state-of-the-art
generative model with high quality samples, with intriguing
properties such as mode coverage and high flexibility.
They have also been shown to be effective inverse problem
solvers, acting as the prior of the distribution, while the
information of the forward model can be granted at the
This work was supported by the Korea Medical Device Development Fund grant funded by the Korea government (the Ministry of Science and ICT, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, the Ministry
of Health & Welfare, the Ministry of Food and Drug Safety) (Project
Number: 1711137899, KMDF PR 20200901 0015), by the National Research Foundation of Korea under Grant NRF-2020R1A2B5B03001980,
by the KAIST Key Research Institute (Interdisciplinary Research Group)
Project, and by the MSIT (Ministry of Science and ICT), Korea, under the
ITRC(Information Technology Research Center) support program(IITP2022-2020-0-01461) supervised by the IITP(Institute for Information &
communications Technology Planning & Evaluation).

sampling stage. Nonetheless, as the generative process
remains in the same high dimensional (i.e. identical to
data dimension) space, the models have not been extended
to 3D inverse problems due to the extremely high memory
and computational cost. In this paper, we combine the
ideas from the conventional model-based iterative reconstruction with the modern diffusion models, which leads
to a highly effective method for solving 3D medical image
reconstruction tasks such as sparse-view tomography,
limited angle tomography, compressed sensing MRI from
pre-trained 2D diffusion models. In essence, we propose
to augment the 2D diffusion prior with a model-based
prior in the remaining direction at test time, such that
one can achieve coherent reconstructions across all dimensions. Our method can be run in a single commodity
GPU, and establishes the new state-of-the-art, showing
that the proposed method can perform reconstructions

22542

