This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive Cartoonization with Controllable Perceptual Factors
Namhyuk Ahn1

Patrick Kwon1 Jihye Back1 Kibeom Hong2 Seungkwon Kim1
1
NAVER WEBTOON AI 2 Yonsei University

Figure 1. Interactive cartoonization. The proposed cartoonization method allows user interaction over texture and color and can generate
diverse outputs that meet users’ demands. Leftmost: source photography and an exemplar image of the target cartoon.

Abstract
Cartoonization is a task that renders natural photos into
cartoon styles. Previous deep cartoonization methods only
have focused on end-to-end translation, which may hinder
editability. Instead, we propose a novel solution with editing features of texture and color based on the cartoon creation process. To do that, we design a model architecture
to have separate decoders, texture and color, to decouple
these attributes. In the texture decoder, we propose a texture controller, which enables a user to control stroke style
and abstraction to generate diverse cartoon textures. We
also introduce an HSV color augmentation to induce the
networks to generate diverse and controllable color translation. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first deep
approach to control the cartoonization at inference while
showing profound quality improvement over to baselines.

1. Introduction
Cartoons gain steep popularity in a recent, and the number of cartoon creators have also increased. The universal workflow of cartoon painters is as follows: character

drawing, which is then composed into a background scene.
Post-processing such as shading is added afterward. Professional tools [1, 3] provide helpful plugins to assist the artist.
Despite this, cartoon creation still remains an arduous task
even for the more skilled creators.
We follow the observation that cartoon-styled scene generation has received notable attention. Many artists convert real-world photographs into cartoon styles to utilize as
a background scene, dubbed as image cartoonization. This
allows creators to more focus on effective decisions in making cartoons, such as character generation. It is shown that
deep learning-based cartoonization approach is able to produce cartoon-stylized output with a prominent quality, that
is possible to be utilized in real service production [5,6,19].
However, the previous deep methods skip the intermediate procedures of cartoon-making processes, thus disabling
the creators from controlling outputs. The artists follow
a series of structured steps when creating a cartoon background from a photo (Figure 2). 1) Color stylization, where
the author changes the color both locally and globally. Sky
synthesis is performed along with this procedure. 2) Texture
stylization, where additional sketch lines are drawn, and
fine details are selectively removed to achieve the different

16827

