This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grounding Counterfactual Explanation of Image Classifiers
to Textual Concept Space
Siwon Kim1,† Jinoh Oh2 Sungjin Lee2 Seunghak Yu3 Jaeyoung Do2 Tara Taghavi2
1
Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Amazon Alexa AI, Seattle WA, USA 3 NAVER Search US
tuslkkk@snu.ac.kr, {ojino, sungjinl, domjae, taghavit}@amazon.com, seunghak.yu@navercorp.com

Positive dataset ( )

Concept-based explanation aims to provide concise and
human-understandable explanations of an image classifier.
However, existing concept-based explanation methods typically require a significant amount of manually collected
concept-annotated images. This is costly and runs the
risk of human biases being involved in the explanation.
In this paper, we propose Counterfactual explanation with
text-driven concepts (CounTEX), where the concepts are
defined only from text by leveraging a pre-trained multimodal joint embedding space without additional conceptannotated datasets. A conceptual counterfactual explanation is generated with text-driven concepts. To utilize the
text-driven concepts defined in the joint embedding space to
interpret target classifier outcome, we present a novel projection scheme for mapping the two spaces with a simple yet
effective implementation. We show that CounTEX generates
faithful explanations that provide a semantic understanding
of model decision rationale robust to human bias.

1. Introduction
Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) aims to unveil
the reasoning process of a black-box deep neural network.
In the vision field, heatmap-style explanation has been extensively studied to interpret image classifiers [20, 21, 24].
However, simply highlighting the pixels that significantly
contribute to model outcome does not answer intuitive and
actionable questions such as “What aspect of the region
is important? Is it color? Or pattern?”. On the other
hand, drawing human-understandable rationale from the
highlighted pixels requires domain expert’s intervention and
can thus be impacted by the human subjectivity [11].
In contrast, concept-based explanation can provide a
more human-understandable and high-level semantic expla† Work done during the internship at Amazon Alexa AI

Concept activation vector
(CAV)

...

Abstract

...

BlackBox
DNN
BlackBox latent space

Negative dataset ( )

(a) Conventional concept activation vector
“object” ( )
“striped object” ( )

CLIP

Concept direction

(text)

CLIP latent space

(b) Proposed method (CounTEX)

Figure 1. (a) Conventional concept-based explanation derives a
CAV with the target model’s embedding of manually collected
concept-annotated images. (b) CounTEX derives the concept direction directly from texts in CLIP latent space.

nation [3, 4, 7, 9, 11]. Concept fundamentally indicates an
abstract idea, and it is generally equated as a word such as
“stripe” or “red”. The earliest approach to interpret how
a specific concept affects the outcome of the target image
classifier is concept activation vector, or CAV [11]. A CAV
represents the direction of a concept within the target classifier embedding space and has been widely adopted to subsequent concept-based explanations [15, 19, 25].
However, the CAVs acquisition requires collections of
human annotations. The CAV of a concept is typically precomputed via two steps as depicted in Figure 1 (a); 1) collecting a number of positive and negative images that best
represent a concept (e.g., images with and without stripes),
2) training a linear classifier (commonly support vector machine) with the images. The vector normal to the decision boundary serves as a CAV. Collecting positive/negative
datasets in step 1 is not only costly but also poses the risk of
admitting human biases in two aspects; diverging CAVs for
the same concept and unintended entanglement of multiple
concepts. We will demonstrate in Section 2 that this may
threaten credibility of explanation.

10942

