This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TranSG: Transformer-Based Skeleton Graph Prototype Contrastive Learning
with Structure-Trajectory Prompted Reconstruction for Person Re-Identification
Haocong Rao Chunyan Miao*
LILY Research Center, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{haocong001, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Prompt

* Corresponding author

...

Representative Features

Person re-identification (re-ID) via 3D skeleton data is
an emerging topic with prominent advantages. Existing
methods usually design skeleton descriptors with raw body
joints or perform skeleton sequence representation learning. However, they typically cannot concurrently model different body-component relations, and rarely explore useful
semantics from fine-grained representations of body joints.
In this paper, we propose a generic Transformer-based
Skeleton Graph prototype contrastive learning (TranSG)
approach with structure-trajectory prompted reconstruction to fully capture skeletal relations and valuable spatialtemporal semantics from skeleton graphs for person re-ID.
Specifically, we first devise the Skeleton Graph Transformer
(SGT) to simultaneously learn body and motion relations
within skeleton graphs, so as to aggregate key correlative
node features into graph representations. Then, we propose
the Graph Prototype Contrastive learning (GPC) to mine
the most typical graph features (graph prototypes) of each
identity, and contrast the inherent similarity between graph
representations and different prototypes from both skeleton
and sequence levels to learn discriminative graph representations. Last, a graph Structure-Trajectory Prompted
Reconstruction (STPR) mechanism is proposed to exploit
the spatial and temporal contexts of graph nodes to prompt
skeleton graph reconstruction, which facilitates capturing
more valuable patterns and graph semantics for person reID. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that TranSG significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. We
further show its generality under different graph modeling, RGB-estimated skeletons, and unsupervised scenarios. Our codes are available at https://github.com/KaliHac/TranSG.

Skeletal Relations

Contrast and Learn

Figure 1. TranSG temporally and spatially masks skeleton graphs
to prompt their reconstruction, while integrating full skeletal relations into contrastive learning of typical features for person re-ID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) is a challenging task of
retrieving and matching a specific person across varying
views or scenarios, which has empowered many vital applications such as security authentication, human tracking,
and robotics [1–4]. Recently driven by economical, nonobtrusive and accurate skeleton-tracking devices like Kinect
[5], person re-ID via 3D skeletons has attracted surging attention in both academia and industry [2, 6–14]. Unlike
conventional methods that rely on visual appearance features (e.g., colors, silhouettes), skeleton-based person reID methods model unique body and motion representations
with 3D positions of key body joints, which typically enjoy
smaller data sizes, lighter models, and more robust performance under scale and view variations [2, 15].
Most existing methods manually extract anthropometric
descriptors and gait attributes from body-joint coordinates
[7–10, 13], or leverage sequence learning paradigms such
as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [16] to model body
and motion features with skeleton sequences [2, 6, 14, 17].
However, these methods rarely explore the inherent body
relations within skeletons (e.g., inter-joint motion correlations), thus largely ignoring some valuable skeleton patterns. To fill this gap, a few recent works [11, 18] construct skeleton graphs to model body-component relations

22118

