This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Overlooked Factors in Concept-based Explanations:
Dataset Choice, Concept Learnability, and Human Capability
Vikram V. Ramaswamy, Sunnie S. Y. Kim, Ruth Fong, Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University
{vr23, suhk, ruthfong, olgarus}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Concept-based interpretability methods aim to explain a
deep neural network model’s components and predictions
using a pre-defined set of semantic concepts. These methods evaluate a trained model on a new, “probe” dataset
and correlate the model’s outputs with concepts labeled in
that dataset. Despite their popularity, they suffer from limitations that are not well-understood and articulated in the
literature. In this work, we identify and analyze three commonly overlooked factors in concept-based explanations.
First, we find that the choice of the probe dataset has a profound impact on the generated explanations. Our analysis
reveals that different probe datasets lead to very different
explanations, suggesting that the generated explanations
are not generalizable outside the probe dataset. Second, we
find that concepts in the probe dataset are often harder to
learn than the target classes they are used to explain, calling into question the correctness of the explanations. We
argue that only easily learnable concepts should be used in
concept-based explanations. Finally, while existing methods use hundreds or even thousands of concepts, our human
studies reveal a much stricter upper bound of 32 concepts
or less, beyond which the explanations are much less practically useful. We discuss the implications of our findings
and provide suggestions for future development of conceptbased interpretability methods. Code for our analysis and
user interface can be found at https://github.com/
princetonvisualai/OverlookedFactors

1. Introduction
Performance and opacity are often correlated in deep
neural networks: the highly parameterized nature of these
models that enable them to achieve high task accuracy also
reduces their interpretability. However, in order to responsibly use and deploy them, especially in high-risk settings
such as medical diagnoses, we need these models to be interpretable, i.e., understandable by people. With the grow-

ing recognition of the importance of interpretability, many
methods have been proposed in recent years to explain some
aspects of neural networks and render them more interpretable (see [4, 14, 18, 42, 44, 53] for surveys).
In this work, we dive into concept-based interpretability methods for image classification models, which explain
model components and/or predictions using a pre-defined
set of semantic concepts [5, 16, 25, 29, 56]. Given access to
a trained model and a set of images labelled with semantic concepts (i.e., a “probe” dataset), these methods produce
explanations with the provided concepts. See Fig. 1 for an
example explanation.
Concept-based methods are a particularly promising
approach for bridging the interpretability gap between
complex models and human understanding, as they explain model components and predictions with humaninterpretable units, i.e., semantic concepts. Recent work
finds that people prefer concept-based explanations over
other forms (e.g., heatmap and example-based) because
they resemble human reasoning and explanations [27]. Further, concept-based methods uniquely provide a global,
high-level understanding of a model, e.g., how it predicts
a certain class [39, 56] and what the model (or some part of
it) has learned [5,16,25]. These insights are difficult to gain
from local explanation methods that only provide an explanation for a single model prediction, such as saliency maps
that highlight relevant regions within an image.
However, existing research on concept-based interpretability methods focuses heavily on new method development, ignoring important factors such as the probe dataset
used to generate explanations or the concepts composing
the explanations. Outside the scope of concept-based methods, there have been several recent works that study the effect of different factors on explanations. These works, however, are either limited to saliency maps [1, 28, 31, 41] or a
general call for transparency, e.g., include more information
when releasing an interpretability method [47].
In this work, we conduct an in-depth study of commonly
overlooked factors in concept-based interpretability methods. Concretely, we analyze four representative methods:

10932

