This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SemiCVT: Semi-Supervised Convolutional Vision Transformer for Semantic
Segmentation
Huimin Huang1 , Shiao Xie1† , Lanfen Lin1 *, Ruofeng Tong1,2 , Yen-Wei Chen3 , Yuexiang Li4 ,
Hong Wang4 , Yawen Huang4* , Yefeng Zheng4
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Zhejiang Lab, 3 Ritsumeikan University, 4 Tencent Jarvis Lab

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning improves data efficiency of
deep models by leveraging unlabeled samples to alleviate
the reliance on a large set of labeled samples. These successes concentrate on the pixel-wise consistency by using
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) but fail to address
both global learning capability and class-level features for
unlabeled data. Recent works raise a new trend that Transformer achieves superior performance on the entire feature
map in various tasks. In this paper, we unify the current
dominant Mean-Teacher approaches by reconciling intramodel and inter-model properties for semi-supervised segmentation to produce a novel algorithm, SemiCVT, that
absorbs the quintessence of CNNs and Transformer in a
comprehensive way. Specifically, we first design a parallel CNN-Transformer architecture (CVT) with introducing
an intra-model local-global interaction schema (LGI) in
Fourier domain for full integration. The inter-model classwise consistency is further presented to complement the
class-level statistics of CNNs and Transformer in a crossteaching manner. Extensive empirical evidence shows that
SemiCVT yields consistent improvements over the state-ofthe-art methods in two public benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [4, 25, 41, 44] is a foundational
problem in computer vision and has attracted tremendous
interests for assigning pixel-level semantic labels in an image. Despite remarkable successes of convolutional neural
network (CNN), collecting a large quantity of pixel-level
annotations is quite expensive and time-consuming. Recently, semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides an alternative way to infer labels by learning from a small number of
images annotated to fully explore those unlabeled data.
The main stream of semi-supervised learning relies on
* Corresponding Authors: Lanfen Lin (llf@zju.edu.cn), Yawen Huang
(yawenhuang@tencent.com).
†Huimin Huang and Shiao Xie are co-first authors, and this work is done
during the internship at Tencent Jarvis Lab.

Figure 1. Visualizations of class activation maps generated by
Grad-CAM [31] and segmentation results of MT [33] and Our
SemiCVT. Current MT-based SSLs suffer from limited global dependency (e.g., incomplete human leg in (a), (c)) and class confusion (e.g., mis-classify bottle as person in (e), (g)). Our SemiCVT
improves the performance from intra-model and inter-model perspective, achieving better compactness and accurate localization.

consistency regularization [13, 30, 33, 38], pseudo labeling [29, 32], entropy minimization [3, 14] and bootstrapping [15]. For semantic segmentation, a typical approach
is to build a Mean-Teacher (MT) model [33] (in Fig. 2 (a)),
which allows the predictions generated from either teacher
or student model as close as possible. However, such a classic structure still suffers from two limitations: 1) Most of
MT-based frameworks are built upon stacking convolutional
layers, while the dilemma of CNNs is to capture global representations in the limited receptive field [11]. It results in
the neglected ability of aggregating global context and local
features, as depicted in Figs. 1 (a) and (c). 2) These approaches usually leverage the pixel-wise predictions from
CNNs to enforce consistency regularization with their focuses on fine-level pair-wise similarity. It may fail to explore rich information in feature space and also overlook
the global feature distribution, as shown in Figs. 1 (e), (g).
On the other hand, Transformer [34] has achieved notable performance on vision tasks [2, 24, 37], owing to their
strong capability in multi-head self-attention for capturing
long-distance dependencies. However, pure Transformerbased architectures cannot achieve satisfactory perfor-

11340

