This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identiﬁcation via Progressive Graph
Matching and Alternate Learning
Zesen Wu1 , Mang Ye1,2 *
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China
https://github.com/zesenwu23/USL-VI-ReID

Abstract
‫ܦ‬௜௡௧௘௥

Unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identiﬁcation is
a challenging task due to the large modality gap and the
unavailability of cross-modality correspondences. Crossmodality correspondences are very crucial to bridge the
modality gap. Some existing works try to mine crossmodality correspondences, but they focus only on local information. They do not fully exploit the global relationship
across identities, thus limiting the quality of the mined correspondences. Worse still, the number of clusters of the two
modalities is often inconsistent, exacerbating the unreliability of the generated correspondences. In response, we
devise a Progressive Graph Matching method to globally
mine cross-modality correspondences under cluster imbalance scenarios. PGM formulates correspondence mining
as a graph matching process and considers the global information by minimizing the global matching cost, where the
matching cost measures the dissimilarity of clusters. Besides, PGM adopts a progressive strategy to address the
imbalance issue with multiple dynamic matching processes.
Based on PGM, we design an Alternate Cross Contrastive
Learning (ACCL) module to reduce the modality gap with
the mined cross-modality correspondences, while mitigating the effect of noise in correspondences through an alternate scheme. Extensive experiments demonstrate the reliability of the generated correspondences and the effectiveness of our method.

Correspondences for

‫ܦ‬௜௡௧௥௔
‫ܦ‬௜௡௧௘௥ ‫ܦ ب‬௜௡௧௥௔
Feature distribution

Final matching results

(a) Illustration of the problem

(b) Illustration of the existing work

/

Cost matrix

࣡ோ

/

Modality
graph

࣡௏

Visible / Infrared Cluster
Unmatched/ Matched Cluster
Reconstructed
modality graph

࣡ோ

Remaining nodes
࣡௏ ᇲ

Globally optimal correspondence

Cost matrix

(c) Illustration of the proposed Progressive Graph Matching

Figure 1. Idea illustration. Different colors indicate different
pedestrians. (a) illustrates the feature distribution of randomly
selected persons of SYSU-MM01. The cross-modality discrepancy is much larger than inter-class variance within each modality.
(b) abstracts the existing solution. The locally closest unmatched
cross-modality cluster is treated as correspondence. Bottom of (b)
indicates its two drawbacks: 1) it ignores the global information
among different identities and 2) it ignores the cluster imbalance
issue across modalities and discards remaining nodes ( ). (c) is
the progressive graph matching method. We utilize graph matching to obtain the globally optimal correspondences and design a
progressive strategy to handle the cluster imbalance issue.

1. Introduction
The target of visible-infrared person re-identiﬁcation
(VI-ReID) [23, 25, 38, 51, 52] is to recognize the same
person across a set of visible/infrared gallery images when
given an image from another modality. This task has at-

tracted extensive interest recently due to its signiﬁcance in
night intelligent surveillance and public security. Many progresses [3, 5, 29, 40, 51] have been made in VI-ReID. However, these methods require well-annotated training sets
which are exhausting to obtain, so they are less applicable

* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye

9548

