This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decoupled Multimodal Distilling for Emotion Recognition
Yong Li, Yuanzhi Wang, Zhen Cui∗
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
{yong.li, yuanzhiwang, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

Language

Accuracy (%)

80

Human multimodal emotion recognition (MER) aims to
perceive human emotions via language, visual and acoustic modalities. Despite the impressive performance of previous MER approaches, the inherent multimodal heterogeneities still haunt and the contribution of different modalities varies signiﬁcantly. In this work, we mitigate this issue
by proposing a decoupled multimodal distillation (DMD)
approach that facilitates ﬂexible and adaptive crossmodal
knowledge distillation, aiming to enhance the discriminative features of each modality. Specially, the representation
of each modality is decoupled into two parts, i.e., modalityirrelevant/-exclusive spaces, in a self-regression manner.
DMD utilizes a graph distillation unit (GD-Unit) for each
decoupled part so that each GD can be performed in a more
specialized and effective manner. A GD-Unit consists of
a dynamic graph where each vertice represents a modality
and each edge indicates a dynamic knowledge distillation.
Such GD paradigm provides a ﬂexible knowledge transfer manner where the distillation weights can be automatically learned, thus enabling diverse crossmodal knowledge
transfer patterns. Experimental results show DMD consistently obtains superior performance than state-of-the-art
MER methods. Visualization results show the graph edges
in DMD exhibit meaningful distributional patterns w.r.t. the
modality-irrelevant/-exclusive feature spaces. Codes are released at https://github.com/mdswyz/DMD.

75

It is very loyal to the book

70

Vision

65
60
55

Acoustic

(a) Unimodal Accuracy

(b) Cross-modal Distillation
Shared Encoder

Language
It is very loyal to the book

Homogeneous GD

Vision

Private Encoder
Acoustic

Heterogeneous GD
1. Input

2. Feature Decoupling

3. Graph Distillation

(c) Our proposed Decoupled Multimodal Distillation
Figure 1. (a) illustrates the signiﬁcant emotion recognition discrepancies using unimodality, adapted from Mult [28]. (b) shows
the conventional cross-modal distillation. (c) shows our proposed
decoupled multimodal distillation (DMD) method. DMD consists
of two graph distillation (GD) units: homogeneous GD and heterogeneous GD. The decoupled GD paradigm decreases the burden of
absorbing knowledge from the heterogeneous data and allows each
GD to be performed in a more specialized and effective manner.

1. Introduction

search topics of affective computing with abundant appealing applications, such as intelligent tutoring systems [24],
product feedback estimation [18], and robotics [15].
For MER, different modalities in the same video segment are often complementary to each other, providing extra cues for semantic and emotional disambiguation. The
core part of MER is multimodal representation learning and
fusion, in which a model aims to encode and integrate representations from multiple modalities to understand the emotion behind the raw data. Despite the achievement of the

Human multimodal emotion recognition (MER) aims
to perceive the sentiment attitude of humans from video
clips [13, 17]. The video ﬂows involve time-series data
from various modalities, e.g., language, acoustic, and vision. This rich multimodality facilitates us in understanding
human behaviors and intents from a collaborative perspective. Recently, MER has become one of the most active re* The corresponding author.

6631

