This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Atoms: Pre-training Vision Transformers with Sinusoidal Waves
Sora Takashima1,2 , Ryo Hayamizu1 , Nakamasa Inoue1,2 , Hirokatsu Kataoka1 , Rio Yokota1,2
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
2
Tokyo Institute of Technology

https://masora1030.github.io/Visual-Atoms-Pre-training-Vision-Transformers-with-Sinusoidal-Waves/

Electron waves

Abstract
Formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL) has been
shown to be an effective method for pre-training vision
transformers, where ExFractalDB-21k was shown to exceed
the pre-training effect of ImageNet-21k. These studies also
indicate that contours mattered more than textures when
pre-training vision transformers. However, the lack of a
systematic investigation as to why these contour-oriented
synthetic datasets can achieve the same accuracy as real
datasets leaves much room for skepticism. In the present
work, we develop a novel methodology based on circular
harmonics for systematically investigating the design space
of contour-oriented synthetic datasets. This allows us to
efﬁciently search the optimal range of FDSL parameters
and maximize the variety of synthetic images in the dataset,
which we found to be a critical factor. When the resulting
new dataset VisualAtom-21k is used for pre-training ViTBase, the top-1 accuracy reached 83.7% when ﬁne-tuning
on ImageNet-1k. This is only 0.5% difference from the top-1
accuracy (84.2%) achieved by the JFT-300M pre-training,
even though the scale of images is 1/14. Unlike JFT-300M
which is a static dataset, the quality of synthetic datasets
will continue to improve, and the current work is a testament to this possibility. FDSL is also free of the common
issues associated with real images, e.g. privacy/copyright
issues, labeling costs/errors, and ethical biases.

Quantized visual waves

De Broglie’s atomic model

Wave Φ

Visual atom

Visual wave V 𝑂, Φ

+
sin(4𝜃)

sin(12𝜃)

(a) The visual atomic renderer

Real Image

Synthetic Image

p JFT-300M
p 300M Images
p Human Supervision
p 84.2 % @ ImageNet-1k

p VisualAtom (ours)
p 21M Images (x14 smaller!)
p Formula Supervision
p 83.7 % @ ImageNet-1k

(b) Comparison of VisualAtom and JFT-300M

1. Introduction
Vision transformers [10] have made a signiﬁcant impact on the entire ﬁeld of computer vision, and state of
the art models in classiﬁcation [37, 41, 42], object detection [25, 36], and segmentation [8, 15, 23, 36] are now based
on vision transformers. The accuracy of vision transformers exceeds that of convolutional neural networks by a considerable margin when the model is pre-trained on huge
datasets, such as JFT-300M [32]. However, the JFT-300M
dataset contains 300M images and 375M labels. It is impos-

Figure 1. VisualAtom: a new FDSL dataset (a) Inspired by de
Broglie’s atomic model, we propose VisualAtom dataset containing shapes from two sinusoidal waves. (b) When ﬁne-tuning on
ImageNet-1k, ViT-B pre-trained with VisualAtom achieved the accuracy of only 0.5% lower than JFT-300M using 1/14 images.

sible to manually label all of these images. Efforts to automatically label such datasets is still not as accurate as manual labeling. Self-supervised learning (SSL) is increasing
in popularity, as datasets do not need to be labeled for this

18579

