This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DoNet: Deep De-overlapping Network for Cytology Instance Segmentation
Yanning Zhou2
Yumeng Wang1
Hao Chen1†
Rushan Zhang1 *
Hao Jiang1 *
1
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Tencent AI Lab
{hjiangaz,jhc}@cse.ust.hk, {rzhangbq,ywanglu}@connect.ust.hk, amandayzhou@tencent.com

Abstract
Cell instance segmentation in cytology images has significant importance for biology analysis and cancer screening, while remains challenging due to 1) the extensive overlapping translucent cell clusters that cause the ambiguous boundaries, and 2) the confusion of mimics and debris as nuclei. In this work, we proposed a De-overlapping
Network (DoNet) in a decompose-and-recombined strategy. A Dual-path Region Segmentation Module (DRM) explicitly decomposes the cell clusters into intersection and
complement regions, followed by a Semantic Consistencyguided Recombination Module (CRM) for integration. To
further introduce the containment relationship of the nucleus in the cytoplasm, we design a Mask-guided Region
Proposal Strategy (MRP) that integrates the cell attention
maps for inner-cell instance prediction. We validate the
proposed approach on ISBI2014 and CPS datasets. Experiments show that our proposed DoNet significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art (SOTA) cell instance segmentation methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/DeepDoNet/DoNet.

1. Introduction
Cytology image has been essential for cancer screening and earlier diagnosis, such as qualitative and quantitative identification of cellular morphology, nuclei size,
nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and other cytological features
[12, 15, 25]. However, examining tens of thousands of cells
under the microscope visually is inherently tedious and suffers from inter-/intra-observer variability. Computational
techniques enable efficient and accurate characterization of
cells from cytology images [12, 16]. Among all computational techniques, cell segmentation has been a fundamental
and widely-studied task, since the acquisition of cell-level
identification is a pre-requisition for further assessment and
analysis [3, 23].
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Instance Layer
Complement Layer
Intersection Layer

Overlapping Cells

Microscopy Image

Figure 1. The schematic illustration of proposed DoNet with
decompose-and-recombined strategy, which maps each overlapping cell into the intersection, complement, and instance layers to
address the overlapping issue in cytology instance segmentation.

Deep Learning (DL) methods show promising results
for cell-nuclei segmentation in the histopathology image
[5,6,14,17]. However, cytology segmentation remains challenging for the following two reasons. Firstly, cells in a cytology image are prone to cluster with each other, leading to
the overlapping issue. In the cytology images, the translucent cytoplasm of the cell (seen in Figure 1) tends to occlude each other with low contrast staining, leading to ambiguous cellular boundary predictions. This phenomenon
is particularly evident in cervical cell images. Secondly,
hard mimics, are widespread in the background, along with
other technical artefacts such as bubbles, which could mislead the instance segmentation models [4]. Take the cervical
cell image as an example, the widespread white blood cells
and mucus stains lead to false predictions for nuclei. To address these challenges, several works [24, 33] propose the
segment-then-refine paradigm, while others [39, 40] utilize
the detection-based framework, e.g., Mask R-CNN [11].
However, they fail to model the interaction between intersection and complement sub-regions within the translucent
cell cluster explicitly, resulting in a limited understanding
of cross-region relationships.
Amodal instance segmentation tackles the occlusion

15641

