This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On-the-fly Category Discovery
Ruoyi Du1 , Dongliang Chang1 , Kongming Liang1 ,* Timothy Hospedales2 , Yi-Zhe Song3 , Zhanyu Ma1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
3
University of Edinburgh, UK
University of Surrey, UK
{duruoyi, changdongliang, liangkongming, mazhanyu}@bupt.edu.cn,
t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk, y.song@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep models are well known for beating humans in visual recognition [13]. However, this is just a victory of
specialist models over generalist humans – existing vision
recognition models are mostly closed-set experts. Given
a defined category set, huge datasets are gathered and annotated, and then, deep models trained with the annotated
data can easily handle such an in-category recognition due
to their great fitting ability. However, these models are arguably only learning to memorize in that they are restricted
to the defined category set and are incapable of modeling
novel categories. Although paradigms like open set recog* Corresponding Author

#NCD
#OCD

Although machines have surpassed humans on visual
recognition problems, they are still limited to providing
closed-set answers. Unlike machines, humans can cognize novel categories at the first observation. Novel category discovery (NCD) techniques, transferring knowledge
from seen categories to distinguish unseen categories, aim
to bridge the gap. However, current NCD methods assume a
transductive learning and offline inference paradigm, which
restricts them to a pre-defined query set and renders them
unable to deliver instant feedback. In this paper, we study
on-the-fly category discovery (OCD) aimed at making the
model instantaneously aware of novel category samples
(i.e., enabling inductive learning and streaming inference).
We first design a hash coding-based expandable recognition model as a practical baseline. Afterwards, noticing
the sensitivity of hash codes to intra-category variance, we
further propose a novel Sign-Magnitude dIsentangLEment
(SMILE) architecture to alleviate the disturbance it brings.
Our experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
SMILE against our baseline model and prior art. Our
code is available at https://github.com/PRISCV/On-the-fly-Category-Discovery.

Transductive Learning
e.g., Fully- & Semi- & Selfsupervised Learning

e.g., Fully-supervised
Learning

Inductive Learning

Offline Inference
e.g., Clustering

e.g., Hash Coding

1000001001

Instant Inference

Figure 1. Comparison of the conventional NCD setting and the
proposed OCD setting. (a) NCD adopts transductive learning and
offline inference. (b) OCD removes the pre-defined query set assumption and conducts inductive learning and instant inference.

nition [9] aim to filter out the out-of-category samples, simply rejecting them is not satisfactory. For humans, visual
recognition is far beyond a closed-set problem – instead of
learning to memorize, we learn to cognize. In particular,
given samples containing novel categories, we can not only
tell which are novel but we can also tell which may share
the same novel category. E.g., even you have never seen
“hedgehogs”, you can easily realize that they differ from
other creatures you have seen before and realise that multiple hedgehog images belong to the same category, even if
you don’t know the name.
To bridge the gap, a rising field named novel category
discovery (NCD) [11] attaching increasing attention. With
a labelled support set of seen categories and an unlabeled
query set containing unseen ones, NCD aims at cognizing unseen categories by splitting the query set into several
groups with the same latent category. As shown in Figure 1,
existing NCD works [7, 10, 15, 37] mostly fall into a transductive learning and offline inference procedure. Specifically, a visual feature encoder is first trained with the support set via supervised learning and the query set via unsupervised or semi-supervised learning. After that, clustering

11691

