This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3Mformer: Multi-order Multi-mode Transformer
for Skeletal Action Recognition
†

Lei Wang†, §
Piotr Koniusz* , §, †
Australian National University, § Data61rCSIRO
§
firstname.lastname@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Many skeletal action recognition models use GCNs to
represent the human body by 3D body joints connected body
parts. GCNs aggregate one- or few-hop graph neighbourhoods, and ignore the dependency between not linked body
joints. We propose to form hypergraph to model hyperedges between graph nodes (e.g., third- and fourth-order
hyper-edges capture three and four nodes) which help capture higher-order motion patterns of groups of body joints.
We split action sequences into temporal blocks, Higherorder Transformer (HoT) produces embeddings of each
temporal block based on (i) the body joints, (ii) pairwise
links of body joints and (iii) higher-order hyper-edges of
skeleton body joints. We combine such HoT embeddings of
hyper-edges of orders 1, ..., r by a novel Multi-order Multimode Transformer (3Mformer) with two modules whose order can be exchanged to achieve coupled-mode attention on
coupled-mode tokens based on ‘channel-temporal block’,
‘order-channel-body joint’, ‘channel-hyper-edge (any order)’ and ‘channel-only’ pairs. The first module, called
Multi-order Pooling (MP), additionally learns weighted aggregation along the hyper-edge mode, whereas the second
module, Temporal block Pooling (TP), aggregates along
the temporal block1 mode. Our end-to-end trainable network yields state-of-the-art results compared to GCN-,
transformer- and hypergraph-based counterparts.

1. Introduction
Action Recognition has applications in video surveillance, human-computer interaction, sports analysis, and
virtual reality [24, 25, 40, 52–59]. Di↵erent from videobased methods which mainly focus on modeling the spatiotemporal representations from RGB frames and/or optical flow [25, 52–55, 58], skeleton sequences, representing
a spatio-temporal evolution of 3D body joints, have been
* Corresponding author.
1 For brevity, we write ⌧ temporal blocks per sequence but ⌧ varies.

proven robust against sensor noises and e↵ective in action
recognition while being computationally and storage efficient [24, 40, 52, 53, 56, 57, 59]. The skeleton data is usually
obtained by either localization of 2D/3D coordinates of human body joints with the depth sensors or pose estimation
algorithms applied to videos [2]. Skeleton sequences enjoy (i) simple structural connectivity of skeletal graph and
(ii) temporal continuity of 3D body joints evolving in time.
While temporal evolution of each body joint is highly informative, embeddings of separate body joints are insensitive
to relations between body parts. Moreover, while the links
between adjacent 3D body joints (following the structural
connectivity) are very informative as they model relations,
these links represent highly correlated nodes in the sense of
their temporal evolution. Thus, modeling larger groups of
3D body joints as hyper-edges can capture more complex
spatio-temporal motion dynamics.
The existing graph-based models mainly di↵er by how
they handle temporal information. Graph Neural Network (GNN) may encode spatial neighborhood of the node
followed by aggregation by LSTM [46, 65]. Alternatively, Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) may perform
spatio-temporal convolution in the neighborhood of each
node [64]. Spatial GCNs perform convolution within one or
two hop distance of each node, e.g., spatio-temporal GCN
model called ST-GCN [64] models spatio-temporal vicinity of each 3D body joint. As ST-GCN applies convolution
along structural connections (links between body joints),
structurally distant joints, which may cover key patterns of
actions, are largely ignored. ST-GCN captures ever larger
neighborhoods as layers are added but su↵ers from oversmoothing that can be mitigated by linear GCNs [76–78].
Human actions are associated with interaction groups
of skeletal joints, e.g., wrist alone, head-wrist, head-wristankles, etc. The impact of these groups of joints on each
action di↵ers, and the degree of influence of each joint
should be learned. Accordingly, designing a better model
for skeleton data is vital given the topology of skeleton
graph is suboptimal. While GCN can be applied to a fullyconnected graph (i.e., 3D body joints as densely connected

5620

