This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Semantic Segmentation in the Wild:
Learning Generalized Models for Adverse-Condition Point Clouds
Aoran Xiao1 , Jiaxing Huang1 , Weihao Xuan2 , Ruijie Ren3 , Kangcheng Liu1
Dayan Guan4 , Abdulmotaleb El Saddik4,6 , Shijian Lu1,† , Eric Xing4,5
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Waseda University 3 Technical University of Denmark
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
5
Carnegie Mellon University 6 University of Ottawa

(a) A LiDAR scan captured in a snowy day

(b) Point-level annotations

Figure 1. We introduce SemanticSTF, an adverse-weather LiDAR point cloud dataset with dense point-level annotations that can be
exploited for the study of point cloud semantic segmentation under all-weather conditions (including fog, snow, and rain). The graph on
the left shows one scan sample captured on a snowy day, and the one on the right shows the corresponding point-level annotations.

Abstract
Robust point cloud parsing under all-weather conditions is crucial to level-5 autonomy in autonomous driving.
However, how to learn a universal 3D semantic segmentation (3DSS) model is largely neglected as most existing
benchmarks are dominated by point clouds captured under
normal weather. We introduce SemanticSTF, an adverseweather point cloud dataset that provides dense point-level
annotations and allows to study 3DSS under various adverse weather conditions. We study all-weather 3DSS modeling under two setups: 1) domain adaptive 3DSS that
adapts from normal-weather data to adverse-weather data;
2) domain generalizable 3DSS that learns all-weather 3DSS
models from normal-weather data. Our studies reveal the
challenge while existing 3DSS methods encounter adverseweather data, showing the great value of SemanticSTF in
steering the future endeavor along this very meaningful research direction. In addition, we design a domain randomization technique that alternatively randomizes the geometry styles of point clouds and aggregates their embeddings,
ultimately leading to a generalizable model that can improve 3DSS under various adverse weather effectively. The
SemanticSTF and related codes are available at https:
//github.com/xiaoaoran/SemanticSTF.
† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
3D LiDAR point clouds play an essential role in semantic scene understanding in various applications such as
self-driving vehicles and autonomous drones. With the recent advance of LiDAR sensors, several LiDAR point cloud
datasets [2, 11, 49] such as SemanticKITTI [2] have been
proposed which greatly advanced the research in 3D semantic segmentation (3DSS) [19, 41, 62] for the task of
point cloud parsing. As of today, most existing point cloud
datasets for outdoor scenes are dominated by point clouds
captured under normal weather. However, 3D vision applications such as autonomous driving require reliable 3D
perception under all-weather conditions including various
adverse weather such as fog, snow, and rain. How to learn
a weather-tolerant 3DSS model is largely neglected due to
the absence of related benchmark datasets.
Although several studies [3, 33] attempt to include adverse weather conditions in point cloud datasets, such as the
STF dataset [3] that consists of LiDAR point clouds captured under various adverse weather, these efforts focus on
object detection benchmarks and do not provide any pointwise annotations which are critical in various tasks such as
3D semantic and instance segmentation. To address this
gap, we introduce SemanticSTF, an adverse-weather point
cloud dataset that extends the STF Detection Benchmark by
providing point-wise annotations of 21 semantic categories,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. Similar to STF, SemanticSTF cap-

9382

