This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NIRVANA: Neural Implicit Representations of Videos with
Adaptive Networks and Autoregressive Patch-wise Modeling
Shishira R Maiya1,2 * †, Sharath Girish1 ,* Max Ehrlich1 , Hanyu Wang1†, Kwot Sin Lee2 ,
Patrick Poirson2 , Pengxiang Wu2 , Chen Wang2 , Abhinav Shrivastava1
1
2
University of Maryland
Snap Inc
{maxehr,sgirish,shishira,hwang}@umd.edu
{klee6, ppoirson, pwu,chen.wang}@snapchat.com abhinav@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INR) have recently
shown to be powerful tool for high-quality video compression. However, existing works are are limiting as they do
not exploit the temporal redundancy in videos, leading to a
long encoding time. Additionally, these methods have fixed
architectures which do not scale to longer videos or higher
resolutions. To address these issues, we propose NIRVANA,
which treats videos as groups of frames and fits separate
networks to each group performing patch-wise prediction.
The video representation is modeled autoregressively, with
networks fit on a current group initialized using weights
from the previous group’s model. To enhance efficiency, we
quantize the parameters during training, requiring no posthoc pruning or quantization. When compared with previous works on the benchmark UVG dataset, NIRVANA improves encoding quality from 37.36 to 37.70 (in terms of
PSNR) and the encoding speed by 12×, while maintaining the same compression rate. In contrast to prior video
INR works which struggle with larger resolution and longer
videos, we show that our algorithm scales naturally due
to its patch-wise and autoregressive design. Moreover, our
method achieves variable bitrate compression by adapting
to videos with varying inter-frame motion. NIRVANA also
achieves 6× decoding speed scaling well with more GPUs,
making it practical for various deployment scenarios.1 .

1. Introduction
In the information age today, where petabytes of content is generated and consumed every hour, the ability to
compress data fast and reliably is important. Not only
does compression make data cheaper for server hosting, it

SIREN

NeRV

Pixelwise prediction

Framewise prediction

Single
model

Single
model

( x ,y , t )

( xp , yp )

Pixel coordinates

(t)

Patch coordinates Time coordinates

Autoregressive
modeling
Initialize

Patchwise
prediction
Frame 1

2

3

4

5

6

Frame-group 1 Frame-group 2

N-2

N

Frame-group N

g

Full video frames
Figure 1. Overview of NIRVANA: Prior video INR works perform either pixel-wise or frame-wise prediction. We instead perform spatio-temporal patch-wise prediction and fit individual neural networks to groups of frames (clips) which are initialized using
networks trained on the previous group. Such an autoregressive
patch-wise approach exploits both spatial and temporal redundancies present in videos while promoting scalability and adaptability
to varying video content, resolution or duration.

* First two authors contributed equally
† Work done during internship at Snap Inc.
1 The project site can be found here

14378

