This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GradICON: Approximate Diffeomorphisms via Gradient Inverse Consistency
Lin Tian∗1 Hastings Greer*1 François-Xavier Vialard2,3 Roland Kwitt4 Raúl San José Estépar5
Richard Jarrett Rushmore6 Nikolaos Makris5 Sylvain Bouix7 Marc Niethammer1
1

UNC Chapel Hill 2 LIGM, Université Gustave Eiffel 3 MOKAPLAN, INRIA Paris
4
University of Salzburg 5 Harvard Medical School 6 Boston University 7 ÉTS Montréal

Abstract
We present an approach to learning regular spatial transformations between image pairs in the context of medical
image registration. Contrary to optimization-based registration techniques and many modern learning-based methods,
we do not directly penalize transformation irregularities but
instead promote transformation regularity via an inverse
consistency penalty. We use a neural network to predict a
map between a source and a target image as well as the map
when swapping the source and target images. Different from
existing approaches, we compose these two resulting maps
and regularize deviations of the Jacobian of this composition from the identity matrix. This regularizer – GradICON –
results in much better convergence when training registration models compared to promoting inverse consistency of
the composition of maps directly while retaining the desirable implicit regularization effects of the latter. We achieve
state-of-the-art registration performance on a variety of realworld medical image datasets using a single set of hyperparameters and a single non-dataset-specific training protocol.
Code is available at https://github.com/uncbiag/ICON.

1. Introduction
Image registration is a key component in medical image
analysis to estimate spatial correspondences between image
pairs [14, 53]. Applications include estimating organ motion
between treatment fractions in radiation therapy [25, 37],
capturing disease progression [64], or allowing for localized
analyses in a common coordinate system [19].
Many different registration algorithms have been proposed over the last decades in medical imaging [10, 41, 44,
63, 64] and in computer vision [21, 33]. Contributions have
focused on different transformation models (i.e., what types
of transformations are considered permissible), similarity
measures (i.e., how “good alignment” between image pairs
is quantified), and solution strategies (i.e., how transformation parameters are numerically estimated). The respective
choices are generally based on application requirements as
* Equal Contribution.

OAI

HCP

COPDGene

Figure 1. Example source (left), target (middle) and warped source
(right) images obtained with our method, trained with a single
protocol, using the proposed GradICON regularizer.

well as assumptions about image appearance and the expected transformation space. In consequence, while reliable registration algorithms have been developed for transformation models ranging from simple parametric models
(e.g., rigid and affine transformations) to significantly more
complex nonparametric formulations [41, 44, 63] that allow
highly localized control, practical applications of registration
typically require many choices and rely on significant parameter tuning to achieve good performance. Recent image
registration work has shifted the focus from solutions based
on numerical optimization for a specific image pair to learning to predict transformations based on large populations of
image pairs via neural networks [10, 15, 17, 34, 35, 56, 57, 68].
However, while numerical optimization is now replaced by
training a regression model which can be used to quickly predict transformations at test time, parameter tuning remains a

18084

