This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ObjectMatch: Robust Registration using Canonical Object Correspondences
Can Gümeli

Angela Dai

Matthias Nießner

Technical University of Munich

Figure 1. Modern camera pose estimation relies on feature matching between overlapping frames - in this work, we present ObjectMatch to
find correspondences between frames with little or no overlap by predicting semantic mappings through canonical object correspondences.
The images above share no direct overlap, yet our method establishes indirect correspondences, thus enabling a successful registration.

1. Introduction
Abstract
We present ObjectMatch1 , a semantic and object-centric
camera pose estimator for RGB-D SLAM pipelines. Modern camera pose estimators rely on direct correspondences
of overlapping regions between frames; however, they cannot align camera frames with little or no overlap. In this
work, we propose to leverage indirect correspondences obtained via semantic object identification. For instance,
when an object is seen from the front in one frame and from
the back in another frame, we can provide additional pose
constraints through canonical object correspondences. We
first propose a neural network to predict such correspondences on a per-pixel level, which we then combine in our
energy formulation with state-of-the-art keypoint matching
solved with a joint Gauss-Newton optimization. In a pairwise setting, our method improves registration recall of
state-of-the-art feature matching, including from 24% to
45% in pairs with 10% or less inter-frame overlap. In registering RGB-D sequences, our method outperforms cuttingedge SLAM baselines in challenging, low-frame-rate scenarios, achieving more than 35% reduction in trajectory error in multiple scenes.

1 https://cangumeli.github.io/ObjectMatch/

RGB-D registration and 3D SLAM has been a fundamental task in computer vision, with significant study and
enabling many applications in mixed reality, robotics, and
content creation. Central to both state-of-the-art traditional
and learning-based camera pose estimation is establishing
correspondences between points in input frames. However,
correspondence estimation remains quite challenging when
there is little or no overlap between frames.
In contrast, humans can easily localize across these challenging scenarios by leveraging additional semantic knowledge – in particular, by further localizing at the level of objects and identifying matching objects between views. For
instance, when observing a chair from the back and the side
(e.g., in Figure 1), view overlap is minimal (or even no
view overlap), resulting in failed registration from keypoint
matching. However, the semantic knowledge of the chair
and its object pose nonetheless enables humans to estimate
the poses from which the front and side views were taken.
Thus, we propose to take a new perspective on camera pose
estimation and imbue camera registration with awareness of
such semantic correspondences between objects for robust
performance in these challenging scenarios.
To this end, we propose ObjectMatch, a new paradigm
for camera pose estimation leveraging canonical object correspondences in tandem with local keypoint correspondences between views. This enables significantly more
robust registration under a variety of challenging scenar-

13082

