This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

N-Gram in Swin Transformers for Efficient Lightweight Image Super-Resolution
Haram Choi1 Jeongmin Lee2 Jihoon Yang1 *
1
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Sogang University

1. Introduction
The goal of single image super-resolution (SR) is to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution
(LR) images. Many deep learning-based methods have
worked in this field. In particular, several image restoration studies [16, 27, 55, 61, 63, 66] have adapted the window self-attention (WSA) proposed by Swin Transformer
(Swin) [32] as it integrates long-range dependency of Vision Transformer [14] and locality of conventional convolution. However, two critical problems remain in these works.
First, the receptive field of the plain WSA is limited within a
small local window [52,56,58]. It prevents the models from
utilizing the texture or pattern of neighbor windows to re* Corresponding author.

28.4

LG Innotek

39.2
NGswin (ours)

28.5
HNCT

FMEN (CVPRW22)

28.3 (CVPRW22)
28.2
28.1
28.0
20

RFDN-L (ECCV20)
LatticeNet (ECCV20)
SRPN-Lite
(ICLR22)
IMDN (ACMMM19)
CARN (ECCV18)

40

60
80
100
Mult-Adds (G)

120

PSNR (Manga109 x2)

While some studies have proven that Swin Transformer
(Swin) with window self-attention (WSA) is suitable for single image super-resolution (SR), the plain WSA ignores
the broad regions when reconstructing high-resolution images due to a limited receptive field. In addition, many
deep learning SR methods suffer from intensive computations. To address these problems, we introduce the N-Gram
context to the low-level vision with Transformers for the
first time. We define N-Gram as neighboring local windows in Swin, which differs from text analysis that views
N-Gram as consecutive characters or words. N-Grams interact with each other by sliding-WSA, expanding the regions seen to restore degraded pixels. Using the N-Gram
context, we propose NGswin, an efficient SR network with
SCDP bottleneck taking multi-scale outputs of the hierarchical encoder. Experimental results show that NGswin
achieves competitive performance while maintaining an
efficient structure when compared with previous leading
methods. Moreover, we also improve other Swin-based SR
methods with the N-Gram context, thereby building an enhanced model: SwinIR-NG. Our improved SwinIR-NG outperforms the current best lightweight SR approaches and
establishes state-of-the-art results. Codes are available at
https://github.com/rami0205/NGramSwin.

28.6

PSNR (Urban100 x3)

Abstract

2

w/o N-Gram
w/ N-Gram

39.0

38.8

38.6

NGswin

SwinIR-light

HNCT

Figure 1. Two tracks of this paper using the N-Gram context.
(Left) NGswin outperforms previous leading SR methods with
an efficient structure. (Right) Our proposed N-Gram context improves different Swin Transformer-based SR models.

cover degraded pixels, producing the distorted images. Second, recent state-of-the-art SR [9,27,61,66] and lightweight
SR [6, 15, 35, 63] networks require intensive computations.
Reducing operations is essential for real-world applications
if the parameters are kept around a certain level (e.g., 1M,
4MB sizes), because the primary consumption of semiconductor energy (concerning time) for neural networks is related to Mult-Adds operations [17, 47].
To overcome these problems, we define the N-Gram context as the interaction of neighbor local windows. Neighbor
uni-Gram embeddings interact with each other by slidingWSA to produce the N-Gram context features before window partitioning. The uni-Gram embeddings result from
a channel-reducing group convolution [10] to decrease the
complexity of N-Gram interaction (see Fig. 3c). Our NGram context efficiently expands the receptive field of WSA
for recovery tasks. This work introduces N-Gram to lowlevel vision with Transformers for the first time, inspired
by the following facts: N-Gram language models treat the
extended context beyond each separate word to understand
text statistically [8]. Since images have heavy spatial redundancy, some degraded pixels can be recovered from contextual information of neighbor pixels [18].
As shown in Fig. 1, our work progresses in two tracks.
Mainly, to solve the problem of the intensive operations in SR, we propose an efficient N-Gram Swin Transformer (NGswin). As illustrated in Fig. 3a, NGswin consists of five components: a shallow module, three hierarchical encoder stages (with patch-merging) that contain
NSTBs (N-Gram Swin Transformer Blocks), SCDP Bot-

2071

