This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRDi: Single-View NeRF Synthesis
with Language-Guided Diffusion as General Image Priors
Congyue Deng2∗ Chiyu “Max” Jiang1 Charles R. Qi1 Xinchen Yan1
Leonidas Guibas2,3 Dragomir Anguelov1
1

Waymo

2

Stanford University

3

Yin Zhou1

Google Research

Figure 1. From left to right: We present a single-image NeRF synthesis framework for in-the-wild images without 3D supervision by
leveraging general priors from large-scale image diffusion models. Given an input image, we optimize for a NeRF by minimizing an image
distribution loss for arbitrary-view renderings with the diffusion model conditioned on the input image. We design a two-section semantic
feature as the conditioning input to the diffusion model. The first section is the image caption s0 which carries the overall semantics; the
second section is a text embedding s∗ extracted from the input image with textual inversion, which captures additional visual cues. Our
two-section semantic feature provides an appropriate image prior, allowing the synthesis of a realistic NeRF coherent to the input image.

Abstract
2D-to-3D reconstruction is an ill-posed problem, yet humans are good at solving this problem due to their prior
knowledge of the 3D world developed over years. Driven by
this observation, we propose NeRDi, a single-view NeRF
synthesis framework with general image priors from 2D
diffusion models. Formulating single-view reconstruction
as an image-conditioned 3D generation problem, we optimize the NeRF representations by minimizing a diffusion
loss on its arbitrary view renderings with a pretrained image diffusion model under the input-view constraint. We
leverage off-the-shelf vision-language models and introduce
a two-section language guidance as conditioning inputs to
the diffusion model. This is essentially helpful for improving
multiview content coherence as it narrows down the general
image prior conditioned on the semantic and visual features
of the single-view input image. Additionally, we introduce
a geometric loss based on estimated depth maps to regularize the underlying 3D geometry of the NeRF. Experimental

results on the DTU MVS dataset show that our method can
synthesize novel views with higher quality even compared
to existing methods trained on this dataset. We also demonstrate our generalizability in zero-shot NeRF synthesis for
in-the-wild images.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is a long-existing problem in computer vision and computer graphics. Recent progresses
in neural rendering such as NeRFs [22] have made huge
strides in novel view synthesis. Given a set of multiview images with known camera poses, NeRFs represent
a static 3D scene as a radiance field parametrized by a neural network, which enables rendering at novel views with
the learned network. A line of work has been focusing
on reducing the required inputs to NeRF reconstructions,
ranging from dense inputs with calibrated camera poses to
sparse images [11, 25, 52] with noisy or without camera
*Work done as an intern at Waymo.

20637

