This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Color Backdoor: A Robust Poisoning Attack in Color Space
Wenbo Jiang1 * Hongwei Li1† Guowen Xu2 Tianwei Zhang2
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Backdoor attacks against neural networks have been intensively investigated, where the adversary compromises
the integrity of the victim model, causing it to make wrong
predictions for inference samples containing a specific trigger. To make the trigger more imperceptible and humanunnoticeable, a variety of stealthy backdoor attacks have
been proposed, some works employ imperceptible perturbations as the backdoor triggers, which restrict the pixel
differences of the triggered image and clean image. Some
works use special image styles (e.g., reflection, Instagram
filter) as the backdoor triggers. However, these attacks sacrifice the robustness, and can be easily defeated by common
preprocessing-based defenses.
This paper presents a novel color backdoor attack,
which can exhibit robustness and stealthiness at the same
time. The key insight of our attack is to apply a uniform
color space shift for all pixels as the trigger. This global
feature is robust to image transformation operations and the
triggered samples maintain natural-looking. To find the optimal trigger, we first define naturalness restrictions through
the metrics of PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS. Then we employ the
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm to search for
the optimal trigger that can achieve high attack effectiveness and robustness while satisfying the restrictions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of PSO and
the robustness of color backdoor against different mainstream backdoor defenses.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have been applied in an increasing variety of domains, including image classification [10], speech
recognition [16] and natural language processing [1]. However, recent studies show that neural networks are susceptible to backdoor attacks [9, 14]. The adversary can embed
* This work was done at NTU as a visiting student.
† Corresponding author

a backdoor into the victim model by poisoning the training dataset. Consequently, the backdoored victim model
will perform normally on clean samples but behave wrongly
on samples containing a specific trigger. Such threat can
bring severe damages to many critical applications in the
real world, such as face authentication [36], malware detection [30], speech recognition [39], autonomous driving [13],
etc.
Researchers advance the backdoor study by proposing
a variety of sophisticated attack techniques. These attacks
are improved from two perspectives. (1) Stealthiness. The
backdoor in the infected model can bypass existing detection approaches. Additionally, the triggers are designed to
look natural and evade human inspection. (2) Robustness.
The backdoor and the triggers are expected to be robust and
cannot be easily removed by the defender. A backdoor attack with these features will be very difficult to mitigate.
However, we observe that pursuing the visual stealthiness can sacrifice the attack robustness. Specifically, there
can be two kinds of strategies for stealthy backdoor attacks.
The first one is invisible triggers, which restrict the pixel
distances between the clean and triggered images [2,17,46].
Some attacks further enforce the consistency of the latent
representation besides the pixels to achieve stealthiness in
the feature space [5, 27, 44]. The second strategy is natural triggers, which use special image styles (e.g., reflection [22], Instagram filter [21], weather condition [3]) to
activate the backdoor. The triggered images do not need
to maintain the similarity from the clean images, but just
look natural to human eyes. Unfortunately, these delicate
backdoor triggers can be easily invalidated by common image transformation operations, and the corresponding backdoor attacks are vulnerable to some preprocessing-based
defenses, e.g., DeepSweep [25], image compression [37],
ShrinkPad [19] (see Section 4.4.1 for evaluation results).
Besides, some methods [3, 5, 27, 44] require the adversary
to have full control over the victim’s training process, which
can not be applied to the data poisoning threat model.
To overcome these limitations, we propose color backdoor, a novel poisoning-based backdoor attack that can ex-

8133

