This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sliced Optimal Partial Transport
Yikun Bai∗1 & Bernhard Schmitzer∗2 & Matthew Thorpe3,4 & Soheil Kolouri1
1
Department of Computer Science, Vanderbilt University
2
Institute of Computer Science, Göttingen University
3
Department of Mathematics, University of Manchester
4
The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) has become exceedingly popular in machine learning, data science, and computer vision.
The core assumption in the OT problem is the equal total amount of mass in source and target measures, which
limits its application. Optimal Partial Transport (OPT) is
a recently proposed solution to this limitation. Similar to
the OT problem, the computation of OPT relies on solving
a linear programming problem (often in high dimensions),
which can become computationally prohibitive. In this paper, we propose an efficient algorithm for calculating the
OPT problem between two non-negative measures in one
dimension. Next, following the idea of sliced OT distances,
we utilize slicing to define the Sliced OPT distance. Finally,
we demonstrate the computational and accuracy benefits of
the Sliced OPT-based method in various numerical experiments. In particular, we show an application of our proposed Sliced OPT problem in noisy point cloud registration
and color adaptation. Our code is available at Github Link.

1. Introduction
The Optimal Transport (OT) problem studies how to
find the most cost-efficient way to transport one probability measure to another, and it gives rise to popular probability metrics like the Wasserstein distance. OT has attracted abundant attention in data science, statistics, machine learning, signal processing, and computer vision
[1, 12, 13, 21, 24, 31, 37, 39, 47, 49]
A core assumption in the OT problem is the equal total amount of mass in the source and target measures (e.g.,
probability measures). Many practical problems, however,
deal with comparing non-negative measures with varying
total amounts of mass, e.g., shape analysis [9, 46], domain adaptation [17], color transfer [10]. In addition, OT

distances are often not robust to outliers and noise, as
transporting outliers could be prohibitively expensive and
might compromise the distance estimation. To address
these issues, many variants of the OT problem have been
recently proposed, for example, the optimal partial transport (OPT) problem [6, 18, 19], the Hellinger–Kantorovich
distance [9, 36], unnormalized optimal transport [22], and
Kantorovich–Rubinstein norm [25,35]. These variants were
subsequently unified under the name “unbalanced optimal
transport” [11, 36].
The computational complexity of linear programming
for balanced and partial OT problems is often a bottleneck
for solving large-scale problems. Different approaches have
been developed to address this issue. For instance, by entropic regularization, the problem becomes strictly convex
and can be solved with the celebrated Sinkhorn–Knopp algorithm [14,45] which has been extended to the unbalanced
setting [10]. This approach can still be computationally expensive for small regularization levels. Other strategies exploit specific properties of ground costs. For example, if the
ground cost is determined by the unique path on a tree, the
problem can be efficiently solved in the balanced [33, 41]
and the unbalanced setting [44]. In particular, balanced 1dimensional transport problems with convex ground costs
can be solved by the northwest corner rule, which essentially amounts to sorting the support points of the two input
measures.
Based on this, another popular method is the sliced OT
approach [5, 30, 43], which assumes the ground cost is
consistent with the Euclidean distance (in 1-dimensional
space). Furthermore, it has been shown [30, 32, 44] that the
OT distance in Euclidean space can be approximated by the
OT distance in 1-dimensional Euclidean space. Inspired by
these works, in this paper, we propose the sliced version of
OPT and an efficient computational algorithm for empirical distributions
with uniform weights, i.e., measures of the
Pn
form i=1 δxi , where δx is the Dirac measure. Our contributions in this paper can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a primal-dual algorithm for 1-dimensional

∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

13681

