This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Biomechanics-guided Facial Action Unit Detection through Force Modeling
Zijun Cui1 , Chenyi Kuang1 , Tian Gao2 , Kartik Talamadupula2 , Qiang Ji1
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 IBM Research
ceejkl@gmail.com, {kuangc2, jiq}@rpi.edu, {tgao, krtalamad}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Existing AU detection algorithms are mainly based on
appearance information extracted from 2D images, and
well-established facial biomechanics that governs 3D facial skin deformation is rarely considered. In this paper,
we propose a biomechanics-guided AU detection approach,
where facial muscle activation forces are modelled and
are employed to predict AU activation. Specifically, our
model consists of two branches: 3D physics branch and
2D image branch. In 3D physics branch, we first derive
the Euler-Lagrange equation governing facial deformation.
The Euler-Lagrange equation represented as an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) is embedded into a differentiable ODE solver. Muscle activation forces together with
other physics parameters are firstly regressed, and then are
utilized to simulate 3D deformation by solving the ODE.
By leveraging facial biomechanics, we obtain physically
plausible facial muscle activation forces. 2D image branch
compensates 3D physics branch by employing additional
appearance information from 2D images. Both estimated
forces and appearance features are employed for AU detection. The proposed approach achieves competitive AU detection performance on two benchmark datasets. Furthermore, by leveraging biomechanics, our approach achieves
outstanding performance with reduced training data.

1. Introduction
Action unit (AU) describes a local facial behavior, representing the movement of one facial muscle or a group of
facial muscles [6]. For example, AU12 (lip corner puller)
is corresponding to the muscle zygomatic major. AU15 (lip
corner depressor) is corresponding to the muscle depressor
anguli oris. In Figure 1, we visualize the muscles zygomatic
major and depressor anguli oris. Due to the muscle activation, facial changes, in terms of both appearance and skin
geometry, can be observed. Action unit detection task is to
automatically predict if an AU is activated or not, given a
2D image. The majority of existing AU detection methods
perform AU detection based on appearance information ex-

(a) Zygomaticus major

(b) Depressor anguli oris

Figure 1. Visualization of depressor anguli oris (shown in (a)) and
orbicularis oris (shown in (b)). Images are from https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki available under Public Domain.

tracted from 2D images [4,16,26,46]. These algorithms are
mainly data-driven, whose performance highly depends on
the quantity and quality of AU annotations. Unfortunately,
AU annotations are hard to obtain and prone to errors. Besides, data-driven AU detection algorithms can’t generalize
well to unseen scenarios beyond training samples.
To perform robust and generalizable AU detection under limited AU annotations, generic knowledge about the
anatomical spatial relationships among facial muscles is
considered, based on which AU relationships are derived [16, 17, 48, 49]. Facial biomechanics, which defines
the dynamic of facial 3D deformation given muscle activation forces and is represented as second-order ODEs, is
rarely considered. Facial biomechanics is important since
it directly connects the muscle activation to skin deformation through principled physics laws, which is applicable to
different subjects and independent of a specific dataset.
In this paper, we propose a biomechanics-guided AU
detection approach, where facial muscle activation forces
are modelled given 2D images and are employed for AU
detection task. Our model consists of two branches: 3D
physics branch and 2D image branch. In 3D physics branch,
the Euler-Lagrange equation governing 3D deformation is
firstly derived, which is represented as an ordinary differential equation (ODE). Muscle activation forces together
with other physics parameters are regressed and utilized for
physics-based reconstruction by solving the ODE. 2D im-

8694

