This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ISBNet: a 3D Point Cloud Instance Segmentation Network
with Instance-aware Sampling and Box-aware Dynamic Convolution
Tuan Duc Ngo
Binh-Son Hua
Khoi Nguyen
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{v.tuannd42, v.sonhb, v.khoindm}@vinai.io

Abstract
Existing 3D instance segmentation methods are predominated by the bottom-up design – manually fine-tuned algorithm to group points into clusters followed by a refinement
network. However, by relying on the quality of the clusters, these methods generate susceptible results when (1)
nearby objects with the same semantic class are packed
together, or (2) large objects with loosely connected regions. To address these limitations, we introduce ISBNet, a
novel cluster-free method that represents instances as kernels and decodes instance masks via dynamic convolution.
To efficiently generate high-recall and discriminative kernels, we propose a simple strategy named Instance-aware
Farthest Point Sampling to sample candidates and leverage the local aggregation layer inspired by PointNet++ to
encode candidate features. Moreover, we show that predicting and leveraging the 3D axis-aligned bounding boxes
in the dynamic convolution further boosts performance.
Our method set new state-of-the-art results on ScanNetV2
(55.9), S3DIS (60.8), and STPLS3D (49.2) in terms of AP
and retains fast inference time (237ms per scene on ScanNetV2). The source code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/ISBNet.

1. Introduction
3D instance segmentation (3DIS) is a core problem of
deep learning in the 3D domain. Given a 3D scene represented by a point cloud, we seek to assign each point with
a semantic class and a unique instance label. 3DIS is an
important 3D perception task and has a wide range of applications in autonomous driving, augmented reality, and
robot navigation where point cloud data can be leveraged to
complement the information provided by 2D images. Compared to 2D image instance segmentation (2DIS), 3DIS is
arguably harder due to much higher variations in appearance
and spatial extent along with unequal distribution of point
cloud, i.e., dense near object surface and sparse elsewhere.
Thus, it is not trivial to apply 2DIS methods to 3DIS.

Ground Truth

1

DyCo3D's

2

"chair"

Ours

DyCo3D's

"table"

Ours

Figure 1. In DyCo3D [16], kernel prediction quality is greatly
affected by the centroid-based clustering algorithm which has two
issues: 1 mis-grouping nearby instances and 2 over-segment
a large object into multiple fragments. Our method addresses
these issues by instance-aware point sampling, achieving far better
results. Each sample point aggregates information from its local
context to generate a kernel for predicting its own object mask, and
the final instances will be filtered and selected by an NMS.

A typical approach for 3DIS, DyCo3D [16], adopts dynamic convolution [33, 37] to predict instance masks. Specifically, points are clustered, voxelized, and passed through a
3D Unet to generate instance kernels for dynamic convolution with the feature of all points in the scene. This approach
is illustrated in Fig. 2 (a). However, this approach has several
limitations. First, the clustering algorithm heavily relies on
the centroid-offset prediction whose quality deteriorates significantly when: (1) objects are densely packed so that two
objects can be mistakenly grouped together as one object, or
(2) large objects whose parts are loosely connected resulting

13550

