This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Post-Processing Temporal Action Detection
Sauradip Nag1,2
1

Xiatian Zhu1,3

CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK
3

2

Yi-Zhe Song1,2

Tao Xiang1,2

iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Center on Artificial Intelligence, UK

Surrey Institute for People-Centred Artificial Intelligence, UK

{s.nag,xiatian.zhu,y.song,t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Existing Temporal Action Detection (TAD) methods typically take a pre-processing step in converting an input
varying-length video into a fixed-length snippet representation sequence, before temporal boundary estimation and
action classification. This pre-processing step would temporally downsample the video, reducing the inference resolution and hampering the detection performance in the
original temporal resolution. In essence, this is due to a
temporal quantization error introduced during resolution
downsampling and recovery. This could negatively impact
the TAD performance, but is largely ignored by existing
methods. To address this problem, in this work we introduce a novel model-agnostic post-processing method without model redesign and retraining. Specifically, we model
the start and end points of action instances with a Gaussian distribution for enabling temporal boundary inference
at a sub-snippet level. We further introduce an efficient
Taylor-expansion based approximation, dubbed as Gaussian Approximated Post-processing (GAP). Extensive experiments demonstrate that our GAP can consistently improve a wide variety of pre-trained off-the-shelf TAD models on the challenging ActivityNet (+0.2%∼0.7% in average mAP) and THUMOS (+0.2%∼0.5% in average mAP)
benchmarks. Such performance gains are already significant and highly comparable to those achieved by novel
model designs. Also, GAP can be integrated with model
training for further performance gain. Importantly, GAP
enables lower temporal resolutions for more efficient inference, facilitating low-resource application. The code is
available at https://github.com/sauradip/GAP

1. Introduction
The objective of Temporal action detection (TAD) is to
identify both the temporal interval (i.e., start and end points)
and the class label of all action instances in an untrimmed
video [3, 7]. Given a test video, existing TAD methods

Figure 1. A typical pipeline for temporal action detection. (a) For
efficiency and model design ease, temporal resolution reduction
is often applied during pre-processing. This causes model inference at lower (coarse) temporal resolutions. (b) After bringing the
prediction results back to the original temporal resolution during
inference, quantization error will be introduced inevitably.

typically generate a set of action instance candidates via
proposal generation based on regressing predefined anchor
boxes [4, 6, 13, 23] or directly predicting the start and end
times of proposals [2,9,10,15,25–27] and global segmentation masking [14]. To facilitate deep model design and improve computational efficiency, most TAD methods would
pre-process a varying-length video into a fixed-length snippet sequence by first extracting frame-level visual features
18837

