This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Discriminative Representations for Skeleton Based Action Recognition
Huanyu Zhou1 , Qingjie Liu1,2,3,∗, Yunhong Wang1
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, 3 Hangzhou Innovation Institute of Beihang University
{zhysora, qingjie.liu, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Human action recognition aims at classifying the category of human action from a segment of a video. Recently,
people have dived into designing GCN-based models to extract features from skeletons for performing this task, because skeleton representations are much more efficient and
robust than other modalities such as RGB frames. However,
when employing the skeleton data, some important clues
like related items are also discarded. It results in some
ambiguous actions that are hard to be distinguished and
tend to be misclassified. To alleviate this problem, we propose an auxiliary feature refinement head (FR Head), which
consists of spatial-temporal decoupling and contrastive feature refinement, to obtain discriminative representations of
skeletons. Ambiguous samples are dynamically discovered
and calibrated in the feature space. Furthermore, FR Head
could be imposed on different stages of GCNs to build a
multi-level refinement for stronger supervision. Extensive
experiments are conducted on NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D
120, and NW-UCLA datasets. Our proposed models obtain
competitive results from state-of-the-art methods and can
help to discriminate those ambiguous samples. Codes are
available at https://github.com/zhysora/FR-Head.

1. Introduction
In human-to-human communication, action plays a particularly important role. The behaviors convey intrinsic information like emotions and potential intentions and thus
help to understand the person. Empowering intelligent machines with the same ability to understand human behaviors
is critical for natural human-computer interaction and many
other practical applications, and has been attracting much
attention recently.
Nowadays, obtaining 2D/3D skeletons of humans has
become much easier thanks to the advanced sensor technology and human pose estimation algorithms. Skeletons
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. There are some actions that are hard to recognize because the skeleton representations lack important interactive objects and contexts, which make them easily confused with each
other.

are compact and robust representations that are immune to
viewpoint changes and cluttered backgrounds, making them
attractive for action recognition. A typical way to use skeletons for action recognition is to build Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) [38]. The joints and bones in the human
body naturally form graphs, which make GCNs a perfect
tool to extract topological features of skeletons. GCN-based
methods have become more and more popular, with another
merit that the models can be built lightweight and have high
computational efficiency compared with models processing
video frames.
However, using skeletons to recognize actions has some
limitations. A major problem is that skeleton representation
lacks important interactive objects and contextual informa-

10608

