This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Differentiable Lens:
Compound Lens Search over Glass Surfaces and Materials for Object Detection
Geoffroi Côté1,2

Fahim Mannan3 Simon Thibault1 Jean-François Lalonde1
1
Université Laval 2 Princeton University 3 Algolux

Abstract
Most camera lens systems are designed in isolation, separately from downstream computer vision methods. Recently,
joint optimization approaches that design lenses alongside
other components of the image acquisition and processing pipeline—notably, downstream neural networks—have
achieved improved imaging quality or better performance
on vision tasks. However, these existing methods optimize
only a subset of lens parameters and cannot optimize glass
materials given their categorical nature. In this work, we
develop a differentiable spherical lens simulation model that
accurately captures geometrical aberrations. We propose
an optimization strategy to address the challenges of lens
design—notorious for non-convex loss function landscapes
and many manufacturing constraints—that are exacerbated
in joint optimization tasks. Specifically, we introduce quantized continuous glass variables to facilitate the optimization
and selection of glass materials in an end-to-end design context, and couple this with carefully designed constraints to
support manufacturability. In automotive object detection,
we report improved detection performance over existing designs even when simplifying designs to two- or three-element
lenses, despite significantly degrading the image quality.

1. Introduction
The prevailing design paradigm for typical optical systems is to conceive them in isolation by use of simplified image quality metrics such as spot size [28]. However, achieving ideal imaging properties or optimal performance on computer vision tasks generally requires a more comprehensive
approach that includes the remaining parts of the image
acquisition and processing chain, in particular the sensor,
image signal processing, and downstream neural networks.
Over the years, many works have addressed the joint design of simple optical systems such as diffractive optical
elements (DOEs) [3, 20, 27, 31]. These works approach
joint optics design by simplifying the design to a single
phase plate that allows for a differentiable paraxial Fourier
image formation model, optimizable via stochastic gradi-

S-LAL12

S-LAH92

Felix Heide2,3

Scene

S-TIM1

[mm]

[mm]

0°

5°

10° 15° 20° 25°

(a) Baseline Lens

S-LAH96

0°

5°

10° 15° 20° 25°

(b) Optimized Lens

Figure 1. We introduce a differentiable lens simulation model and
an optimization method to optimize compound lenses specifically
for downstream computer vision tasks, and apply them to automotive object detection. Here, although the optimized two-element
lens has a worse average spot size than the baseline lens (136 µm
vs 80 µm), it achieves a better mean average precision (AP) on the
BDD100K dataset (32.0 vs 30.3). The optimized lens sacrifices
optical performance near the corners for better performance in the
small and medium field values where most of the objects are located.
In lens layout plots, dashed lines represent the baseline/optimized
counterpart and annotations indicate the optimized glass materials.

ent descent (SGD) variants. More recently, several differentiable lens simulation models have been introduced to
address the more complex compound lens systems present
in most commodity-type cameras. Tseng et al. [35] build
such a model by training a proxy neural network, whereas
other works [11, 17, 32] directly implement differentiable
ray-tracing operations in automatic differentiation frameworks [1, 22], an idea also discussed in [6, 40, 41]. However,
all relevant previous works [11, 17, 32, 35] optimize over
only a subset of possible surface profiles and spacings, and
ignore the optimization of glass materials altogether. Yet,
allowing all lens variables to be freely optimized—that is,
without predefined boundaries—provides an opportunity for
increased performance on downstream tasks.

20803

