This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatially Adaptive Self-Supervised Learning for Real-World Image Denoising
Junyi Li1 , Zhilu Zhang1 , Xiaoyu Liu1 , Chaoyu Feng, Xiaotao Wang, Lei Lei, Wangmeng Zuo1,2( )
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
nagejacob@gmail.com, cszlzhang@outlook.com, liuxiaoyu1104@gmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Signiﬁcant progress has been made in self-supervised
image denoising (SSID) in the recent few years. However,
most methods focus on dealing with spatially independent
noise, and they have little practicality on real-world sRGB
images with spatially correlated noise. Although pixelshufﬂe downsampling has been suggested for breaking the
noise correlation, it breaks the original information of images, which limits the denoising performance. In this paper,
we propose a novel perspective to solve this problem, i.e.,
seeking for spatially adaptive supervision for real-world
sRGB image denoising. Speciﬁcally, we take into account
the respective characteristics of ﬂat and textured regions
in noisy images, and construct supervisions for them separately. For ﬂat areas, the supervision can be safely derived
from non-adjacent pixels, which are much far from the current pixel for excluding the inﬂuence of the noise-correlated
ones. And we extend the blind-spot network to a blindneighborhood network (BNN) for providing supervision on
ﬂat areas. For textured regions, the supervision has to be
closely related to the content of adjacent pixels. And we
present a locally aware network (LAN) to meet the requirement, while LAN itself is selectively supervised with the output of BNN. Combining these two supervisions, a denoising
network (e.g., U-Net) can be well-trained. Extensive experiments show that our method performs favorably against
state-of-the-art SSID methods on real-world sRGB photographs. The code is available at https://github.
com/nagejacob/SpatiallyAdaptiveSSID.

(a) Noisy Input

(b) CVF-SID [35]

(c) AP-BSN+R3 [27]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Visual comparison between self-supervised denoising
methods on the DND dataset [37]. PSNR (dB) and SSIM with
respect to the ground-truth are marked on the result for quantitative
comparison. Our method performs better in removing spatially
correlated noise from real-world sRGB photographs.

able. A feasible solution is to collect real-world cleannoisy image pairs [1, 37] and take them for model training [2, 15, 21, 46, 47]. But building such datasets generally
requires strictly controlled environment as well as complicated photographing and post-processing, which is timeconsuming and labor-intensive. Moreover, the noise statistics vary under different cameras and illuminating conditions [43,54], and it is impractical to capture pairs for every
device and scenario.
To circumvent the limitations of noisy-clean pairs
collection, self-supervised image denoising (SSID) ap-

1. Introduction
Image denoising aims to restore clean images from noisy
observations [5, 11, 14], and it has achieved noticeable improvement with the advances in deep networks [2, 10, 21,
29–31, 33, 38, 40, 41, 46–48, 50, 51]. However, the models trained with synthetic noise usually perform poorly in
real-world scenarios in which noise is complex and change9914

