This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MethaneMapper: Spectral Absorption aware Hyperspectral Transformer for
Methane Detection
Satish Kumar

Ivan Arevalo

ASM Iftekhar

B S Manjunath

satishkumar@ucsb.edu

ifa@ucsb.edu

iftekhar@ucsb.edu

manj@ucsb.edu

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California Santa Barbara

Abstract
Methane (CH4 ) is the chief contributor to global climate change. Recent Airborne Visible-Infrared Imaging
Spectrometer-Next Generation (AVIRIS-NG) has been very
useful in quantitative mapping of methane emissions. Existing methods for analyzing this data are sensitive to local
terrain conditions, often require manual inspection from domain experts, prone to significant error and hence are not
scalable. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
end-to-end spectral absorption wavelength aware transformer network, MethaneMapper, to detect and quantify the
emissions. MethaneMapper introduces two novel modules
that help to locate the most relevant methane plume regions
in the spectral domain and uses them to localize these accurately. Thorough evaluation shows that MethaneMapper
achieves 0.63 mAP in detection and reduces the model size
(by 5×) compared to the current state of the art. In addition, we also introduce a large-scale dataset of methane
plume segmentation mask for over 1200 AVIRIS-NG flight
lines from 2015-2022. It contains over 4000 methane plume
sites. Our dataset will provide researchers the opportunity
to develop and advance new methods for tackling this challenging green-house gas detection problem with significant
broader social impact. Dataset and source code link1 .

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of detecting and localizing
methane (CH4 ) plumes from hyperspectral imaging data.
Detecting and localizing potential CH4 hot spots is a necessary first step in combating global warming due to greenhouse gas emissions. Methane gas is estimated to contribute
20% of global warming induced by greenhouse gasses [24]
with a Global Warming Potential (GWP) 86 times higher
than carbon dioxide (CO2 ) in a 20 year period [33]. To
1 https://github.com/UCSB-VRL/MethaneMapper-Spectral-Absorptionaware-Hyperspectral-Transformer-for-Methane-Detection

put into perspective, the amount of environmental damage
that CO2 can do in 100 years, CH4 can do in 1.2 years.
Hence it is critical to monitor and curb the CH4 emissions.
While CH4 emission has many sources, of particular interest are those from oil and natural gas industries. According
to the United States Environmental Protection Agency report, CH4 emissions from these industries accounts to 84
million tons per year [18]. These CH4 emissions emanate
from specific locations, mainly from pipeline leakages, storage tank leak or leakage from oil extraction point.
Current efforts to detect these sources mostly depend on
aerial imagery. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) has
conducted thousands of aerial surveys in the last decade to
collect data using an airborne sensor AVIRIS-NG [21]. Several methods have been proposed to detect potential emission sites from such imagery, for example, see [8, 9, 35, 38,
40, 41]. However, these methods are in general very sensitive to background context and land-cover types, resulting
in a large number of false positives that often require significant domain expert time to correct the detections. The
primary reason is that these pixel-based methods are solely
dependent on spectral correlations for detection. Spatial information can be very effective in reducing these false positives as CH4 plumes exhibit a plume-like structure morphology. There has been recent efforts in utilizing spatial
correlation using deep learning methods [22, 29], however,
these works don’t leverage spectral properties to filter out
confusers. For example, methane has similar spectral properties as white-painted commercial roofs or paved surfaces
such as airport asphalts [1]. This paper presents a novel
deep-network based solution to minimize the effects of such
confusers in accurately localizing methane plumes.
Our proposed approach, referred to as the MethaneMapper (MM), adapts the DETR [4], a transformer model that
combines the spectral and spatial correlations in the imaging data to generate a map of potential methane (CH4 )
plume candidates. These candidates reduce the search space
for a hyperspectral decoder to detect CH4 plumes and re-

17609

