This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frequency-Modulated Point Cloud Rendering with Easy Editing
Yi Zhang1* Xiaoyang Huang1* Bingbing Ni1† Teng Li2 Wenjun Zhang1
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Anhui University

0.023 FPS

Ours

NeRF

Point cloud

Edited

39.3 FPS

Original

{yizhangphd, huangxiaoyang, nibingbing}@sjtu.edu.cn

Point clouds

Real-time high-fidelity rendering

Object-level editing

Scene composition

Figure 1. We propose a novel frequency-modulated point cloud rendering pipeline, which enables high fidelity local detail reconstruction,
real-time rendering and user-friendly editing. Specifically, we can render sharper textures with 1700× faster than NeRF [21] and support
both object-level editing and scene composition.

Abstract
We develop an effective point cloud rendering pipeline
for novel view synthesis, which enables high fidelity local
detail reconstruction, real-time rendering and user-friendly
editing. In the heart of our pipeline is an adaptive frequency modulation module called Adaptive Frequency Net
(AFNet), which utilizes a hypernetwork to learn the local
texture frequency encoding that is consecutively injected
into adaptive frequency activation layers to modulate the
implicit radiance signal. This mechanism improves the frequency expressive ability of the network with richer frequency basis support, only at a small computational budget. To further boost performance, a preprocessing module is also proposed for point cloud geometry optimization
via point opacity estimation. In contrast to implicit rendering, our pipeline supports high-fidelity interactive editing
based on point cloud manipulation. Extensive experimental
results on NeRF-Synthetic, ScanNet, DTU and Tanks and
Temples datasets demonstrate the superior performances
achieved by our method in terms of PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS,
in comparison to the state-of-the-art. Code is released at
https://github.com/yizhangphd/FreqPCR.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic rendering and editing of 3D representations is a key problem in 3D computer vision and graphics with numerous applications, such as computer games,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.

VR/AR, and video creation. In particular, recently introduced neural radiance field (NeRF) [21] has inspired some
follow-up works aiming to editable rendering [15, 17, 20,
47, 49, 55]. Due to the deeply coupled black-box network, NeRF-based object-level editing usually requires a
pre-trained segmentation model to separate the objects to be
edited [17, 55]. Although some recent voxel-based variants
of NeRF [47,58] achieve multi-scene composition, they still
lack the ability to extract target objects from voxels.
In contrast to implicit rendering, point cloud rendering [1, 6, 13, 18, 33, 36, 57] is a promising editable rendering
model. On the one hand, explicit 3D representations are better for interactive editing. On the other hand, the geometric
priors provided by point clouds can help us avoid massive
sampling in volume rendering methods, which can meet the
requirements of some real-time applications. As a class of
representative point cloud rendering methods, NPBG and
NPBG++ [1,33] achieve real-time rendering by using pointwise features for encoding appearance information and an
U-Net [35] for decoding, respectively. However, the parameter quantity increases with the size of point cloud, which
may limit their application due to the excessive computational and memory complexity. Huang et al. [13] combine
point clouds with implicit rendering, where explicit point
clouds are used to estimate the geometry, and implicit radiance mapping is used to predict view-dependent appearance
of surfaces. However, quantitative evaluation of its rendering results is significantly lower than that of implicit rendering methods such as NeRF [21], mainly due to the following
reasons: 1) the color of each viewing ray only depends on

119

