This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NÜWA-LIP: Language-guided Image Inpainting with Defect-free VQGAN
Minheng Ni1
1

Xiaoming Li1 B
2

Harbin Institute of Technology

mhni@stu.hit.edu.cn

Peng Cheng Laboratory

csxmli@gmail.com

Abstract
Language-guided image inpainting aims to fill the defective regions of an image under the guidance of text while
keeping the non-defective regions unchanged. However, directly encoding the defective images is prone to have an
adverse effect on the non-defective regions, giving rise to distorted structures on non-defective parts. To better adapt
the text guidance to the inpainting task, this paper proposes NÜWA-LIP, which involves defect-free VQGAN (DFVQGAN) and a multi-perspective sequence-to-sequence module (MP-S2S). To be specific, DF-VQGAN introduces relative
estimation to carefully control the receptive spreading, as
well as symmetrical connections to protect structure details
unchanged. For harmoniously embedding text guidance into
the locally defective regions, MP-S2S is employed by aggregating the complementary perspectives from low-level
pixels, high-level tokens as well as the text description. Experiments show that our DF-VQGAN effectively aids the
inpainting process while avoiding unexpected changes in
non-defective regions. Results on three open-domain benchmarks demonstrate the superior performance of our method
against state-of-the-arts. Our code, datasets, and model will
be made publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
The task of image inpainting, which aims to fill missing
pixels in the defective regions with photo-realistic structures, is as ancient as art itself [2]. Despite its practical
applications [18, 32, 34], such as image manipulation, image
completion, and object removal, the task poses significant
challenges, including the effective extraction of valid features from defective input and the generation of semantically
consistent results.
With the remarkable success of vision-language learning,
language-guided image inpainting has become a promising topic [24, 28, 33], which enables the generation of controllable results with the guidance of text description (see
the completed results in Fig. 1). Recently, multimodal pre1 https://github.com/kodenii/NUWA-LIP

Wangmeng Zuo1,2

Defective Image

A bird.

wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Completed Results Guided by Language

A black dog with red
necklace in the sun.

A small bear
eating apples.

Cute teddy bear
laying on the ground.

Birds.

A laptop
somebody lost.

Grass land
without anything.

Figure 1. Language-guided inpainting results via NÜWA-LIP.
Text descriptions provide effective guidance for inpainting the defective image with desired objects. More examples are in the suppl.

training methods based on diffusion and autoregressive models have exhibited impressive capabilities in synthesizing
various and photo-realistic images, such as Stable Diffusion [21], Parti [29] and NÜWA [25]. In particular, NÜWA
has demonstrated a promising capability for language-guided
image generation, suggesting the potential for combining
this pre-training schema with VQVAE and Transformer for
language-guided image inpainting.
It is worth noting that this work focuses on addressing the
challenge of processing defective images with some regions
filled with zeros (see the first image in Fig. 1). This setting
has been widely adopted in previous works [24, 28, 33] and
is consistent with real-world corrupted image inpainting. To
learn unified representations of the vision and language, it
is crucial to ensure that the representation of non-defective
regions is accurate and remains unaffected by defective parts.
This requirement exacerbates the challenges associated with
our method, as it involves the effective extraction of valid
features from defective input.
However, existing pre-trained image generative models [21, 25, 29] are usually trained on non-defective images.
When used in the image inpainting task, these models encode the whole image and fuse the features from defective
regions into the representations of non-defective parts, re-

14183

