This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Align and Attend: Multimodal Summarization with Dual Contrastive Losses
Bo He1 ,* Jun Wang1 , Jielin Qiu2 , Trung Bui3 , Abhinav Shrivastava1 , Zhaowen Wang3
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

Carnegie Mellon University

3

Adobe Research

{bohe,abhinav}@cs.umd.edu, junwong@umd.edu, jielinq@andrew.cmu.edu, {bui,zhawang}@adobe.com

Abstract
The goal of multimodal summarization is to extract
the most important information from different modalities
to form summaries. Unlike unimodal summarization, the
multimodal summarization task explicitly leverages crossmodal information to help generate more reliable and highquality summaries. However, existing methods fail to leverage the temporal correspondence between different modalities and ignore the intrinsic correlation between different samples. To address this issue, we introduce Align
and Attend Multimodal Summarization (A2Summ), a unified multimodal transformer-based model which can effectively align and attend the multimodal input. In addition, we propose two novel contrastive losses to model
both inter-sample and intra-sample correlations. Extensive experiments on two standard video summarization
datasets (TVSum and SumMe) and two multimodal summarization datasets (Daily Mail and CNN) demonstrate the
superiority of A2Summ, achieving state-of-the-art performances on all datasets. Moreover, we collected a large-scale
multimodal summarization dataset BLiSS, which contains
livestream videos and transcribed texts with annotated summaries. Our code and dataset are publicly available at
https://boheumd.github.io/A2Summ/.

1. Introduction
With the development in multimodal learning, multimodal summarization has drawn increasing attention [1–9].
Different from traditional unimodal summarization tasks,
such as video summarization [10–17] and text summarization [18–22], multimodal summarization aims at generating
summaries by utilizing the information from different modalities. With the explosive growing amount of online content
(e.g., news, livestreams, vlogs, etc.), multimodal summarization can be applied in many real-world applications. It
provides summarized information to the users, which is especially useful for redundant long videos such as livestream
* Part of this work was done when Bo was an intern at Adobe Research.

Video
[00:00-00:02]

I'm gonna draw cat.

[00:02-00:04]

A2Summ

Summarized Video
[00:00-00:02]

I'm gonna draw cat.

I can draw this water
bottle to make it cute.

[00:02-00:04]

I can draw this water
bottle to make it cute.

[00:45-01:00]

I'm doing coloring...

[00:45-01:00]

I'm doing coloring...

[02:31-02:34]

That is just cute, just
cute stuff.

[02:31-02:34]

That is just cute, just
cute stuff.

Text

Summarized Text

Figure 1. A2Summ is a unified multimodal summarization framework, which aligns and attends multimodality inputs while leveraging time correspondence (e.g., video and transcript) and outputs
the selected important frames and sentences as summaries.

and product review videos.
Previous multimodal summarization methods [2,4,23,24]
leverage the additional modality information but can only
generate the main modality summary, i.e., either a video
summary or a text summary, severely limiting the use of
complementary benefits in the additional modality. Recently,
multimodal summarization with multimodal output (MSMO)
has been explored in several studies [1, 6, 25, 26], which
aim at generating both video and text summaries using a
joint model. Compared to previous methods, which only
produce a unimodal summary, MSMO provides a better
user experience with an easier and faster way to get useful
information. However, we find that the existing MSMO
methods still have the following limitations. First, even if
both modalities are learned together, the correspondence
between different modalities is not exploited. For example,
given a video and its transcripts, which are automatically
matched along the time axis, no existing method utilizes the
mutual temporal alignment information and treats the two
modalities separately. Second, previous works adopt simple
strategies to model the cross-modal correlation by sequence
modeling and attention operation [1, 4, 25, 25, 26, 26], which
requires a large number of annotated multimodal data which
is hard to obtain.
Motivated by the above observations, we propose a novel
architecture for multimodal summarization based on a uni-

14867

