This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Panoptic Segmentation with Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Jiarui Xu1*

Input Image

Sifei Liu2† Arash Vahdat2† Wonmin Byeon2
Xiaolong Wang1 Shalini De Mello2
1
2
UC San Diego
NVIDIA
K-Means Clustering of
Internal Diﬀusion Features

Open-Vocabulary Panoptic Segmentation
Prediction from ODISE

Figure 1. We learn open-vocabulary panoptic segmentation with the internal representation of text-to-image diffusion models. K-Means
clustering of the diffusion model’s internal representation shows semantically differentiated and localized information wherein objects
are well grouped together (middle figure). We leverage these dense and rich diffusion features to perform open-vocabulary panoptic
segmentation (right figure).

Abstract
We present ODISE: Open-vocabulary DIffusion-based
panoptic SEgmentation, which unifies pre-trained textimage diffusion and discriminative models to perform openvocabulary panoptic segmentation. Text-to-image diffusion models have the remarkable ability to generate highquality images with diverse open-vocabulary language descriptions. This demonstrates that their internal representation space is highly correlated with open concepts in the
real world. Text-image discriminative models like CLIP, on
the other hand, are good at classifying images into openvocabulary labels. We leverage the frozen internal representations of both these models to perform panoptic segmentation of any category in the wild. Our approach outperforms the previous state of the art by significant margins
on both open-vocabulary panoptic and semantic segmentation tasks. In particular, with COCO training only, our
method achieves 23.4 PQ and 30.0 mIoU on the ADE20K
dataset, with 8.3 PQ and 7.9 mIoU absolute improvement
over the previous state of the art. We open-source our
code and models at https://github.com/NVlabs/
ODISE.
* Jiarui Xu was an intern at NVIDIA during the project. † equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Humans look at the world and can recognize limitless
categories. Given the scene presented in Fig. 1, besides
identifying every vehicle as a “truck”, we immediately understand that one of them is a pickup truck requiring a trailer
to move another truck. To reproduce an intelligence with
such a fine-grained and unbounded understanding, the problem of open-vocabulary recognition [36, 57, 76, 89] has recently attracted a lot of attention in computer vision. However, very few works are able to provide a unified framework that parses all object instances and scene semantics at
the same time, i.e., panoptic segmentation.
Most current approaches for open-vocabulary recognition rely on the excellent generalization ability of textimage discriminative models [30, 57] trained with Internetscale data. While such pre-trained models are good at classifying individual object proposals or pixels, they are not
necessarily optimal for performing scene-level structural
understanding. Indeed, it has been shown that CLIP [57]
often confuses the spatial relations between objects [69].
We hypothesize that the lack of spatial and relational understanding in text-image discriminative models is a bottleneck
for open-vocabulary panoptic segmentation.
On the other hand, text-to-image generation using diffusion models trained on Internet-scale data [1, 59, 61, 62,
12955

