This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GLeaD: Improving GANs with A Generator-Leading Task
Qingyan Bai1∗
1

Ceyuan Yang2

Yinghao Xu3∗

Xihui Liu4

Yujiu Yang1†

Yujun Shen5

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 The University of Hong Kong 5 Ant Group
Forward Pass
Backward Pass

Abstract
Generative adversarial network (GAN) is formulated
as a two-player game between a generator (G) and a
discriminator (D), where D is asked to differentiate whether
an image comes from real data or is produced by G. Under
such a formulation, D plays as the rule maker and hence
tends to dominate the competition. Towards a fairer game in
GANs, we propose a new paradigm for adversarial training,
which makes G assign a task to D as well. Specifically,
given an image, we expect D to extract representative
features that can be adequately decoded by G to reconstruct
the input. That way, instead of learning freely, D is
urged to align with the view of G for domain classification.
Experimental results on various datasets demonstrate the
substantial superiority of our approach over the baselines.
For instance, we improve the FID of StyleGAN2 from 4.30
to 2.55 on LSUN Bedroom and from 4.04 to 2.82 on LSUN
Church. We believe that the pioneering attempt present in
this work could inspire the community with better designed
generator-leading tasks for GAN improvement. Project
page is at https://ezioby.github.io/glead/.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [18] have significantly advanced image synthesis, which is typically
formulated as a two-player game. The generator (G) aims
at synthesizing realistic data to fool the discriminator (D),
while D pours attention on distinguishing the synthesized
samples from the real ones. Ideally, it would come to
an optimal solution where G can recover the real data
distribution, and D can hardly tell the source of images
anymore [18].
However, the competition between G and D seems to be
∗ This work was done during an internship at Ant Group.
† Corresponding author. This work was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U1903213) and the
Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (JCYJ20220818101014030).

z

G

G(z)
Gradients

D

Realness
Reconstruction
Difference

D
x

D(x)
Gradients

G
x’

Figure 1. Concept diagram of our proposed generator-leading
task (bottom), as complementary to the discriminator-leading task
in the original formulation of GANs (upper). D is required to
extract representative features that can be adequately decoded by
G to reconstruct the input.

unfair. Specifically, on the one hand, D acts as a player
in this adversarial game by measuring the discrepancy
between the real and synthesized samples. But on the
other hand, the learning signals (i.e., gradients) of G are
only derived from D, making the latter naturally become a
referee in the competition. Such a formulation easily allows
D to rule the game. Massive experimental results could
serve as supporting evidence for the theoretical analysis.
For instance, in practice, D can successfully distinguish
real and fake samples from a pretty early stage of training
and is able to maintain its advantage in the entire training
process [63]. Accordingly, the capability of the discriminator usually determines the generation performance more
or less. For instance, a discriminator that has over-fitted
the whole training set always results in synthesis with
limited diversity and poor visual quality [33]. Following
this philosophy, many attempts [28, 29, 38, 40, 56, 70] have
been made for discriminator improvement.
This work offers a different perspective on GAN improvement. In particular, we propose a new adversarial
paradigm where G is assigned a new role, i.e., playing as the
referee as well to guide D. Recall that producing realistic
images usually requires G to generate all-level concepts

12094

