This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Federated Visual Prompt in Null Space for MRI Reconstruction
Bangjun Li2 Xinxing Xu1,∗ Yong Liu1, * Huazhu Fu1 Wangmeng Zuo3
1
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shangdong University, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China

Chun-Mei Feng1

strawberry.feng0304@gmail.com, {xuxinx,liuyong}@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
https://github.com/chunmeifeng/FedPR
❸ Catastrophic forgetting

Server

Global

Abstract

1. Introduction
Federated Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) reconstruction enables multiple hospitals to train a powerful
global model in a distributed manner without sharing private data [7, 9, 13]. In federated MRI, each client (i.e.,
hospital) uses its local computing power, memory, and private data to train local models independently, while the
server aggregates all the local models in each communica* Corresponding author.

❷ Limited communication bandwidth

Local K

…

Knowledge
Preservation
area

Federated Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) reconstruction enables multiple hospitals to collaborate distributedly without aggregating local data, thereby protecting patient privacy. However, the data heterogeneity caused
by different MRI protocols, insufficient local training data,
and limited communication bandwidth inevitably impair
global model convergence and updating. In this paper, we
propose a new algorithm, FedPR, to learn federated visual prompts in the null space of global prompt for MRI
reconstruction. FedPR is a new federated paradigm that
adopts a powerful pre-trained model while only learning
and communicating the prompts with few learnable parameters, thereby significantly reducing communication costs
and achieving competitive performance on limited local
data. Moreover, to deal with catastrophic forgetting caused
by data heterogeneity, FedPR also updates efficient federated visual prompts that project the local prompts into an
approximate null space of the global prompt, thereby suppressing the interference of gradients on the server performance. Extensive experiments on federated MRI show that
FedPR significantly outperforms state-of-the-art FL algorithms with < 6% of communication costs when given the
limited amount of local training data.

z

Local 2

Local 1
ting z+1
get
For
Global

…
Hospital 1

Hospital 2

Hospital K

❶ Insufficient local training data

Figure 1. Illustration of the three key issues in federated MRI.

tion round and distributes the global model to each client
again [26].
Existing federated MRI reconstruction techniques usually improve federated learning (FL) by enhancing the aggregation process [9] and reducing the local parameter’s
variance [5, 13]. Such techniques require a large communication bandwidth and sufficient local training data. However, federated MRI often faces two issues, ❶ insufficient
amount of local training data due to the difficulty of acquiring the ground-truth of MRI reconstruction [10, 11, 12]
and ❷ limited communication bandwidth due to unbalanced
regional development (see Fig. 1). To cope with the issue ❶, pre-trained models have exhibited superior performance, and have shown to close the gap between federated and centralized performance [3, 28]. However, since
the model parameters need to be shared between the client
and the server for updating, the large number of parameters of pre-trained models will result in a huge communication cost. On contrary, prompt tuning has recently been
suggested as a new fine-tuning paradigm by freezing the
models and only learning a small number of learnable parameters in the input space [15, 31, 32]. Benefited from
pre-trained models, only parameter-efficient prompts are required in learning and communication, and prompt tuning
can be conducted with a limited number of samples, making it very appealing in tackling the above two issues (i.e.,

8064

