This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A New Path: Scaling Vision-and-Language Navigation with
Synthetic Instructions and Imitation Learning
Aishwarya Kamath∗†1 Peter Anderson∗2 Su Wang2 Jing Yu Koh†3 Alexander Ku2
Austin Waters2 Yinfei Yang†4 Jason Baldridge2 Zarana Parekh2
1

New York University

2

Google Research

3

Carnegie Mellon University

4

Apple

Abstract
Recent studies in Vision-and-Language Navigation
(VLN) train RL agents to execute natural-language navigation instructions in photorealistic environments, as a step
towards robots that can follow human instructions. However, given the scarcity of human instruction data and limited diversity in the training environments, these agents
still struggle with complex language grounding and spatial language understanding. Pretraining on large text
and image-text datasets from the web has been extensively
explored but the improvements are limited. We investigate large-scale augmentation with synthetic instructions.
We take 500+ indoor environments captured in denselysampled 360◦ panoramas, construct navigation trajectories through these panoramas, and generate a visuallygrounded instruction for each trajectory using Marky [63],
a high-quality multilingual navigation instruction generator. We also synthesize image observations from novel viewpoints using an image-to-image GAN [27]. The resulting
dataset of 4.2M instruction-trajectory pairs is two orders of
magnitude larger than existing human-annotated datasets,
and contains a wider variety of environments and viewpoints. To efficiently leverage data at this scale, we train
a simple transformer agent with imitation learning. On the
challenging RxR dataset, our approach outperforms all existing RL agents, improving the state-of-the-art NDTW from
71.1 to 79.1 in seen environments, and from 64.6 to 66.8 in
unseen test environments. Our work points to a new path to
improving instruction-following agents, emphasizing largescale training on near-human quality synthetic instructions.

1. Introduction
Developing intelligent agents that follow human instructions is a long-term, formidable challenge in AI [66]. A
recent focus addressing this problem space is Vision-andLanguage Navigation (VLN) [3, 9]. Navigation is an ideal
∗ Equal Contribution. † Work done while at Google Research.

Figure 1. Simpler agents with more data: We investigate largescale augmentation using 500+ environments annotated with synthetic instructions that approach human quality.

test bed for studying instruction-following, since the task
can be simulated photo-realistically at scale and evaluation
is straightforward. However, datasets that capture the linguistic diversity and idiosyncrasies of real human instructors are small and expensive to collect.
Shortages of human-annotated training data for other
vision-and-language tasks have been partially addressed
by pretraining transformers on up to billions of imagetext pairs. This has underpinned dramatic improvements
in image captioning [65, 70], visual question answering
[59], phrase grounding [26, 35], text-to-video retrieval,
video question answering [32] and text-to-image synthesis
[49, 69]. However, these are all static image or video tasks,
whereas VLN agents interact with 3D environments. In
VLN, pretraining on large image-text and text-only datasets
has been thoroughly explored [21, 22, 40, 45], but improvements are more limited. Arguably, progress in VLN has
plateaued while still leaving a large gap between machine
and human performance [73]. We hypothesize that static
image-text and text-only datasets – despite their size – lack
the spatially grounded and action-oriented language needed
for effective VLN pretraining. Consider instructions from
the Room-across-Room (RxR) dataset [30], which illustrate that wayfinding requires an understanding of allocen-

10813

