This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Exemplar Driven Task-Prompting for Unified Perception in Autonomous
Driving
Xiwen Liang1 , Minzhe Niu2 , Jianhua Han2 , Hang Xu2 , Chunjing Xu2 , Xiaodan Liang1†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{liangxw29@mail2, liangxd9@mail}.sysu.edu.cn,
{niuminzhe1, hanjianhua4, xu.hang, xuchunjing}@huawei.com

Multi-task learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm
to solve a range of tasks simultaneously with good efficiency
in both computation resources and inference time. However,
these algorithms are designed for different tasks mostly not
within the scope of autonomous driving, thus making it
hard to compare multi-task methods in autonomous driving.
Aiming to enable the comprehensive evaluation of present
multi-task learning methods in autonomous driving, we extensively investigate the performance of popular multi-task
methods on the large-scale driving dataset, which covers
four common perception tasks, i.e., object detection, semantic segmentation, drivable area segmentation, and lane detection. We provide an in-depth analysis of current multitask learning methods under different common settings and
find out that the existing methods make progress but there
is still a large performance gap compared with single-task
baselines. To alleviate this dilemma in autonomous driving,
we present an effective multi-task framework, VE-Prompt,
which introduces visual exemplars via task-specific prompting to guide the model toward learning high-quality taskspecific representations. Specifically, we generate visual
exemplars based on bounding boxes and color-based markers, which provide accurate visual appearances of target
categories and further mitigate the performance gap. Furthermore, we bridge transformer-based encoders and convolutional layers for efficient and accurate unified perception in autonomous driving. Comprehensive experimental
results on the diverse self-driving dataset BDD100K show
that the VE-Prompt improves the multi-task baseline and
further surpasses single-task models.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) has been the source of a number of breakthroughs in autonomous driving over the last
† Corresponding author.

A photo of a [class].
...

Image

...

Text
Encoder
[CLASS]

Image
Encoder

Alignment

...

Embed

Image Patch

(a) Textual Prompt
...

...

Learnable
Prompts

...

(b) Visual Prompt
Prompt
Generator

Task Prompts

Head A
Head B

...
...

Transformer

Abstract

Head C
Image

Image
Encoder

Task
Prompting

Head D

(c) Visual Exemplar Driven Prompt (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of different prompts in computer vision. (a) Extracting textual prompts from a text encoder to perform image-text alignment [62]. (b) Prepend learnable prompts
to the embeddings of image patches [20]. (c) Visual exemplar
driven prompts for multi-task learning (ours). The generated task
prompts encode high-quality task-specific knowledge for downstream tasks.

few years [23, 50, 56] and general vision tasks recently
[2, 12, 26, 34, 55]. As the foundation of autonomous driving, a robust vision perception system is required to provide critical information, including the position of traffic
participants, traffic signals like lights, signs, lanes, and obstacles that influence the drivable space, to ensure driving
safety and comfort. These tasks gain knowledge from the
same data source and present prominent relationships between each other, like traffic participants, are more likely to
appear within drivable spaces and traffic signs may appear
near traffic lights, etc. Training these tasks independently is
time costing and fails to mine the latent relationship among
them. Therefore, it is crucial to solve these multiple tasks
simultaneously, which can improve data efficiency and reduce training and inference time.
Some recent works have attempted to apply unified training on multiple tasks in autonomous training. Uncertainty
[21] trains per-pixel depth prediction, semantic segmenta-

9611

