This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conditional Text Image Generation with Diffusion Models
Yuanzhi Zhu, Zhaohai Li, Tianwei Wang, Mengchao He, Cong Yao†
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Hangzhou, China.
{z.yuanzhi, zhaohai.li, wangtw}@foxmail.com, mengchao.hmc@alibaba-inc.com,
yaocong2010@gmail.com.

Abstract
Current text recognition systems, including those for
handwritten scripts and scene text, have relied heavily on
image synthesis and augmentation, since it is difficult to realize real-world complexity and diversity through collecting and annotating enough real text images. In this paper,
we explore the problem of text image generation, by taking
advantage of the powerful abilities of Diffusion Models in
generating photo-realistic and diverse image samples with
given conditions, and propose a method called Conditional
Text Image Generation with Diffusion Models (CTIG-DM
for short). To conform to the characteristics of text images, we devise three conditions: image condition, text condition, and style condition, which can be used to control
the attributes, contents, and styles of the samples in the image generation process. Specifically, four text image generation modes, namely: (1) synthesis mode, (2) augmentation mode, (3) recovery mode, and (4) imitation mode,
can be derived by combining and configuring these three
conditions. Extensive experiments on both handwritten and
scene text demonstrate that the proposed CTIG-DM is able
to produce image samples that simulate real-world complexity and diversity, and thus can boost the performance
of existing text recognizers. Besides, CTIG-DM shows its
appealing potential in domain adaptation and generating
images containing Out-Of-Vocabulary (OOV) words.

1. Introduction
Text recognition has been an important research topic
in the computer vision community for a long time, due
to its wide range of applications. In the past few years,
numerous recognition methods for scene and handwritten
text [3, 16, 43, 57, 58, 65, 69, 72] have been proposed, which
have substantially improved the recognition accuracy on
various benchmarks. The volume and diversity of data are
crucial for high recognition performance, but it is extremely
† Corresponding author.

Styles

Real and generated handwritten text images

Figure 1. Handwritten text image samples from IAM [46] or generated by our proposed CTIG-DM. On the left, the handwriting
styles of the same word “and” written by different writers are considerably different, indicating the diversity of handwritten text and
the challenge of handwritten text recognition. On the right, two
images out of four in each row are written by the corresponding
writer on the left. Can you distinguish them from the generated
samples? (The answer will be revealed in the next page.)

（1）

（2）

（3）

（4）

（5）

（6）

（7）

（8）

（9）

（10）

（11）

（12）

（13）

（14）

（15）

Figure 2. Scene text image samples from Real-L [5] or produced
by CTIG-DM. Only seven images herein are real. Can you identify
them? (The answer will be revealed in the next page.)

hard, if not impossible, to collect and label sufficient real
text images, so majority of the existing recognition methods rely heavily on data synthesis and augmentation.
Previously, a variety of data synthesis and augmentation
methods [7, 17, 18, 20, 25, 33, 38, 44, 45, 67] have been proposed to enrich data for training stronger text recognition
models. In this paper, we investigate a technique that is
highly related and complementary to such works. Drawing inspiration from the recent progress of Diffusion Models [15, 48], we propose a text image generation model,
which is able to conduct data synthesis, and thus can boost

14235

