This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Semantic Segmentation by Altering Resolutions for Compressed Videos
Yubin Hu1 Yuze He1 Yanghao Li1 Jisheng Li1 Yuxing Han2 Jiangtao Wen3 Yong-Jin Liu1 *
1
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
Eastern Institute for Advanced Study
{huyb20, hyz22, liyangha18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jas0n1ee@icloud.com,
yuxinghan@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, jtwen@eias.ac.cn, liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
[&RQY

Video semantic segmentation (VSS) is a computationally
expensive task due to the per-frame prediction for videos
of high frame rates. In recent work, compact models or
adaptive network strategies have been proposed for efficient
VSS. However, they did not consider a crucial factor that
affects the computational cost from the input side: the input resolution. In this paper, we propose an altering resolution framework called AR-Seg for compressed videos to
achieve efficient VSS. AR-Seg aims to reduce the computational cost by using low resolution for non-keyframes. To
prevent the performance degradation caused by downsampling, we design a Cross Resolution Feature Fusion (CReFF) module, and supervise it with a novel Feature Similarity Training (FST) strategy. Specifically, CReFF first makes
use of motion vectors stored in a compressed video to warp
features from high-resolution keyframes to low-resolution
non-keyframes for better spatial alignment, and then selectively aggregates the warped features with local attention
mechanism. Furthermore, the proposed FST supervises the
aggregated features with high-resolution features through
an explicit similarity loss and an implicit constraint from the
shared decoding layer. Extensive experiments on CamVid
and Cityscapes show that AR-Seg achieves state-of-the-art
performance and is compatible with different segmentation backbones. On CamVid, AR-Seg saves 67% computational cost (measured in GFLOPs) with the PSPNet18 backbone while maintaining high segmentation accuracy. Code:
https://github.com/THU-LYJ-Lab/AR-Seg.

1. Introduction
Video semantic segmentation (VSS) aims to predict
pixel-wise semantic labels for each frame in a video sequence. In contrast to a single image, a video sequence
* Corresponding author.

[&RQY

[&RQY

6KDUHG[&RQYROXWLRQ

&5H))
:DUS

09

&RPSUHVVHG
9LGHR

(a)

 3IUDPH

 3IUDPH

&RPSUHVVHG9LGHR

&RPSUHVVHG9LGHR

(b)

(c)

,IUDPH

Figure 1. Comparison of different VSS methods: (a) per-frame
framework, (b) Accel [19] that alters the depth of models, and
(c) our AR-Seg. AR-Seg reduces the computational cost for nonkeyframes by lowering the input resolution (depicted by narrow
blocks), which is a dimension orthogonal to the depth of networks.

is a series of consecutive image frames recorded at a certain frame rate (usually 25fps or higher). Applying imagebased segmentation methods [6, 25, 48, 52, 55] to a video
frame by frame consumes considerable computational resources. To improve the efficiency of VSS, existing methods mainly focus on the design of network architectures.
A class of methods proposes compact and efficient imagebased architectures to reduce the computational overhead
per-frame [22, 23, 28, 49, 51, 52, 54]. Another class of methods applies a deep model to keyframes and a shallow network for non-keyframes to avoid the repetitive computation [19, 24, 27, 34] for videos.
The work presented in this paper is based on an important observation: the above existing works ignored a crucial factor that affects the computational cost from the input
side: the input resolution. For image-related tasks, the input resolution directly determines the amount of computation, e.g., the computational cost of 2D convolution is proportional to the product of image width and height. Once we

22627

