This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Practical Stereo Depth System for Smart Glasses
Daniel Scharstein1
Akash Bapat1
Kevin Blackburn-Matzen2†
Jialiang Wang1 *
Matthew Yu1
Jonathan Lehman1
Suhib Alsisan1
Yanghan Wang1
Sam Tsai1
1
1
1
1
Jan-Michael Frahm
Zijian He
Peter Vajda
Michael F. Cohen
Matt Uyttendaele1
1

Meta Platforms Inc.

2

Adobe

Figure 1. (a) Overview. The user captures a stereo pair with smart glasses. The images are sent to the user’s phone for processing,
including online rectification and fast disparity prediction via neural networks. The predicted disparity map is then used to generate visual
effects by rendering novel views. (b) Zero-shot accuracy. Our stereo network, Argos, achieves high accuracy despite not being trained
on these datasets, being quantized to 8 bits, and being significantly faster than SotA models such as RAFT-stereo [18], GA-Net [45] and
LEA-Stereo [3].

Abstract
We present the design of a productionized end-to-end
stereo depth sensing system that does pre-processing, online stereo rectification, and stereo depth estimation with a
fallback to monocular depth estimation when rectification is
unreliable. The output of our depth sensing system is then
used in a novel view generation pipeline to create 3D computational photography effects using point-of-view images
captured by smart glasses. All these steps are executed ondevice on the stringent compute budget of a mobile phone,
and because we expect the users can use a wide range of
smartphones, our design needs to be general and cannot
* Email: jialiangw@meta.com
† work was done at Meta

be dependent on a particular hardware or ML accelerator
such as a smartphone GPU. Although each of these steps
is well studied, a description of a practical system is still
lacking. For such a system, all these steps need to work in
tandem with one another and fallback gracefully on failures
within the system or less than ideal input data. We show
how we handle unforeseen changes to calibration, e.g., due
to heat, robustly support depth estimation in the wild, and
still abide by the memory and latency constraints required
for a smooth user experience. We show that our trained
models are fast, and run in less than 1s on a six-year-old
Samsung Galaxy S8 phone’s CPU. Our models generalize
well to unseen data and achieve good results on Middlebury
and in-the-wild images captured from the smart glasses.

21498

