This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DualRefine: Self-Supervised Depth and Pose Estimation
Through Iterative Epipolar Sampling and Refinement Toward Equilibrium
Antyanta Bangunharcana1 , Ahmed Magd2 , Kyung-Soo Kim1
1 Mechatronics, Systems, and Control Laboratory, 2 Vehicular Systems Design and Control Lab

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Republic of Korea

antabangun, a.magd, kyungsoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Self-supervised multi-frame depth estimation achieves
high accuracy by computing matching costs of pixel correspondences between adjacent frames, injecting geometric
information into the network. These pixel-correspondence
candidates are computed based on the relative pose estimates between the frames. Accurate pose predictions are
essential for precise matching cost computation as they influence the epipolar geometry. Furthermore, improved depth
estimates can, in turn, be used to align pose estimates.
Inspired by traditional structure-from-motion (SfM) principles, we propose the DualRefine model, which tightly couples depth and pose estimation through a feedback loop. Our
novel update pipeline uses a deep equilibrium model framework to iteratively refine depth estimates and a hidden state
of feature maps by computing local matching costs based on
epipolar geometry. Importantly, we used the refined depth
estimates and feature maps to compute pose updates at each
step. This update in the pose estimates slowly alters the
epipolar geometry during the refinement process. Experimental results on the KITTI dataset demonstrate competitive
depth prediction and odometry prediction performance surpassing published self-supervised baselines 1 .

1. Introduction
The optimization of the coordinates of observed 3D
points and camera poses forms the basis of structure-frommotion (SfM). Estimation of both lays the foundation for
robotics [34, 35, 75], autonomous driving [20], or AR/VR
applications [60]. Traditionally, however, SfM techniques
are susceptible to errors in scenes with texture-less regions,
dynamic objects, etc. This has motivated the development
of deep learning models that can learn to predict depth from
monocular images [14, 15, 18, 48, 50]. These models can
1 https://github.com/antabangun/DualRefine

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The estimated pose of a camera affects the epipolar geometry.
(b) The epipolar line in the source image, calculated from yellow points in
the target image, for the PoseNet-based [43] initial pose regression (red) and
our refined pose (green). The yellow point in the source image is calculated
based on our final depth and pose estimates.

accurately predict depth based solely on image cues, without
requiring geometric information.
In recent years, self-supervised training of depth and pose
models has become an attractive method, as it alleviates the
need for ground truth while demonstrating precision comparable to those of supervised counterparts [7, 19, 22, 23, 26,
28, 30, 61, 70, 74, 83, 87, 98, 106, 108]. Such an approach
uses depth and pose predictions to synthesize neighboring
images in a video sequence and enforce consistency between
them. As the image sequence is also available at test time,
recent self-supervised methods also study the use of multiple
frames during inference [91]. These typically involve the
construction of cost volumes from multiple views to compute
pixel correspondences, bearing similarities to (multi-view)
stereo models [4, 44, 77]. By incorporating multi-frame data,
geometric information is integrated to make depth predic-

726

