This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Complete-to-Partial 4D Distillation for Self-Supervised Point Cloud Sequence
Representation Learning

1

Yunze Liu1,3
Yuhao Dong1 *
Zhuoyang Zhang1 *
2
IIIS, Tsinghua University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

3

Li Yi1,2,3 †
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Recent work on 4D point cloud sequences has attracted
a lot of attention. However, obtaining exhaustively labeled
4D datasets is often very expensive and laborious, so it is
especially important to investigate how to utilize raw unlabeled data. However, most existing self-supervised point
cloud representation learning methods only consider geometry from a static snapshot omitting the fact that sequential observations of dynamic scenes could reveal more
comprehensive geometric details. To overcome such issues, this paper proposes a new 4D self-supervised pretraining method called Complete-to-Partial 4D Distillation.
Our key idea is to formulate 4D self-supervised representation learning as a teacher-student knowledge distillation framework and let the student learn useful 4D representations with the guidance of the teacher. Experiments
show that this approach significantly outperforms previous pre-training approaches on a wide range of 4D point
cloud sequence understanding tasks. Code is available at:
https://github.com/dongyh20/C2P.

1. Introduction
Recently, there is a surge of interest in understanding
point cloud sequences in 4D (3D space + 1D time) [7, 8,
11, 21, 30]. As the direct sensor input for a wide range
of applications including robotics and augmented reality,
point cloud sequences faithfully depict a dynamic environment regarding its geometric content and object movements
in the context of the camera ego-motion. Though widely
accessible, such 4D data is prohibitively expensive to annotate in large scale with fine details. As a result, there
is a strong need for leveraging the colossal amount of unlabeled sequences. Among the possible solutions, selfsupervised representation learning has shown its effectiveness in a wide range of fields including images [2, 12, 13],
videos [6, 9, 15, 22, 28] and point clouds [16, 24, 31, 33, 34].
* Equal contribution with the order determined by rolling dice.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. We propose a complete-to-partial 4D distillation (C2P)
approach. Our key idea is to formulate 4D self-supervised representation learning as a teacher-student knowledge distillation
framework in which students learn useful 4D representations under the guidance of a teacher. The learned features can be transferred to a range of 4D downstream tasks.

We therefore aim to fill in the absence of self-supervised
point cloud sequence representation learning in this work.
Learning 4D representations in a self-supervised manner seems to be a straightforward extension of 3D cases.
However, a second thought reveals its challenging nature
since such representations need to unify the geometry and
motion information in a synergetic manner. From the geometry aspect, a 4D representation learner needs to understand 3D geometry in a dynamic context. However, most
existing self-supervised point cloud representation learning methods [16, 24, 34] only consider geometry from a
static snapshot, omitting the fact that sequential observations of dynamic scenes could reveal more comprehensive
geometric details. From the motion aspect, a 4D representation learner needs to understand motion in the 3D space,
which requires an accurate cross-time geometric association. Nevertheless, existing video representation learning
frameworks [6, 9, 22] mostly model motion as image space
flows so geometric-aware motion cues are rarely encoded.
Due to such challenges, 4D has been rarely discussed in the
self-supervised representation learning literature, with only
a few works [4, 23] designing learning objectives in 4D to
facilitate static 3D scene understanding.
To address the above challenges, we examine the nature of 4D dynamic point cloud sequences, and draw two

17661

