This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-shot Non-line-of-sight Imaging
with Signal-surface Collaborative Regularization
Xintong Liu1 , Jianyu Wang1 , Leping Xiao1 , Xing Fu1 , Lingyun Qiu1,2 , and Zuoqiang Shi1,2
1
Tsinghua University
2
Yanqi Lake Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications

Abstract
The non-line-of-sight imaging technique aims to reconstruct targets from multiply reflected light. For most existing methods, dense points on the relay surface are raster
scanned to obtain high-quality reconstructions, which requires a long acquisition time. In this work, we propose a
signal-surface collaborative regularization (SSCR) framework that provides noise-robust reconstructions with a minimal number of measurements. Using Bayesian inference,
we design joint regularizations of the estimated signal, the
3D voxel-based representation of the objects, and the 2D
surface-based description of the targets. To our best knowledge, this is the first work that combines regularizations in
mixed dimensions for hidden targets. Experiments on synthetic and experimental datasets illustrated the efficiency of
the proposed method under both confocal and non-confocal
settings. We report the reconstruction of the hidden targets
with complex geometric structures with only 5 × 5 confocal
measurements from public datasets, indicating an acceleration of the conventional measurement process by a factor
of 10,000. Besides, the proposed method enjoys low time
and memory complexity with sparse measurements. Our
approach has great potential in real-time non-line-of-sight
imaging applications such as rescue operations and autonomous driving.

1. Introduction
The non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging technique enables reconstructions of targets out of the direct line of
sight, which is attractive in various applications such as autonomous driving, remote sensing, rescue operations and
medical imaging [1,5,6,10,15,16,19,21,26,33–35,38–40].
A typical scenario of NLOS imaging is shown in Figure 1.
Several points on the visible surface are illuminated by a
laser and the back-scattered light from the target is detected to reconstruct the target. The NLOS detection system is confocal if each illumination point is the same with

Figure 1. A typical non-line-of-sight imaging scenario. a) The
time resolved signals are measured at only 3 × 3 focal points. b)
The three views of the reconstructed target obtained with the proposed SSCR method.

the detection point, and non-confocal otherwise. The timecorrelated single-photon counting (TCSPC) technique is applied in the detection process due to the extremely low photon intensity after multiple diffuse reflections. In practice, a
single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) in the Geiger-mode
can be used to record the photon events with time-of-flight
(TOF) information [3]. The first experimental demonstration of NLOS imaging dates back to 2012, where the targets
are reconstructed with the back-projection (BP) method
[37]. Extensions of this approach include its fast implementation [2], the filtering technique for reconstruction quality
enhancement [17], and weighting factors for noise reduction [11].
A number of efficient methods have been designed

13303

