This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MSINet: Twins Contrastive Search of Multi-Scale Interaction for Object ReID
Jianyang Gu1 Kai Wang2 Hao Luo3 Chen Chen4 Wei Jiang1∗
Yuqiang Fang5 Shanghang Zhang6 Yang You2 Jian Zhao7 *
1
Zhejiang University 2 National University of Singapore 3 Alibaba Group
4
OPPO Research Institute 5 Space Engineering University 6 Peking University
7
Institute of North Electronic Equipment
{gu jianyang, jiangwei zju}@zju.edu.cn zhaojian90@u.nus.edu

Abstract
hood

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has been increasingly
appealing to the society of object Re-Identiﬁcation (ReID),
for that task-speciﬁc architectures signiﬁcantly improve the
retrieval performance. Previous works explore new optimizing targets and search spaces for NAS ReID, yet they
neglect the difference of training schemes between image
classiﬁcation and ReID. In this work, we propose a novel
Twins Contrastive Mechanism (TCM) to provide more appropriate supervision for ReID architecture search. TCM
reduces the category overlaps between the training and validation data, and assists NAS in simulating real-world ReID
training schemes. We then design a Multi-Scale Interaction (MSI) search space to search for rational interaction
operations between multi-scale features. In addition, we
introduce a Spatial Alignment Module (SAM) to further
enhance the attention consistency confronted with images
from different sources. Under the proposed NAS scheme,
a speciﬁc architecture is automatically searched, named
as MSINet. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method surpasses state-of-the-art ReID methods on both indomain and cross-domain scenarios. Source code available
in https://github.com/vimar-gu/MSINet.

1. Introduction
Object re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) aims at retrieving speciﬁc object instances across different views [39, 40, 57,
65, 70], which attracts much attention in computer vision community due to its wide-range applications. Previous works have achieved great progresses on both supervised [42, 49, 58] and unsupervised ReID tasks [17, 50, 78],
most of which adopts backbone models originally designed
for general image classiﬁcation tasks [20, 52].
Recent literature [64, 75] has shown that applying differ* Co-corresponding authors

19243

bumper

luggage
carrier
side
decorations

Figure 1. The left panel shows the example activation maps of
ResNet50 (1st row) and MSINet (2nd row). The right panel shows
the average distances between the most similar 10 negative samples and each query image at the inference. Best viewed in color.

ent architectures on ReID leads to large performance variations. Some works employ Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) for ReID [28, 45]. The proposed optimizing targets
and search spaces stably improve the model performance,
yet the main search scheme still follows traditional NAS
methods designed for general classiﬁcation tasks [12, 36].
As an open-set task, ReID contains different categories in
the training and validation sets [64, 71], while the two sets
share exactly the same categories in standard classiﬁcation tasks [10], which is also followed by traditional NAS
methods. The incompatibility between search schemes and
real-world training schemes makes the searched architecture sub-optimal for ReID. Moreover, ReID is required to
distinguish more subtle distinctions among ﬁne-grained instances compared with image-level classiﬁcation [48, 63].
Some previous works [4,44,68,75] have manifested that local perspectives and multi-scale features are discriminative
for ReID. However, current utilizations of these features are
mostly empirically designed, which can be more ﬂexible
according to the characteristics of different network layers.

