This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Video Autoencoders: Toward Temporally Consistent
Face Video Editing via Disentangled Video Encoding
Gyeongman Kim1 Hajin Shim1 Hyunsu Kim2 Yunjey Choi2 Junho Kim2 Eunho Yang1,3
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
2
NAVER AI Lab 3 AITRICS, South Korea
{hyunsu1125.kim, yunjey.choi, jhkim.ai}@navercorp.com

Ours

Baseline

Original

{gmkim, shimazing, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Face video editing. Our editing method shows improvement compared to the baseline [35] in terms of temporal consistency (left, “eyeglasses”) and robustness to the unusual case such as the hand-occluded face (right, “beard”).

Abstract
Inspired by the impressive performance of recent face
image editing methods, several studies have been naturally
proposed to extend these methods to the face video editing
task. One of the main challenges here is temporal consistency among edited frames, which is still unresolved. To this
end, we propose a novel face video editing framework based
on diffusion autoencoders that can successfully extract the
decomposed features - for the first time as a face video editing model - of identity and motion from a given video. This
modeling allows us to edit the video by simply manipulating the temporally invariant feature to the desired direction
for the consistency. Another unique strength of our model
is that, since our model is based on diffusion models, it can
satisfy both reconstruction and edit capabilities at the same
time, and is robust to corner cases in wild face videos (e.g.
occluded faces) unlike the existing GAN-based methods.1

1. Introduction
As one of the standard tasks in computer vision to change
various face attributes such as hair color, gender, or glasses
1 Project page: https://diff-video-ae.github.io

of a given face image, face editing has been continuously
gaining attention due to its various applications and entertainment. In particular, with the improvement of analysis and manipulation techniques for recent Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) models [8, 11, 22, 29, 30], we
simply can do this task by manipulating a given image’s
latent feature. In addition, very recently, many methods
for face image editing also have been proposed based on
Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DPM)-based methods that
show high-quality and flexible manipulation performance
[3, 12, 17, 19, 23, 25].
Naturally, further studies [2, 35, 41] have been proposed
to extend image editing methods to incorporate the temporal axis for videos. Now, given real videos with a human
face, these studies try to manipulate some target facial attributes with the other remaining features and motion intact. They all basically edit each frame of a video independently via off-the-shelf StyleGAN-based image editing
techniques [22, 29, 41].
Despite the advantages of StyleGAN in this task such as
high-resolution image generation capability and highly disentangled semantic representation space, one harmful drawback of GAN-based editing methods is that the encoded real

6091

