This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViewNet: A Novel Projection-Based Backbone with View Pooling for Few-shot
Point Cloud Classification
Jiajing Chen, Minmin Yang, Senem Velipasalar
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Dept., Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA
{jchen152, myang47, svelipas}@syr.edu *

Abstract
Although different approaches have been proposed for
3D point cloud-related tasks, few-shot learning (FSL) of
3D point clouds still remains under-explored. In FSL, unlike traditional supervised learning, the classes of training
and test data do not overlap, and a model needs to recognize unseen classes from only a few samples. Existing
FSL methods for 3D point clouds employ point-based models as their backbone. Yet, based on our extensive experiments and analysis, we first show that using a point-based
backbone is not the most suitable FSL approach, since (i)
a large number of points’ features are discarded by the
max pooling operation used in 3D point-based backbones,
decreasing the ability of representing shape information;
(ii) point-based backbones are sensitive to occlusion. To
address these issues, we propose employing a projectionand 2D Convolutional Neural Network-based backbone, referred to as the ViewNet, for FSL from 3D point clouds.
Our approach first projects a 3D point cloud onto six different views to alleviate the issue of missing points. Also, to
generate more descriptive and distinguishing features, we
propose View Pooling, which combines different projected
plane combinations into five groups and performs maxpooling on each of them. The experiments performed on the
ModelNet40, ScanObjectNN and ModelNet40-C datasets,
with cross validation, show that our method consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines. Moreover, compared to traditional image classification backbones, such as
ResNet, the proposed ViewNet can extract more distinguishing features from multiple views of a point cloud. We also
show that ViewNet can be used as a backbone with different
FSL heads and provides improved performance compared
to traditionally used backbones.

* The information, data, or work presented herein was funded in part by
National Science Foundation under Grant 1816732 and Federal Highway
Administration Exploratory Advanced Research Program under Agreement No. 693JJ31950022. The views and opinions of authors expressed
herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud data has a wide range of applications
including robotics, self driving cars and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). In recent years, different
approaches have been proposed for traditional point cloudrelated tasks, such as point cloud classification, segmentation and object detection. Yet, few-shot learning of 3D point
clouds remains relatively under-explored. In contrast to
structured 2D images, a 3D point cloud is a set of unordered
points. Thus, traditional Convolution Neural Networks
(CNNs) cannot be directly used with 3D point clouds. To
address this, PointNet [14] was proposed, which employs a
max pooling operation to obtain permutation invariant features. This has been shown to be effective in capturing 3D
objects’ shape, and could be used for downstream tasks,
such as point cloud classification and segmentation. However, in PointNet, each point’s features are learned independently, and features from neighboring points are not aggregated. Thus, later works presented different approaches,
wherein a better representation can be learned by incorporating features from neighboring points [15, 22, 24, 25]. Despite having different network structures, these point-based
methods all employ a max pooling module to obtain permutation invariant features for the downstream tasks.
Traditional supervised learning needs a large number of
labeled samples for training, and performs testing on the
same classes used in training. In contrast, with few-shot
learning (FSL), a model performs prediction on classes,
which have not been seen during training, with only a few
labeled samples provided in a support set. Let (x, y) denote
a point cloud sample and its label. In N -way-K-shot FSL, a
N ×K
support set S = {(xi , yi )}i=1
contains N classes with K
N ×q
samples for each class. A query set Q = {xj }j=1
contains
the same classes, with q samples for each class. The model
matches each sample in Q with a sample in S to predict the
labels of query samples. Support and query sets are used
both in training and testing. The model gains the ability to
learn the similarities between samples from the same class,
and dissimilarities between different classes.
Existing approaches for FSL from point clouds [26, 27]

17652

