This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transformer Scale Gate for Semantic Segmentation
Hengcan Shi, Munawar Hayat, Jianfei Cai
Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University
Wellington Rd, Clayton VIC 3800, Melbourne, Australia
{hengcan.shi, munawar.hayat, jianfei.cai}@monash.edu

Abstract
Effectively encoding multi-scale contextual information
is crucial for accurate semantic segmentation. Most of the
existing transformer-based segmentation models combine
features across scales without any selection, where features
on sub-optimal scales may degrade segmentation outcomes.
Leveraging from the inherent properties of Vision Transformers, we propose a simple yet effective module, Transformer Scale Gate (TSG), to optimally combine multi-scale
features. TSG exploits cues in self and cross attentions in
Vision Transformers for the scale selection. TSG is a highly
flexible plug-and-play module, and can easily be incorporated with any encoder-decoder-based hierarchical vision
Transformer. Extensive experiments on the Pascal Context,
ADE20K and Cityscapes datasets demonstrate that the proposed feature selection strategy achieves consistent gains.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to segment all objects including ‘things’ and ‘stuff’ in an image and determine their
categories. It is a challenging task in computer vision, and
serves as a foundation for many higher-level tasks, such as
scene understanding [15,34], object recognition [23,29] and
vision+language [30, 33]. In recent years, Vision Transformers based on encoder-decoder architectures have become a new paradigm for semantic segmentation. The encoder consists of a series of multi-head self-attention modules to capture features of image patches, while the decoder
has both self- and cross-attention modules to generate segmentation masks. Earlier works [47] usually use Vision
Transformers designed for image classification to tackle semantic segmentation, and only encode single-scale features.
However, different from image classification where we only
need to recognize one object in an image, semantic segmentation is generally expected to extract multiple objects of
different sizes. It is hard to segment and recognize these
varying sized objects by only single-scale features.

Some methods [20, 37] attempt to leverage multi-scale
features to solve this problem. They first use hierarchical
transformers such as Swin Transformer [20] and PVT [37]
to extract multi-scale image features, and then combine
them, e.g. by the pyramid pooling module (PPM) [46] or
the seminal feature pyramid network (FPN) [18] borrowed
from CNNs. We argue that such feature combinations cannot effectively select an appropriate scale for each image
patch. Features on sub-optimal scales may impact the segmentation performance.To address this issue, CNN-based
methods [3, 8, 14, 32] design learnable models to select the
optimal scales. Nevertheless, these models are complex, either use complex mechanisms [3, 8, 14] and/or require scale
labels [32], which decrease the network efficiency and may
cause over-fitting.
In this paper, we exploit the inherent characteristics of
Vision Transformers to guide the feature selection process.
Specifically, our design is inspired from the following observations: (1) As shown in Fig. 1(a), the self-attention
module in the transformer encoder learns the correlations
among image patches. If an image patch is correlated to
many patches, small-scale (low-resolution) features may be
preferred for segmenting this patch, since small-scale features have large effective receptive fields [42] to involve as
many of these patches as possible, and vice versa. (2) In
the transformer decoder, the cross-attention module models correlations between patch-query pairs, as shown in
Fig. 1(b), where the queries are object categories. If an
image patch is correlated to multiple queries, it indicates
that this patch may contain multiple objects and need largescale (high-resolution) features for fine-grained segmentation. On the contrary, an image patch correlated to only a
few queries may need small-scale (low-resolution) features
to avoid over-segmentations. (3) The above observations
can guide design choices for not only category-query-based
decoders but also object-query-based decoders. In objectquery-based decoders, each query token corresponds to an
object instance. Then, the cross-attention module extracts
relationships between patch-object pairs. Many high crossattention values also indicate that the image patch may con-

3051

