This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Co-SLAM: Joint Coordinate and Sparse Parametric Encodings for
Neural Real-Time SLAM
Hengyi Wang⋆ Jingwen Wang⋆ Lourdes Agapito
Department of Computer Science, University College London
{hengyi.wang.21, jingwen.wang.17, l.agapito}@ucl.ac.uk
Ours

NICE-SLAM

ScanNet mesh

Trajectory

a) Input RGB-D stream

b) Our Tracking & Mapping

c) Zoom in

Figure 1. We present Co-SLAM, a neural RGB-D SLAM method that performs online tracking and mapping in real time. We propose a
new hybrid representation based on a joint coordinate and sparse-parametric encoding with global bundle adjustment. Our method shows
fast, high-fidelity scene reconstruction with efficient memory use and plausible hole-filling.

Abstract
We present Co-SLAM, a neural RGB-D SLAM system
based on a hybrid representation, that performs robust camera tracking and high-fidelity surface reconstruction in real
time. Co-SLAM represents the scene as a multi-resolution
hash-grid to exploit its high convergence speed and ability to represent high-frequency local features. In addition, Co-SLAM incorporates one-blob encoding, to encourage surface coherence and completion in unobserved areas. This joint parametric-coordinate encoding enables
real-time and robust performance by bringing the best of
both worlds: fast convergence and surface hole filling.
Moreover, our ray sampling strategy allows Co-SLAM to
perform global bundle adjustment over all keyframes instead of requiring keyframe selection to maintain a small
number of active keyframes as competing neural SLAM approaches do. Experimental results show that Co-SLAM runs
at 10−17Hz and achieves state-of-the-art scene reconstruction results, and competitive tracking performance in various datasets and benchmarks (ScanNet, TUM, Replica, Synthetic RGBD). Project page: https://hengyiwang.
github.io/projects/CoSLAM

⋆ Indicates equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Real-time joint camera tracking and dense surface reconstruction from RGB-D sensors has been a core problem
in computer vision and robotics for decades. Traditional
SLAM solutions exist that can robustly track the position of
the camera while fusing depth and/or color measurements
into a single high-fidelity map. However, they rely on handcrafted loss terms and do not exploit data-driven priors.
Recent attention has turned to learning-based models
that can exploit the ability of neural network architectures
to learn smoothness and coherence priors directly from data.
Coordinate-based networks have probably become the most
popular representation, since they can be trained to predict
the geometric and appearance properties of any point in the
scene in a self-supervised way, directly from images. The
most notable example, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [14],
encodes scene density and color in the weights of a neural
network. In combination with volume rendering, NeRF is
trained to re-synthesize the input images and has a remarkable ability to generalize to nearby unseen views.
Coordinate-based networks embed input point coordinates into a high dimensional space, using sinusoidal or
other frequency embeddings, allowing them to capture
high-frequency details that are essential for high-fidelity
geometry reconstruction [1]. Combined with the smooth-

13293

