This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Surface Contrastive Clustering for LiDAR Point Clouds
Zaiwei Zhang*
Nuro Inc
zaizhang@nuro.ai

Min Bai
AWS AI
baimin@amazon.com

Li Erran Li
AWS AI
lilimam@amazon.com

Abstract
Self-supervised pretraining on large unlabeled datasets
has shown tremendous success in improving the task performance of many 2D and small scale 3D computer vision tasks. However, the popular pretraining approaches
have not been impactfully applied to outdoor LiDAR point
cloud perception due to the latter’s scene complexity and
wide range. We propose a new self-supervised pretraining method ISCC with two novel pretext tasks for LiDAR
point clouds. The first task uncovers semantic information
by sorting local groups of points in the scene into a globally consistent set of semantically meaningful clusters using
contrastive learning, complemented by a second task which
reasons about precise surfaces of various parts of the scene
through implicit surface reconstruction to learn geometric structures. We demonstrate their effectiveness through
transfer learning on 3D object detection and semantic segmentation in real world LiDAR scenes. We further design
an unsupervised semantic grouping task to show that our
approach learns highly semantically meaningful features.

1. Introduction
Robust and reliable 3D LiDAR perception is critical for
autonomous driving systems. Unlike images, LiDAR provides unambiguous measurements of the vehicle’s 3D environment. A plethora of perception models have arisen in
recent years to enable a variety of scene understanding tasks
using LiDAR input, such as object detection and semantic
segmentation. However, training these models generally relies on a large quantity of human annotated data, which is
tedious and expensive to produce.
Recently, self-supervised learning has attracted significant research attention [5, 7, 16–18], as it has the potential
to increase performance on downstream tasks with limited
quantities of annotated data in the image domain. However,
self-supervised learning has shown less impact for outdoor
* Work done at AWS AI.

Figure 1. With frame t as input, we 1) apply contrastive cluster
learning to reason about unsupervised semantic clustering and also
enforce feature consistency across different views, and 2) conduct
implicit surface reconstruction in randomly cropped out regions.

3D point clouds. A core difficulty stems from the relative difficulty in designing appropriate pretext tasks used
for self-supervision. In the image domain, the ImageNet
dataset [35] provides millions of canonical images of everyday objects, allowing for straightforward manipulations
to generate pretext tasks that lead to strong object-centric or
semantic group-centric feature learning. While large-scale
unlabeled outdoor LiDAR datasets are relatively easy to collect, the data samples exhibit a high level of scene complexity, sparsity of measurements, and heavy dependency on the
observer positioning and sensor type. These factors pose
great challenges for creating useful pretext tasks.
Recent works have proposed 3D-specific self-supervised
learning, starting with scene-level contrastive learning [44,
49], followed by the work of [30] and [47], which use finer,
region-level granularity to better encode individual components of large scale LiDAR point clouds. However, these
techniques do not explicitly make use of regularities in 3D
shapes and surfaces.
In our work, we propose ISCC (Implicit Surface Con-

21716

