This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Realistic Saliency Guided Image Enhancement
S. Mahdi H. Miangoleh1
1

Zoya Bylinskii2

Eric Kee2
2

Simon Fraser University

Eli Shechtman2

Yağız Aksoy1

Adobe Research

Figure 1. (top) We develop a saliency-based image enhancement method that can be applied to multiple regions in the image to deemphasize objects (steps 1, 2) or enhance subjects (steps 3, 4). (bottom) Our novel realism loss allows us to apply realistic edits to a wide
variety of objects while state-of-the-art methods [1, 17] may generate less realistic editing results.

Abstract
Common editing operations performed by professional photographers include the cleanup operations: deemphasizing distracting elements and enhancing subjects.
These edits are challenging, requiring a delicate balance
between manipulating the viewer’s attention while maintaining photo realism. While recent approaches can boast
successful examples of attention attenuation or amplification, most of them also suffer from frequent unrealistic edits. We propose a realism loss for saliency-guided image enhancement to maintain high realism across varying image
types, while attenuating distractors and amplifying objects
of interest. Evaluations with professional photographers
confirm that we achieve the dual objective of realism and effectiveness, and outperform the recent approaches on their
own datasets, while requiring a smaller memory footprint
and runtime. We thus offer a viable solution for automating
image enhancement and photo cleanup operations.

1. Introduction
In everyday photography, the composition of a photo
typically encompasses subjects on which the photographer
intends to focus our attention, rather than other distracting
things. When distracting things cannot be avoided, photographers routinely edit their photos to de-emphasize them.
Conversely, when the subjects are not sufficiently visible,
photographers routinely emphasize them. Among the most
common emphasis and de-emphasis operations performed
by professionals are the elementary ones: changing the saturation, exposure, or the color of each element. Although
conceptually simple, these operations are challenging to apply because they must delicately balance the effects on the
viewer attention with photo realism.
To automate this editing process, recent works use
saliency models as a guide [1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 17]. These saliency
models [3, 7, 10, 14, 19] aim to predict the regions in the

186

