This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EqMotion: Equivariant Multi-agent Motion Prediction
with Invariant Interaction Reasoning
Chenxin Xu1,2 , Robby T. Tan2 , Yuhong Tan1 , Siheng Chen1,3*,
Yu Guang Wang1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Yanfeng Wang3,1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 National University of Singapore, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{xcxwakaka,tyheeeer,sihengc,yuguang.wang,wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn, {robby.tan,xinchao}@nus.edu.sg

Euclidean transformation

Abstract
Learning to predict agent motions with relationship reasoning is important for many applications. In motion prediction tasks, maintaining motion equivariance under Euclidean geometric transformations and invariance of agent
interaction is a critical and fundamental principle. However,
such equivariance and invariance properties are overlooked
by most existing methods. To fill this gap, we propose EqMotion, an efficient equivariant motion prediction model
with invariant interaction reasoning. To achieve motion
equivariance, we propose an equivariant geometric feature
learning module to learn a Euclidean transformable feature
through dedicated designs of equivariant operations. To
reason agent’s interactions, we propose an invariant interaction reasoning module to achieve a more stable interaction
modeling. To further promote more comprehensive motion
features, we propose an invariant pattern feature learning
module to learn an invariant pattern feature, which cooperates with the equivariant geometric feature to enhance
network expressiveness. We conduct experiments for the
proposed model on four distinct scenarios: particle dynamics, molecule dynamics, human skeleton motion prediction
and pedestrian trajectory prediction. Experimental results
show that our method is not only generally applicable, but
also achieves state-of-the-art prediction performances on
all the four tasks, improving by 24.0/30.1/8.6/9.2%. Code
is available at https://github.com/MediaBrainSJTU/EqMotion.

1. Introduction
Motion prediction aims to predict future trajectories of
multiple interacting agents given their historical observations.
It is widely studied in many applications like physics [3, 28],
molecule dynamics [7], autonomous driving [35] and humanrobot interaction [38,68]. In the task of motion prediction, an
* Corresponding author.

Past motion

Spring

Future motion

Stick

(equivariant)

Euclidean transformation

Interaction

(invariant)

Past motion

Single bond

Future motion

Double bond

(equivariant)

(a) Particle dynamics

(b) Molecule dynamics

Euclidean transformation

Euclidean transformation

Past motion
Future motion

Bone connection
Interaction

(equivariant)

(invariant)

(c) Human skeleton motion

Past motion
Future motion

(equivariant)

Interaction

(invariant)

Meeting
Interaction

(invariant)

(d) Pedestrian trajectories

Figure 1. Motion equivariance and interaction invariance under
the Euclidean geometric transformation is a fundamental principle
for a prediction model, but this principle is often overlooked by
previous works. In this work, we propose EqMotion to fill this gap.

often-overlooked yet fundamental principle is that a prediction model is required to be equivariant under the Euclidean
geometric transformation (including translation, rotation and
reflection), and at the same time maintain the interaction
relationships invariant. Motion equivariance here means that
if an input motion is transformed under a Euclidean transformation, the output motion must be equally transformed
under the same transformation. Interaction invariance means
that the way agents interact remains unchanged under the
input’s transformation. Figure 1 shows real-world examples
of motion equivariance and interaction invariance.
Employing this principle in a network design brings at
least two benefits. First, the network will be robust to arbitrary Euclidean transformations. Second, the network will
have the capability of being generalizable over rotations and
translations of the data. This capability makes the network
more compact, reducing the network’s learning burden and
contributing to a more accurate prediction.
Despite the motion equivariance property being important

1410

