This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Event-based Video Frame Interpolation with Cross-Modal Asymmetric
Bidirectional Motion Fields
Taewoo Kim, Yujeong Chae, Hyun-Kurl Jang, Kuk-Jin Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{intelpro,yujeong,jhg0001,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) aims to generate intermediate video frames between consecutive input frames.
Since the event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that only
encode brightness changes with a micro-second temporal
resolution, several works utilized the event camera to enhance the performance of VFI. However, existing methods
estimate bidirectional inter-frame motion fields with only
events or approximations, which can not consider the complex motion in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we
propose a novel event-based VFI framework with crossmodal asymmetric bidirectional motion field estimation. In
detail, our EIF-BiOFNet utilizes each valuable characteristic of the events and images for direct estimation of
inter-frame motion fields without any approximation methods. Moreover, we develop an interactive attention-based
frame synthesis network to efficiently leverage the complementary warping-based and synthesis-based features. Finally, we build a large-scale event-based VFI dataset, ERFX170FPS, with a high frame rate, extreme motion, and
dynamic textures to overcome the limitations of previous
event-based VFI datasets. Extensive experimental results
validate that our method shows significant performance improvement over the state-of-the-art VFI methods on various datasets. Our project pages are available at: https:
//github.com/intelpro/CBMNet

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is a long-standing problem in computer vision that aims to increase the temporal
resolution of videos. It is widely applied to various fields
ranging from SLAM, object tracking, novel view synthesis, frame rate up-conversion, and video enhancement. Due
to its practical usage, many researchers are engaged in enhancing the performance of video frame interpolation. Recently, numerous deep learning-based VFI methods have
been proposed and recorded remarkable performance improvements in various VFI datasets. Specifically, numerous

Frames + Events
(a) Inputs (Overlay)

PSNR 16.29 dB
(b) SuperSloMo

PSNR 14.78 dB
(c) BMBC

PSNR 21.58 dB
(d) ABME

PSNR 25.46 dB
(e) TimeLens

PSNR 35.02 dB
(f) Ours

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison on the warped frame of interframe motion fields. (b) and (c) estimate symmetrical inter-frame
motion fields. (d) and (e) estimate asymmetric motion fields using
only images and events, respectively. (f) Ours shows the best results using cross-modal asymmetric bidirectional motion fields.

motion-based VFI methods [3, 4, 8, 12, 22, 29, 30] are proposed thanks to the recent advance in motion estimation algorithms [13, 14, 16, 23, 39, 41]. For the inter-frame motion
field estimation, the previous works [3, 12, 29] estimate the
optical flows between consecutive frames and approximate
intermediate motion fields [12, 29, 49] using linear [12, 29]
or quadratic [49] approximation assumptions. These methods often estimate the inaccurate inter-frame motion fields
when the motions between frames are vast or non-linear,
adversely affecting the VFI performance.
Event cameras, novel bio-inspired sensors, can capture blind motions between frames with high temporal resolutions since they asynchronously report the brightness
changes of the pixels at the micro-second level. Therefore, recent event-based VFI methods [9, 19, 42, 43, 47, 51]
have tried to leverage the advantages of the events to estimate the inter-frame motion field. However, they utilized
only the stream of events to estimate motion fields [9,43] or
used approximation methods [42, 47, 51], resulting in suboptimal motion field estimation. The first reason is that the
nature of events is sparse and noisy, and all the brightness
changes are not recorded in the stream, leading to inaccu-

18032

