This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot Pose Transfer for Unrigged Stylized 3D Characters
Jiashun Wang1* Xueting Li2 Sifei Liu2 Shalini De Mello2
Orazio Gallo2 Xiaolong Wang3 Jan Kautz2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 NVIDIA 3 UC San Diego

Source

Zero-shot pose transfer onto stylized characters

Figure 1. Our algorithm transfers the pose of a reference avatar (source) to stylized characters. Unlike existing methods, at training time
our approach needs only the mesh of the source avatar in rest and desired pose, and the mesh of the stylized characater only in rest pose.

Abstract
Transferring the pose of a reference avatar to stylized 3D
characters of various shapes is a fundamental task in computer graphics. Existing methods either require the stylized
characters to be rigged, or they use the stylized character in
the desired pose as ground truth at training. We present a
zero-shot approach that requires only the widely available
deformed non-stylized avatars in training, and deforms stylized characters of significantly different shapes at inference.
Classical methods achieve strong generalization by deforming the mesh at the triangle level, but this requires labelled
correspondences. We leverage the power of local deformation, but without requiring explicit correspondence labels.
We introduce a semi-supervised shape-understanding module to bypass the need for explicit correspondences at test
time, and an implicit pose deformation module that deforms
individual surface points to match the target pose. Furthermore, to encourage realistic and accurate deformation of
* Work done during Jiashun Wang’s internship at NVIDIA.

stylized characters, we introduce an efficient volume-based
test-time training procedure. Because it does not need rigging, nor the deformed stylized character at training time,
our model generalizes to categories with scarce annotation,
such as stylized quadrupeds. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method compared
to the state-of-the-art approaches trained with comparable or more supervision. Our project page is available at
https://jiashunwang.github.io/ZPT/

1. Introduction
Stylized 3D characters , such as those in Fig. 1, are commonly used in animation, movies, and video games. Deforming these characters to mimic natural human or animal
poses has been a long-standing task in computer graphics.
Different from the 3D models of natural humans and animals, stylized 3D characters are created by professional
artists through imagination and exaggeration. As a result,
each stylized character has a distinct skeleton, shape, mesh

8704

