This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Cross-Temporal Contexts for Continuous Sign Language Recognition
Wanli Xue1 * Qing Guo2 * Bo Liu3 Kaihua Zhang4
Tiantian Yuan5 Shengyong Chen1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology,
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore, 3 Walmart Global Tech, Sunnyvale, CA, USA,
4
School of Computer and Software, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology,
5
Technical College for the Deaf, Tianjin University of Technology
Leming Guo1

(a) Existing CSLR framework
Input: Sign Language Video

(b) The generalization(IIW ) and performance(WER ) comparison
10.0
1.0E-05

Baseline

The generalization (IIW) of TAM

Abstract

8.0
1.0E-05

1. Introduction
Sign language is a visual language for deaf and hearingimpaired people for ease of communication. Because sign
language has a different grammatical structure and expression from natural spoken language, deaf and hearing* Wanli Xue and Qing Guo are corresponding authors (xuewanli@email.tjut.edu.cn and tsingqguo@ieee.org).

SMKD

6.0
1.0E-05

4.0

TLP
CTCA

1.0E-05

Temporal Aggregation Module

WER

2.0

<

1.0E-05

2.0E-06

2.0E-05

<

4.0E-05

6.0E-05

The generalization (IIW ) of SPM
(c) Comparison to SOTAs on (WER ) and model efficiency
26

CTCA(Ours)
TLP(ECCV2022)
SMKD(ICCV2021)
VAC(ICCV2021)
SFL(ECCV2020)

Connect. Temporal Classification

Word Error Rate(%)

Continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) aims to
recognize glosses in a sign language video. State-of-theart methods typically have two modules, a spatial perception module and a temporal aggregation module, which are
jointly learned end-to-end. Existing results in [9, 20, 25, 36]
have indicated that, as the frontal component of the overall model, the spatial perception module used for spatial
feature extraction tends to be insufficiently trained. In this
paper, we first conduct empirical studies and show that a
shallow temporal aggregation module allows more thorough training of the spatial perception module. However, a
shallow temporal aggregation module cannot well capture
both local and global temporal context information in sign
language. To address this dilemma, we propose a crosstemporal context aggregation (CTCA) model. Specifically,
we build a dual-path network that contains two branches for
perceptions of local temporal context and global temporal
context. We further design a cross-context knowledge distillation learning objective to aggregate the two types of context and the linguistic prior. The knowledge distillation enables the resultant one-branch temporal aggregation module to perceive local-global temporal and semantic context.
This shallow temporal perception module structure facilitates spatial perception module learning. Extensive experiments on challenging CSLR benchmarks demonstrate that
our method outperforms all state-of-the-art methods.

VAC

24

Output: Gloss Predictions
Given Annotation:
__ON__；JETZT；WETTER；
WIE-AUSSEHEN； MORGEN；SAMSTAG；
ZWEITE； APRIL；__OFF__；__ON__；
ZEIGEN-BILDSCHIRM；__OFF__

22

Model Size

20

<
30

35

40

Test time(seconds)

45

<
50

Figure 1. (a) is the common CSLR framework. (b) presents the
generalization capability (i.e., information stored in weights (IIW)
[31]) of TAMs and SPMs of baseline, state-of-the-art methods and
the proposed method. (c) is the performance of the state-of-the-art
methods including word error rate, test time, and model size.

impaired people hardly communicate normally with hearing people in daily life. To eliminate this communication gap, continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) enforces to recognition of various glosses from a sign language video. Due to the data collection and annotation
being labor-intensive, CSLR benchmarks adopt a sentenceannotation manner for all sign language videos [1, 15, 33].
In recent years, there is a consensus among state-of-theart methods on a baseline framework (See Fig. 1 (a)). It
is made up of a spatial perception module (SPM), and a
temporal aggregation module (TAM) including two components for local and global temporal perception module, and
the connectionist temporal classification (CTC) loss [8] for
training. At present, these methods [9, 20, 25, 36] have perceived one limitation of this framework that the temporal
aggregation module can lead to insufficiently trained spatial

10771

