This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Energy-Efficient Adaptive 3D Sensing
Brevin Tilmon1 * Zhanghao Sun2 Sanjeev J. Koppal1 Yicheng Wu3 Georgios Evangelidis3
Ramzi Zahreddine3 Gurunandan Krishnan3 Sizhuo Ma3† Jian Wang3†
1
University of Florida 2 Stanford University 3 Snap Inc.

Abstract
Active depth sensing achieves robust depth estimation
but is usually limited by the sensing range. Naively increasing the optical power can improve sensing range but induces eye-safety concerns for many applications, including
autonomous robots and augmented reality. In this paper, we
propose an adaptive active depth sensor that jointly optimizes range, power consumption, and eye-safety. The main
observation is that we need not project light patterns to the
entire scene but only to small regions of interest where depth
is necessary for the application and passive stereo depth estimation fails. We theoretically compare this adaptive sensing scheme with other sensing strategies, such as full-frame
projection, line scanning, and point scanning. We show
that, to achieve the same maximum sensing distance, the
proposed method consumes the least power while having
the shortest (best) eye-safety distance. We implement this
adaptive sensing scheme with two hardware prototypes, one
with a phase-only spatial light modulator (SLM) and the
other with a micro-electro-mechanical (MEMS) mirror and
diffractive optical elements (DOE). Experimental results
validate the advantage of our method and demonstrate its
capability of acquiring higher quality geometry adaptively.
Please see our project website for video results and code:
https://btilmon.github.io/e3d.html.

1. Introduction
Active 3D depth sensors have diverse applications in
augmented reality, navigation, and robotics. Recently, these
sensor modules are widely used in consumer products, such
as time-of-flight (e.g., Lidar [15]), structured light (e.g.,
Kinect V1 [18]) and others. In addition, many computer
vision algorithms have been proposed to process the acquired data for downstream tasks such as 3D semantic understanding [29], object tracking [17], guided upsampling
in SLAM [24], etc.
* Work done during internship at Snap Research.
† Co-corresponding authors

Low power

Long sensible
distance

Short eye-safety
distance

(a) Depth sensing on wearables faces challenges
When distance is the same
The laser energy is
redistributed to the ROI.

Required power (↓ is better)

Eye-safety distance (↓ is better)

Scene

Camera
Camera
Projector

(b) Our system with adaptive projection

Full
Line Adaptive
pattern scanning pattern
(ours)

(c) Comparison

Figure 1. Energy-efficient adaptive 3D sensing. (a) Depth
sensing devices have three key optimization goals: minimizing
the power consumption and eye-safety distance while maximizing sensing distance. However, these goals are coupled to each
other. (b) We propose a novel adaptive sensing method with an
active stereo setup and a projector that can redistribute the light
energy and project the pattern only to the required regions (e.g.,
textureless regions). (c) The proposed approach outperforms previous methods including full-frame pattern systems (like Intel RealSense) and line-scanning systems (like Episcan3D [22]): When
the maximum sensing distance is the same, the required power is
much less and the eye-safety distance is also shorter.

Unlike stereo cameras that only sense reflected ambient
light passively, active depth sensors illuminate the scene
with modulated light patterns, either spatially, temporally,
or both. The illumination encodings allow robust estimation of scene depths. However, this also leads to three
shortcomings: First, active depth sensors consume optical
power, burdening wearable devices that are on a tight power
budget. Second, the number of received photons reflected
back from the scene drops with inverse-square relationship

5054

