This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning via Class-Aware Bilateral Distillation
Linglan Zhao1,∗ , Jing Lu2,∗ , Yunlu Xu2 , Zhanzhan Cheng2,† , Dashan Guo1 , Yi Niu2 , Xiangzhong Fang1
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Hikvision Research Institute
{llzhao,dmlab gds,xzfang}@sjtu.edu.cn, {lujing6,xuyunlu,chengzhanzhan,niuyi}@hikvision.com

(a) CIL: catastrophic forgetting

Abstract
Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) aims to
continually learn novel classes based on only few training samples, which poses a more challenging task than the
well-studied Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) due to data
scarcity. While knowledge distillation, a prevailing technique in CIL, can alleviate the catastrophic forgetting of
older classes by regularizing outputs between current and
previous model, it fails to consider the overﬁtting risk of
novel classes in FSCIL. To adapt the powerful distillation
technique for FSCIL, we propose a novel distillation structure, by taking the unique challenge of overﬁtting into account. Concretely, we draw knowledge from two complementary teachers. One is the model trained on abundant
data from base classes that carries rich general knowledge,
which can be leveraged for easing the overﬁtting of current novel classes. The other is the updated model from
last incremental session that contains the adapted knowledge of previous novel classes, which is used for alleviating their forgetting. To combine the guidances, an adaptive
strategy conditioned on the class-wise semantic similarities is introduced. Besides, for better preserving base class
knowledge when accommodating novel concepts, we adopt
a two-branch network with an attention-based aggregation
module to dynamically merge predictions from two complementary branches. Extensive experiments on 3 popular
FSCIL datasets: mini-ImageNet, CIFAR100 and CUB200
validate the effectiveness of our method by surpassing existing works by a signiﬁcant margin. Code is available at
https://github.com/LinglanZhao/BiDistFSCIL.

1. Introduction
Real-world applications often face novel data in continuous stream format. In contrast, traditional models can only
make predictions on a pre-deﬁned label set, and are not ﬂexible enough to tackle novel classes which may emerge after deployment. To address this issue, Class-Incremental
Learning (CIL) has become an active area of recent research [2, 13, 20, 26]. The main focus of CIL is to effectively learn new concepts from abundant labeled samples
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

11838

Logits

Abundant novel data

Model t-1
Distill
Model t

(b) FSCIL: catastrophic forgetting & overfitting
Abundant base data

Trained

Semantic sim

Logits
Model base

Transfer

Model t-1

Imprinted

Distill

Few-shot novel data

Model t

Figure 1. Comparisons of (a) vanilla knowledge distillation in CIL
and (b) our adapted class-aware bilateral distillation for FSCIL.

and to simultaneously alleviate catastrophic forgetting over
old classes. However, the requirement of sufﬁcient training
data from novel classes still makes CIL impractical in many
scenarios, especially when annotated samples are hard to
obtain due to privacy or the unaffordable collecting cost.
For instance, to train an incremental model for face recognition, one or only few images are uploaded for recognizing
the newly occurred person. To this end, Few-Shot ClassIncremental Learning (FSCIL) is proposed to learn novel
concepts given only a few samples [30]. FSCIL deﬁnes a
challenging task where abundant training samples are available only in the base session for initial model pre-training
and the model should continually absorb novel concepts
from few data points in each incremental session.
A prevailing technique in CIL is to leverage knowledge
distillation for alleviating the forgetting problem. The general routine is to calibrate the output logits between current
and previous model, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). The output of current model t is restrained to be consistent with the
output of model t-1 in last incremental session. Nevertheless, such paradigm is not suitable for FSCIL [30, 41, 42],
since the scarcity of novel class samples will cause model

