This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PosterLayout: A New Benchmark and Approach for Content-aware
Visual-Textual Presentation Layout
HsiaoYuan Hsu1,2 , Xiangteng He1,2 , Yuxin Peng1,2 *, Hao Kong3 and Qing Zhang3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University 2 National Key Laboratory for
Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University 3 Meituan

1

kslh99@stu.pku.edu.cn, {hexiangteng, pengyuxin, konghao}@pku.edu.cn, zhangqing31@meituan.com

Abstract
Content-aware visual-textual presentation layout aims at
arranging spatial space on the given canvas for pre-defined
elements, including text, logo, and underlay, which is a key
to automatic template-free creative graphic design. In practical applications, e.g., poster designs, the canvas is originally non-empty, and both inter-element relationships as
well as inter-layer relationships should be concerned when
generating a proper layout. A few recent works deal with
them simultaneously, but they still suffer from poor graphic
performance, such as a lack of layout variety or spatial
non-alignment. Since content-aware visual-textual presentation layout is a novel task, we first construct a new dataset
named PKU PosterLayout, which consists of 9,974 posterlayout pairs and 905 images, i.e., non-empty canvases. It
is more challenging and useful for greater layout variety,
domain diversity, and content diversity. Then, we propose
design sequence formation (DSF) that reorganizes elements
in layouts to imitate the design processes of human designers, and a novel CNN-LSTM-based conditional generative
adversarial network (GAN) is presented to generate proper
layouts. Specifically, the discriminator is design-sequenceaware and will supervise the ”design” process of the generator. Experimental results verify the usefulness of the
new benchmark and the effectiveness of the proposed approach, which achieves the best performance by generating
suitable layouts for diverse canvases. The dataset and the
source code are available at https://github.com/PKU-ICSTMIPL/PosterLayout-CVPR2023.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, visual-textual presentation rendering informative and decorative elements on an image, i.e., canvas, is
widely used to convey information, such as advertisement
posters [5, 13, 16], magazines [20, 22], and so on [4, 10, 15].
* Corresponding author.

Logo
Text
Underlay

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Content-aware visual-textual presentation layout: (a)
Non-empty canvas; (b) Content-aware layout; (c) An example of
rendered presentation applying (b).

The basis of these creative works is the layout that indicates
the spatial structure of the arranged elements, as shown in
Fig. 1, which is also a key factor influencing their effectiveness and aesthetics. For their popularity and usefulness, not
only experienced designers but also novice ones or ”newbies” are commonly in need of creating them. People resort to pre-defined templates when they don’t have enough
prerequisites or need mass production. However, one can
easily imagine that these templates harshly limit the flexibility and diversity of the presentations. These drawbacks
of relying on templates hence highlight the importance and
practicality of template-free creative graphic design, which
can be preliminarily satisfied by automatically generating
visual-textual presentation layouts.
With the advance in deep learning and big data, more and
more data-driven approaches for visual-textual presentation
layout have emerged in this decade. However, most of them
have only been devoted to mining the relationship between
elements and seldom concerned between layers, i.e., layout
and canvas. Without proper constraints, elements are easily
prone to cover the salient contents in the canvas, causing a
severe occlusion problem. For example, in advertisement
poster design, one of the most content-rich presentations,
the product in the canvas shouldn’t be over-occluded, which
is no doubt. A few works [1,23] deal with inter-element and

6018

