This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ORCa: Glossy Objects as Radiance-Field Cameras
Kushagra Tiwary1* , Akshat Dave2* , Nikhil Behari1 , Tzofi Klinghoffer1 ,
Ashok Veeraraghavan2 , Ramesh Raskar1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 Rice University
{ktiwary,behari,tzofi,raskar}@mit.edu, {akshat,vashok}@rice.edu

Figure 1. Objects as radiance-field cameras. We convert everyday objects with unknown geometry (a) into radiance-field cameras by
modeling multi-view reflections (b) as projections of the 5D radiance field of the environment. We convert the object surface into a virtual
sensor to capture this radiance field (c), which enables depth and radiance estimation of the surrounding environment. We can then query
this radiance field to perform beyond field-of-view novel view synthesis of the environment (d).

Abstract
Reflections on glossy objects contain valuable and hidden
information about the surrounding environment. By converting these objects into cameras, we can unlock exciting
applications, including imaging beyond the camera’s fieldof-view and from seemingly impossible vantage points, e.g.
from reflections on the human eye. However, this task is
challenging because reflections depend jointly on object geometry, material properties, the 3D environment, and the
observer’s viewing direction. Our approach converts glossy
objects with unknown geometry into radiance-field cameras
to image the world from the object’s perspective. Our key
insight is to convert the object surface into a virtual sensor
that captures cast reflections as a 2D projection of the 5D
environment radiance field visible to and surrounding the
object. We show that recovering the environment radiance
fields enables depth and radiance estimation from the object to its surroundings in addition to beyond field-of-view
* Equal contribution

novel-view synthesis, i.e. rendering of novel views that are
only directly visible to the glossy object present in the scene,
but not the observer. Moreover, using the radiance field we
can image around occluders caused by close-by objects in
the scene. Our method is trained end-to-end on multi-view
images of the object and jointly estimates object geometry,
diffuse radiance, and the 5D environment radiance field.
For more information, visit our website.

1. Introduction
Imagine that you’re driving down a city street that is
packed with lines of parked cars on both sides. Inspection
of the cars’ glass windshields, glossy paint, and plastic reveal sharp, but faint and distorted views of the surroundings
that might be otherwise hidden from you. Humans can infer
depth and semantic cues about the occluded areas in the environment by processing reflections visible on reflective objects, internally decomposing the object geometry and radiance from the specular radiance being reflected onto it. Our
aim is to decompose the object from its reflections to “see”
the world from the object’s perspective, effectively turning

20773

