This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MetaPortrait: Identity-Preserving Talking Head Generation
with Fast Personalized Adaptation
Bowen Zhang1∗
Chenyang Qi2∗
Pan Zhang1
Bo Zhang3†
HsiangTao Wu3
Dong Chen2
Qifeng Chen2†
Yong Wang1
Fang Wen3
1
2
3
USTC
HKUST
Microsoft

Source

Driving

Ours

Driving

Ours

Figure 1. Our method yields identity-preserving talking head generation. See the webpage for video demos.

Abstract
In this work, we propose an ID-preserving talking head
generation framework, which advances previous methods in
two aspects. First, as opposed to interpolating from sparse
ﬂow, we claim that dense landmarks are crucial to achieving accurate geometry-aware ﬂow ﬁelds. Second, inspired
by face-swapping methods, we adaptively fuse the source
identity during synthesis, so that the network better preserves the key characteristics of the image portrait. Although the proposed model surpasses prior generation ﬁdelity on established benchmarks, personalized ﬁne-tuning
is still needed to further make the talking head generation
qualiﬁed for real usage. However, this process is rather
computationally demanding that is unaffordable to standard users. To alleviate this, we propose a fast adaptation
model using a meta-learning approach. The learned model
can be adapted to a high-quality personalized model as fast
as 30 seconds. Last but not least, a spatial-temporal enhancement module is proposed to improve the ﬁne details
while ensuring temporal coherency. Extensive experiments
* Equal contribution, interns at Microsoft Research.
† Joint corresponding authors.

22096

prove the signiﬁcant superiority of our approach over the
state of the arts in both one-shot and personalized settings.

1. Introduction
Talking head generation [1, 6, 7, 24, 27, 31, 33, 39, 41, 47]
has found extensive applications in face-to-face live chat,
virtual reality and virtual avatars in games and videos. In
this paper, we aim to synthesize a realistic talking head with
a single source image (one-shot) that provides the appearance of a given person while being animatable according
to the motion of the driving person. Recently, considerable
progress has been made with neural rendering techniques,
bypassing the sophisticated 3D human modeling process
and expensive driving sensors. While these works attain
increasing ﬁdelity and higher rendering resolution, identity
preserving remains a challenging issue since the human vision system is particularly sensitive to any nuanced deviation from the person’s facial geometry.
Prior arts mainly focus on learning a geometry-aware
warping ﬁeld, either by interpolating from sparse 2D/3D
landmarks or leveraging 3D face prior, e.g., 3D morphable

