This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenMix: Exploring Outlier Samples for Misclassification Detection
Fei Zhu1,2 , Zhen Cheng1,2 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2 *, Cheng-Lin Liu1,2
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
{zhufei2018, chengzhen2019}@ia.ac.cn, {xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Reliable confidence estimation for deep neural classifiers is a challenging yet fundamental requirement in highstakes applications. Unfortunately, modern deep neural
networks are often overconfident for their erroneous predictions. In this work, we exploit the easily available outlier
samples, i.e., unlabeled samples coming from non-target
classes, for helping detect misclassification errors. Particularly, we find that the well-known Outlier Exposure, which
is powerful in detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
from unknown classes, does not provide any gain in identifying misclassification errors. Based on these observations,
we propose a novel method called OpenMix, which incorporates open-world knowledge by learning to reject uncertain pseudo-samples generated via outlier transformation.
OpenMix significantly improves confidence reliability under various scenarios, establishing a strong and unified
framework for detecting both misclassified samples from
known classes and OOD samples from unknown classes.
The code is publicly available at https://github.
com/Impression2805/OpenMix.

1. Introduction
Human beings inevitably make mistakes, so do machine learning systems. Wrong predictions or decisions can
cause various problems and harms, from financial loss to
injury and death. Therefore, in risk-sensitive applications
such as clinical decision making [14] and autonomous driving [29, 63], it is important to provide reliable confidence
to avoid using wrong predictions, in particular for nonspecialists who may trust the computational models without further checks. For instance, a disease diagnosis model
should hand over the input to human experts when the prediction confidence is low. However, though deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled breakthroughs in many fields,
they are known to be overconfident for their erroneous pre* Corresponding author.

class #1

class #2

counterexample

misclassification

adult / suit

child / casual

dog / suit

adult (low confid.)

Figure 1. Illustration of advantages of counterexample data for
reliable confidence estimation. The misclassified image has the
most determinative and shortcut [18] features from class #1 (i.e.,
suit). Counterexample teaches the model the knowledge of what
is not adult even if it has suit, which could help reduce model’s
confidence on wrong predictions.

dictions [25, 62], i.e., assigning high confidence for ① misclassified samples from in-distribution (ID) and ② out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples from unknown classes.
In recent years, many efforts have been made to enhance
the OOD detection ability of DNNs [2, 13, 15, 23, 26, 39],
while little attention has been paid to detecting misclassified errors from known classes. Compared with the widely
studied OOD detection problem, misclassification detection
(MisD) is more challenging because DNNs are typically
more confident for the misclassified ID samples than that for
OOD data from a different distribution [19]. In this paper,
we focus on the under-explored MisD, and propose a simple approach to help decide whether a prediction is likely to
be misclassified, and therefore should be rejected.
Towards developing reliable models for detecting misclassification errors, we start by asking a natural question:
Why are human beings good at confidence estimation?
A crucial point is that humans learn and predict in context, where we have abundant prior knowledge about other
entities in the open world. According to mental models
[11,31,54] in cognitive science, when assessing the validity
or evidence of a prediction, one would retrieve counterexamples, i.e., which satisfy the premise but cannot lead to
the conclusion. In other words, exploring counterexamples
from open world plays an important role in establishing reliable confidence for the reasoning problem. Inspired by

12074

