This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask3D: Pre-training 2D Vision Transformers by Learning Masked 3D Priors
Ji Hou1

Xiaoliang Dai1
1

Zijian He1

Meta Reality Labs

2

Angela Dai2

Matthias Nießner2

Technical University of Munich

Figure 1. We present Mask3D, which learns to embed 3D priors to 2D representations for image understanding tasks, based on a selfsupervised pre-training formulation from single RGB-D views, without requiring any camera pose or multi-view correspondence information. Our pre-training takes masked RGB and depth patches as input to reconstruct the dense depth map, and the pre-trained color backbone
is used to fine-tune various downstream image understanding tasks. This results in effective ViT pre-training for a variety of downstream
tasks and datasets.

Abstract
Current popular backbones in computer vision, such as
Vision Transformers (ViT) and ResNets are trained to perceive the world from 2D images. However, to more effectively understand 3D structural priors in 2D backbones, we
propose Mask3D to leverage existing large-scale RGB-D
data in a self-supervised pre-training to embed these 3D
priors into 2D learned feature representations. In contrast to traditional 3D contrastive learning paradigms requiring 3D reconstructions or multi-view correspondences,
our approach is simple: we formulate a pre-text reconstruction task by masking RGB and depth patches in individual
RGB-D frames. We demonstrate the Mask3D is particularly effective in embedding 3D priors into the powerful
2D ViT backbone, enabling improved representation learning for various scene understanding tasks, such as semantic
segmentation, instance segmentation and object detection.

Experiments show that Mask3D notably outperforms existing self-supervised 3D pre-training approaches on ScanNet,
NYUv2, and Cityscapes image understanding tasks, with
an improvement of +6.5% mIoU against the state-of-the-art
Pri3D on ScanNet image semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen remarkable advances in 2D image understanding as well as 3D scene understanding, although their representation learning has generally been
treated separately. Powerful 2D architectures such as
ResNets [21] and Vision Transformers (ViT) [14] have
achieved notable success in various 2D recognition and segmentation tasks, but focus on learning from 2D image data.
Current large-scale RGB-D datasets [1,4,10,34,35] provide
an opportunity to learn key geometric and structural priors
to provide more informed reasoning about the scale and cir-

13510

