This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoNet: Benchmarking Unsupervised Adaptation across Geographies
Tarun Kalluri

Wangdong Xu
Manmohan Chandraker
UC San Diego
https://tarun005.github.io/GeoNet

Abstract

Design
Shift

Context

+ Shift

Testing Domain
Asia

Rel. Accuracy Gain

(a) Geographic bias manifested in proposed GeoNet dataset

40
30
20
10
0
10

DomainNet (Real->Clipart)
GeoImNet (USA->Asia)
DANN

MDD

MCC

CDAN

ToAlign MemSAC

(b) Unsupervised domain adaptation does not suffice on GeoNet

Accuracy (%)

In recent years, several efforts have been aimed at improving the robustness of vision models to domains and
environments unseen during training. An important practical problem pertains to models deployed in a new geography
that is under-represented in the training dataset, posing
a direct challenge to fair and inclusive computer vision.
In this paper, we study the problem of geographic robustness and make three main contributions. First, we introduce a large-scale dataset GeoNet for geographic adaptation containing benchmarks across diverse tasks like scene
recognition (GeoPlaces), image classification (GeoImNet)
and universal adaptation (GeoUniDA). Second, we investigate the nature of distribution shifts typical to the problem of geographic adaptation and hypothesize that the major source of domain shifts arise from significant variations in scene context (context shift), object design (design shift) and label distribution (prior shift) across geographies. Third, we conduct an extensive evaluation of
several state-of-the-art unsupervised domain adaptation algorithms and architectures on GeoNet, showing that they do
not suffice for geographical adaptation, and that large-scale
pre-training using large vision models also does not lead to
geographic robustness. Our dataset is publicly available at
https://tarun005.github.io/GeoNet.

Training Domain
USA

60
50
40
30

1. Introduction

Target Supervised
Sup.-IN 1k
MOCO-IN 1k

SWAV-IN 1k
DINO-IN 1k
MAE-IN 1k

SWAG-IG 3.7B
CLIP-LAION 400M

RN-50 (24.0M) ViT-S (21.8M) ViT-B (85.9M)
Backbone (#params)

ViT-L (303.3M)

(c) Large vision models exhibit cross-domain drops on GeoNet

In recent years, domain adaptation has emerged as an
effective technique to alleviate dataset bias [80] during training and improve transferability of vision models to sparsely
labeled target domains [27, 36, 40, 42, 49–51, 68, 69, 86, 89].
While being greatly instrumental in driving research forward,
methods and benchmark datasets developed for domain adaptation [56, 57, 64, 83] have been restricted to a narrow set of
divergences between domains. However, the geographic origin of data remains a significant source of bias, attributable to
several factors of variation between train and test data. Training on geographically biased datasets may cause a model
to learn the idiosyncrasies of their geographies, preventing

Figure 1. Summary of our contributions. (a): Training computer vision
models on geographically biased datasets suffers from poor generalization to new geographies. We propose a new dataset called GeoNet to
study this problem and take a closer look at the various types of domain
shifts induced by geographic variations. (b) Prior unsupervised adaptation methods that efficiently handle other variations do not suffice for
improving geographic transfer. (c) We highlight the limitations of modern convolutional and transformer architectures in addressing geographic
bias, exemplified here by USA→Asia transfer on GeoImNet.

generalization to novel domains with significantly different
geographic and demographic composition. Besides robustness, this may have deep impact towards fair and inclusive

15368

