This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decompose More and Aggregate Better:
Two Closer Looks at Frequency Representation Learning
for Human Motion Prediction
Xuehao Gao1 , Shaoyi Du1 , Yang Wu2 , Yang Yang1, *
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Tencent AI Lab
{gaoxuehao.xjtu, dushaoyi}@gmail.com, dylanywu@tencent.com

Abstract
Encouraged by the effectiveness of encoding temporal
dynamics within the frequency domain, recent human motion prediction systems prefer to first convert the motion
representation from the original pose space into the frequency space. In this paper, we introduce two closer looks
at effective frequency representation learning for robust motion prediction and summarize them as: decompose more
and aggregate better. Motivated by these two insights,
we develop two powerful units that factorize the frequency
representation learning task with a novel decompositionaggregation two-stage strategy: (1) frequency decomposition unit unweaves multi-view frequency representations
from an input body motion by embedding its frequency features into multiple spaces; (2) feature aggregation unit deploys a series of intra-space and inter-space feature aggregation layers to collect comprehensive frequency representations from these spaces for robust human motion prediction. As evaluated on large-scale datasets, we develop a
strong baseline model for the human motion prediction task
that outperforms state-of-the-art methods by large margins:
8%∼12% on Human3.6M, 3%∼7% on CMU MoCap, and
7%∼10% on 3DPW.

1. Introduction
3D skeleton-based human motion prediction system
forecasts future poses given a past motion. It helps machines understand human behavior and plan their own responses, which is crucial in many real-world applications,
including intelligent surveillance [11, 40], human-machine
interaction [16, 17] and autonomous driving [18, 32]. The
core challenge behind this task lies in developing a powerful
mapping function that effectively bridges past body motion
to the future [23, 25, 27, 30, 33].
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Diverse frequency distributions of body poses. As for
a human action, the differences in temporal smoothness between
different body joints and motion samples enlarge the representation gap in its frequency space.

Earlier prediction algorithms tend to extract motion patterns from the original pose space [7, 9, 10, 22, 34, 43].
Due to the subject-specific nature of pose space, their embedding representations intertwine body motion information and structure information jointly. In this case, they encapsulate an inductive bias on general human stature and
thus suffer from limited robustness against body shape perturbation. Inspired by the effectiveness of encoding temporal smoothness in frequency domain, frequency space
encourages human motion prediction systems to focus on
trajectory-related cues [1, 42]. As an initial attempt, Mao et
al. [28] propose to convert the motion representation from
the pose space into the frequency space with discrete cosine
transform (DCT). Following this insight, recent methods
widely use DCT as a routine operation in the data preprocessing stage and extract feature embeddings from the single frequency space initialized by the DCT [21, 24, 26, 38].
In this context, the frequency features extracted from past
body motions dominate the future motion prediction. A
further investigation into developing a powerful frequency
representation learning framework for robust human motion
prediction remains fundamental yet under-explored.
As sketched in Figure 1, diverse frequency distributions
of body motions lie in intra-sample and inter-sample levels: (1) intra-sample difference. Since the human skeleton

6451

