This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Architectural Backdoors in Neural Networks
Mikel Bober-Irizar*

Ilia Shumailov†‡

Yiren Zhao§ *

mikel@mxbi.net

ilia.shumailov@chch.ox.ac.uk

a.zhao@imperial.ac.uk

Robert Mullins*

Nicolas Papernot¶ †

robert.mullins@cl.cam.ac.uk

nicolas.papernot@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Machine learning is vulnerable to adversarial manipulation. Previous literature demonstrated that at the training
stage attackers can manipulate data [14] and data sampling
procedures [29] to control model behaviour. A common attack goal is to plant backdoors i.e. force the victim model
to learn to recognise a trigger known only by the adversary.
In this paper, we introduce a new class of backdoor attacks
that hide inside model architectures i.e. in the inductive bias
of the functions used to train. These backdoors are simple
to implement, for instance by publishing open-source code
for a backdoored model architecture that others will reuse
unknowingly. We demonstrate that model architectural backdoors represent a real threat and, unlike other approaches,
can survive a complete re-training from scratch. We formalise the main construction principles behind architectural
backdoors, such as a connection between the input and the
output, and describe some possible protections against them.
We evaluate our attacks on computer vision benchmarks of
different scales and demonstrate the underlying vulnerability
is pervasive in a variety of common training settings.

1. Introduction
The Machine Learning (ML) community now faces a
threat posed by backdoored neural networks; models which
are intentionally modified by an attacker in the supply chain
to insert hidden behaviour [3, 14]. A backdoor causes a
network’s behaviour to change arbitrarily when a specific secret ‘trigger’ is present in the model’s input, while behaving
as the defender intended when the trigger is absent (retaining a high evaluation performance). The vast majority of
current backdoor attacks in the literature work by changing
the trained weights of models [14, 15] – here the backdoor
* University of Cambridge, UK.
† Vector Institute, CA.

is planted into the parameters during training of the neural
network. This can be done directly (i.e. modify the values
of the weights directly [12, 15]), or indirectly by sampling
adversarially [29] and modifying training data [14]. This
means that when the weights are later modified by another
party (e.g. through fine-tuning), the backdoor could feasibly
be removed or weakened [34]. When the weights provided
by an attacker are discarded entirely (e.g. through re-training
from scratch on a new dataset), any embedded backdoor
would of course naturally be discarded.
However, the performance of a neural network depends
not only on its weights but also its architecture (the composition and connections between layers in the model). Research
showed that, when given sufficient flexibility, the neural network architectures themselves can be pre-disposed to certain
outcomes [11, 38]. The network architectures can be seen
as an inductive bias of the ML model. This raises a new
question: Can the network architectures themselves be
modified to hide backdoors?
In this paper we investigate if an adversary can use neural
network architectures to perform backdoor attacks, forcing
the model to become sensitive to a specific trigger applied
to an image. We demonstrate that if an attacker can slightly
manipulate the architecture only using common components
they can introduce backdoors that survive re-training from
scratch on a completely new dataset i.e. making these model
backdoors weights- and dataset-agnostic. We describe a way
to construct such Model Architecture Backdoors (MAB)
and formalize their requirements. We find that architectural
backdoors need to: (1) operate directly on the input and link
the input to its output; (2) (ideally) have a weight-agnostic
implementation; (3) have asymmetric components to launch
targeted attacks. We demonstrate how such requirements
make MAB detection possible and show that without these
requirements, the learned backdoors will struggle to survive
re-training.
We make the following contributions:

‡ University of Oxford, UK.

• We show a new class of backdoor attacks against neural
networks, where the backdoor is planted inside of the

§ Imperial College London, UK.
¶ University of Toronto, CA.

24595

