This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fine-grained Image-text Matching by Cross-modal Hard Aligning Network

1

Zhengxin Pan1
Zhejiang University

2

Fangyu Wu2 *
Xian Jiaotong-liverpool University

panzx@zju.edu.cn

fangyu.wu02@xjtlu.edu.cn

3

Bailing Zhang3
NingboTech University

bailing.zhang@nit.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art image-text matching methods
implicitly align the visual-semantic fragments, like regions
in images and words in sentences, and adopt cross-attention
mechanism to discover ﬁne-grained cross-modal semantic
correspondence. However, the cross-attention mechanism
may bring redundant or irrelevant region-word alignments,
degenerating retrieval accuracy and limiting efﬁciency. Although many researchers have made progress in mining
meaningful alignments and thus improving accuracy, the
problem of poor efﬁciency remains unresolved. In this work,
we propose to learn ﬁne-grained image-text matching from
the perspective of information coding. Speciﬁcally, we suggest a coding framework to explain the fragments aligning
process, which provides a novel view to reexamine the crossattention mechanism and analyze the problem of redundant
alignments. Based on this framework, a Cross-modal Hard
Aligning Network (CHAN) is designed, which comprehensively exploits the most relevant region-word pairs and eliminates all other alignments. Extensive experiments conducted on two public datasets, MS-COCO and Flickr30K,
verify that the relevance of the most associated word-region
pairs is discriminative enough as an indicator of the imagetext similarity, with superior accuracy and efﬁciency over
the state-of-the-art approaches on the bidirectional image
and text retrieval tasks. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/ppanzx/CHAN.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of information technology,
multi-modal data, like texts, audio, images, and video, has
become ubiquitous in our daily life. It is of great value
to study multi-modal learning to give computers the ability
to process and relate information from multiple modalities.
Among the tasks of multi-modal learning, image-text retrieval is the most fundamental one, which paves the way for
more general cross-modal retrieval, namely, implementing
a retrieval task across different modalities, such as video* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of different semantic corresponding methods:
(a) Global Embedding methods, (b) Fragment Embedding methods, (c) existing Fragment Aligning methods, and (d) our CHAN
method. Here ω in (c) and (d) is the attention weight/assignment
between the word "pajamas" and the image region, where the region with the maximum attention weight is outlined in yellow
below. Compared to existing Fragment Aligning methods which
bring redundant alignments, we improve them by attending to the
most relevant region while neglecting all of the misalignments.

text and audio-text. Image-text retrieval has attracted broad
attention in recent years [12,21,23]; yet, the key challenges,
i.e., bridging the inter-modality gap and achieving the semantic correspondence across modalities, are far from being resolved. A good alignment directly links to correctly
measuring the similarity between images and texts.
Early works usually adopt the intuitive idea of global
embedding to ﬁnd the semantic correspondence between a
whole picture and the complete sentence [12]. By projecting the overall image and text into a common embedding
space, the similarity between heterogeneous samples is measured for the subsequent matching of the two modalities, as

19275

