This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HierVL: Learning Hierarchical Video-Language Embeddings
Kumar Ashutosh1 , Rohit Girdhar2 , Lorenzo Torresani2 , Kristen Grauman1,2
1
UT Austin, 2 FAIR, Meta AI

Abstract
Video-language embeddings are a promising avenue for
injecting semantics into visual representations, but existing methods capture only short-term associations between
seconds-long video clips and their accompanying text. We
propose HierVL, a novel hierarchical video-language embedding that simultaneously accounts for both long-term
and short-term associations. As training data, we take
videos accompanied by timestamped text descriptions of
human actions, together with a high-level text summary
of the activity throughout the long video (as are available
in Ego4D). We introduce a hierarchical contrastive training objective that encourages text-visual alignment at both
the clip level and video level. While the clip-level constraints use the step-by-step descriptions to capture what
is happening in that instant, the video-level constraints use
the summary text to capture why it is happening, i.e., the
broader context for the activity and the intent of the actor. Our hierarchical scheme yields a clip representation
that outperforms its single-level counterpart as well as a
long-term video representation that achieves SotA results on
tasks requiring long-term video modeling. HierVL successfully transfers to multiple challenging downstream tasks
(in EPIC-KITCHENS-100, Charades-Ego, HowTo100M) in
both zero-shot and fine-tuned settings.

1. Introduction
Understanding human activity in video is a fundamental
vision problem with abundant applications in augmented reality, robotics, and information retrieval. The field has made
exciting advances, from new models for recognition [24,
53, 86] and self-supervised representations [55, 58, 61, 90]
to major datasets [16, 34, 63, 74, 106]. Nonetheless, activity
understanding in video lags noticeably behind object understanding in images, where today’s AI models compete well
with people.
One key reason for this discrepancy is the fact that
whereas objects present themselves directly in the pixels—
no subtext required—activity naturally has broad temporal
Website: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/hiervl/

4 minutes

Summary: C made salad dressings with some oil and sauce

C opens the tap

C places a bottle of
vinegar on table

Standard Embedding

C opens the fridge

Our Hierarchical Embedding

Figure 1. Conventional video-language embeddings are trained
to match short-term clips with their corresponding descriptions,
e.g., open tap (in orange boxes), thus capturing what is happening. Our hierarchical video-language embedding (in dotted blue
box) learns both short-term and long-term visual-text relations,
thereby capturing why is it happening (e.g., making salad dressing). Long-term intent is conveyed by textual summaries (blue)
that give an abstractive summary of the whole video, and complement the more literal step-by-step narrations (green).

context rooted in the human actor’s (latent) intentions. Not
only does an activity stretch across video frames, but also its
interpretation relies on the larger context of what the person
is trying to accomplish. Thus, there is a natural hierarchy
of information in video, starting with the short-term “what
the person is literally doing right now” (e.g., reaching for
the stove) and going all the way to the long-term “what the
person aims to do” (e.g., cook dinner).
As a step towards capturing this hierarchy, we explore
video-language representation learning. Video often has accompanying timestamped text, whether from spoken narrations in a how-to video [63, 75, 106], closed caption text
and scripts [9,76], or deliberate text annotations [16,34,91].
Existing video-language models learn a correspondence between the two modalities by matching short video segments
with their text counterpart, typically with a learned embed-

23066

