This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Normalizing Flow based Feature Synthesis for Outlier-Aware Object Detection
Nishant Kumar1 , Siniša Šegvić2 , Abouzar Eslami3 , and Stefan Gumhold1
1
TU Dresden, 2 University of Zagreb - FER, 3 Carl Zeiss Meditec AG
1.4

Abstract

1. Introduction
General purpose object detectors such as Faster RCNN [42] and Mask R-CNN [17] deliver high performance
for inlier images. However, in many real-world scenarios,
such as autonomous driving [3], plenty of unknown outliers
(OD) naturally occur in an image or a video scene. Due
to the co-existence of OD with the labeled inlier (ID) objects in the scene, object detectors confuse outliers with inliers. Therefore, reliable object-detection deployments require detecting such anomalies without degrading the performance of inlier object detection.
Many outlier detection approaches focus on multi-class
image classification task by either performing outlier detection during inference [19, 24, 30, 31, 35, 44] or training
on real outlier data [1, 20, 39, 53]. However, such OD inputs are unaware of the decision boundary between inliers
and outliers, resulting in an inaccurate model regularization.
A popular work [29] proposed a novel training scheme to

ID objects
Background patches
OD samples

5

4

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

3

2

1

0.2
0.0

FFS (ours)

1e 3

ID objects
Background patches
OD samples

Frequency

Frequency

Real-world deployment of reliable object detectors is
crucial for applications such as autonomous driving. However, general-purpose object detectors like Faster R-CNN
are prone to providing overconfident predictions for outlier
objects. Recent outlier-aware object detection approaches
estimate the density of instance-wide features with classconditional Gaussians and train on synthesized outlier features from their low-likelihood regions. However, this strategy does not guarantee that the synthesized outlier features
will have a low likelihood according to the other classconditional Gaussians. We propose a novel outlier-aware
object detection framework that distinguishes outliers from
inlier objects by learning the joint data distribution of all
inlier classes with an invertible normalizing flow. The appropriate sampling of the flow model ensures that the synthesized outliers have a lower likelihood than inliers of all
object classes, thereby modeling a better decision boundary between inlier and outlier objects. Our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art for outlier-aware
object detection on both image and video datasets.

VOS

1e 6

1.2

5

4

3

2

1

Log-likelihood scores

0

0
1e6

7.0

6.5

6.0

Log-likelihood scores

5.5

5.0
1e3

Figure 1. We compare distributions of log-likelihoods for inliers
(ID), background patches, and synthetic outlier (OD) samples by
applying a pre-trained model on Pascal-VOC [11] validation set.
The left plot shows the likelihoods of class-conditional Gaussians
from the official approach of VOS [10]. The right plot shows the
likelihoods recovered with our normalizing flow. We observe that
our flow separates the three distributions much better than VOS.

generate synthetic outlier samples in the high-dimensional
pixel space using Generative Adversarial Networks for outlier aware training of an image classification model. However, GANs are challenging to optimize and are likely to
deliver insufficient coverage [36]. Moreover, the previous
work [29] generates an entire image as an outlier sample,
whereas in an object detection problem, both inliers and
outliers can coexist in the same image space.
Recently, [10] proposed to model the inlier features as
class-conditional Gaussians and then synthesize OD features from the low likelihood region of the modeled distribution. Even though density is more easily estimated in the
feature space than in pixel space, the assumption of classconditional Gaussian may not provide an accurate decision
boundary between inliers and outliers. Furthermore, synthesizing a low-likelihood OD sample from the Gaussian for
class A does not guarantee that the sample is also of the
low likelihood for the Gaussian of class B, as indicated in
the left plot of Figure 1. Recent work for object detection
in video [9] extracts the background patches for uncertainty
regularization by thresholding the dissimilarity with the reference inlier features. However, the extracted background
patches may lie far from the inlier-outlier decision boundary, leading to sub-optimal regularization of the model.
We propose a novel approach for open-set object detection which we call Flow Feature Synthesis (FFS). Our approach trains an invertible normalizing flow to map the data
distribution of ID features of all object classes to a latent

5156

