This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GAPartNet: Cross-Category Domain-Generalizable Object Perception
and Manipulation via Generalizable and Actionable Parts
Haoran Geng 1,2,3* Helin Xu 4* Chengyang Zhao 1*
Chao Xu 5 Li Yi 4 Siyuan Huang 3 He Wang1,2†
1
CFCS, Peking University 2 School of EECS, Peking University
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
4
Tsinghua University 5 University of California, Los Angeles
https://pku-epic.github.io/GAPartNet

Generalize
Slider Lid

Hinge Lid

Hinge Door

Round Fixed Handle

Line Fixed Handle

Hinge Handle

Hinge Knob

Slider Button

Slider Drawer

Seen Object Categories

Unseen Object Categories
Domain Generalizable Perception

In the Simulator

In the Real World
Cross-category Part-based Object Manipulation

Part Classes in the GAPartNet Dataset

Figure 1. Overview. We propose to learn generalizable object perception and manipulation skills via Generalizable and Actionable Parts,
and present GAPartNet, a large-scale interactive dataset with rich part annotations. We propose a domain generalization method for crosscategory part segmentation and pose estimation. Our GAPart definition boosts cross-category object manipulation and can transfer to real.

Abstract
For years, researchers have been devoted to generalizable object perception and manipulation, where crosscategory generalizability is highly desired yet underexplored. In this work, we propose to learn such crosscategory skills via Generalizable and Actionable Parts
(GAParts). By identifying and defining 9 GAPart classes
(lids, handles, etc.) in 27 object categories, we construct
a large-scale part-centric interactive dataset, GAPartNet,
where we provide rich, part-level annotations (semantics,
poses) for 8,489 part instances on 1,166 objects. Based on
GAPartNet, we investigate three cross-category tasks: part
segmentation, part pose estimation, and part-based object
manipulation. Given the significant domain gaps between
seen and unseen object categories, we propose a robust 3D
segmentation method from the perspective of domain generalization by integrating adversarial learning techniques.
Our method outperforms all existing methods by a large
* Equal contribution with the order determined by rolling dice.
† Corresponding author: hewang@pku.edu.cn.

margin, no matter on seen or unseen categories. Furthermore, with part segmentation and pose estimation results,
we leverage the GAPart pose definition to design part-based
manipulation heuristics that can generalize well to unseen
object categories in both the simulator and the real world.

1. Introduction
Generalizable object perception and manipulation are at
the core of building intelligent and multi-functional robots.
Recent efforts on generalizing the vision have been devoted
to category-level object perception that deals with perceiving novel object instances from known object categories,
including object detectors from RGB images [17, 21, 46],
point clouds [5, 19], and category-level pose estimation
works on rigid [4, 53] and articulated objects [27, 59]. On
the front of generalizable manipulation, complex tasks that
involve interacting with articulated objects have also been
proposed in a category-level fashion, as in the recent challenge on learning category-level manipulation skills [38].
Additionally, to boost robot perception and manipulation

7081

