This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Analytical Posterior Probability for Human Mesh Recovery
Qi Fang1
1

Kang Chen1

Yinghui Fan1

NetEase Games AI Lab

2

Qing Shuai2

Zhejiang University

3

Jiefeng Li3

Weidong Zhang1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Despite various probabilistic methods for modeling the
uncertainty and ambiguity in human mesh recovery, their
overall precision is limited because existing formulations
for joint rotations are either not constrained to SO(3) or
difficult to learn for neural networks. To address such an
issue, we derive a novel analytical formulation for learning posterior probability distributions of human joint rotations conditioned on bone directions in a Bayesian manner, and based on this, we propose a new posterior-guided
framework for human mesh recovery. We demonstrate that
our framework is not only superior to existing SOTA baselines on multiple benchmarks but also flexible enough to
seamlessly incorporate with additional sensors due to its
Bayesian nature. The code is available at https://
github.com/NetEase-GameAI/ProPose.

1. Introduction
Human mesh recovery is a task of recovering body
meshes and 3D joint rotations of human actors from images, which has ubiquitous applications in animation production, sports analysis, etc. To achieve this goal, various approaches have been proposed in the computer vision
community. Existing methods can be divided into two categories, i.e., direct and indirect, respectively. Direct methods
use neural networks to regress the rotations (e.g., axis angle [22], rotation matrix [34], 6D vector [29,37,74]) of each
humanoid joint in an end-to-end way, while indirect methods recover joint rotations based on some intermediately
predicted proxies (e.g., 3D human keypoints [19, 36, 42],
2D heatmaps [52] or part segmentation [27]). However,
both methods have obvious weaknesses. Generally, the estimated poses from direct solutions are not so well-aligned
with the images (Fig. 1(a)), because joint rotations are more
difficult to regress compared with keypoints [19,36]. On the
contrary, though indirect solutions tend to have better estimation precision, their performance heavily relies on the
precision of the intermediate proxies and thus are vulnerable to noise and error in the predicted keypoints or part
segmentation (Fig. 1(b)).

Input

(a) Direct

(b) Indirect

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Comparisons of (a) the direct method [29], (b) the indirect method [36], and (c) our method.

To simultaneously achieve high precision and high robustness, some probabilistic methods are developed, which,
instead of seeking a unique solution, try to explicitly model
the uncertainty of human poses by learning some kind of
probability distribution. Prevalent ways of modeling the
distribution include multivariate Gaussian distributions [48,
56], normalizing flows [31], and neural networks [51, 53].
In practice, these learned probability distributions can notably improve the estimation results in some extreme cases
(e.g., under large occlusion), however, only minor differences can be found in terms of the overall performances on
large datasets. One reason is that these probability models
cannot truly reflect the rotational uncertainty since they are
not strictly constrained to SO(3). Recently, [55] proposes
to adopt the matrix Fisher distribution over SO(3) [8, 25]
to model the rotational uncertainty caused by depth ambiguity. However, even with this mathematically-correct formulation, the actual performance does not improve much
either, because the parameters of the matrix Fisher distribution are not easy for deep neural networks to learn directly.
To address this problem, we propose a new learningfriendly and mathematically-correct formulation for learning probability distributions for human mesh recovery. Our
formulation is derived based on the facts that, (i) the joint
rotations follow the matrix Fisher distribution over SO(3),

8781

