This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Characteristic Function-based Method for Bottom-up Human Pose Estimation
Haoxuan Qu1 , Yujun Cai2 , Lin Geng Foo1 , Ajay Kumar3 , Jun Liu 1, *
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
haoxuan qu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, yujun001@e.ntu.edu.sg, lingeng foo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
ajay.kumar@polyu.edu.hk, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Most recent methods formulate the task of human pose
estimation as a heatmap estimation problem, and use the
overall L2 loss computed from the entire heatmap to optimize the heatmap prediction. In this paper, we show that
in bottom-up human pose estimation where each heatmap
often contains multiple body joints, using the overall L2
loss to optimize the heatmap prediction may not be the optimal choice. This is because, minimizing the overall L2
loss cannot always lead the model to locate all the body
joints across different sub-regions of the heatmap more accurately. To cope with this problem, from a novel perspective, we propose a new bottom-up human pose estimation
method that optimizes the heatmap prediction via minimizing the distance between two characteristic functions respectively constructed from the predicted heatmap and the
groundtruth heatmap. Our analysis presented in this paper indicates that the distance between these two characteristic functions is essentially the upper bound of the L2
losses w.r.t. sub-regions of the predicted heatmap. Therefore, via minimizing the distance between the two characteristic functions, we can optimize the model to provide a more
accurate localization result for the body joints in different
sub-regions of the predicted heatmap. We show the effectiveness of our proposed method through extensive experiments on the COCO dataset and the CrowdPose dataset.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation aims to locate the body joints of
each person in a given RGB image. It is relevant to various applications, such as action recognition [7, 43], person
Re-ID [28], and human object interaction [35]. For tackling human pose estimation, most of the recent methods fall
* Corresponding Author

into two major categories: top-down methods and bottomup methods. Top-down methods [24,32,33,39,44] generally
use a human detector to detect all the people in the image,
and then perform single-person pose estimation for each
detected subject separately. In contrast, bottom-up methods [5, 6, 16, 17, 22, 23, 25, 26] usually locate the body joints
of all people in the image at the same time. Hence, bottomup methods, the main focus of this paper, are often a more
efficient choice compared to top-down methods, especially
when there are many people in the input image [5].
In existing works, it is common to regard human pose
estimation as a heatmap prediction problem, since this can
preserve the spatial structure of the input image throughout
the encoding and decoding process [12]. During the general optimization process, the groundtruth (GT) heatmaps
Hg are first constructed via putting 2D Gaussian blobs centered at the GT coordinates of the body joints. After that,
these constructed GT heatmaps are used to supervise the
predicted heatmaps Hp via the overall L2 loss Loverall
cal2
culated (averaged) over the whole heatmap. Specifically,
denoting the area of the heatmap as A, we have Loverall
=
2
∥Hp −Hg ∥22
.
A
We argue that using the overall L2 loss to supervise the
predicted heatmap may not be the optimal choice in bottomup methods where each heatmap often contains multiple
body joints from the multiple people in various sub-regions,
as shown in Fig. 1(b). This is because, a smaller overall L2
loss calculated over the whole heatmap cannot always lead
the model to locate all the body joints across different subregions in the heatmap more accurately. As illustrated in
Fig. 1(a), the predicted heatmap #2 has a smaller overall L2
loss compared to the predicted heatmap #1. However, the
predicted heatmap #2 locates the body joint in the topright sub-region wrongly, whereas the predicted heatmap
#1 locates body joints in both the top-right and bottomleft sub-regions correctly. This is because, while the decrease of the overall L2 loss can be achieved when the L2
loss w.r.t. each sub-region either decreases or remains the

13009

