This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Rotation-Translation-Decoupled Solution for Robust and Efficient
Visual-Inertial Initialization
Yijia He *
Chinese Academy of Sciences

Bo Xu *
Wuhan University

Zhanpeng Ouyang
ShanghaiTech University

Hongdong Li
Australian National University

Abstract
0.6

1. Introduction
Visual-inertial odometry (VIO) aims to estimate camera
motion and recover 3D scene structure by fusing both image and IMU measurements. The low-cost and compactness
of the camera module and IMU sensors make VIO widely
used in virtual or augmented reality systems (VR/AR) and
various autonomous navigation systems. Currently, most
VIO systems track camera motion by minimizing nonlinear
* Equal contribution.

Loosely-coupled
Tightly-coupled
Ours

Scale RMSE

We propose a novel visual-inertial odometry (VIO) initialization method, which decouples rotation and translation estimation, and achieves higher efficiency and better robustness. Existing loosely-coupled VIO-initialization
methods suffer from poor stability of visual structure-frommotion (SfM), whereas those tightly-coupled methods often ignore the gyroscope bias in the closed-form solution,
resulting in limited accuracy. Moreover, the aforementioned two classes of methods are computationally expensive, because 3D point clouds need to be reconstructed simultaneously. In contrast, our new method fully combines
inertial and visual measurements for both rotational and
translational initialization. First, a rotation-only solution
is designed for gyroscope bias estimation, which tightly
couples the gyroscope and camera observations. Second,
the initial velocity and gravity vector are solved with linear translation constraints in a globally optimal fashion
and without reconstructing 3D point clouds. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that our method is 8 ∼ 72
times faster (w.r.t. a 10-frame set) than the state-of-the-art
methods, and also presents significantly higher robustness
and accuracy. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/boxuLibrary/drt-vio-init.

CS-VISfM

0.4

AS-MLE
DRT-t

CS-VISfM-GBE

0.2
VINS-Mono
DRT-l

0.0

1

3.89
10
Computational Cost (ms)

100

500

Figure 1. Comparison of computational cost and scale factor errors on EuRoC dataset. Different colors indicate different types
of methods. Our proposed initialization method for decoupling
rotation and translation (DRT) is accurate and computationally efficient.

visual re-projection errors [14, 30], so the accuracy of the
initial value will affect the convergence. In addition, the robustness and lower latency of the initialization are also very
important for the downstream application, e.g. AR developers need accurate camera tracking within a few hundred milliseconds after launching VIO, regardless of the use case.
For the sensor that has calibrated intrinsic and extrinsic parameters, the initial variables for VIO include the gravity
vector, initial velocity, gyroscope and accelerometer biases.
Many VIO systems are initialized by setting the initial
velocity to zero, then calculating the gravity vector and gyroscope bias with IMU measurements [14,20,36]. However,
this method only works when the system is strictly static.
For sensors in motion, loosely-coupled and tightly-coupled
initialization methods are widely studied. As shown in Fig.
2, the loosely-coupled methods [5,28,30] combine the camera poses estimated by visual SfM and the IMU measurements to estimate the initial state variables. However, visual SfM is prone to inaccuracy or failure when co-viewed

739

