This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Discriminative Spatial and Temporal Network
for Efficient Video Deblurring

1

Jinshan Pan1∗ , Boming Xu1∗, Jiangxin Dong1† , Jianjun Ge2 , and Jinhui Tang1†
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 China Electronics Technology Group Corporation

Abstract

'671HW 2XUV
%DVLF965
5HVWRUPHU

How to effectively explore spatial and temporal information is important for video deblurring. In contrast to existing methods that directly align adjacent frames without discrimination, we develop a deep discriminative spatial and
temporal network to facilitate the spatial and temporal feature exploration for better video deblurring. We first develop a channel-wise gated dynamic network to adaptively
explore the spatial information. As adjacent frames usually
contain different contents, directly stacking features of adjacent frames without discrimination may affect the latent clear frame restoration. Therefore, we develop a simple
yet effective discriminative temporal feature fusion module
to obtain useful temporal features for latent frame restoration. Moreover, to utilize the information from long-range
frames, we develop a wavelet-based feature propagation
method that takes the discriminative temporal feature fusion module as the basic unit to effectively propagate main
structures from long-range frames for better video deblurring. We show that the proposed method does not require
additional alignment methods and performs favorably against state-of-the-art ones on benchmark datasets in terms
of accuracy and model complexity.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of hand-held video capturing devices in our daily life, capturing high-quality clear
videos becomes more and more important. However, due to
the moving objects, camera shake, and depth variation during the exposure time, the captured videos usually contain
significant blur effects. Thus, there is a great need to restore
clear videos from blurred ones so that they can be pleasantly
viewed on display devices and facilitate the following video
understanding problems.
Different from single image deblurring that explores spa∗ Co-first authorship
† Corresponding author

)*67

0351HW
&'9'763

(67511

'9'6()

67)$1

('95

···

2200

2400

Figure 1. Floating point operations (FLOPs) vs. video deblurring
performance on the GoPro dataset [24]. Our model achieves favorable results in terms of accuracy and FLOPs.

tial information for blur removal, video deblurring is more
challenging as it needs to model both spatial and temporal information. Conventional methods usually use optical
flow [2, 9, 14, 36] to model the blur in videos and then jointly estimate optical flow and latent frames under the constraints by some assumed priors. As pointed out by [26],
these methods usually lead to complex optimization problems that are difficult to solve. In addition, improper priors
will significantly affect the quality of restored videos.
Instead of using assumed priors, lots of methods develop
kinds of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to explore spatial and temporal information for video deblurring.
Several approaches stack adjacent frames as the input of CNN models [29] or employ spatial and temporal 3D convolution [40] for latent frame restoration. Gast et al. [10] show
that using proper alignment strategies in deep CNNs would
improve deblurring performance. To this end, several methods introduce alignment modules in deep neural networks.
The commonly used alignment modules for video deblurring mainly include optical flow [26], deformable convolution [32], and so on. However, estimating alignment information from blurred adjacent frames is not a trivial task due
to the influence of motion blur. In addition, using alignment modules usually leads to large deep CNN models that

22191

