This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HRDFuse: Monocular 360◦ Depth Estimation by Collaboratively Learning
Holistic-with-Regional Depth Distributions

1

Hao Ai1 Zidong Cao1 Yan-Pei Cao2 Ying Shan2 Lin Wang1,3 *
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 Dept. of CSE, HKUST
hai033@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, caozidong1996@gmail.com
caoyanpei@gmail.com, yingsshan@tencent.com, linwang@ust.hk

Abstract
Depth estimation from a monocular 360◦ image is a burgeoning problem owing to its holistic sensing of a scene.
Recently, some methods, e.g., OmniFusion, have applied
the tangent projection (TP) to represent a 360◦ image and
predicted depth values via patch-wise regressions, which
are merged to get a depth map with equirectangular projection (ERP) format. However, these methods suffer from
1) non-trivial process of merging plenty of patches; 2) capturing less holistic-with-regional contextual information by
directly regressing the depth value of each pixel. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework, HRDFuse, that subtly combines the potential of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and transformers by collaboratively learning the
holistic contextual information from the ERP and the regional structural information from the TP. Firstly, we propose a spatial feature alignment (SFA) module that learns
feature similarities between the TP and ERP to aggregate
the TP features into a complete ERP feature map in a pixelwise manner. Secondly, we propose a collaborative depth
distribution classification (CDDC) module that learns the
holistic-with-regional histograms capturing the ERP and
TP depth distributions. As such, the final depth values can
be predicted as a linear combination of histogram bin centers. Lastly, we adaptively combine the depth predictions
from ERP and TP to obtain the final depth map. Extensive
experiments show that our method predicts more smooth
and accurate depth results while achieving favorably better results than the SOTA methods.

Multimedia Material
For videos, code, demo and more information, you can
visit https://VLIS2022.github.io/HRDFuse/

1. Introduction
The 360◦ camera is becoming increasingly popular as a
360◦ image provides holistic sensing of a scene with a wide
* Corresponding author (e-mail: linwang@ust.hk)

Figure 1. (a) Our HRDFuse employs the SFA module to align the
regional information in discrete TP patches and holistic information in a complete ERP image. The CDDC module is proposed to
estimate ERP format depth outputs from both the ERP image and
TP patches based on holistic-with-regional depth histograms. (b)
Compared with OmniFusion [30], our depth predictions are more
smooth and more accurate.

field of view (FoV) [1, 4, 19, 44, 48, 52]. Therefore, the ability to infer the 3D structure of a 360◦ camera’s surroundings
has sparked the research for monocular 360◦ depth estimation [23, 36, 43, 45]. Generally, raw 360◦ images are transmitted into 2D planar representations while preserving the
omnidirectional information [12, 50]. Equirectangular projection (ERP) is the most commonly used projection format [38, 49] and can provide a complete view of a scene.
Cubemap projection (CP) [9] projects 360◦ contents into six
discontinuous faces of a cube to reduce the distortion; thus,
the pre-trained 2D convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
can be applied. However, ERP images suffer from severe
distortions in the polar regions, while CP patches are hampered by geometric discontinuity and limited FoV.
For this reason, some works [53, 54] have proposed
distortion-aware convolution filters to tackle the ERP distortion problem for depth estimation. BiFuse [43] and UniFuse [23] explore the complementary information from the
ERP image and CP patches to predict the depth map.

13273

