This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-term Visual Localization with Mobile Sensors
Shen Yan1,3 Yu Liu1 Long Wang2 Zehong Shen3 Zhen Peng2
Haomin Liu2 Maojun Zhang1 Guofeng Zhang3 Xiaowei Zhou3†
1

National University of Defense Technology

2

SenseTime Research

3

Zhejiang University

1. Introduction
Visual localization aims at estimating the camera translation and orientation for a given image relative to a known
scene. Solving this problem is crucial for many applications
such as autonomous driving [11], robot navigation [37] and
augmented and virtual reality [7, 41].
State-of-the-art approaches to visual localization typically involve matching 3D points in a pre-built map and
2D pixels in a query image [4, 22, 42, 50–52, 67, 69]. An
intermediate image retrieval step [2, 21, 23, 46] is often applied to determine which parts of the scene are likely visible
AA

The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State
Key Lab of CAD&CG and ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision.
† Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

Query

Despite the remarkable advances in image matching and
pose estimation, image-based localization of a camera in
a temporally-varying outdoor environment is still a challenging problem due to huge appearance disparity between
query and reference images caused by illumination, seasonal
and structural changes. In this work, we propose to leverage
additional sensors on a mobile phone, mainly GPS, compass,
and gravity sensor, to solve this challenging problem. We
show that these mobile sensors provide decent initial poses
and effective constraints to reduce the searching space in
image matching and final pose estimation. With the initial
pose, we are also able to devise a direct 2D-3D matching
network to efficiently establish 2D-3D correspondences instead of tedious 2D-2D matching in existing systems. As no
public dataset exists for the studied problem, we collect a
new dataset that provides a variety of mobile sensor data
and significant scene appearance variations, and develop a
system to acquire ground-truth poses for query images. We
benchmark our method as well as several state-of-the-art
baselines and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach. Our code and dataset are available on the project
page: https://zju3dv.github.io/sensloc/.

Reference

Abstract

Illumination
changes

Dark
night

Rainy
weather

Cross
seasons

New
construction

Figure 1. Visual localization under extremely challenging conditions. The proposed benchmark dataset SensLoc exhibits long-term
appearance changes due to illumination, weather, season, day-night
alternation, and new constructions.

in the query image, in order to handle large-scale scenes.
The resulting camera poses are estimated using a standard
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) solver [24, 32] inside a robust
RANSAC [3, 12, 13, 18] loop. However, in real-world outdoor scenarios, obtaining such correspondences and further
recovering the 6-DoF pose are difficult, since the outdoor
scenes can experience large appearance variations caused
by illumination (e.g., day and night), seasonal (e.g., summer
and winter) and structure changes. Visual localization under
such challenging conditions remains an unsolved problem,
as reported by recent benchmarks [48, 53, 76].
Fortunately, nowadays, with the popularity of smart devices that come equipped with various sensors such as Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), gravity, compass, GPS, or
radio signals (like WiFi and Bluetooth), new possibilities
arise for mobile phone pose estimation exploiting these additional multi-modality sensors. Nevertheless, previous works

17245

