This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POTTER: Pooling Attention Transformer for Efficient Human Mesh Recovery
Ce Zheng1 *, Xianpeng Liu2 , Guo-Jun Qi3,4 , Chen Chen1
1
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
2
North Carolina State University
3
OPPO Seattle Research Center, USA 4 Westlake University
cezheng@knights.ucf.edu; xliu59@ncsu.edu; guojunq@gmail.com; chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Transformer architectures have achieved SOTA performance on the human mesh recovery (HMR) from monocular images. However, the performance gain has come at the
cost of substantial memory and computational overhead. A
lightweight and efficient model to reconstruct accurate human mesh is needed for real-world applications. In this
paper, we propose a pure transformer architecture named
POoling aTtention TransformER (POTTER) for the HMR
task from single images. Observing that the conventional
attention module is memory and computationally expensive,
we propose an efficient pooling attention module, which significantly reduces the memory and computational cost without sacrificing performance. Furthermore, we design a new
transformer architecture by integrating a High-Resolution
(HR) stream for the HMR task. The high-resolution local
and global features from the HR stream can be utilized for
recovering more accurate human mesh. Our POTTER outperforms the SOTA method METRO by only requiring 7%
of total parameters and 14% of the Multiply-Accumulate
Operations on the Human3.6M (PA-MPJPE metric) and
3DPW (all three metrics) datasets. The project webpage
is https://zczcwh.github.io/potter_page/.

1. Introduction
With the blooming of deep learning techniques in the
computer vision community, rapid progress has been made
in understanding humans from monocular images such as
human pose estimation (HPE). No longer satisfied with detecting 2D or 3D human joints from monocular images, human mesh recovery (HMR) which can estimate 3D human
pose and shape of the entire human body has drawn increasing attention. Various real-world applications such as gam* Work conducted during an internship at OPPO Seattle Research Center, USA.

Figure 1. HMR performance comparison with Params and MACs
on 3DPW dataset. We outperform SOTA methods METRO [17]
and FastMETRO [3] with much fewer Params and MACs. PAMPJPE is the Procrustes Alignment Mean Per Joint Position Error.

ing, human-computer interaction, and virtual reality (VR)
can be facilitated by HMR with rich human body information. However, HMR from single images is extremely challenging due to complex human body articulation, occlusion,
and depth ambiguity.
Recently, motivated by the evolution of the transformer
architecture in natural language processing, Vision Transformer (ViT) [4] successfully introduced transformer architecture to the field of computer vision. The attention mechanism in transformer architecture demonstrates a strong ability to model global dependencies in comparison to the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture. With this
trend, the transformer-based models have sparked a variety of computer vision tasks, including object detection
[23, 26], semantic segmentation [2, 38], and video understanding [22, 31] with promising results. For HMR, the
SOTA methods [3, 17] all utilize the transformer architecture to exploit non-local relations among different human
body parts for achieving impressive performance.
However, one significant limitation of these SOTA HMR
methods is model efficiency. Although transformer-based
methods [17, 18] lead to great improvement in terms of accuracy, the performance gain comes at the cost of a substantial computational and memory overhead. The large CNN
backbones are needed for [17, 18] to extract features first.

1611

