This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLOTH4D: A Dataset for Clothed Human Reconstruction
Xingxing Zou1,3∗ , Xintong Han2∗ , Waikeung Wong3,1†
1
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, 2 Huya Inc.
3
School of Fashion and Textiles, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
aemika.zou@connect.polyu.hk, hanxintong@huya.com, calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk

(a) 2D patterns

(b) varied poses

(c) multi views
(d) series of paired dynamic textured meshes
Figure 1. An instance in CLOTH4D. Given (a) hand-crafted 2D sewing patterns, clothes are simulated with virtual fashion software to
have (b) varied poses, (c) multiple views, and (d) high-quality and physically plausible series of paired dynamic 3D meshes with textures.

Abstract
Clothed human reconstruction is the cornerstone for creating the virtual world. To a great extent, the quality of recovered avatars decides whether the Metaverse is a passing
fad. In this work, we introduce CLOTH4D, a clothed human dataset containing 1,000 subjects with varied appearances, 1,000 3D outfits, and over 100,000 clothed meshes
with paired unclothed humans, to fill the gap in largescale and high-quality 4D clothing data. It enjoys appealing characteristics: 1) Accurate and detailed clothing textured meshes—all clothing items are manually created and then simulated in professional software, strictly
following the general standard in fashion design. 2) Separated textured clothing and under-clothing body meshes,
closer to the physical world than single-layer raw scans.
3) Clothed human motion sequences simulated given a set
of 289 actions, covering fundamental and complicated dynamics. Upon CLOTH4D, we novelly designed a series of

temporally-aware metrics to evaluate the temporal stability
of the generated 3D human meshes, which has been overlooked previously. Moreover, by assessing and retraining
current state-of-the-art clothed human reconstruction methods, we reveal insights, present improved performance, and
propose potential future research directions, confirming our
dataset’s advancement. The dataset is available at 1 .

1. Introduction
As we enter the volumetric and XR content era, researchers have been trailblazing their way into the Metaverse. With the converging of technologies and practical
applications, e.g., fashion NFTs (non-fungible tokens), immersive AR and VR, and games, clothed human reconstruction demands are rapidly growing. While current research has made astonishing results in creating digital hu1 www.github.com/AemikaChow/AiDLab-fAshIon-Data
* X. Zou and X. Han contribute equally. † Corresponding author.

12847

