This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense-Localizing Audio-Visual Events in Untrimmed Videos:
A Large-Scale Benchmark and Baseline
Tiantian Geng1,2 , Teng Wang1,3 , Jinming Duan2 , Runmin Cong4 , Feng Zheng1,5∗
1
Southern University of Science and Technology 2 University of Birmingham
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Shandong University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
gengtiantian97@gmail.com tengwang@connect.hku.hk j.duan@bham.ac.uk
rmcong@sdu.edu.cn

f.zheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Existing audio-visual event localization (AVE) handles
manually trimmed videos with only a single instance in
each of them. However, this setting is unrealistic as natural videos often contain numerous audio-visual events
with different categories. To better adapt to real-life applications, in this paper we focus on the task of denselocalizing audio-visual events, which aims to jointly localize and recognize all audio-visual events occurring in
an untrimmed video. The problem is challenging as it requires fine-grained audio-visual scene and context understanding. To tackle this problem, we introduce the first
Untrimmed Audio-Visual (UnAV-100) dataset, which contains 10K untrimmed videos with over 30K audio-visual
events. Each video has 2.8 audio-visual events on average, and the events are usually related to each other and
might co-occur as in real-life scenes. Next, we formulate
the task using a new learning-based framework, which is
capable of fully integrating audio and visual modalities to
localize audio-visual events with various lengths and capture dependencies between them in a single pass. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method as
well as the significance of multi-scale cross-modal perception and dependency modeling for this task. The dataset and
code are available at https://unav100.github.io.

1. Introduction
Understanding real-world scenes and events is inherently a multisensory perception process for humans [15,31].
However, for machines, how to integrate multi-modal information, especially audio and visual ones, to facilitate
comprehensive video understanding is still a challenging
problem. In recent years, with the introduction of many
audio-visual datasets [7, 8, 11, 36], we have seen progress in
∗ Corresponding author

0s

0s

...

...

...

...

2s

4s

6s

8s

...

...

...

...

10s

playing violin

20s

playing trumpet

30s

10s

40s

male singing

Figure 1. Different from the previous AVE task, dense-localizing
audio-visual events involves localizing and recognizing all audiovisual events occurring in an untrimmed video. In real-life audiovisual scenes, there are often multiple audio-visual events that
might be very short or long, and occur concurrently. The top and
bottom examples are from the current AVE dataset [36] and our
UnAV-100 dataset, respectively.

learning joint audio-visual representations [1, 27, 28], spatially localizing visible sound sources [7, 22] and temporally localizing audio-visual events [39, 40, 46], etc. While
the success of these algorithms is encouraging, they all focus on manually trimmed videos that often just contain a
single audio-visual instance/object in each of them. In particular, audio-visual event localization (AVE) [36] aims to
localize a single event that is both audible and visible at
the same time in a short, trimmed video, as shown in the
upper part of Fig. 1. The task setting is impractical as a
real-life video is usually long, untrimmed and associated to
multiple audio-visual events from different categories, and
these events might have various duration and occur simultaneously. For example, as illustrated at the bottom of Fig. 1,
a man starts singing and other people accompany him on

22942

