This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Mean Teacher for Continual and Gradual Test-Time Adaptation
Mario Döbler *

Robert A. Marsden *
University of Stuttgart

Bin Yang

{mario.doebler, robert.marsden, bin.yang}@iss.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract
Since experiencing domain shifts during test-time is inevitable in practice, test-time adaption (TTA) continues to
adapt the model after deployment. Recently, the area of
continual and gradual test-time adaptation (TTA) emerged.
In contrast to standard TTA, continual TTA considers not
only a single domain shift, but a sequence of shifts. Gradual TTA further exploits the property that some shifts evolve
gradually over time. Since in both settings long test sequences are present, error accumulation needs to be addressed for methods relying on self-training. In this work,
we propose and show that in the setting of TTA, the symmetric cross-entropy is better suited as a consistency loss
for mean teachers compared to the commonly used crossentropy. This is justified by our analysis with respect to
the (symmetric) cross-entropy’s gradient properties. To pull
the test feature space closer to the source domain, where
the pre-trained model is well posed, contrastive learning
is leveraged. Since applications differ in their requirements, we address several settings, including having source
data available and the more challenging source-free setting.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method
“robust mean teacher“ (RMT) on the continual and gradual corruption benchmarks CIFAR10C, CIFAR100C, and
Imagenet-C. We further consider ImageNet-R and propose a
new continual DomainNet-126 benchmark. State-of-the-art
results are achieved on all benchmarks. 1

1. Introduction
Assuming that training and test data originate from the
same distribution, deep neural networks achieve remarkable
performance. In the real world, this assumption is often violated for a deployed model, as many environments are nonstationary. Since the occurrence of a data shift [35] during
test-time will likely result in a performance drop, domain
generalization aims to improve robustness and generaliza* Equal contribution.
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/mariodoebler/

test-time-adaptation

tion already during training [11, 13, 32, 43, 45]. However,
these approaches are often limited, due to the wide range
of potential data shifts [30] that are unknown during training. To gain insight into the current distribution shift, recent approaches leverage the test samples encountered during model deployment to adapt the pre-trained model. This
is also known as test-time adaptation (TTA) and can be done
either offline or online. While offline TTA assumes to have
access to all test data at once, online TTA considers the setting where the predictions are needed immediately and the
model is adapted on the fly using only the current test batch.
While adapting the batch normalization statistics during test-time can already significantly improve the performance [38], more sophisticated methods update the model
weights using self-training based approaches, like entropy
minimization [49]. However, the effectiveness of most TTA
methods is only demonstrated for a single domain shift at
a time. Since encountering just one domain shift is very
unlikely in real world applications, [50] introduced continual test-time adaptation where the model is adapted to a sequence of domain shifts. As pointed out by [50], adapting
the model to long test sequences in non-stationary environments is very challenging, as self-training based methods
are prone to error accumulation due to miscalibrated predictions. Although it is always possible to reset the model
after it has been updated, this prevents exploiting previously
acquired knowledge, which is undesirable for the following
reason: While some domain shifts occur abruptly in practice, there are also several shifts which evolve gradually
over time [17]. In [26], this setting is denoted as gradual
test-time adaptation. [17, 26] further showed that in the setting of gradual shifts, pseudo-labels are more reliable, resulting in a better model adaptation to large domain gaps.
However, if the model is reset and the domain gap increases
over time, model adaptation through self-training or selfsupervised learning may not be successful [17, 24].
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we introduce a
robust mean teacher (RMT) that exploits a symmetric crossentropy (SCE) loss instead of the commonly used crossentropy (CE) loss to perform self-training. This is motivated
by our findings that the CE loss has undesirable gradient

7704

