This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Pitfall of Mixup for Uncertainty Calibration
Deng-Bao Wang1 , Lanqing Li2,3,4* , Peilin Zhao2 , Pheng-Ann Heng4 , Min-Ling Zhang1*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 Zhejiang Lab 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{wangdb,zhangml}@seu.edu.cn, lanqingli1993@gmail.com
masonzhao@tencent.com, pheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
By simply taking convex combinations between pairs of
samples and their labels, mixup training has been shown
to easily improve predictive accuracy. It has been recently
found that models trained with mixup also perform well on
uncertainty calibration. However, in this study, we found
that mixup training usually makes models less calibratable
than vanilla empirical risk minimization, which means that
it would harm uncertainty estimation when post-hoc calibration is considered. By decomposing the mixup process
into data transformation and random perturbation, we suggest that the confidence penalty nature of the data transformation is the reason of calibration degradation. To mitigate this problem, we first investigate the mixup inference
strategy and found that despite it improves calibration on
mixup, this ensemble-like strategy does not necessarily outperform simple ensemble. Then, we propose a general strategy named mixup inference in training, which adopts a
simple decoupling principle for recovering the outputs of
raw samples at the end of forward network pass. By embedding the mixup inference, models can be learned from
the original one-hot labels and hence avoid the negative
impact of confidence penalty. Our experiments show this
strategy properly solves mixup’s calibration issue without
sacrificing the predictive performance, while even improves
accuracy than vanilla mixup.

1. Introduction
Although modern neural networks have made notable
performance on predictive accuracy in various computer vision tasks [7], they have been found to perform poorly in
terms of uncertainty calibration, which is an important consideration in many real-world applications [5]. Intuitively,
we expect a predictive model to be accurate when it is confi* Corresponding author
This work is done when Deng-Bao works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab.

dent about its outputs while reveal high uncertainty when it
is likely to be inaccurate. Otherwise, the miscalibrated prediction of models could cause undesired consequences in
many safety-critical applications such as medical diagnosis
and autonomous driving. Early researches on uncertainty
estimation mainly focus on probabilistic models. However,
in deep learning paradigm, training of deep bayesian models are expensive and their performance usually depends on
approximate inference methods due to the computational
constraint in real-world deployment. Therefore, uncertainty
calibration of deterministic neural networks becomes an important topic in recent years.
Guo et al. [5] systematically studied the uncertainty calibration problem of modern neural networks with comprehensive experiments. They pointed out that popular modern neural networks usually suffer from severe miscalibration issue than shallow models. They empirically showed
that large model capacity without proper regularization is
closely related to the miscalibration issue. They also evaluated the performance of various calibration strategies and
found that simple post-hoc approaches like temperature
scaling (TS) [22] and histogram binning (HB) [34] can reduce the calibration error to a quite low level. Following
their work, a number of calibration friendly regularization
methods and post-calibration approaches were proposed to
address the miscalibration issue of deep neural networks
[12, 17, 18, 21].
Recently, researchers investigated the impact of mixup
training for calibration. Thulasidasan et al. [27] empirically
found that mixup improves calibration across various model
architectures and datasets. Zhang et al. [38] provided a theoretical explanation for the effect of mixup training on calibration in high-dimensional regime. Carratino et al. [3]
pointed out that mixup implicitly performs label smoothing
and hence can avoid the overconfidence issue. However,
there are also empirical observations showing that mixup
does not necessarily improve calibration. The experiments
in [16] provides evidence showing mixup degrades calibration in some cases. The empirical studies in [31] and [23]

7609

