This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TexPose: Neural Texture Learning for Self-Supervised
6D Object Pose Estimation
Hanzhi Chen1 Fabian Manhardt2 Nassir Navab1 Benjamin Busam1,3
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Google Inc. 3 3Dwe.ai
hanzhi.chen@tum.de

fabianmanhardt@google.com

Abstract

b.busam@tum.de

strong generalisation capabilities [16, 39, 53, 59]. However,
it is very labor-intensive and time consuming to generate
accurate annotations for pose data [15, 53]. Meanwhile, this
process also easily suffers from labelling errors as precise
annotation in 3D is highly challenging [14]. Therefore, most
of the benchmarks have only few hundreds images, which
does not allow proper learning of large models. In fact,
methods training with such low amount of real data tend to
strongly overﬁt to the data domain and fail to generalise to
new scenes [18].
As a consequence, many different approaches have been
proposed in the literature to tackle this problem. The simplest solution is to employ cut-and-paste strategy to increase
domain invariance [11, 26]. Nonetheless, this requires highly
accurate manual annotations and most models tend to overﬁt
to the original domain. Another alternative is to rely on
a large amount of synthetically generated data to prevent
overﬁtting. Though this process is relatively cheap and fast,
rendered images can exhibit drastic visual discrepancy in
comparison with real images even when advanced physicallybased renderers [9] are used. A handful of approaches try to
close the domain gap via the use of generative adversarial
networks to translate the synthetic images into the real domain [2, 58]. Unfortunately, these methods do not achieve
promising results as the generated images are still easily
distinguishable from real imagery. Notably, very recently
a new line of work that proposes to self-supervise the pose
estimator on real data has emerged. After training in simulation they ﬁne-tune on the new datasets [46, 47]. While
these methods achieve impressive results that are even on
par with fully supervised methods, they still suffer from signiﬁcant performance drop when not leveraging additional
supervisory signals such as depth data [46] or ground truth
camera poses [25, 42]. In this work, we propose a novel way
to conduct self-supervised 6D pose estimation that is free
from any additional supervision sources and further yields
state-of-the-art performance.
The core idea of previous attempts [44,46,47,54] to adapt
pretrained pose estimators to the real domain is to conduct
render-and-compare using a differentiable renderer. With

In this paper, we introduce neural texture learning for
6D object pose estimation from synthetic data and a few
unlabelled real images. Our major contribution is a novel
learning scheme which removes the drawbacks of previous
works, namely the strong dependency on co-modalities or
additional reﬁnement. These have been previously necessary
to provide training signals for convergence. We formulate
such a scheme as two sub-optimisation problems on texture
learning and pose learning. We separately learn to predict realistic texture of objects from real image collections
and learn pose estimation from pixel-perfect synthetic data.
Combining these two capabilities allows then to synthesise
photorealistic novel views to supervise the pose estimator
with accurate geometry. To alleviate pose noise and segmentation imperfection present during the texture learning phase,
we propose a surfel-based adversarial training loss together
with texture regularisation from synthetic data. We demonstrate that the proposed approach signiﬁcantly outperforms
the recent state-of-the-art methods without ground-truth pose
annotations and demonstrates substantial generalisation improvements towards unseen scenes. Remarkably, our scheme
improves the adopted pose estimators substantially even
when initialised with much inferior performance.

1. Introduction
For spatial interaction with objects, one needs an understanding of the translation and rotation of targets within 3D
space. Inferring these 6D object pose parameters from a
single RGB image is a core task for 3D computer vision.
This visually retrieved information has a wide range of applications in AR/VR [13, 33], autonomous driving [12, 30, 57],
and robotic manipulation [24, 51, 53]. Noteworthy, accuracy
and runtime have both recently made a huge leap forward
thanks to deep learning [19, 23, 31, 39, 40]. Unfortunately,
most of these methods heavily rely on a massive amount of
labelled data for supervision to learn precise models with
4841

