This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Vision-Language Pre-training to Collaborate with
Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization
Chen Ju1∗ , Kunhao Zheng1∗ , Jinxiang Liu1 , Peisen Zhao3 , Ya Zhang1,2 ,
Jianlong Chang3 , Qi Tian3 , Yanfeng Wang1,2 B
1

CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

3

Huawei Cloud

{ju chen, dyekuu, jinxliu, ya zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn, {pszhao93, jianlong.chang, tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Temporal action localization (TAL), which aims to localize and classify action instances from untrimmed long
videos, has been recognized as an indispensable component
of video understanding [13,72,92]. To avoid laborious temporal boundary annotations, the weakly-supervised setting
(WTAL) [31, 62, 64, 78], i.e. only video-level category labels are available, has gained increasing attentions.
To date in the literature, almost all WTAL methods rely
on Classification-Based Pre-training (CBP) for video fea-

→→

CBP

(A)

Input Videos

→→

GT

CBP branch
Collaboration
VLP branch

(B)

FP & FN

TP & TN

→

VLP

True Positive (TP)
False Positive (FP)

→

1. Introduction

True Negative (TN)
False Negative (FN)

Distill
Foreground

Weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL)
learns to detect and classify action instances with only category labels. Most methods widely adopt the off-the-shelf
Classification-Based Pre-training (CBP) to generate video
features for action localization. However, the different optimization objectives between classification and localization,
make temporally localized results suffer from the serious incomplete issue. To tackle this issue without additional annotations, this paper considers to distill free action knowledge
from Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP), as we surprisingly observe that the localization results of vanilla VLP
have an over-complete issue, which is just complementary
to the CBP results. To fuse such complementarity, we propose a novel distillation-collaboration framework with two
branches acting as CBP and VLP respectively. The framework is optimized through a dual-branch alternate training
strategy. Specifically, during the B step, we distill the confident background pseudo-labels from the CBP branch; while
during the F step, the confident foreground pseudo-labels
are distilled from the VLP branch. As a result, the dualbranch complementarity is effectively fused to promote one
strong alliance. Extensive experiments and ablation studies
on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.2 reveal that our method
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

Distill
Background

Abstract

Figure 1. (A) Complementarity. Most works use ClassificationBased Pre-training (CBP) for localization, bringing high TN yet
serious FN. Vanilla Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) confuses
action and background, bringing high TP yet serious FP. (B) Our
distillation-collaboration framework distills foreground from
the VLP branch while background from the CBP branch, and promotes mutual collaboration, bringing satisfactory results.

ture extraction [5, 73]. A popular pipeline is to train an action classifier with CBP features, then threshold the framelevel classification probabilities for final localization results. As demonstrated in Figure 1 (A), these CBP methods suffer from the serious incompleteness issue, i.e. only
detecting sparse discriminative action frames and incurring
high false negatives. The main reason is that the optimization objective of classification pre-training, is to find several discriminative frames for action recognition, which is
far from the objective of complete localization. As a result, features from CBP are inevitably biased towards partial discriminative frames. To solve the incompleteness issue, many efforts [33, 43, 56, 96] have been attempted, but
most of them are trapped in a ‘performance-cost dilemma’,
namely, solely digging from barren category labels to keep
costs low. Lacking location labels fundamentally limits the
performance, leaving a huge gap from strong supervision.
To jump out of the dilemma, this paper raises one novel
question: is there free action knowledge available, to help

14751

