This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeurOCS: Neural NOCS Supervision for Monocular 3D Object Localization
Zhixiang Min1 Bingbing Zhuang2 Samuel Schulter2 Buyu Liu2
Enrique Dunn1 Manmohan Chandraker2
1
Stevens Institute of Technology 2 NEC Laboratories America
Abstract
Monocular 3D object localization in driving scenes is a
crucial task, but challenging due to its ill-posed nature. Estimating 3D coordinates for each pixel on the object surface
holds great potential as it provides dense 2D-3D geometric constraints for the underlying PnP problem. However,
high-quality ground truth supervision is not available in
driving scenes due to sparsity and various artifacts of Lidar data, as well as the practical infeasibility of collecting
per-instance CAD models. In this work, we present NeurOCS, a framework that uses instance masks and 3D boxes
as input to learn 3D object shapes by means of differentiable
rendering, which further serves as supervision for learning
dense object coordinates. Our approach rests on insights
in learning a category-level shape prior directly from real
driving scenes, while properly handling single-view ambiguities. Furthermore, we study and make critical design
choices to learn object coordinates more effectively from
an object-centric view. Altogether, our framework leads to
new state-of-the-art in monocular 3D localization that ranks
1st on the KITTI-Object [16] benchmark among published
monocular methods.

1. Introduction
Localization of surrounding vehicles in 3D space is an
important problem in autonomous driving. While Lidar
[32, 59, 72] and stereo [32, 59, 72] methods have achieved
strong performances, monocular 3D localization remains a
challenge despite recent progress in the field [4, 35, 43].
Monocular 3D object localization can be viewed as a
form of 3D reconstruction, with the goal to estimate the 3D
extent of an object from single images. While single-view
3D reconstruction is challenging due to its ill-posed nature,
learned priors combined with differentiable rendering [65]
have recently emerged as a powerful technique, which has
the potential to improve 3D localization as well. Indeed, researchers [2, 31, 78, 79] have applied it as a means for object
pose optimization in 3D localization. However, difficulties
remain due to pose optimization being ambiguous under

Figure 1. NeurOCS learns category-level shape model in real driving scenes to provide dense and clean NOCS supervision through
differentiable rendering, leading to new state-of-the-art 3D object
localization performance.

challenging photometric conditions (such as textureless vehicle surfaces) and geometric occlusions ubiquitous in driving
scenes. The question of how differentiable rendering may
be best explored in 3D localization remains under-studied.
Our work proposes a framework to unleash its potential – instead of using differentiable rendering for pose optimization,
we use it with annotated ground truth pose to provide highquality supervision for image-based shape learning, leading
to a new state-of-the-art in 3D localization performance.
Our framework relies on the machinery of Perspectiven-Point (PnP) [33] pose estimation, which uses 2D-3D constraints to explicitly leverage geometric principles that lend
itself well to generalization. In particular, learning 3D object coordinates for every visible pixel on the object surface,
known as normalized object coordinate space (NOCS) [66],
provides a dense set of constraints. However, despite NOCSbased pose estimation dominating indoor benchmarks [21],
their use in real driving scenes has been limited primarily
due to lack of supervision – it is nontrivial to obtain accurate
per-instance reconstructions or CAD models in road scenes.
Lidar or its dense completion [23] are natural alternatives

21404

