This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WinCLIP: Zero-/Few-Shot Anomaly Classification and Segmentation
Jongheon Jeong2∗† Yang Zou1∗ Taewan Kim1
Dongqing Zhang1 Avinash Ravichandran1‡ Onkar Dabeer1
1
AWS AI Labs 2 KAIST

Abstract
Visual anomaly classification and segmentation are vital for automating industrial quality inspection. The focus of prior research in the field has been on training
custom models for each quality inspection task, which requires task-specific images and annotation. In this paper
we move away from this regime, addressing zero-shot and
few-normal-shot anomaly classification and segmentation.
Recently CLIP, a vision-language model, has shown revolutionary generality with competitive zero-/few-shot performance in comparison to full-supervision. But CLIP
falls short on anomaly classification and segmentation
tasks. Hence, we propose window-based CLIP (WinCLIP)
with (1) a compositional ensemble on state words and
prompt templates and (2) efficient extraction and aggregation of window/patch/image-level features aligned with
text. We also propose its few-normal-shot extension WinCLIP+, which uses complementary information from normal images. In MVTec-AD (and VisA), without further tuning, WinCLIP achieves 91.8%/85.1% (78.1%/79.6%) AUROC in zero-shot anomaly classification and segmentation
while WinCLIP+ does 93.1%/95.2% (83.8%/96.4%) in 1normal-shot, surpassing state-of-the-art by large margins.

1. Introduction
Visual anomaly classification (AC) and segmentation
(AS) classify and localize defects in industrial manufacturing, respectively, predicting an image or a pixel as normal or anomalous. Visual inspection is a long-tail problem.
The objects and their defects vary widely in color, texture,
and size across a wide range of industrial domains, including aerospace, automobile, pharmaceutical, and electronics.
These result in two main challenges in the field.
First, defects are rare with wide range of variations,
leading to a lack of representative anomaly samples in the
† Work done during an Amazon internship.
∗ The authors contributed equally.
‡ Work done as part of AWS AI Labs.
1 few-shot and few-normal-shot are used interchangeably in our case.

Figure 1. Language guided zero-/one-shot1 anomaly segmentation
from WinCLIP/WinCLIP+. Best viewed in color and zoom in.

training data. Consequently, existing works have mainly
focused on one-class or unsupervised anomaly detection
[2,7,8,20,29,31,51,57], which only requires normal images.
These methods typically fit a model to the normal images and
treat any deviations from it as anomalous. When hundreds
or thousands of normal images are available, many methods
achieve high-accuracy on public benchmarks [3, 8, 31]. But
in the few-normal-shot regime, there is still room to improve
performance [14, 32, 39, 57], particularly in comparison with
the fully-supervised upper bound.
Second, prior work has focused on training a bespoke
model for each visual inspection task, which is not scalable
across the long-tail of tasks. This motivates our interest
in zero-shot anomaly classification and segmentation. But
many defects are defined with respect to a normal image.
For example, a missing component on a circuit board is
most easily defined with respect to a normal circuit board
with all components present. For such cases, at least a few
normal images are needed. So in addition to the zero-shot
case, we also consider the case of few-normal-shot anomaly
classification and segmentation. Since only few normal
images are available, there is no segmentation supervision
for localizing anomalies, making this a challenging problem
across the long-tail of tasks.

19606

