This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OrienterNet: Visual Localization in 2D Public Maps with Neural Matching
Paul-Edouard Sarlin1 Daniel DeTone2 Tsun-Yi Yang2 Armen Avetisyan2 Julian Straub2
Tomasz Malisiewicz2 Samuel Rota Bulo2 Richard Newcombe2 Peter Kontschieder2 Vasileios Balntas2
1
ETH Zurich 2 Meta Reality Labs

Abstract
Humans can orient themselves in their 3D environments
using simple 2D maps. Differently, algorithms for visual localization mostly rely on complex 3D point clouds that are
expensive to build, store, and maintain over time. We bridge
this gap by introducing OrienterNet, the first deep neural
network that can localize an image with sub-meter accuracy
using the same 2D semantic maps that humans use. OrienterNet estimates the location and orientation of a query image
by matching a neural Bird’s-Eye View with open and globally
available maps from OpenStreetMap, enabling anyone to localize anywhere such maps are available. OrienterNet is supervised only by camera poses but learns to perform semantic matching with a wide range of map elements in an endto-end manner. To enable this, we introduce a large crowdsourced dataset of images captured across 12 cities from the
diverse viewpoints of cars, bikes, and pedestrians. OrienterNet generalizes to new datasets and pushes the state of the
art in both robotics and AR scenarios. The code is available
at github.com/facebookresearch/OrienterNet.

1. Introduction
As humans, we intuitively understand the relationship between what we see and what is shown on a map of the scene
we are in. When lost in an unknown area, we can accurately
pinpoint our location by carefully comparing the map with
our surroundings using distinct geographic features.
Yet, algorithms for accurate visual localization are typically complex, as they rely on image matching and require
detailed 3D point clouds and visual descriptors [18,31,38,39,
53, 57, 60]. Building 3D maps with LiDAR or photogrammetry [2, 22, 43, 61, 67] is expensive at world scale and requires
costly, freshly-updated data to capture temporal changes in
visual appearance. 3D maps are also expensive to store, as
they are orders of magnitude larger than basic 2D maps.
This prevents executing localization on-device and usually
requires costly cloud infrastructure. Spatial localization is
thus a serious bottleneck for the large-scale deployment of
robotics and augmented reality devices. This disconnect be-

inputs

Humans use 2D maps

single
image

Existing algorithms:
3D point clouds

gravity

OrienterNet
neural map matching
GPS
OpenStreetMap

3-DoF
(x, y, θ)

camera pose

Figure 1. Towards human-like localization. Humans can easily orient themselves with basic 2D maps while state-of-the-art
algorithms for visual localization require complex 3D cues. OrienterNet can localize an image using only compact maps from
OpenStreetMap by matching Bird’s-Eye View and neural maps.

tween the localization paradigms of humans and machines
leads to the important research question of How can we teach
machines to localize from basic 2D maps like humans do?
This paper introduces the first approach that can localize
single images and image sequences with sub-meter accuracy
given the same maps that humans use. These planimetric
maps encode only the location and coarse 2D shape of few
important objects but not their appearance nor height. Such
maps are extremely compact, up to 104 times smaller in size
than 3D maps, and can thus be stored on mobile devices and
used for on-device localization within large areas. We demonstrate these capabilities with OpenStreetMap (OSM) [46],
an openly accessible and community-maintained world map,
enabling anyone to localize anywhere for free. This solution
does not require building and maintaining costly 3D maps
over time nor collecting potentially sensitive mapping data.
Concretely, our algorithm estimates the 3-DoF pose, as
position and heading, of a calibrated image in a 2D map.
The estimate is probabilistic and can therefore be fused with
an inaccurate GPS prior or across multiple views from a
multi-camera rig or image sequences. The resulting solution
is significantly more accurate than consumer-grade GPS
sensors and reaches accuracy levels closer to the traditional
pipelines based on feature matching [57, 60].

21632

