This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Behind the Scenes: Density Fields for Single View Reconstruction
Felix Wimbauer1,2
Nan Yang1
1
Technical University of Munich

Christian Rupprecht3
Daniel Cremers1,2,3
2
3
MCML
University of Oxford

{felix.wimbauer, nan.yang, cremers}@tum.de

Self-Supervised Loss based on
Multiple Views

chrisr@robots.ox.ac.uk

Single Input Image

Density Field

Training

Inference

Figure 1. Predicting a Density Field from a Single Image. Through a novel “density field” formulation, which decouples geometry
from color, architectural improvements, and a novel self-supervised training scheme, our method learns to predict a volumetric scene
representation from a single image in challenging conditions. The voxel occupancy view shows that our method predicts accurate density
even in occluded regions, which is not possible in traditional depth prediction. Please check out our project page at fwmb.github.io/bts/.

Abstract
Inferring a meaningful geometric scene representation
from a single image is a fundamental problem in computer
vision. Approaches based on traditional depth map prediction can only reason about areas that are visible in the image. Currently, neural radiance fields (NeRFs) can capture
true 3D including color, but are too complex to be generated from a single image. As an alternative, we propose to
predict an implicit density field from a single image. It maps
every location in the frustum of the image to volumetric density. By directly sampling color from the available views
instead of storing color in the density field, our scene representation becomes significantly less complex compared to
NeRFs, and a neural network can predict it in a single forward pass. The network is trained through self-supervision
from only video data. Our formulation allows volume rendering to perform both depth prediction and novel view synthesis. Through experiments, we show that our method is
able to predict meaningful geometry for regions that are occluded in the input image. Additionally, we demonstrate the
potential of our approach on three datasets for depth prediction and novel-view synthesis.

1. Introduction
The ability to infer information about the geometric
structure of a scene from a single image is of high importance for a wide range of applications from robotics to aug-

mented reality. While traditional computer vision mainly
focused on reconstruction from multiple images, in the deep
learning age the challenge of inferring a 3D scene from
merely a single image has received renewed attention.
Traditionally, this problem has been formulated as the
task of predicting per-pixel depth values (i.e. depth maps).
One of the most influential lines of work showed that it is
possible to train neural networks for accurate single-image
depth prediction in a self-supervised way only from video
sequences. [14–16, 29, 44, 51, 58, 59, 61] Despite these advances, depth prediction methods are not modeling the true
3D of the scene: they model only a single depth value per
pixel. As a result, it is not directly possible to obtain depth
values from views other than the input view without considering interpolation and occlusion. Further, the predicted
geometric representation of the scenes does not allow reasoning about areas that lie behind another object in the image (e.g. a house behind a tree), inhibiting the applicability
of monocular depth estimation to 3D understanding.
Due to the recent advance of 3D neural fields, the related
task of novel view synthesis has also seen a lot of progress.
Instead of directly reasoning about the scene geometry, the
goal here is to infer a representation that allows rendering
views of the scene from novel viewpoints. While geometric properties can often be inferred from the representation,
they are usually only a side product and lack visual quality.
Even though neural radiance field [32] based methods
achieve impressive results, they require many training im-

9076

