This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPPING: Distilling CLIP-Based Models with a Student Base for
Video-Language Retrieval
Renjing Pei, Jianzhuang Liu, Weimian Li,
Bin Shao, Songcen Xu, Peng Dai, Juwei Lu, Youliang Yan
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{peirenjing,liu.jianzhuang,liweimian,shaobin3,
xusongcen,peng.dai,juwei.lu,yanyouliang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Pre-training a vision-language model and then finetuning it on downstream tasks have become a popular
paradigm. However, pre-trained vision-language models
with the Transformer architecture usually take long inference time. Knowledge distillation has been an efficient
technique to transfer the capability of a large model to
a small one while maintaining the accuracy, which has
achieved remarkable success in natural language processing. However, it faces many problems when applying KD
to the multi-modality applications. In this paper, we propose a novel knowledge distillation method, named CLIPPING1 , where the plentiful knowledge of a large teacher
model that has been fine-tuned for video-language tasks
with the powerful pre-trained CLIP can be effectively transferred to a small student only at the fine-tuning stage. Especially, a new layer-wise alignment with the student as
the base is proposed for knowledge distillation of the intermediate layers in CLIPPING, which enables the student’s layers to be the bases of the teacher, and thus allows
the student to fully absorb the knowledge of the teacher.
CLIPPING with MobileViT-v2 as the vision encoder without
any vision-language pre-training achieves 88.1%–95.3% of
the performance of its teacher on three video-language retrieval benchmarks, with its vision encoder being 19.5x
smaller. CLIPPING also significantly outperforms a stateof-the-art small baseline (ALL-in-one-B) on the MSR-VTT
dataset, obtaining relatively 7.4% performance gain, with
29% fewer parameters and 86.9% fewer flops. Moreover,
CLIPPING is comparable or even superior to many large
pre-training models.

1 In this paper, CLIPPING means cutting something to make it smaller
through distilling.

1. Introduction
Recently, pre-training a vision-language model and
then fine-tuning it on downstream tasks are a popular
paradigm [12, 16, 20, 21, 30]. Pre-trained vision-language
models (PVLMs) have achieved great success in many
multi-modality tasks (e.g., video-text retrieval). However,
PVLMs with the Transformer architecture (especially the
vision stream) usually consume a huge amount of computation, making them difficult to be deployed on edge
devices such as mobile phones. Recent small models
[8, 14, 19, 22, 27, 40] show that combining Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) and Transformers as a hybrid architecture gets the best of both architectures, but the overall performance of these works is still far from satisfactory
when compared to large pre-training models. Apparently,
knowledge distillation (KD) [15] is an efficient technique to
transfer the capability of a large model to a small one while
maintaining the accuracy, which has achieved remarkable
success in natural language processing (NLP) [17, 18]. In
NLP, the knowledge distillation methods are usually performed at both the pre-training and the fine-tuning stages.
However, the collection of the pre-training data for the
pre-training knowledge distillation cost huge manpower in
multi-modality applications (e.g., the pre-training dataset of
CLIP is hard to obtain). Therefore, an efficient knowledge
distillation method need to be explored for multi-modality
applications. To this end, we propose a novel knowledge
distillation method, named CLIPPING, where the plentiful
knowledge of a large teacher model Clip4clip [26] that has
been fine-tuned for video-language tasks with the powerful pre-trained CLIP [30] can be effectively transferred to
a small student only at the fine-tuning stage. The contributions of CLIPPING are summarized below:
1) We introduce an efficient approach to distill both the
vision knowledge and the cross-modality knowledge from
teacher to a small model at the fine-tuning stage. The resulting model shows strong performance on multi-modality

18983

