This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Visual Prompting for Efficient 2D Temporal Video Grounding
Yimeng Zhang1,2 , Xin Chen2 , Jinghan Jia1 , Sijia Liu1 , Ke Ding2
1
Michigan State University, 2 Applied AI, Intel
{zhan1853, jiajingh, liusiji5}@msu.edu,
{xin.chen, ke.ding}@intel.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of temporal video
grounding (TVG), which aims to predict the starting/ending
time points of moments described by a text sentence within
a long untrimmed video. Benefiting from fine-grained 3D
visual features, the TVG techniques have achieved remarkable progress in recent years. However, the high complexity
of 3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) makes extracting dense 3D visual features time-consuming, which calls
for intensive memory and computing resources. Towards
efficient TVG, we propose a novel text-visual prompting
(TVP) framework, which incorporates optimized perturbation patterns (that we call ‘prompts’) into both visual inputs and textual features of a TVG model. In sharp contrast to 3D CNNs, we show that TVP allows us to effectively co-train vision encoder and language encoder in a
2D TVG model and improves the performance of crossmodal feature fusion using only low-complexity sparse 2D
visual features. Further, we propose a Temporal-Distance
IoU (TDIoU) loss for efficient learning of TVG. Experiments on two benchmark datasets, Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions datasets, empirically show that the proposed TVP significantly boosts the performance of 2D TVG
(e.g., 9.79% improvement on Charades-STA and 30.77%
improvement on ActivityNet Captions) and achieves 5× inference acceleration over TVG using 3D visual features.
Codes are available at Open.Intel.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed great progress on
temporal video grounding (TVG) [30, 74]. One key to
this success comes from the fine-grained dense 3D visual features extracted by 3D convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (e.g., C3D [56] and I3D [3]) since TVG tasks demand spatial-temporal context to locate the temporal interval of the moments described by the text query. However,
due to the high cost of the dense 3D feature extraction, most
existing TVG models only take these 3D visual features ex-

Figure 1. The architecture and performance comparison among TVG
methods: a) 3D TVG methods [14, 16, 18, 34, 43, 60–62, 64, 67, 69, 71, 73],
b) 2D TVG methods [1, 7], and c) TVP-based 2D TVG (Ours), d) overall performance comparison. Ours is the most efficient (least inference
time) and achieves competitive performance compared to 3D TVG methods. In contrast to existing TVG methods, which utilize dense video features extracted by non-trainable offline 3D CNNs and textual features, our
proposed framework utilizes a trainable 2D CNN as the vision encoder to
extract features from sparsely-sampled video frames with a universal set of
frame-aware visual prompts and adds text prompts in textual feature space
for end-to-end regression-based modeling.

tracted by offline 3D CNNs as inputs instead of co-training
during TVG model training.
Although models using 3D visual features (that we
call ‘3D methods or models’) outperform these using the
2D features (that we call ‘2D methods or models’), a
unique advantage of 2D methods is that extracting 2D
visual features can significantly reduce the cost in TVG
tasks [14, 15, 30, 34, 61, 62, 69, 74, 75]. An efficient and
lightweight solution with reasonable performance is also
demanded in computer vision, NLP, and video-language
tasks [19, 23, 38, 41, 68, 76–80]. As discussed above, the
methods employing 3D video features are challenging to be

14794

