This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Motion Encoding for Self-Supervised Video Representation Learning
Xinyu Sun1 2 * Peihao Chen1 * Liangwei Chen1 Changhao Li1
Thomas H. Li6 Mingkui Tan1 5 7† Chuang Gan3 4
1
3

South China University of Technology, 2 Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University

UMass Amherst, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 5 Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
6

Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, 7 Pazhou Laboratory

Abstract
How to learn discriminative video representation from
unlabeled videos is challenging but crucial for video analysis. The latest attempts seek to learn a representation
model by predicting the appearance contents in the masked
regions. However, simply masking and recovering appearance contents may not be sufficient to model temporal clues as the appearance contents can be easily reconstructed from a single frame. To overcome this limitation,
we present Masked Motion Encoding (MME), a new pretraining paradigm that reconstructs both appearance and
motion information to explore temporal clues. In MME,
we focus on addressing two critical challenges to improve
the representation performance: 1) how to well represent
the possible long-term motion across multiple frames; and
2) how to obtain fine-grained temporal clues from sparsely
sampled videos. Motivated by the fact that human is able to
recognize an action by tracking objects’ position changes
and shape changes, we propose to reconstruct a motion
trajectory that represents these two kinds of change in the
masked regions. Besides, given the sparse video input, we
enforce the model to reconstruct dense motion trajectories
in both spatial and temporal dimensions. Pre-trained with
our MME paradigm, the model is able to anticipate longterm and fine-grained motion details. Code is available at
https://github.com/XinyuSun/MME.

1. Introduction
Video representation learning plays a critical role in
video analysis like action recognition [15,32,79], action localization [12,81], video retrieval [4,82], videoQA [40], etc.
Learning video representation is very difficult for two reasons. Firstly, it is extremely difficult and labor-intensive to
annotate videos, and thus relying on annotated data to learn
* Equal contribution. Email: {csxinyusun, phchencs}@gmail.com
† Corresponding author. Email: mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

video representations is not scalable. Also, the complex
spatial-temporal contents with a large data volume are difficult to be represented simultaneously. How to perform selfsupervised videos representation learning only using unlabeled videos has been a prominent research topic [7,13,49].
Taking advantage of spatial-temporal modeling using a
flexible attention mechanism, vision transformers [3, 8, 25,
26, 53] have shown their superiority in representing video.
Prior works [5, 37, 84] have successfully introduced the
mask-and-predict scheme in NLP [9, 23] to pre-train an image transformer. These methods vary in different reconstruction objectives, including raw RGB pixels [37], handcrafted local patterns [75], and VQ-VAE embedding [5], all
above are static appearance information in images. Based
on previous successes, some researchers [64,72,75] attempt
to extend this scheme to the video domain, where they mask
3D video regions and reconstruct appearance information.
However, these methods suffers from two limitations. First,
as the appearance information can be well reconstructed in
a single image with an extremely high masking ratio (85%
in MAE [37]), it is also feasible to be reconstructed in the
tube-masked video frame-by-frame and neglect to learn important temporal clues. This can be proved by our ablation
study (cf. Section 4.2.1). Second, existing works [64, 75]
often sample frames sparsely with a fixed stride, and then
mask some regions in these sampled frames. The reconstruction objectives only contain information in the sparsely
sampled frames, and thus are hard to provide supervision
signals for learning fine-grained motion details, which is
critical to distinguish different actions [3, 8].
In this paper, we aim to design a new mask-and-predict
paradigm to tackle these two issues. Fig. 1(a) shows two key
factors to model an action, i.e., position change and shape
change. By observing the position change of the person, we
realize he is jumping in the air, and by observing the shape
change that his head falls back and then tucks to his chest,
we are aware that he is adjusting his posture to cross the bar.
We believe that anticipating these changes helps the model
better understand an action.

2235

