This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G ENIE: Show Me the Data for Quantization
Yongkweon Jeon∗

Chungman Lee∗

Ho-young Kim∗

Samsung Research
{dragwon.jeon, chungman.lee, hoyoung4.kim}@samsung.com

Figure 1. Distilled images by G ENIE (without any image prior loss).

Abstract
Zero-shot quantization is a promising approach for developing lightweight deep neural networks when data is inaccessible owing to various reasons, including cost and issues related to privacy. By exploiting the learned parameters (µ and σ) of batch normalization layers in an FP32pre-trained model, zero-shot quantization schemes focus on
generating synthetic data. Subsequently, they distill knowledge from the pre-trained model (teacher) to the quantized
model (student) such that the quantized model can be optimized with the synthetic dataset. However, thus far, zeroshot quantization has primarily been discussed in the context of quantization-aware training methods, which require
task-specific losses and long-term optimization as much
as retraining. We thus introduce a post-training quantization scheme for zero-shot quantization that produces highquality quantized networks within a few hours. Furthermore, we propose a framework called G ENIE that generates data suited for quantization. With the data synthesized
by G ENIE, we can produce robust quantized models without real datasets, which is comparable to few-shot quantization. We also propose a post-training quantization algorithm to enhance the performance of quantized models. By
combining them, we can bridge the gap between zero-shot
∗ Equal contribution. Correspondence to: dragwon.jeon@samsung.com

and few-shot quantization while significantly improving the
quantization performance compared to that of existing approaches. In other words, we can obtain a unique stateof-the-art zero-shot quantization approach. The code is
available at https://github.com/SamsungLabs/
Genie.

1. Introduction
Quantization is an indispensable procedure for deploying models in resource-constrained devices such as mobile
phones. By representing tensors using a lower bit width and
maintaining a dense format of tensors, quantization reduces
a computing unit to a significantly smaller size compared
to that achieved by other approaches (such as pruning and
low-rank approximations) and facilitates massive data parallelism with vector processing units. Most early studies utilized quantization-aware training (QAT) schemes [8, 23] to
compress models, which requires the entire training dataset
and takes as much time as training FP32 models. However,
access to the entire dataset for quantizing models may not
be possible in the real world or industry owing to a variety
of reasons, including issues related to privacy preservation.
Thus, recent studies have emphasized post-training quantization (PTQ) [12, 14, 17, 21] because it serves as a convenient method of producing high-quality quantized networks

12064

