This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot Referring Image Segmentation with Global-Local Context Features
Seonghoon Yu1
Paul Hongsuck Seo2
Jeany Son1
1
2
AI Graduate School, GIST
Google Research
seonghoon@gm.gist.ac.kr

phseo@google.com

jeany@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Referring image segmentation (RIS) aims to find a segmentation mask given a referring expression grounded to a
region of the input image. Collecting labelled datasets for
this task, however, is notoriously costly and labor-intensive.
To overcome this issue, we propose a simple yet effective
zero-shot referring image segmentation method by leveraging the pre-trained cross-modal knowledge from CLIP. In
order to obtain segmentation masks grounded to the input
text, we propose a mask-guided visual encoder that captures global and local contextual information of an input image. By utilizing instance masks obtained from off-the-shelf
mask proposal techniques, our method is able to segment
fine-detailed instance-level groundings. We also introduce a
global-local text encoder where the global feature captures
complex sentence-level semantics of the entire input expression while the local feature focuses on the target noun phrase
extracted by a dependency parser. In our experiments, the
proposed method outperforms several zero-shot baselines of
the task and even the weakly supervised referring expression
segmentation method with substantial margins. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Seonghoon-Yu/Zero-shot-RIS.

1. Introduction
Recent advances of deep learning has revolutionised computer vision and natural language processing, and addressed
various tasks in the field of vision-and-language [4, 19, 27,
28, 36, 43, 50]. A key element in the recent success of the
multi-modal models such as CLIP [43] is the contrastive
image-text pre-training on a large set of image and text pairs.
It has shown a remarkable zero-shot transferability on a wide
range of tasks, such as object detection [9, 10, 13], semantic
segmentation [7, 12, 59, 63], image captioning [40], visual
question answering (VQA) [47] and so on.
Despite its good transferability of pre-trained multi-modal
models, it is not straightforward to handle dense prediction
tasks such as object detection and image segmentation. A
pixel-level dense prediction task is challenging since there

Figure 1. Illustrations of the task of referring image segmentation and motivations of global-local context features. To find the
grounded mask given an expression, we need to understand the
relations between the objects as well as their semantics.

is a substantial gap between the image-level contrastive pretraining task and the pixel-level downstream task such as semantic segmentation. There have been several attempts to reduce gap between two tasks [44, 54, 63], but these works aim
to fine-tune the model consequently requiring task-specific
dense annotations, which is notoriously labor-intensive and
costly.
Referring image segmentation is a task to find the specific
region in an image given a natural language text describing
the region, and it is well-known as one of challenging visionand-language tasks. Collecting annotations for this task is
even more challenging as the task requires to collect precise
referring expression of the target region as well as its dense
mask annotation. Recently, a weakly-supervised referring
image segmentation method [48] is proposed to overcome
this issue. However, it still requires high-level text expression annotations pairing with images for the target datasets
and the performance of the method is far from that of the
supervised methods. To tackle this issue, in this paper, we focus on zero-shot transferring from the pre-trained knowledge

19456

