This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Affordances from Human Videos as a Versatile Representation for Robotics
Shikhar Bahl⋆1,2

Russell Mendonca⋆1
1

CMU

Lili Chen1
2

Unnat Jain1,2

Deepak Pathak1

Meta AI

Learning Visual Affordances

Deployment on Robot

Figure 1. We leverage human videos to learn visual affordances that can be deployed on multiple real robot, in the wild, spanning several
tasks and learning paradigms. Videos available at https://vision-robotics-bridge.github.io/.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Building a robot that can understand and learn to interact by watching humans has inspired several vision problems. However, despite some successful results on static
datasets, it remains unclear how current models can be used
on a robot directly. In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap
by leveraging videos of human interactions in an environment centric manner. Utilizing internet videos of human
behavior, we train a visual affordance model that estimates
where and how in the scene a human is likely to interact.
The structure of these behavioral affordances directly enables the robot to perform many complex tasks. We show
how to seamlessly integrate our affordance model with four
robot learning paradigms including offline imitation learning, exploration, goal-conditioned learning, and action parameterization for reinforcement learning. We show the efficacy of our approach, which we call Vision-Robotics Bridge
(VRB) across 4 real world environments, over 10 different
tasks, and 2 robotic platforms operating in the wild.
The meaning or value of a thing consists of what it
affords... what we perceive when we look at objects are
their affordances, not their qualities.

Imagine standing in a brand-new kitchen. Before taking
even a single action, we already have a good understanding of how most objects should be manipulated. This understanding goes beyond semantics as we have a belief of
where to hold objects and which direction to move them
in, allowing us to interact with it. For instance, the oven
is opened by pulling the handle downwards, the tap should
be turned sideways, drawers are to be pulled outwards, and
light switches are turned on with a flick. While things don’t
always work as imagined and some exploration might be
needed, but humans heavily rely on such visual affordances
of objects to efficiently perform day-to-day tasks across environments [34, 35]. Extracting such actionable knowledge
from videos has long inspired the vision community.
More recently, with improving performance on static
datasets, the field is increasingly adopting a broader ‘active’
definition of vision through research in egocentric visual
understanding and visual affordances from videos of human
interaction. With deep learning, methods can now predict
heatmaps of where a human would interact [38, 75] or seg⋆ equal contribution

J.J. Gibson (1979)

13778

