This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

REC-MV: REconstructing 3D Dynamic Cloth from Monocular Videos
Lingteng Qiu1 * Guanying Chen1,2 * Jiapeng Zhou1
Junle Wang3 Xiaoguang Han1,2†
1

SSE, CUHKSZ

2

FNii, CUHKSZ

3

Mutian Xu1

Tencent

Abstract
Reconstructing dynamic 3D garment surfaces with open
boundaries from monocular videos is an important problem
as it provides a practical and low-cost solution for clothes
digitization. Recent neural rendering methods achieve
high-quality dynamic clothed human reconstruction results
from monocular video, but these methods cannot separate
the garment surface from the body. Moreover, despite existing garment reconstruction methods based on feature
curve representation demonstrating impressive results for
garment reconstruction from a single image, they struggle
to generate temporally consistent surfaces for the video input. To address the above limitations, in this paper, we formulate this task as an optimization problem of 3D garment
feature curves and surface reconstruction from monocular
video. We introduce a novel approach, called REC-MV, to
jointly optimize the explicit feature curves and the implicit
signed distance field (SDF) of the garments. Then the open
garment meshes can be extracted via garment template registration in the canonical space. Experiments on multiple
casually captured datasets show that our approach outperforms existing methods and can produce high-quality dynamic garment surfaces. The source code is available at
https://github.com/GAP-LAB-CUHK-SZ/REC-MV.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity clothes digitization plays an essential role
in various human-related vision applications such as virtual shopping, film, and gaming. In our daily life, humans are always in a moving status, driving their clothes
to move together. To realize this very common scenario, it
is indispensable to gain dynamic garments in real applications. Thanks to the rapid development of mobile devices
in terms of digital cameras, processors, and storage, shooting a monocular video in the wild becomes highly convenient and accessible for general customers. In this paper,
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn.

Figure 1. Can we extract dynamic 3D garments from monocular videos? The answer is Yes! By jointly optimizing the dynamic
feature curves and garment surface followed by non-rigid template
registration, our method can reconstruct high-fidelity and temporally consistent garment meshes with open boundaries.

our goal is definite – extracting dynamic 3D garments from
monocular videos, which is significantly meaningful and
valuable for practical applications, but is yet an uncultivated
land with many challenges.
We attempt to seek a new solution to this open problem and start by revisiting existing works from two mainstreams. i) Leveraging the success of neural rendering
methods [35, 37, 57], several works are able to reconstruct dynamic clothed humans from monocular videos
[8, 19, 29, 47, 49], by representing the body surface with
an implicit function in the canonical space and apply skinning based deformation for motion modeling. One naive
way to achieve our goal is: first to get the clothed human
through these methods and separate the garments from human bodies. However, such a separation job requires laborious and non-trivial processing by professional artists,
which is neither straightforward nor feasible for general
application scenarios. ii) As for garment reconstruction,
many methods [5, 10, 20, 61, 62] make it possible to reconstruct high-quality garment meshes from single-view images in the wild. Specifically, ReEF [62] estimates 3D fea-

4637

