This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to Prevent the Continuous Damage of Noises to Model Training?
Xiaotian Yu1 , Yang Jiang5 , Tianqi Shi5 , Zunlei Feng12 , Yuexuan Wang4 , Mingli Song12 , Li Sun3 *
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University,
3
Ningbo Innovation Center Zhejiang University, 4 University of Hong Kong, 5 Alibaba Group

Abstract
Deep learning with noisy labels is challenging and inevitable in many circumstances. Existing methods reduce
the impact of mislabeled samples by reducing loss weights
or screening, which highly rely on the model’s superior
discriminative power for identifying mislabeled samples.
However, in the training stage, the trainee model is imperfect and will wrongly predict some mislabeled samples,
which cause continuous damage to the model training. Consequently, there is a large performance gap between existing anti-noise models trained with noisy samples and models trained with clean samples. In this paper, we put forward
a Gradient Switching Strategy (GSS) to prevent the continuous damage of mislabeled samples to the classifier. Theoretical analysis shows that the damage comes from the misleading gradient direction computed from the mislabeled
samples. The trainee model will deviate from the correct
optimization direction under the influence of the accumulated misleading gradient of mislabeled samples. To address this problem, the proposed GSS alleviates the damage
by switching the gradient direction of each sample based on
the gradient direction pool, which contains all-class gradient directions with different probabilities. During training,
each gradient direction pool is updated iteratively, which
assigns higher probabilities to potential principal directions for high-confidence samples. Conversely, uncertain
samples are forced to explore in different directions rather
than mislead model in a fixed direction. Extensive experiments show that GSS can achieve comparable performance
with a model trained with clean data. Moreover, the proposed GSS is pluggable for existing frameworks. This idea
of switching gradient directions provides a new perspective
for future noisy-label learning.

1. Introduction
Recently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved
breakthrough results across various computer vision
tasks [9, 14–16, 20, 34, 36, 49, 50]. The high performance
* Li Sun is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Performance comparison of existing methods and the
proposed GSS on CIFAR-10 with 40% noisy labels. The red
dashed line denotes the upper limit, which is the accuracy of models trained with completely clean labels.

of DNNs requires a large amount of labeled data, but it is
hard to guarantee label quality in many circumstances. As a
matter of fact, many benchmark datasets inevitably contain
noisy labels according to investigation results in [35].
Various types of researches are proposed to address the
noisy-label problem. The mainstream types are robust loss
function [18, 27, 44, 54] and sample screening [30, 37, 40].
These methods deal with mislabeled samples in essentially similar ways, that is, by decreasing the weights of
low-confidence samples, which highly rely on the trainee
model’s discriminative power of identifying mislabeled
samples. However, during training the trainee model is
imperfect and will miss many mislabeled samples, which
will continuously damage the model. That is why there is a
large performance gap between existing anti-noise models
trained with noisy samples and models trained with clean
samples. As shown in Fig. 1, existing anti-noise methods (denoted by solid lines) have 1.61% ∼ 9.81% accuracy gaps compared with the reference upper limit (red dash
line), which denotes the performance of models trained with
clean samples. It raises an important question: how to
prevent the continuous damage of noises to model training? The theoretical analysis in Section 4 shows that the
noise damage comes from the misleading gradient direc-

12054

