This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MHPL: Minimum Happy Points Learning for Active Source Free
Domain Adaptation
Fan Wang1 , Zhongyi Han1 , Zhiyan Zhang1 , Rundong He1 , Yilong Yin1 *
1
School of Software, Shandong University, China
{fanwang,rundong he}@mail.sdu.edu.cn, {hanzhongyicn,zyzhangcs}@gmail.com, ylyin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Source free domain adaptation (SFDA) aims to transfer
a trained source model to the unlabeled target domain without accessing the source data. However, the SFDA setting
faces a performance bottleneck due to the absence of source
data and target supervised information, as evidenced by
the limited performance gains of the newest SFDA methods. Active source free domain adaptation (ASFDA) can
break through the problem by exploring and exploiting a
small set of informative samples via active learning. In
this paper, we first find that those satisfying the properties of neighbor-chaotic, individual-different, and sourcedissimilar are the best points to select. We define them as the
minimum happy (MH) points challenging to explore with existing methods. We propose minimum happy points learning
(MHPL) to explore and exploit MH points actively. We design three unique strategies: neighbor environment uncertainty, neighbor diversity relaxation, and one-shot querying, to explore the MH points. Further, to fully exploit MH
points in the learning process, we design a neighbor focal
loss that assigns the weighted neighbor purity to the cross
entropy loss of MH points to make the model focus more on
them. Extensive experiments verify that MHPL remarkably
exceeds the various types of baselines and achieves significant performance gains at a small cost of labeling.

1. Introduction
Transferring a trained source model instead of the source
data to the unlabeled target domain, source-free domain
adaptation (SFDA) has drawn much attention recently.
Since it prevents the external leakage of source data, SFDA
meets privacy persevering [19, 47], data security [43], and
data silos [39]. Moreover, it has important potential in
many applications, e.g., object detection [23], object recognition [25], and semantic segmentation [17]. However, the
SFDA setting faces a performance bottleneck due to the ab* denotes corresponding author.

sence of source data and target supervised information. The
state-of-the-art A2 Net [50] is a very powerful method that
seeks a classifier and exploits classifier design to achieve adversarial domain-level alignment and contrastive categorylevel matching, but it only improved the mean accuracy of
the pioneering work (SHOT [25]) from 71.8% to 72.8% on
the challenging Office-Home dataset [45]. Although some
recent studies [20, 52] utilize the transformer or mix-up to
improve the performance further, they have modified the
structure of the source model or changed the source data,
which is not universal in privacy-preserving scenarios.
Active source free domain adaptation (ASFDA) can produce remarkable performance gains and breakthrough performance bottlenecks when a small set of informative target samples labeled by experts. Two factors must be considered to achieve significant performance gains: (1) Exploring samples that, once labeled, will improve accuracy
significantly; (2) Exploiting limited active labeled target
data well in adaptation. However, these two factors have
not been achieved. For example, ELPT [24] uses prediction uncertainty [27] to explore active samples and applies
cross-entropy loss to exploit these selected samples. While
the prediction uncertainty is error-prone due to the miscalibrated source model under distribution shift [32], and the
pseudo-label noise of unlabeled samples easily influence
the effect of standard cross-entropy loss on active samples.
In this paper, we first find the best informative samples for ASFDA are Minimum Happy (MH) points that satisfy the properties of neighbor-chaotic, individual-different,
and source-dissimilar. (1) The property of neighbor-chaotic
refers to the sample’s neighbor labels being very inconsistent, which measures the sample uncertainty through its environment. The Active Learning (AL) and Active DA methods, which rely on the miscalibrated model output [32] or
domain discrepancy, can’t identify these uncertain samples
in ASFDA. As shown in Fig. 1, the samples selected by our
method are more likely to fall into red blocks with labelchaotic environments than BVSB [14]. (2) The property
of individual-different guarantees the diversity of selected
uncertain samples to improve the effectiveness of querying.

20008

