This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EfficientViT: Memory Efficient Vision Transformer with
Cascaded Group Attention
Xinyu Liu1,∗ , Houwen Peng2 , Ningxin Zheng2 , Yuqing Yang2 , Han Hu2 , Yixuan Yuan1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Microsoft Research
1155195604@link.cuhk.edu.hk, {houwen.peng, ningxin.zheng, yuqing.yang, hanhu}@microsoft.com, yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Vision transformers have shown great success due to
their high model capabilities. However, their remarkable
performance is accompanied by heavy computation costs,
which makes them unsuitable for real-time applications. In
this paper, we propose a family of high-speed vision transformers named EfficientViT. We find that the speed of existing transformer models is commonly bounded by memory inefficient operations, especially the tensor reshaping
and element-wise functions in MHSA. Therefore, we design
a new building block with a sandwich layout, i.e., using a
single memory-bound MHSA between efficient FFN layers,
which improves memory efficiency while enhancing channel
communication. Moreover, we discover that the attention
maps share high similarities across heads, leading to computational redundancy. To address this, we present a cascaded group attention module feeding attention heads with
different splits of the full feature, which not only saves computation cost but also improves attention diversity. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate EfficientViT outperforms
existing efficient models, striking a good trade-off between
speed and accuracy. For instance, our EfficientViT-M5 surpasses MobileNetV3-Large by 1.9% in accuracy, while getting 40.4% and 45.2% higher throughput on Nvidia V100
GPU and Intel Xeon CPU, respectively. Compared to
the recent efficient model MobileViT-XXS, EfficientViT-M2
achieves 1.8% superior accuracy, while running 5.8×/3.7×
faster on the GPU/CPU, and 7.4× faster when converted to
ONNX format. Code and models are available at here.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have taken computer vision
domain by storm due to their high model capabilities and
superior performance [18, 44, 69]. However, the constantly
improved accuracy comes at the cost of increasing model
sizes and computation overhead. For example, SwinV2 [43]
uses 3.0B parameters, while V-MoE [62] taking 14.7B parameters, to achieve state-of-the-art performance on Ima∗ Work done when Xinyu was an intern of Microsoft Research.

Figure 1. Speed and accuracy comparisons between EfficientViT
(Ours) and other efficient CNN and ViT models tested on an
Nvidia V100 GPU with ImageNet-1K dataset [17].

geNet [17]. Such large model sizes and the accompanying
heavy computational costs make these models unsuitable
for applications with real-time requirements [40, 78, 86].
There are several recent works designing light and efficient vision transformer models [9,19,29,49,50,56,79,81].
Unfortunately, most of these methods aim to reduce model
parameters or Flops, which are indirect metrics for speed
and do not reflect the actual inference throughput of models.
For example, MobileViT-XS [50] using 700M Flops runs
much slower than DeiT-T [69] with 1,220M Flops on an
Nvidia V100 GPU. Although these methods have achieved
good performance with fewer Flops or parameters, many
of them do not show significant wall-clock speedup against
standard isomorphic or hierarchical transformers, e.g., DeiT
[69] and Swin [44], and have not gained wide adoption.
To address this issue, in this paper, we explore how to
go faster with vision transformers, seeking to find principles for designing efficient transformer architectures. Based
on the prevailing vision transformers DeiT [69] and Swin
[44], we systematically analyze three main factors that affect model inference speed, including memory access, computation redundancy, and parameter usage. In particular,
we find that the speed of transformer models is commonly
memory-bound. In other words, memory accessing delay prohibits the full utilization of the computing power
in GPU/CPUs [21, 32, 72], leading to a critically negative
impact on the runtime speed of transformers [15, 31]. The

14420

