This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffSwap: High-Fidelity and Controllable Face Swapping via
3D-Aware Masked Diffusion
Wenliang Zhao, Yongming Rao, Weikang Shi, Zuyan Liu, Jie Zhou, Jiwen Lu†
Tsinghua University

Figure 1. Face swapping results of DiffSwap at 512 × 512 resolution. In each group, we show the swapped face (right) generated by
replacing the target face (bottom-left) with the source face (top-left). Benefiting from the generative power and controllability, our model
can produce high-fidelity swapped faces that are robust to the differences in face shape, face pose and skin color between the source face
and target face. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose DiffSwap, a diffusion model
based framework for high-fidelity and controllable face
swapping. Unlike previous work that relies on carefully designed network architectures and loss functions to fuse the
information from the source and target faces, we reformulate the face swapping as a conditional inpainting task, performed by a powerful diffusion model guided by the desired
face attributes (e.g., identity and landmarks). An important issue that makes it nontrivial to apply diffusion models to face swapping is that we cannot perform the timeconsuming multi-step sampling to obtain the generated image during training. To overcome this, we propose a midpoint estimation method to efficiently recover a reasonable
diffusion result of the swapped face with only 2 steps, which
enables us to introduce identity constraints to improve the
face swapping quality. Our framework enjoys several favorable properties more appealing than prior arts: 1) Controllable. Our method is based on conditional masked diffusion on the latent space, where the mask and the conditions
can be fully controlled and customized. 2) High-fidelity.
The formulation of conditional inpainting can fully exploit
the generative ability of diffusion models and can preserve
the background of target images with minimal artifacts. 3)
† Corresponding author

Shape-preserving. The controllability of our method enables us to use 3D-aware landmarks as the condition during
generation to preserve the shape of the source face. Extensive experiments on both FF++ and FFHQ demonstrate
that our method can achieve state-of-the-art face swapping
results both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
There has been growing interest in face swapping technology from both vision and graphics communities [1, 2, 6,
21,36,39] because of its broad applications in creating digital twins, making films, protecting privacy, etc. The goal of
face swapping is to transfer the identity of the source face to
a target image or a video frame while keeping the attributes
(e.g., pose, expression, background) unchanged.
There are two essential steps in realizing high-quality
face swapping: encoding the identity information of the
source face effectively and blending identity and attributes
from different images seamlessly. Early work [4,24] on face
swapping adopts 3D models [5] to represent the source face
and directly replace the reconstructed faces in the target image based on 3D structural priors, leading to recognizable
artifacts. The development of generative adversarial networks (GAN) [12] provides a strong tool to generate photorealistic face images. Many recent methods [2, 6, 21, 39]
perform face swapping by extracting the identity feature

8568

