This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hunting Sparsity: Density-Guided Contrastive Learning for
Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation

1

XJTLU

2

Xiaoyang Wang1,2,3
University of Liverpool

Bingfeng Zhang4
3
Metavisioncn

4

Limin Yu1
Jimin Xiao1 *
China University of Petroleum (East China)

wangxy@liverpool.ac.uk, bingfeng.zhang@upc.edu.cn, {limin.yu, jimin.xiao}@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent semi-supervised semantic segmentation methods
combine pseudo labeling and consistency regularization to
enhance model generalization from perturbation-invariant
training. In this work, we argue that adequate supervision can be extracted directly from the geometry of feature space. Inspired by density-based unsupervised clustering, we propose to leverage feature density to locate
sparse regions within feature clusters defined by label and
pseudo labels. The hypothesis is that lower-density features tend to be under-trained compared with those densely
gathered. Therefore, we propose to apply regularization on
the structure of the cluster by tackling the sparsity to increase intra-class compactness in feature space. With this
goal, we present a Density-Guided Contrastive Learning
(DGCL) strategy to push anchor features in sparse regions
toward cluster centers approximated by high-density positive keys. The heart of our method is to estimate feature
density which is defined as neighbor compactness. We design a multi-scale density estimation module to obtain the
density from multiple nearest-neighbor graphs for robust
density modeling. Moreover, a unified training framework is
proposed to combine label-guided self-training and densityguided geometry regularization to form complementary supervision on unlabeled data. Experimental results on PASCAL VOC and Cityscapes under various semi-supervised
settings demonstrate that our proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performances. The project is available
at https://github.com/Gavinwxy/DGCL.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, as an essential computer vision
task, has seen significant advances along with the rise of
deep learning [4, 30, 46]. Nevertheless, training segmentation models requires massive pixel-level annotations which
can be time-consuming and laborious to obtain. Therefore,
* Corresponding author.

(a) Feature clusters

(b) Local density estimation

Figure 1. Illustration of feature density within clusters. (a) Pixellevel features of 5 classes extracted from PASCAL VOC 2012 [12]
with prediction confidence over 0.95. (b) Feature density estimated by the averaged distance of 16 nearest neighbor features.

semi-supervised learning is introduced in semantic segmentation and is drawing growing interest. It aims to design a
label-efficient training scheme with limited annotated data
to allow better model generalization by leveraging additional unlabeled images.
The key in semi-supervised semantic segmentation lies
in mining extra supervision from unlabeled samples. Recent studies focus on learning consistency-based regularization [13, 29, 32, 51] and designing self-training pipelines
[15, 19, 43, 44]. Inspired by the advances in representation
learning [17,24], another line of works [28,40,47–49] introduce contrastive learning on pixel-level features to enhance
inter-class separability. Though previous works have shown
effectiveness, their label-guided learning scheme solely relies on classifier knowledge, while the structure information
of feature space is under-explored. In this work, we argue
that effective supervision can be extracted from the geometry of feature clusters to complement label supervision.
Feature density, measured by local compactness, has
shown its potential to reveal feature patterns in unsupervised clustering algorithms such as DBSCAN [11]. The
density-peak assumption [33] states that cluster centers are
more likely located in dense regions. Inversely, features in

3114

