This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bias-Eliminating Augmentation Learning for Debiased Federated Learning
Yuan-Yi Xu1
Ci-Siang Lin1
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1
2
National Taiwan University, Taiwan
NVIDIA, Taiwan
{r10942094, d08942011, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Learning models trained on biased datasets tend to observe correlations between categorical and undesirable features, which result in degraded performances. Most existing debiased learning models are designed for centralized
machine learning, which cannot be directly applied to distributed settings like federated learning (FL), which collects data at distinct clients with privacy preserved. To
tackle the challenging task of debiased federated learning, we present a novel FL framework of Bias-Eliminating
Augmentation Learning (FedBEAL), which learns to deploy Bias-Eliminating Augmenters (BEA) for producing
client-specific bias-conflicting samples at each client. Since
the bias types or attributes are not known in advance, a
unique learning strategy is presented to jointly train BEA
with the proposed FL framework. Extensive image classification experiments on datasets with various bias types
confirm the effectiveness and applicability of our FedBEAL,
which performs favorably against state-of-the-art debiasing
and FL methods for debiased FL.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have shown promising progress
across different domains such as computer vision [14]
and natural language processing [8]. Their successes
are typically based on the collection of and training on
data that properly describe the inherent distribution of the
data of interest. However, in real-world scenarios, biased
data [24] are often observed during data collection. Biased
datasets [10, 22, 42] contain features that are highly correlated to class labels in the training dataset but not sufficiently describing the inherent semantic meaning. Training
on such biased data thus result in degraded model generalization capability. Take Fig. 1 for example; when addressing the cat-dog classification task, training images collected
by users might contain only orange cats and black dogs.
Their color attributes are strongly correlated with the image
labels during training, but such attributes are not necessarily relevant to the classification task during inference. As

Figure 1. Example of local data bias in FL. When deploying
FL to train a cat-dog classifier with image datasets collected by
multiple pet owners, most of the local images are obtained with
their pets with specific colors. Therefore, the models trained with
each local dataset are likely to establish decision rules on biased
attributes (e.g., fur color), which prevents the aggregated model
from learning proper representation for classification.

pointed out in [10, 42], deep neural networks trained with
such biased data are more likely to make decisions based
on bias attributes instead of semantic attributes. As a result, during inference, performances of the learned models
would dramatically drop when observing bias-conflicting
samples (i.e., data containing semantic and bias attributes
that are rarely correlated in the training set).
To tackle the data bias problem, several works have been
proposed to remove or alleviate data bias when training
deep learning models [6, 11, 18, 24, 27, 32, 36, 40]. For example, Nam et al. [36] train an intentionally biased auxiliary model while enforcing the main model to go against
the prejudice of the biased network. Lee et al. [27] utilize
the aforementioned biased model to synthesize diverse biasconflicting hidden features for learning debiased representations. Nevertheless, the above techniques are designed for
centralized datasets. When performing distributed training
of learning models, such methods might fail to generalize.
For distributed learning, federated learning (FL) [35]

20442

