This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LinK: Linear Kernel for LiDAR-based 3D Perception
Tao Lu 1 Xiang Ding 1 Haisong Liu 1 Gangshan Wu 1 Limin Wang 1,2 *
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Shanghai AI Lab
{taolu,xding,liuhs}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {gswu,lmwang}@nju.edu.cn

Standard
Kernel

Abstract
Extending the success of 2D Large Kernel to 3D perception is challenging due to: 1. the cubically-increasing overhead in processing 3D data; 2. the optimization difficulties
from data scarcity and sparsity. Previous work has taken
the first step to scale up the kernel size from 3 × 3 × 3 to
7 × 7 × 7 by introducing block-shared weights. However, to
reduce the feature variations within a block, it only employs
modest block size and fails to achieve larger kernels like
the 21 × 21 × 21. To address this issue, we propose a new
method, called LinK, to achieve a wider-range perception
receptive field in a convolution-like manner with two core
designs. The first is to replace the static kernel matrix with a
linear kernel generator, which adaptively provides weights
only for non-empty voxels. The second is to reuse the precomputed aggregation results in the overlapped blocks to
reduce computation complexity. The proposed method successfully enables each voxel to perceive context within a
range of 21 × 21 × 21. Extensive experiments on two basic perception tasks, 3D object detection and 3D semantic
segmentation, demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
Notably, we rank 1st on the public leaderboard of the 3D
detection benchmark of nuScenes (LiDAR track), by simply incorporating a LinK-based backbone into the basic detector, CenterPoint. We also boost the strong segmentation
baseline’s mIoU with 2.7% in the SemanticKITTI test set.
Code is available at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/LinK.

1. Introduction
There is a consensus that a large receptive field contributes positively to many downstream vision tasks. For
example, Transformer [2, 3] benefits a lot from the global
relation with self-attention and becomes the leading topic
in classification [2], segmentation [4], and detection [5].
However, self-attention is not the only route to a large receptive field. Previous works like the RepLKNet [6] and
SLaK [7] investigated the potential of obtaining wide-range
* Corresponding author.

LargeKernel3D

Output

LinK (Ours)

Linear Kernel
Generator

Input

Figure 1. Comparisons among the standard kernel, the LargeKernel3D’s [1] block-shared kernel, and our LinK’s kernel from a
generator. Instead of storing a dense kernel matrix, LinK generates
sparse kernels online according to the input data. The amount of
learnable parameters will not increase along with the kernel size,
which enables the scaling up of larger kernel.

information through a large convolutional kernel. They
have achieved comparable results with the Transformerbased methods. Considering that the convolution operator is
more friendly to existing chip architecture, the large kernel
method is efficient in real applications. This raises an immediate question in the 3D perception: can the philosophy
of large kernel generalize to the 3D task?
The answer is yes. LargeKernel3D [1] takes the first step
and successfully achieves better metrics on both segmentation and detection. Time and space consumption are core
concerns during the extension since they increase cubically
in the 3D task. LargeKernel3D [1] introduces a spatial sharing kernel to scale the 3D kernel up to 7 × 7 × 7 and restrict
the rapid growth of parameters amount. However, compared with the 2D counterparts, which have developed the
huge size of 31 × 31 [6] and even 51 × 51 [7], the 7 × 7 × 7
seems to be not large enough, hence only benefiting from
limited context. There are at least two reasons to hinder its
size expansion: first, although the parameter amount is under control, the total amounts of operation on each voxel
are still increasing cubically; second, its assumption that

1105

