This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparsePose: Sparse-View Camera Pose Regression and Refinement
Samarth Sinha1 Jason Y. Zhang2
Andrea Tagliasacchi1,3,4 Igor Gilitschenski1 David B. Lindell1,5
1

University of Toronto

2

Carnegie Mellon University

3

Simon Fraser University

Abstract
Camera pose estimation is a key step in standard 3D reconstruction pipelines that operate on a dense set of images of a single object or scene. However, methods for
pose estimation often fail when only a few images are available because they rely on the ability to robustly identify and
match visual features between image pairs. While these
methods can work robustly with dense camera views, capturing a large set of images can be time-consuming or impractical. We propose SparsePose for recovering accurate camera poses given a sparse set of wide-baseline images (fewer than 10). The method learns to regress initial
camera poses and then iteratively refine them after training on a large-scale dataset of objects (Co3D: Common
Objects in 3D). SparsePose significantly outperforms conventional and learning-based baselines in recovering accurate camera rotations and translations. We also demonstrate our pipeline for high-fidelity 3D reconstruction using
only 5-9 images of an object. Project webpage: https:
//sparsepose.github.io/

1. Introduction
Computer vision has recently seen significant advances
in photorealistic new-view synthesis of individual objects [24, 41, 52, 60] or entire scenes [5, 62, 81]. Some of
these multiview methods take tens to hundreds of images
as input [5, 35, 36, 41], while others estimate geometry and
appearance from a few sparse camera views [43, 52, 76].
To produce high-quality reconstructions, these methods currently require accurate estimates of the camera position and
orientation for each captured image.
Recovering accurate camera poses, especially from a
limited number of images is an important problem for practically deploying 3D reconstruction algorithms, since it can
be challenging and expensive to capture a dense set of images of a given object or scene. While some recent methods for appearance and geometry reconstruction jointly
tackle the problem of camera pose estimation, they typically require dense input imagery and approximate initial-

4

Google

Sparse Input Views

5

Vector Institute

Initial Pose Regression

projected image
features

iter:

Iterative Pose Refinement

0

2

5

10

GT

Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. SparsePose – Given sparse input views, our method
predicts initial camera poses and then refines the poses based
on learned image features aggregated using projective geometry.
SparsePose outperforms conventional methods for camera pose
estimation based on feature matching within a single scene and
enables high-fidelity novel view synthesis (shown for each iteration of pose refinement) from as few as five input views.

ization [34, 67] or specialized capture setups such as imaging rigs [27, 78]. Most conventional pose estimation algorithms learn the 3D structure of the scene by matching image features between pairs of images [46, 58], but they typically fail when only a few wide-baseline images are available. The main reason for this is that features cannot be
matched robustly resulting in failure of the entire reconstruction process.
In such settings, it may be outright impossible to find
correspondences between image features. Thus, reliable
camera pose estimation requires learning a prior over the
geometry of objects. Based on this insight, the recent RelPose method [79] proposed a probabilistic energy-based
model that learns a prior over a large-scale object-centric
dataset [52]. RelPose is limited to predicting camera rotations (i.e., translations are not predicted). Moreover, it op-

21349

