This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human Pose as Compositional Tokens
Zigang Geng1,3 , Chunyu Wang3 *, Yixuan Wei2,3 , Ze Liu1,3 , Houqiang Li1 , Han Hu3 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Tsinghua University 3 Microsoft Research Asia
https://sites.google.com/view/pctpose

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a fundamental task in computer vision which aims to estimate the positions of body
joints from images. The recent progress has focused on network structures [74, 87, 96], training methods [31, 68, 93],
and fusion strategies [14,15,61,67,84,102], which have notably advanced the accuracy on public datasets. However, it
remains an open problem in challenging scenarios, e.g., in
the presence of occlusion, which hinders its application in
practice.
Current 2/3D pose estimators usually represent a pose
by a coordinate vector [23, 34, 79, 110] or its heatmap embeddings [40, 55, 60, 74, 75, 80, 87, 90]. In both representations, the joints are treated independently, ignoring the
fact that the body joints can serve as mutual context to each
* Equal Advising

...

312
638
?

Decoder

Encoder
312
?
638

Decoder

Human pose is typically represented by a coordinate vector of body joints or their heatmap embeddings. While easy
for data processing, unrealistic pose estimates are admitted due to the lack of dependency modeling between the
body joints. In this paper, we present a structured representation, named Pose as Compositional Tokens (PCT), to
explore the joint dependency. It represents a pose by M discrete tokens with each characterizing a sub-structure with
several interdependent joints (see Figure 1). The compositional design enables it to achieve a small reconstruction
error at a low cost. Then we cast pose estimation as a classification task. In particular, we learn a classifier to predict the categories of the M tokens from an image. A prelearned decoder network is used to recover the pose from
the tokens without further post-processing. We show that
it achieves better or comparable pose estimation results as
the existing methods in general scenarios, yet continues to
work well when occlusion occurs, which is ubiquitous in
practice. The code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/Gengzigang/PCT.

312
638

...

513
456

431

871

27

129

933

42

...

Figure 1. Our approach represents a pose by M discrete tokens
which are indices to the codebook entries (top). Each token is
learned to represent a sub-structure. In each row, we show that if
we change the state of one token to different values, it consistently
changes the same sub-structure highlighted by orange. The black
poses are before changing (bottom).

other. As a result, they may get unrealistic estimates when
occlusion occurs as shown in Figure 2 (top). However, it
is interesting to note that humans can easily predict intact
poses from only the visible joints and the visual features.
This is probably because people are able to use context to
aid recognition as evidenced by some psychology experiments [5, 58]. Some works attempt to introduce a tree or
graph structure [2, 21, 65, 85] to model joint dependency.
However, the hand-designed rules usually make unrealistic
assumptions on the relationships, making them incapable to
represent complex patterns.
In this work, we hope to learn the dependency between
the joints earlier in the representation stage without any assumptions. Our initial idea is to learn a set of prototype
poses that are realistic, and represent every pose by the nearest prototype. While it can guarantee that all poses are realistic, it requires a large number of prototypes to reduce the
quantization error to a reasonable level which is computa-

660

