This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Auto-CARD: Efficient and Robust Codec Avatar Driving
for Real-time Mobile Telepresence
Yonggan Fu1 *, Yuecheng Li2 , Chenghui Li2 , Jason Saragih2 ,
Peizhao Zhang2 , Xiaoliang Dai2 , Yingyan (Celine) Lin1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Meta
{yfu314, celine.lin}@gatech.edu {yuecheng.li, leo.li, jsaragih, stzpz, xiaoliangdai}@meta.com

Abstract
Real-time and robust photorealistic avatars for telepresence in AR/VR have been highly desired for enabling immersive photorealistic telepresence. However, there still
exists one key bottleneck: the considerable computational
expense needed to accurately infer facial expressions captured from headset-mounted cameras with a quality level that
can match the realism of the avatar’s human appearance.
To this end, we propose a framework called Auto-CARD,
which for the first time enables real-time and robust driving
of Codec Avatars when exclusively using merely on-device
computing resources. This is achieved by minimizing two
sources of redundancy. First, we develop a dedicated neural
architecture search technique called AVE-NAS for avatar
encoding in AR/VR, which explicitly boosts both the searched
architectures’ robustness in the presence of extreme facial expressions and hardware friendliness on fast evolving AR/VR
headsets. Second, we leverage the temporal redundancy in
consecutively captured images during continuous rendering
and develop a mechanism dubbed LATEX to skip the computation of redundant frames. Specifically, we first identify
an opportunity from the linearity of the latent space derived
by the avatar decoder and then propose to perform adaptive
latent extrapolation for redundant frames. For evaluation,
we demonstrate the efficacy of our Auto-CARD framework in
real-time Codec Avatar driving settings, where we achieve a
5.05× speed-up on Meta Quest 2 while maintaining a comparable or even better animation quality than state-of-the-art
avatar encoder designs.

1. Introduction
Enabling immersive real-time experiences has been the
key factor in driving the advances of Augmented- and
Virtual-Reality (AR/VR) platforms in recent years. Photorealistic telepresence [29, 31, 37, 46] is emerging as a technology for enabling remote interactions in AR/VR that aims
* Work done during an internship at Meta.

to impart a compelling sense of co-location among participants in a shared virtual space. One state-of-the-art (SOTA)
approach, coined Codec Avatars [29], is comprised of two
components: (1) an encoder, which estimates a participant’s
behavior from sensors mounted on an AR/VR headset, and
(2) a decoder, which re-renders the aforementioned behavior
to the other parties’ headset display using an avatar representation. Both the SOTA encoder and decoder designs
have leveraged the expressive power of deep neural networks
(DNNs) to enable the precise estimation of human behaviors
as well as the high fidelity of rendering, which are critical
for immersive photorealistic telepresence.
Despite its big promise, one of the main challenges posed
by photorealistic telepresence is the competing requirements
between ergonomics and computing resources. On the one
hand, power, form factor, and other comfort factors strictly
limit the available computing resources on an AR/VR headset device. On the other hand, the DNNs used in SOTA
Codec Avatars are computationally expensive and require
continuous execution during a telepresence call. It is worth
noting that the limited computing resource on an AR/VR
device must additionally be shared with other core AR/VR
workloads, such as the SLAM-based tracking service, controller tracking, hand tracking, and environment rendering.
Therefore, it is highly desirable and imperative to minimize
the computation overhead and resource utilization of Codec
Avatars, while not hurting their precise estimation of human behaviors and rendering fidelity. This has become a
bottleneck limiting their practical and broad adoption.
To close the above gap towards real-time Codec Avatars
on AR/VR devices, existing work has focused on reducing the computational cost of the decoder. For example,
PiCA [31] leverages the compute characteristics of modern
DSP processors to enable simultaneously rendering up to
five avatars on a Meta Quest 2 headset [31]. On the other
hand, efficient encoder designs that can fit the AR/VR computing envelope have been less explored, with most existing
works assuming off-device computing scenarios. Specifically, SOTA methods for the encoder such as [37, 46] are
prohibitively heavy with ∼3 Giga-floating-point-operations

21036

