This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frame Flexible Network
Yitian Zhang1 Yue Bai1 Chang Liu1 Huan Wang1 Sheng Li2 Yun Fu1
1
Northeastern University 2 University of Virginia
{zhang.yitian, bai.yue, liu.chang6, wang.huan}@northeastern.edu

Existing video recognition algorithms always conduct
different training pipelines for inputs with different frame
numbers, which requires repetitive training operations and
multiplying storage costs. If we evaluate the model using other frames which are not used in training, we observe the performance will drop significantly (see Fig. 1),
which is summarized as Temporal Frequency Deviation
phenomenon. To fix this issue, we propose a general framework, named Frame Flexible Network (FFN), which not
only enables the model to be evaluated at different frames to
adjust its computation, but also reduces the memory costs of
storing multiple models significantly. Concretely, FFN integrates several sets of training sequences, involves MultiFrequency Alignment (MFAL) to learn temporal frequency
invariant representations, and leverages Multi-Frequency
Adaptation (MFAD) to further strengthen the representation abilities. Comprehensive empirical validations using various architectures and popular benchmarks solidly
demonstrate the effectiveness and generalization of FFN
(e.g., 7.08/5.15/2.17% performance gain at Frame 4/8/16
on Something-Something V1 dataset over Uniformer). Code
is available at https://github.com/BeSpontaneous/FFN.

1. Introduction
The growing number of online videos boosts the research
on video recognition, laying a solid foundation for deep
learning which requires massive data. Compared with image classification, video recognition methods need a series
of frames to represent the video which scales the computation. Thus, the efficiency of video recognition methods
has always been an essential factor in evaluating these approaches. One existing direction to explore efficiency is
designing lightweight networks [9, 40] which are hardware
friendly. Even if they increase the efficiency with an acceptable performance trade-off, these methods cannot make further customized adjustments to meet the dynamic-changing
resource constraint in real scenarios. In community, there

Acc (%)

Abstract

55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15

TSM
TSM_ST
SlowFast
SlowFast_ST
Uniformer
Uniformer_ST

5

25 45 65 85

GFLOPs

(a) Temporal Frequency Deviation
phenomenon exists in various video
recognition architectures.

Acc (%)

shengli@virginia.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

45
40
35
30
25
20
15

TSM(R18)
TSM(R18)_ST
TSM(R50)
TSM(R50)_ST
TSM(R101)
TSM(R101)_ST

5

35

65

95

GFLOPs

125

(b) Temporal Frequency Deviation phenomenon exists in different
depths of deep networks.

Figure 1. Temporal Frequency Deviation phenomenon widely
exists in video recognition. All methods are trained with high
frame number and evaluated at other frames to compare with Separated Training (ST) which individually trains the model at different frames on Something-Something V1 dataset.

are two lines of research being proposed to resolve this issue. The first one is to design networks that can execute at
various depths [10] or widths [37] to adjust the computation from the model perspective. The other line of research
considers modifying the resolutions of input data [15,34] to
accommodate the cost from the data aspect. However, these
methods are carefully designed for 2D CNNs, which may
hinder their applications on video recognition where 3D
CNNs and Transformer methods are crucial components.
Different from image-related tasks, we need to sample
multiple frames to represent the video, and the computational costs will grow proportionally to the number of sampled frames. Concretely, standard protocol trains the same
network with different frames separately to obtain multiple models with different performances and computations.
This brings challenges to applying these networks on edge
devices as the parameters will be multiplied if we store all
models, and downloading and offloading models to switch
them will cost non-negligible time. Moreover, the same
video may be sampled at various temporal rates on different platforms, employing a single network that is trained at
a certain frame number for inference cannot resist the variance of frame numbers in real scenarios.

10504

