This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End 3D Dense Captioning with Vote2Cap-DETR
Sijin Chen1 *
1

Hongyuan Zhu2

Xin Chen3

Yinjie Lei4

Gang Yu3

Tao Chen1†

Fudan University 2 Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
3
Tencent PCG 4 Sichuan University
https://github.com/ch3cook-fdu/Vote2Cap-DETR

Abstract
3D dense captioning aims to generate multiple captions localized with their associated object regions. Existing methods follow a sophisticated “detect-then-describe”
pipeline equipped with numerous hand-crafted components.
However, these hand-crafted components would yield suboptimal performance given cluttered object spatial and
class distributions among different scenes. In this paper, we propose a simple-yet-effective transformer framework Vote2Cap-DETR based on recent popular DEtection
TRansformer (DETR). Compared with prior arts, our
framework has several appealing advantages: 1) Without resorting to numerous hand-crafted components, our
method is based on a full transformer encoder-decoder architecture with a learnable vote query driven object decoder, and a caption decoder that produces the dense captions in a set-prediction manner. 2) In contrast to the twostage scheme, our method can perform detection and captioning in one-stage. 3) Without bells and whistles, extensive experiments on two commonly used datasets, ScanRefer and Nr3D, demonstrate that our Vote2Cap-DETR surpasses current state-of-the-arts by 11.13% and 7.11% in
CIDEr@0.5IoU, respectively. Codes will be released soon.

1. Introduction
In recent years, works on 3D learning has grown dramatically for various applications [10, 11, 21, 41, 42]. Among
them, 3D dense captioning [7, 13] requires a system to localize all the objects in a 3D scene and generate descriptive sentences for each object. This problem is challenging,
given 1) the sparsity of point clouds and 2) the cluttered
distribution of objects.
3D dense captioning can be divided into two tasks, object
detection, and object caption generation. Scan2Cap [13],
MORE [20], and SpaCap3D [39] propose well-designed re* Part of this work was accomplished under supervison by Dr.
Hongyuan Zhu from A*STAR, Singapore.
† Corresponding author.

Two-stage methods
Post
Processing

Feature
Encoding

Object
Detection

Relation
Modelling

Caption
Generation

The rolling office chair. The chair
is next to the square desk.
This is a gray chair. It is to the
right of a file cabinet.
⋮

Vote2Cap-DETR
Transformer
Feature
Encoding

Detection
Head

Decoder
Caption
Head

Vote Query

The rolling office chair. The chair
is next to the square desk.
This is a gray chair. It is to the
right of a file cabinet.
⋮

Figure 1. Illustration of existing two-stage 3D dense captioning
method (upper) and our Vote2Cap-DETR (bottom). Existing
methods adopt a two-stage pipeline that heavily depends on a detector’s output. Therefore, we propose a transformer-based onestage model, Vote2Cap-DETR, that frames 3D dense captioning
as a set prediction problem.

lation reasoning modules to model relations among object
proposals efﬁciently. [48] introduces contextual information
from two branches to improve the caption. 3DJCG [4] and
D3Net [7] study the correlation between 3D visual grounding and 3D dense captioning and point out that these two
tasks promote each other. Additionally, χ-Trans2Cap [43]
discusses how to transfer knowledge from additional 2d information to boost 3d dense captioning.
Among existing methods, they all adopt a two-stage
“detect-then-describe” pipeline [4, 7, 13, 20, 39, 48] (Figure 1). This pipeline ﬁrst generates a set of object proposals, then decodes each object by a caption generator
with an explicit reasoning procedure. Though these methods have achieved remarkable performance, the “detectthen-describe” pipeline suffers from the following issues:
1) Because of the serial and explicit reasoning, the captioning performance highly depends on the object detection
performance, which limits the mutual promotion of detection and captioning. 2) The heavy reliance on hand-crafted
components, e.g., radii, 3D operators, the deﬁnition of pro-

11124

