This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

REVEAL: Retrieval-Augmented Visual-Language Pre-Training with
Multi-Source Multimodal Knowledge Memory
Ziniu Hu1 *, Ahmet Iscen2 , Chen Sun2 , Zirui Wang2 , Kai-Wei Chang1 , Yizhou Sun1
Cordelia Schmid2 , David A. Ross2 , Alireza Fathi2
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Google Research

Figure 1. We augment a visual-language model with the ability to retrieve multiple knowledge entries from a diverse set of knowledge
sources, which helps generation. Both retriever and generator are trained jointly, end-to-end, by optimizing a language modeling objective.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end RetrievalAugmented Visual Language Model (REV EAL) that learns
to encode world knowledge into a large-scale memory, and
to retrieve from it to answer knowledge-intensive queries.
REV EAL consists of four key components: the memory, the
encoder, the retriever and the generator. The large-scale
memory encodes various sources of multimodal world knowledge (e.g. image-text pairs, question answering pairs, knowledge graph triplets, etc.) via a unified encoder. The retriever
finds the most relevant knowledge entries in the memory, and
the generator fuses the retrieved knowledge with the input
query to produce the output. A key novelty in our approach
is that the memory, encoder, retriever and generator are all
pre-trained end-to-end on a massive amount of data. Furthermore, our approach can use a diverse set of multimodal
knowledge sources, which is shown to result in significant
gains. We show that REV EAL achieves state-of-the-art results on visual question answering and image captioning.
The project page of this work is reveal.github.io.

1. Introduction
Recent large-scale models such as T5 [33], GPT-3 [4],
PaLM [9], CoCa [49], Flamingo [2], BEIT-3 [43] and
* This work was done when Ziniu was an intern at Google.

PaLI [7] have demonstrated the ability to store substantial
amounts of world knowledge, when scaled to tens of billions
of parameters and trained on vast text and image corpora.
These models achieve state-of-the-art results in downstream
tasks such as image captioning, visual question answering
and open vocabulary recognition. Yet, these models have
a number of drawbacks: (i) they require massive scale, of
parameters, data and computation, and (ii) they need to be
re-trained every time the world knowledge is updated.
To address these issues, we adopt a different approach.
Instead of statically compiling world knowledge into model
weights, we transform the knowledge into a key-value memory through neural representation learning. Our model learns
to utilize the memory for answering knowledge-intensive
queries. By decoupling the knowledge memorization from
reasoning, we enable our model to leverage various external
sources of knowledge (e.g., Wikipedia passages and images [37], the WikiData knowledge graph [40], Web imagetext pairs [5] and visual question answering data [12]). This
enables the model parameters to focus on understanding the
query and conducting reasoning, rather than being dedicated
to memorization.
Retrieval-augmented models have attracted a fair amount
of attention in the fields of NLP [14, 18] and computer vision [13,25]. Typically, these models often use a pre-existing
single-modality backbone to encode and retrieve information from the knowledge corpus. Such approaches do not
leverage all available modalities in the query and knowl-

23369

