This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transforming Radiance Field with Lipschitz Network for
Photorealistic 3D Scene Stylization
Zicheng Zhang1 Yinglu Liu2 Congying Han1 * Yingwei Pan3 Tiande Guo1 Ting Yao3
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 JD AI Research 3 HiDream.ai Inc.
zhangzicheng19@mails.ucas.ac.cn
panyw.ustc@gmail.com

tdguo@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D scene representation and novel
view synthesis have witnessed the rise of Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs). Nevertheless, it is not trivial to exploit
NeRF for the photorealistic 3D scene stylization task, which
aims to generate visually consistent and photorealistic stylized scenes from novel views. Simply coupling NeRF with
photorealistic style transfer (PST) will result in cross-view
inconsistency and degradation of stylized view syntheses.
Through a thorough analysis, we demonstrate that this nontrivial task can be simplified in a new light: When transforming the appearance representation of a pre-trained
NeRF with Lipschitz mapping, the consistency and photorealism across source views will be seamlessly encoded
into the syntheses. That motivates us to build a concise and
flexible learning framework namely LipRF, which upgrades
arbitrary 2D PST methods with Lipschitz mapping tailored
for the 3D scene. Technically, LipRF first pre-trains a radiance field to reconstruct the 3D scene, and then emulates
the style on each view by 2D PST as the prior to learn a Lipschitz network to stylize the pre-trained appearance. In view
of that Lipschitz condition highly impacts the expressivity of
the neural network, we devise an adaptive regularization to
balance the reconstruction and stylization. A gradual gradient aggregation strategy is further introduced to optimize
LipRF in a cost-efficient manner. We conduct extensive experiments to show the high quality and robust performance
of LipRF on both photorealistic 3D stylization and object
appearance editing.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic style transfer (PST) [52] is one of the important tasks for visual content creation, which aims to automatically apply the color style of a reference image to an* Corresponding author

liuyinglu1@jd.com

hancy@ucas.ac.cn

tingyao.ustc@gmail.com

other input (e.g., image [38] or video [65]). In this task,
the stylized result is required to look like a camera shot
and preserve the input structure (e.g., edges and regions).
Benefiting from the launch of deep learning, a series of sophisticated deep PST methods [19, 30, 38, 59, 65] have been
developed for practical usage. Recent progress in 3D scene
representation has featured Neural Radiance Field [43, 67]
(NeRF) with efficient training and high-quality view synthesis. This inspires us to go one step further to explore
a more challenging task of photorealistic 3D scene stylization, which is to generate visually consistent and photorealistic stylized syntheses from arbitrary views. Such a
task enables an automatic modification of 3D scene appearance with different lighting, time of day, weather, or other
effects, thereby enhancing user experience and stimulating
emotions for virtual reality [57].
Nevertheless, it is not trivial to build an effective framework for photorealistic 3D scene stylization. The difficulty mainly originates from the fact that there is no valid
photorealistic style loss tailored for training NeRF. In general, the image-based PST is commonly tackled via either
the neural style transfer [11] combined with complicated
post-processing [30, 38, 41], or particular network structures [29, 61, 65]. However, none of them can be directly
applied to the learning of NeRF. As shown in Figure 1, simply employing the state-of-the-art 2D PST on each view
might result in noise, disharmony and even inconsistency
across views, since the PST methods rely on the size or object masks of the inputs. Such downsides will be further
amplified after reconstructing the 3D scene with NeRF.
To alleviate these limitations, we start with a basic understanding of this task: Though preserving the photorealism and consistency seems to be different in the context of
2D images, they do have the same essence when moving to
3D volume rendering [40]. From this standpoint, the task
is simplified as a problem to regulate the volume rendering
variance of the radiance field before and after stylization.
According to the studies of color mapping [48,51,52], some

20712

