This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Advancing Visual Grounding with Scene Knowledge: Benchmark and Method
Yibing Song4,5
Xiang Wan3
Guanbin Li2†
Ruifei Zhang2 *
Zhihong Chen1,2,3 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Sun Yat-sen University
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 4 Tencent AI Lab 5 AI3 Institute, Fudan University
zhihongchen@link.cuhk.edu.cn
yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

zhangrf23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

wanxiang@sribd.com

liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual grounding (VG) aims to establish fine-grained
alignment between vision and language. Ideally, it can be
a testbed for vision-and-language models to evaluate their
understanding of the images and texts and their reasoning abilities over their joint space. However, most existing
VG datasets are constructed using simple description texts,
which do not require sufficient reasoning over the images
and texts. This has been demonstrated in a recent study [27],
where a simple LSTM-based text encoder without pretraining can achieve state-of-the-art performance on mainstream
VG datasets. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a novel
benchmark of Scene Knowledge-guided Visual Grounding
(SK-VG), where the image content and referring expressions
are not sufficient to ground the target objects, forcing the
models to have a reasoning ability on the long-form scene
knowledge. To perform this task, we propose two approaches
to accept the triple-type input, where the former embeds
knowledge into the image features before the image-query
interaction; the latter leverages linguistic structure to assist
in computing the image-text matching. We conduct extensive experiments to analyze the above methods and show
that the proposed approaches achieve promising results but
still leave room for improvement, including performance
and interpretability. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/zhjohnchan/SK-VG.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding (VG), aiming to locate an object referred to by a description phrase/text in an image, has
emerged as a prominent attractive research direction. It can
be applied to various tasks (e.g., visual question answering
[4, 13, 38, 51] and vision-and-language navigation [1, 11, 35])
and also be treated as a proxy to evaluate machines for
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

The man Jake is celebrating Christmas
with his friends. Jake puts his left hand
on the glasses and holds a wine glass in
his right hand. His friend Alan is sitting
on his right in a suit. Carol, Jake's
another friend, stands on Jake's left
with a wine glass in his left hand,
grinning with white teeth.

Q1: The black glasses
(Traditional)
Q2: Jake’s wine glass
(SK-VG (Ours))
Image

Query

Scene Knowledge

Figure 1. An example from the proposed SK-VG dataset for scene
knowledge-guided visual grounding. The task requires a model to
reason over the (image, scene knowledge, query) triple to locate
the target object referred to by the query.

open-ended scene recognition. Typically, VG requires models to reason over vision and language and build connections through single-modal understanding and cross-modal
matching. Yet, current VG benchmarks (e.g., RefCOCO [47],
RefCOCO+ [47], RefCOCOg [29], ReferItGame [17], and
CLEVR-Ref+ [23]) can not serve as a good test bed to evaluate the reasoning ability since they only focus on simple
vision-language alignment. In addition to the simple nature
of constructed referring expressions, this can be reflected in
the recent state-of-the-art study [27], where they showed that
VG models are less affected by language modeling through
extensive empirical analyses.
In this paper, we believe that the intrinsic difficulty of VG
lies in the difference between perceptual representations of
images and cognitive representations of texts. Specifically, visual features are obtained through perceptual learning, which

15039

