This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Self-Supervised Learning on Diverse Pathology Datasets
Mingu Kang∗ Heon Song∗ Seonwook Park
Lunit Inc.

Donggeun Yoo

Sérgio Pereira

{jeffkang, heon.song, spark, dgyoo, sergio}@lunit.io

Abs. perf. diff.

Linear Evaluation

Label-Efficiency

10

4

5

2

0
5

BACH

CRC

PatchCamelyon
Datasets
MoCo v2

MHIST
SwAV

Barlow Twins

CoNSeP

0

10%

Data Fraction

30%

DINO

Figure 1. Self-supervised pre-training on pathology data improves performance on pathology downstream tasks compared to
ImageNet-supervised baselines. The 𝑦-axes show absolute differences in downstream task performance (Top-1 Acc. or mPQ Score). Linear
evaluation (left) is performed on 4 classification tasks (BACH, CRC, PatchCamelyon, and MHIST) and 1 nuclei instance segmentation task
(CoNSeP). Label-efficiency (right) is assessed by fine-tuning using small fractions of labeled data from the CoNSeP dataset.

Abstract
Computational pathology can lead to saving human lives,
but models are annotation hungry and pathology images are
notoriously expensive to annotate. Self-supervised learning
(SSL) has shown to be an effective method for utilizing unlabeled data, and its application to pathology could greatly
benefit its downstream tasks. Yet, there are no principled
studies that compare SSL methods and discuss how to adapt
them for pathology. To address this need, we execute the
largest-scale study of SSL pre-training on pathology image
data, to date. Our study is conducted using 4 representative
SSL methods on diverse downstream tasks. We establish that
large-scale domain-aligned pre-training in pathology consistently out-performs ImageNet pre-training in standard
SSL settings such as linear and fine-tuning evaluations, as
well as in low-label regimes. Moreover, we propose a set
of domain-specific techniques that we experimentally show
leads to a performance boost. Lastly, for the first time, we
apply SSL to the challenging task of nuclei instance segmentation and show large and consistent performance improvements. We release the pre-trained model weights1 .

1. Introduction
The computational analysis of microscopic images of human tissue – also known as computational pathology – has
emerged as an important topic of research, as its clinical
implementations can result in the saving of human lives
* The first two authors contributed equally.

1 https://lunit- io.github.io/research/publications/pathology_ssl

by improving cancer diagnosis [49] and treatment [42].
Deep Learning and Computer Vision methods in pathology allow for objectivity [15], large-scale analysis [20], and
triaging [5] but often require large amounts of annotated
data [52]. However, the annotation of pathology images requires specialists with many years of clinical residency [37],
resulting in scarce labeled public datasets and the need for
methods to train effectively on them.
When annotated data is scarce for a given Computer Vision task, one common and practical solution is to fine-tune
a model that was pre-trained in a supervised manner using the ImageNet dataset [19, 34]. This paradigm of transfer learning [34] was recently challenged by self-supervised
learning (SSL), which trains on large amounts of unlabeled
data only, yet out-performs supervised pre-training on ImageNet [8, 10, 26]. In the field of pathology, large unlabeled
datasets are abundant [4, 37, 38, 57] in contrast to the lack of
annotated datasets [52]. If we were to apply SSL effectively
to this huge amount of unlabeled data, downstream pathology tasks could benefit greatly even if they contain limited
amount of annotated training data. Naturally, we ask the
question: How well does self-supervised learning help in
improving the performance of pathology tasks?
ImageNet pre-trained weights are commonly used in
medical imaging and are known to be helpful in attaining
high task performance [30, 32, 43, 59]. Due to the difference between natural images and medical images, largescale domain-aligned pre-training has the potential to push
performance beyond ImageNet pre-training [39]. Accordingly, recent works show that SSL pre-training on pathol-

3344

