This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Keypoint-based Action Recognition Framework
via Structured Keypoint Pooling
Ryo Hachiuma*, Fumiaki Sato*, Taiki Sekii
Konica Minolta, Inc.
{rhachiuma,fumiaki.sato.jp,taiki.sekii}@gmail.com

Skeleton-based Action Recognition

𝑡

𝑡

𝑡

Skeleton-based Spatio-temporal Action Localization
Figure 1. Qualitative results of the proposed framework for the skeleton-based action recognition (top) and spatio-temporal localization
task (bottom). The input keypoints and the estimated action labels are visualized in the figure. We achieve state-of-the-art accuracy for the
recognition task while it runs ∼1800FPS on a single RTX 3080Ti GPU. In addition, the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art
weakly supervised spatio-temporal localization methods. See the website for the demo video.

Abstract
This paper simultaneously addresses three limitations
associated with conventional skeleton-based action recognition; skeleton detection and tracking errors, poor variety of the targeted actions, as well as person-wise and
frame-wise action recognition. A point cloud deep-learning
paradigm is introduced to the action recognition, and a unified framework along with a novel deep neural network architecture called Structured Keypoint Pooling is proposed.
The proposed method sparsely aggregates keypoint features
in a cascaded manner based on prior knowledge of the
data structure (which is inherent in skeletons), such as
the instances and frames to which each keypoint belongs,
and achieves robustness against input errors. Its less constrained and tracking-free architecture enables time-series
keypoints consisting of human skeletons and nonhuman object contours to be efficiently treated as an input 3D point
cloud and extends the variety of the targeted action. Furthermore, we propose a Pooling-Switching Trick inspired
by Structured Keypoint Pooling. This trick switches the
* Equal contribution.

pooling kernels between the training and inference phases
to detect person-wise and frame-wise actions in a weakly
supervised manner using only video-level action labels.
This trick enables our training scheme to naturally introduce novel data augmentation, which mixes multiple point
clouds extracted from different videos. In the experiments,
we comprehensively verify the effectiveness of the proposed method against the limitations, and the method outperforms state-of-the-art skeleton-based action recognition
and spatio-temporal action localization methods.

1. Introduction
Recognizing the actions of a person in a video plays an
essential role in various applications such as robotics [28,
41] and surveillance cameras [11, 25, 49]. The approach
to the action recognition task differs depending on whether
leveraging appearance information in a video or human
skeletons1 detected in the video. The former appearancebased approaches [2,7,11,18,20–23,25,32,45,51,52,56,58]
directly use video as an input to deep neural networks
1 Joints or keypoints specific to a person are referred to as skeletons for
clarity, although some are not actual human joints.

22962

