This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Complementary Intrinsics from Neural Radiance Fields and CNNs
for Outdoor Scene Relighting
Siqi Yang1,2,3 # Xuanning Cui1,2,4 # Yongjie Zhu5 Jiajun Tang1,2 Si Li5 Zhaofei Yu3 Boxin Shi1,2,3,4 ∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{yousiki, cxn, jiajun.tang, yuzf12, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn
yongjie.zhu.96@gmail.com lisi@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Relighting an outdoor scene is challenging due to the
diverse illuminations and salient cast shadows. Intrinsic
image decomposition on outdoor photo collections could
partly solve this problem by weakly supervised labels with
albedo and normal consistency from multi-view stereo. With
neural radiance fields (NeRF), editing the appearance code
could produce more realistic results without interpreting
the outdoor scene image formation explicitly. This paper
proposes to complement the intrinsic estimation from volume rendering using NeRF and from inversing the photometric image formation model using convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). The former produces richer and more
reliable pseudo labels (cast shadows and sky appearances
in addition to albedo and normal) for training the latter to
predict interpretable and editable lighting parameters via a
single-image prediction pipeline. We demonstrate the advantages of our method for both intrinsic image decomposition and relighting for various real outdoor scenes.

1. Introduction
The same landmark may appear with drastically varying appearances in different photos, even if they are taken
from the same viewpoint with the same camera parameters,
e.g., the Taj Mahal may look golden or white at sunset or
in the afternoon1 . For a set of photos containing the same
landmark captured in different seasons and times, their “dynamic” lighting changes (compared with the relatively “stable” geometry and reflectance) play a vital role in explaining such great appearance variations. If we can independently manipulate lighting in these photos, the relighted
outdoor scenes could substantially improve experiences for
taking digital photographs.
Outdoor scene relighting could be realized by learning a
style transfer procedure [1, 5]. Such a process only requires
#

Contributed equally to this work as first authors
Corresponding author
1 Changing colours of Taj Mahal: agratajcitytour.com

∗

a single reference image for editing a target image, but it apparently retouches the image to “look like” each other, without explicitly modeling the lighting changes. Intrinsic image decomposition, which inversely decomposes the photometric image formation model, has been extended to work
with outdoor photo collections [32–34]. The common geometry/reflectance (for the whole collection) and distinctive
lighting components (for each image) are estimated using
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), so that relighting could be achieved by keeping the former while editing
the latter in a physics-aware manner. These methods explicitly conduct computationally expensive multi-view reconstruction of the scene at the training stage. The weakly
supervised constraints built upon albedo and normal consistency via multi-view correspondence cannot support the
handling of cast shadows [33] or still struggle with strong
cast shadows [32].
Recently, the emerging of neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [23] has not only boosted the performance of novel
view synthesis with significantly better quality for outdoor
scene photo collections [22], but has also been demonstrated to be capable of transferring the lighting appearance
across the image set using hallucination [4] or a parametric
lighting model [28]. However, these existing NeRF methods in the outdoor scene either miss the explanation to some
important intrinsics for relighting such as cast shadows (except for [28]) or ignore distinctive characteristics between
the non-sky and sky regions, in a physically interpretable
manner.
In this paper, we hope to conduct outdoor scene relighting by mutually complementing intrinsics estimated
from NeRF and CNN and taking advantages of the comprehensive representation power of NeRF and physics interpretability of CNN-based single-image decomposition,
in a single-image inference pipeline as shown in Figure 1.
We formulate the color formation of a pixel as a combination of objects and the sky by tracing rays from camera origins to the furthest plane and accumulating the voxel intrin-

16600

