This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OSRT: Omnidirectional Image Super-Resolution with
Distortion-aware Transformer

Fanghua Yu1∗

Xintao Wang2 * Mingdeng Cao2,3 Gen Li4 Ying Shan2 Chao Dong1,5†
1
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
ARC, Tencent PCG 3 The University of Tokyo
4
Platform Technologies, Tencent Online Video 5 Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
fanghuayu96@gmail.com, xintaowang@tencent.com, cmd@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{genli, yingsshan}@tencent.com, chao.dong@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Omnidirectional images (ODIs) have obtained lots of research interest for immersive experiences. Although ODIs
require extremely high resolution to capture details of the
entire scene, the resolutions of most ODIs are insufﬁcient.
Previous methods attempt to solve this issue by image
super-resolution (SR) on equirectangular projection (ERP)
images. However, they omit geometric properties of ERP in
the degradation process, and their models can hardly generalize to real ERP images. In this paper, we propose Fisheye
downsampling, which mimics the real-world imaging process and synthesizes more realistic low-resolution samples.
Then we design a distortion-aware Transformer (OSRT) to
modulate ERP distortions continuously and self-adaptively.
Without a cumbersome process, OSRT outperforms previous methods by about 0.2dB on PSNR. Moreover, we propose a convenient data augmentation strategy, which synthesizes pseudo ERP images from plain images. This simple
strategy can alleviate the over-ﬁtting problem of large networks and signiﬁcantly boost the performance of ODISR.
Extensive experiments have demonstrated the state-of-theart performance of our OSRT.

Unseen LR

LAU-Net [12] w/o Fisheye

OSRT w/o Fisheye

OSRT w/ Fisheye

Figure 1. Visual comparisons of ×8 SR results on LR images1 with
unknown degradations. Fisheye denotes that the downsampling
process in training stages is under Fisheye images.

As most of the ODIs are stored and transmitted in the
equirectangular projection (ERP) type, the SR process is
usually performed on the ERP images. To generate high/low-resolution training pairs, existing ODISR methods
[12, 15, 28, 39, 40] directly apply uniform bicubic downsampling on the original ERP images (called ERP downsampling), which is identical to general image SR settings
[24, 43]. While omitting geometric properties of ERP in
the degradation process, their models can hardly generalize to real ERP images. We can observe missing structures and blur textures in Fig. 1. Therefore, we need a
more appropriate degradation model before studying SR algorithms. In practice, ODIs are acquired by the ﬁsheye
lens and stored in ERP. Given that the low-resolution issue in real-world scenarios is caused by insufﬁcient sensor
precision and density, the downsampling process should be
applied to original-formatted images before converting into
other storage types. Thus, to be conformed with real-world
imaging processes, we propose to apply uniform bicubic

1. Introduction
In pursuit of the realistic visual experience, omnidirectional images (ODIs), also known as 360◦ images or
panoramic images, have obtained lots of research interest in
the computer vision community. In reality, we usually view
ODIs with a narrow ﬁeld-of-view (FOV), e.g., viewing in a
headset. To capture details of the entire scene, ODIs require
extremely high resolution, e.g., 4K × 8K [1]. However, due
to the high industrial cost of camera sensors with high precision, the resolutions of most ODIs are insufﬁcient.
Recently, some attempts have been made to solve this
problem by image super-resolution (SR) [12, 15, 28, 39, 40].
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author (e-mail: chao.dong@siat.ac.cn)

1 Photoed by Peter Leth on Flickr, with CC license.

13283

