This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple Baseline for Video Restoration with Grouped Spatial-temporal Shift
Dasong Li1

1

CUHK MMLab

Xiaoyu Shi1
Xiaogang Wang1,4
2

Yi Zhang1
Ka Chun Cheung2
Simon See2
Hongwei Qin3
Hongsheng Li1,4

NVIDIA AI Technology Center

3

SenseTime Research

4

CPII under InnoHK

{dasongli@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Video restoration, which aims to restore clear frames
from degraded videos, has numerous important applications. The key to video restoration depends on utilizing
inter-frame information. However, existing deep learning methods often rely on complicated network architectures, such as optical flow estimation, deformable convolution, and cross-frame self-attention layers, resulting in
high computational costs. In this study, we propose a simple yet effective framework for video restoration. Our approach is based on grouped spatial-temporal shift, which
is a lightweight and straightforward technique that can
implicitly capture inter-frame correspondences for multiframe aggregation. By introducing grouped spatial shift, we
attain expansive effective receptive fields. Combined with
basic 2D convolution, this simple framework can effectively
aggregate inter-frame information. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our framework outperforms the previous
state-of-the-art method, while using less than a quarter of
its computational cost, on both video deblurring and video
denoising tasks. These results indicate the potential for our
approach to significantly reduce computational overhead
while maintaining high-quality results. Code is avaliable at
https://github.com/dasongli1/Shift-Net.

1. Introduction
The popularity of capturing videos using handheld devices continues to surge. However, these videos often suffer
from various types of degradation, including image noise
due to low-cost sensors and severe blurs resulting from camera shake or object movement. Consequently, video restoration has garnered significant attention in recent years.
The keys of video restoration methods lie in designing
components to realize alignment across frames. While several methods [7, 38, 39, 53, 60] employ convolutional networks for multi-frame fusion without explicit alignment,

Figure 1. Video deblurring on GoPro dataset [40]. Our models
have fewer parameters (disk sizes) and occupy the top-left corner,
indicating superior performances (PSNR on y-axis) with less computational cost (FLOPS on x-axis).

their performance tends to be suboptimal. Most methods
rely on explicit alignment to establish temporal correspondences, using techniques such as optical flow [46, 61]
or deformable convolution [11, 69]. However, these approaches often necessitate either complex or computationally expensive network architectures to achieve large receptive fields, and they may fail in scenarios involving large
displacements [27], frame noise [8, 63], and blurry regions
[7, 48]. Recently, transformer [12, 15, 34] becomes promising alternatives for attaining long-range receptive fields. A
video restoration transformer (VRT) [32] is developed to
model long-range dependency, but its large number of selfattention layers make it computationally demanding. Inspired by the success of the Swin transformer [34], large
kernel convolutions [14, 35] emerge as a direct solution to
obtain large effective receptive fields. However, extremely
large kernels (e.g. kernel size > 13×13) does not necessarily guarantee improved performance. (shown in 5).
In this study, we propose a simple, yet effective spatialtemporal shift block to achieve large effective receptive field
for temporal correspondence. We introduce a Group ShiftNet, which incorporates the proposed spatial-temporal shift

9822

