This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Null-text Inversion for Editing Real Images using Guided Diffusion Models
Ron Mokady* 1,2 , Amir Hertz* 1,2 , Kfir Aberman1 , Yael Pritch1 , and Daniel Cohen-Or† 1,2
1
Google Research
2
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
Input Image

DDIM Inversion

NULL-text Inversion

Prompt-to-Prompt image editing

Input caption: “Zoom photo of flowers.”

“...origami flowers...”

flowers

Input caption: “A cat sitting next to a mirror.”

“...silver cat sculpture...”

cat

cupcakes

“...wither flowers...”

tiger

“...sleeping cat...”

photo

sketch

“Watercolor drawing of...”

Figure 1. Null-text inversion for real image editing. Our method takes as input a real image (leftmost column) and an associated caption.
The image is inverted with a DDIM diffusion model to yield a diffusion trajectory (second column to the left). Once inverted, we use the
initial trajectory as a pivot for null-text optimization that accurately reconstructs the input image (third column to the left). Then, we can
edit the inverted image by modifying only the input caption using the editing technique of Prompt-to-Prompt [18] .

Abstract
Recent large-scale text-guided diffusion models provide
powerful image generation capabilities. Currently, a massive effort is given to enable the modification of these images using text only as means to offer intuitive and versatile
editing tools. To edit a real image using these state-of-theart tools, one must first invert the image with a meaningful text prompt into the pretrained model’s domain. In this
paper, we introduce an accurate inversion technique and
thus facilitate an intuitive text-based modification of the image. Our proposed inversion consists of two key novel components: (i) Pivotal inversion for diffusion models. While
current methods aim at mapping random noise samples to
a single input image, we use a single pivotal noise vector
for each timestamp and optimize around it. We demonstrate that a direct DDIM inversion is inadequate on its
own, but does provide a rather good anchor for our optimization. (ii) Null-text optimization, where we only modify the unconditional textual embedding that is used for
classifier-free guidance, rather than the input text embedding. This allows for keeping both the model weights and
the conditional embedding intact and hence enables applying prompt-based editing while avoiding the cumbersome
tuning of the model’s weights. Our null-text inversion,
based on the publicly available Stable Diffusion model, is
extensively evaluated on a variety of images and various

prompt editing, showing high-fidelity editing of real images.

1. Introduction
The progress in image synthesis using text-guided diffusion models has attracted much attention due to their exceptional realism and diversity. Large-scale models [29, 32, 34]
have ignited the imagination of multitudes of users, enabling image generation with unprecedented creative freedom. Naturally, this has initiated ongoing research efforts,
investigating how to harness these powerful models for image editing. Most recently, intuitive text-based editing was
demonstrated over synthesized images, allowing the user to
easily manipulate an image using text only [18].
However, text-guided editing of a real image with these
state-of-the-art tools requires inverting the given image and
textual prompt. That is, finding an initial noise vector that
produces the input image when fed with the prompt into
the diffusion process while preserving the editing capabilities of the model. The inversion process has recently drawn
considerable attention for GANs [7,44], but has not yet been
fully addressed for text-guided diffusion models. Although
an effective DDIM inversion [15,37] scheme was suggested
for unconditional diffusion models, it is found lacking for
text-guided diffusion models when classifier-free guidance
[20], which is necessary for meaningful editing, is applied.
* Equal contribution. Performed this work while working at Google.
† Performed this work while working at Google.

6038

