This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WeatherStream: Light Transport Automation of Single Image Deweathering
Howard Zhang1 * Yunhao Ba1 * Ethan Yang1 Varan Mehra1 Blake Gella1
Akira Suzuki1 Arnold Pfahnl1 Chethan Chinder Chandrappa1
Alex Wong2 Achuta Kadambi1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Yale University
{hwdz15508, yhba}@ucla.edu

(a) Snowy Input Image

alex.wong@yale.edu

(b) Model [57] trained on Previous Dataset

achuta@ee.ucla.edu

(c) Model [57] trained on Our Dataset

Figure 1. We propose a new dataset, publicly available, that makes all image-based deweathering models we tested perform better.
In contrast to previous datasets, this dataset is not manually collected, but uses algorithms based on “light transport” [29] to automatically
curate the dataset. Doing this algorithmically not only improves quality of the dataset, but also the scale. Download the dataset or test your
model on the challenge website: http://visual.ee.ucla.edu/wstream.htm/.

Abstract
Today single image deweathering is arguably more sensitive to the dataset type, rather than the model. We introduce WeatherStream, an automatic pipeline capturing all
real-world weather effects (rain, snow, and rain fog degradations), along with their clean image pairs. Previous stateof-the-art methods that have attempted the all-weather removal task train on synthetic pairs, and are thus limited by
the Sim2Real domain gap. Recent work has attempted to
manually collect time multiplexed pairs, but the use of human labor limits the scale of such a dataset. We introduce
a pipeline that uses the power of light-transport physics
and a model trained on a small, initial seed dataset to reject approximately 99.6% of unwanted scenes. The pipeline
is able to generalize to new scenes and degradations that
can, in turn, be used to train existing models just like
fully human-labeled data. Training on a dataset collected
through this procedure leads to significant improvements
on multiple existing weather removal methods on a carefully human-collected test set of real-world weather effects.
The dataset and code can be found in the following website:
http://visual.ee.ucla.edu/wstream.htm/.

1. Introduction
Single-image deweathering aims to remove image degradations caused by rain, fog, or snow. Single-image
* Equal contribution.

deweathering is a mainstay of modern computer vision, valued for the aesthetic appeal of removing weather degradations, as well as the ability to reuse pre-trained computer vision models, which work on clear weather conditions. Unfortunately, the field is dataset bottlenecked. State-of-theart techniques use deep networks, but suffer from a common
issue: the same scene cannot be observed at the same time,
with and without weather artifacts. Therefore, it is not possible to train deep networks on ideal pairs, a pair of clean
and degraded images of the same scene at the same time.
Previous work has attempted to solve the dataset bottleneck by using simulated pairs. A simulated pair is formed
by starting with a clean image of a scene and artificially
adding weather degradations. For example, one could carefully simulate the effect of raindrop streaks on a clean image. Unfortunately, simulating the diverse weather conditions that one can encounter is a very difficult path. Existing simulators for rain are difficult to generalize, and scaling
simulators for rain, fog, and snow poses a further challenge.
Nonetheless, simulated pairs have been the most common
approach, and researchers have accepted the generalization
errors that are encountered. Another emerging way to obtain pairs is to use psuedo-real pairs. A pseudo-real pair
is a pair of clean and degraded images that is formed without the use of simulators. One way of doing so is to use
a video-based deraining method to remove rain (which is
dynamic) from a scene [60]. This form of ground-truthing

13499

