This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Semantic Correspondence Networks
for Video Paragraph Grounding
Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3
Jianhuang Lai1,2,3
Chaolei Tan1
Zihang Lin1
Jian-Fang Hu1,2,3 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{tanchlei,linzh59}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
wszheng@ieee.org, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video Paragraph Grounding (VPG) is an essential yet
challenging task in vision-language understanding, which
aims to jointly localize multiple events from an untrimmed
video with a paragraph query description. One of the critical challenges in addressing this problem is to comprehend the complex semantic relations between visual and
textual modalities. Previous methods focus on modeling
the contextual information between the video and text from
a single-level perspective (i.e., the sentence level), ignoring rich visual-textual correspondence relations at different
semantic levels, e.g., the video-word and video-paragraph
correspondence. To this end, we propose a novel Hierarchical Semantic Correspondence Network (HSCNet), which
explores multi-level visual-textual correspondence by learning hierarchical semantic alignment and utilizes dense supervision by grounding diverse levels of queries. Specifically, we develop a hierarchical encoder that encodes the
multi-modal inputs into semantics-aligned representations
at different levels. To exploit the hierarchical semantic correspondence learned in the encoder for multi-level supervision, we further design a hierarchical decoder that progressively performs finer grounding for lower-level queries conditioned on higher-level semantics. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of HSCNet and our method
significantly outstrips the state-of-the-arts on two challenging benchmarks, i.e., ActivityNet-Captions and TACoS.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental problem that bridges the gap between
computer vision and natural language processing, Video
Language Grounding (VLG) aiming to localize the video
* Corresponding author

This baby … falls down. Then he gets back up and
grabs … again. Next he … hitting it really far.

Then he gets back up and grabs … again.

grabs

(a) Bottom-Up Hierarchy of
Linguistic Descriptions

Words

(b) Coarse-to-Fine Hierarchy of
Temporal Counterparts

Sentences

Paragraph

Figure 1. (a) The bottom-up hierarchy for linguistic semantics is
composed of textual words, sentences, and the paragraph. (b) The
coarse-to-fine hierarchy for temporal granularity consists of visual
counterparts for each level of linguistic query.

segments corresponding to given natural language queries,
has been drawing increasing attention from the community
in these years. Early works in the field of VLG mainly
focused on addressing Video Sentence Grounding (VSG)
[1, 8], whose goal is to localize the most relevant moment
with a single sentence query. Recently, Video Paragraph
Grounding (VPG) is introduced in [2]. It requires to jointly
localize multiple events via a paragraph query consisting of
several temporally ordered sentences. Rather than grounding each event independently, VPG needs to further exploit
the contextual information between the video and the textual paragraph, which helps to avoid ambiguity and achieve
more precise temporal localization of video events.

18973

