This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fantastic Breaks: A Dataset of Paired 3D Scans of Real-World Broken Objects
and Their Complete Counterparts
Nikolas Lamb, Cameron Palmer, Benjamin Molloy, Sean Banerjee, Natasha Kholgade Banerjee
Clarkson University, Potsdam NY, USA
{lambne, campalme, molloybr, sbanerje, nbanerje}@clarkson.edu

Abstract
Automated shape repair approaches currently lack access to datasets that describe real-world damaged geometry. We present Fantastic Breaks (and Where to Find Them:
https://terascale-all-sensing-researchstudio.github.io/FantasticBreaks), a dataset
containing scanned, waterproofed, and cleaned 3D meshes
for 150 broken objects, paired and geometrically aligned
with complete counterparts. Fantastic Breaks contains class
and material labels, proxy repair parts that join to broken
meshes to generate complete meshes, and manually annotated fracture boundaries. Through a detailed analysis of
fracture geometry, we reveal differences between Fantastic
Breaks and synthetic fracture datasets generated using geometric and physics-based methods. We show experimental
shape repair evaluation with Fantastic Breaks using multiple learning-based approaches pre-trained with synthetic
datasets and re-trained with subset of Fantastic Breaks.

1. Introduction
Damage to objects is an expected occurrence of everyday real-world usage. However, when damage occurs, objects that could be repaired are often thrown out. Additive manufacturing techniques are rapidly becoming accessible at the consumer level, with 3D printing technologies
available for materials such as plastics, metals, and even
ceramics and wood. Though current approaches for repair have been largely manual and restricted to niche areas such as cultural heritage restoration, a large body of
recent research has emerged on the automated reversal of
damage, including reassembly of fractured parts using 3D
scans [4, 9, 17, 19, 21–23, 38, 39, 51, 53, 54], or generation of
new repair parts when portions of the original object are irretrievably lost due to damage [18, 20, 28–30, 32, 35, 40, 47,
48]. Geometry-driven approaches based on shape matching [4,17,18,21–23,27,32,35,38–40,47,48] that are not usable for objects of unknown complete geometry have given

Figure 1. We present Fantastic Breaks, a dataset of 3D scans of
real-world broken objects (top) aligned to 3D scans of complete
counterparts (bottom). Objects span classes such as mugs, plates,
statues, jars, and bowls—household items prone to damage.

way to learning-driven approaches [9, 19, 20, 28–30, 51, 53]
aimed at generalization to repair at a large scale.
However, a principal challenge limiting understanding of
real-world damage and limiting application-focused evaluation of repair approaches is that datasets of real-world damage for consumer space objects are virtually non-existent.
Current learning-driven approaches for repair use datasets
where fracture-based damage is synthetically generated using geometric approaches such as Boolean operations with
primitives [9, 18, 28–31]. As they make assumptions about
the fracture process rather than using data-driven fracture
generation, the practical usability of such geometric methods for repairing real fractures is unknown. With Breaking
Bad, Sellán et al. [44] have taken a first step toward largescale fracture dataset generation. Breaking Bad consists of
3D shapes from Thingi10k [55] and PartNet [37] subjected
to physics-based damage using fracture modes [45]. By removing macro-scale shape assumptions embodied by geometric primitives, Breaking Bad is a promising step for research in shape assembly and repair. However, fractures in
Breaking Bad suffer from typical issues of resolution and
simulation time step size that underlie physics simulations.

4681

