This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SimpSON: Simplifying Photo Cleanup
with Single-Click Distracting Object Segmentation Network
Chuong Huynh1 * Yuqian Zhou2 Zhe Lin2 Connelly Barnes2
Eli Shechtman2 Sohrab Amirghodsi2 Abhinav Shrivastava1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Adobe Research
1

{chuonghm,abhinav}@cs.umd.edu

2

{yuqzhou,zlin,cobarnes,elishe,tamirgho}@adobe.com

Figure 1. We present a pipeline that enables the automatic segmentation of distractors in photos using a single click. With just one click,
our pipeline can detect and mask the distracting object in the photo and identify other similar objects that may also be causing distraction.
We can then use popular photo editing tools such as Adobe Photoshop’s ‘Content-Aware Fill’ to remove the visual distractions seamlessly.
Each triad shows the input images with a click, segmentation results, and photo editing performance.

Abstract
In photo editing, it is common practice to remove visual distractions to improve the overall image quality and
highlight the primary subject. However, manually selecting and removing these small and dense distracting regions
can be a laborious and time-consuming task. In this paper, we propose an interactive distractor selection method
that is optimized to achieve the task with just a single click.
Our method surpasses the precision and recall achieved
by the traditional method of running panoptic segmentation and then selecting the segments containing the clicks.
We also showcase how a transformer-based module can
be used to identify more distracting regions similar to the
user’s click position. Our experiments demonstrate that
the model can effectively and accurately segment unknown
distracting objects interactively and in groups. By significantly simplifying the photo cleaning and retouching process, our proposed model provides inspiration for exploring rare object segmentation and group selection with a
single click. More information can be found at https:
//github.com/hmchuong/SimpSON .

1. Introduction
Both professional photographers and casual users often
require efficient photo retouching to enhance the quality of
their images. One essential aspect of this task is the removal
of visual distractions from photos [7]. These distractions
can take various forms, such as unexpected pedestrians, objects that are cropped out of the photo’s edge, dirty spots
on the ground, repeated outlets on a wall, or even colorful
and blurry lens flare. These distractions can be challenging
to categorize due to their diverse appearance. As a result,
users tend to select and mask them entirely and use photo
editing software such as Photoshop to remove them.
Segmentation is necessary for photo cleaning tasks because rough masks may not be suitable for all scenarios.
Accurate masks are required in situations where distractors
are touching the main foreground subjects or where distractors are small but dense in the image. User-drawn rough
masks can result in the deletion of too much background
texture when connected. In other cases, users may have a
* This work was done during Chuong Huynh’s internship at Adobe

14518

