This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GEN: Pushing the Limits of Softmax-Based Out-of-Distribution Detection
Xixi Liu

Yaroslava Lochman

Christopher Zach

xixil@chalmers.se

lochman@chalmers.se

zach@chalmers.se

Chalmers University of Technology

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has been extensively studied in order to successfully deploy neural networks, in particular, for safety-critical applications. Moreover, performing OOD detection on large-scale datasets
is closer to reality, but is also more challenging. Several approaches need to either access the training data
for score design or expose models to outliers during training. Some post-hoc methods are able to avoid the aforementioned constraints, but are less competitive. In this
work, we propose Generalized ENtropy score (GEN), a
simple but effective entropy-based score function, which
can be applied to any pre-trained softmax-based classifier. Its performance is demonstrated on the large-scale
ImageNet-1k OOD detection benchmark. It consistently
improves the average AUROC across six commonly-used
CNN-based and visual transformer classifiers over a number of state-of-the-art post-hoc methods. The average AUROC improvement is at least 3.5%. Furthermore, we used
GEN on top of feature-based enhancing methods as well
as methods using training statistics to further improve the
OOD detection performance. The code is available at:
https://github.com/XixiLiu95/GEN.

1. Introduction
In order to make the usage of deep learning methods
in real-word applications safer, it is crucial to distinguish
whether an input at test time is a valid in-distribution (ID)
sample or a previously unseen out-of-distribution (OOD)
sample. Thus, a trained deep neural network (DNN) should
ideally know what it does not know [30]. This ability
is particularly important for high-stake applications in autonomous driving [8] and medical image analysis [35].
However, it is common for neural networks to make overconfident predictions even for OOD samples. A recent survey on OOD detection [45] identifies several scenarios requiring the detection of OOD samples, with covariate shift

GEN (Ours)+ReAct*
GEN (Ours)

90

OpenImage-O (AUROC)

Abstract

88
86
84
66

MSP ODIN
MaxLogit

68

Energy+ReAct*
Energy
70
72
74

ImageNet-O (AUROC)

76

78

Figure 1. Performance of Post-hoc OOD Detection Methods Applied to 6 Classifiers Trained on ImageNet-1K. Reported are AUROC values (%) averaged over the models. Methods marked with
light squares use information from logits / probabilities. Methods marked with dark crosses also use information from features.
ReAct∗ corresponds to performing extra feature clipping before
computing the score.

(change in the input distribution) and semantic shift (change
in the label distribution) being two important settings.
In this work, we focus on the semantic shift scenario,
meaning that we aim to detect inputs with semantic labels
not present in the training set. When solving the OOD detection problem, the idea is to design a scalar score function
of a data sample as an argument that assigns higher values
to true ID samples. The semantic shift scenario also allows
us to mainly focus on the predictive distribution as provided
by a DNN classifier to design such score function.
A number of existing works for OOD detection rely on
the predictive distribution [14, 28], but often a better OOD
detection performance can be achieved when also incorporating feature statistics for ID data [13, 24, 37, 38, 43].
These high-performing methods have practical constraints
that can be challenging to eliminate: some methods require
access to at least a portion of training data [13, 24, 37, 43]
while others need access to internal feature activations [38].
However, commercially deployed DNNs are often black-

23946

