This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StarCraftImage: A Dataset For Prototyping Spatial Reasoning
Methods For Multi-Agent Environments
Sean Kulinski†
Purdue University

Nicholas R. Waytowich
ARL‡

James Z. Hare
ARL‡

David I. Inouye†
Purdue University

Abstract
Spatial reasoning tasks in multi-agent environments such
as event prediction, agent type identification, or missing data imputation are important for multiple applications (e.g., autonomous surveillance over sensor networks
and subtasks for reinforcement learning (RL)). StarCraft
II game replays encode intelligent (and adversarial) multiagent behavior and could provide a testbed for these tasks;
however, extracting simple and standardized representations for prototyping these tasks is laborious and hinders
reproducibility. In contrast, MNIST and CIFAR10, despite
their extreme simplicity, have enabled rapid prototyping
and reproducibility of ML methods. Following the simplicity of these datasets, we construct a benchmark spatial reasoning dataset based on StarCraft II replays that exhibit
complex multi-agent behaviors, while still being as easy to
use as MNIST and CIFAR10. Specifically, we carefully summarize a window of 255 consecutive game states to create
3.6 million summary images from 60,000 replays, including all relevant metadata such as game outcome and player
races. We develop three formats of decreasing complexity:
Hyperspectral images that include one channel for every
unit type (similar to multispectral geospatial images), RGB
images that mimic CIFAR10, and grayscale images that
mimic MNIST. We show how this dataset can be used for
prototyping spatial reasoning methods. All datasets, code
for extraction, and code for dataset loading can be found at
https://starcraftdata.davidinouye.com/.

1. Introduction
Spatial tasks in multi-agent environments require reasoning over both agents’ positions and the environmental
context such as buildings, obstacles, or terrain features.
These complex spatial reasoning tasks have applications in
autonomous driving, autonomous surveillance over sensor
networks, or reinforcement learning (RL) as subtasks of the
‡ DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
† Corresponding Authors:

Sean Kulinski skulinsk@purdue.edu and
David I. Inouye dinouye@purdue.edu.

Figure 1. Two samples (one per row) showing (Blue box/left) our
64 x 64 StarCraftHyper dataset which contains all unit IDs and
corresponding values for both players (color for unit IDs denotes
categorical unit ids), (Green box/middle) StarCraftCIFAR10 (32 x
32) which is easy to interpret where blue is player 1, red is player
2, and green are neutral units such as terrain or resources, and
(Orange box/right) StarCraftMNIST (28 x 28) which are grayscale
images further simplified to show player 1 as light-gray, player 2
as dark-gray, and neutral as medium-level shades of gray.

RL agent. For example, to predict a car collision, an autonomous driving system needs to reason about other cars,
road conditions, road signs, and buildings. For autonomous
surveillance over sensor networks, the system would need
to reason over the positions of objects, buildings, and other
agents to determine if a new agent is normal or abnormal or
to impute missing sensor values. An RL system may want
to predict the cumulative or final reward or impute missing values given only an incomplete snapshot of the world
state, i.e., partial observability. Yet, collecting large realistic
datasets for these tasks is expensive and laborious.
Due to the challenge of collecting real-world data, practitioners have turned to (semi-)synthetic sources for creating large clean datasets of photo-realistic images or videos
[11, 12, 24, 40]. For example, [11] leveraged the Grand
Theft Auto V game engine to collect a synthetic video
dataset for pedestrian detection and tracking. [4] overlays
aerial images with crowd simulations to provide a crowd
density estimation dataset. Yet, despite near photo-realism,
these prior datasets focus on simple multi-agent environ-

22004

