This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accidental Light Probes
Hong-Xing Yu1

Samir Agarwala1

Charles Herrmann2

Jiajun Wu1
1

Richard Szeliski2

Noah Snavely2

Deqing Sun2
2

Stanford University

Google Research

Abstract
Recovering lighting in a scene from a single image is
a fundamental problem in computer vision. While a mirror ball light probe can capture omnidirectional lighting,
light probes are generally unavailable in everyday images.
In this work, we study recovering lighting from accidental
light probes (ALPs)—common, shiny objects like Coke cans,
which often accidentally appear in daily scenes. We propose
a physically-based approach to model ALPs and estimate
lighting from their appearances in single images. The main
idea is to model the appearance of ALPs by photogrammetrically principled shading and to invert this process via
differentiable rendering to recover incidental illumination.
We demonstrate that we can put an ALP into a scene to allow
high-fidelity lighting estimation. Our model can also recover
lighting for existing images that happen to contain an ALP* .
I’d rather be Shiny. — Tamatoa from Moana, 2016

1. Introduction
Traditionally, scene lighting has been captured through
the use of light probes, typically a chromium mirror ball;
their shape (perfect sphere) and material (perfect mirror)
allow for a perfect measurement of all light that intersects
the probe. Unfortunately, perfect light probes rarely appear
in everyday photos, and it is unusual for people to carry
them around to place in scenes. Fortunately, many everyday
objects share the desired properties of light probes: Coke
cans, rings, and thermos bottles are shiny (high reflectance)
and curved (have a variety of surface normals). These objects can reveal a significant amount of information about
the scene lighting, and can be seen as imperfect “accidental”
light probes (e.g., the Diet Pepsi in Figure 1). Unlike perfect
light probes, they can easily be found in casual photos or
acquired and placed in a scene. In this paper, we explore using such everyday, shiny, curved objects as Accidental Light
Probes (ALPs) to estimate lighting from a single image.
* Project website: https://kovenyu.com/ALP

Figure 1. (Left) From an image that has an accidental light probe
(a Diet Pepsi can), we insert a virtual object (a Diet Coke can)
with estimated lighting using the accidental light probe (Middle),
and using estimated lighting from a recent state-of-the-art lighting
estimation method [49] (Right). Note how our method better relights the inserted can to produce an appearance consistent with the
environment (e.g., the highlight reflection and overall intensity).

In general, recovering scene illumination from a single
view is fundamental for many computer vision applications
such as virtual object insertion [9], relighting [46], and photorealistic data augmentation [51]. Yet, it remains an open
problem primarily due to its highly ill-posed nature. Images
are formed through a complex interaction between geometry,
material, and lighting [21], and without precise prior knowledge of a scene’s geometry or materials, lighting estimation
is extremely under-constrained. For example, scenes that
consist primarily of matte materials reveal little information
about lighting, since diffuse surfaces behave like low-pass
filters on lighting during the shading process [38], eliminating high-frequency lighting information. To compensate for
the missing information, the computer vision community has
explored using deep learning to extract data-driven priors for
lighting estimation [14, 44]. However, these methods generally do not leverage physical measurements to address these
ambiguities, yet physical measurements can offer substantial
benefits in such an ill-posed setting.
For images with ALPs, we propose a physically-based

12521

