This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incremental 3D Semantic Scene Graph Prediction from RGB Sequences
Shun-Cheng Wu1 Keisuke Tateno2 Nassir Navab1
1
Technische Universität München

Abstract

se

clo
by

Cushion
frame: 7

Sofa

close

by

Table

n

sta
ntin
go

n

Scene understanding is a cornerstone in many computer
vision applications requiring perception, interaction, and
manipulation, such as robotics, AR/VR and autonomous
systems [17, 54–56]. Semantic Scene Graphs (SSGs) go
beyond recognizing individual entities (objects and stuff)
by reasoning about the relationships among them [61, 66].
They also proved to be a valuable representation for complex scene understanding tasks, such as image captioning [26, 67], generation [13, 24], scene manipulation [10,
11], task planning [27], and surgical procedure estimation [42, 43]. Given the benefits of such representations,
scene graph estimation received increasing attention in the
computer vision community.
While earlier methods mainly estimate SSGs from images [18, 19, 33, 66, 72], recent approaches have also investigated estimating them from 3D data. Compared to
2D scene graphs, which describe a single image, 3D scene

Table

ing o

1. Introduction

Incremental entity estimation and 3D scene graph estimation

stand

3D semantic scene graphs are a powerful holistic representation as they describe the individual objects and depict the relation between them. They are compact high-level
graphs that enable many tasks requiring scene reasoning.
In real-world settings, existing 3D estimation methods produce robust predictions that mostly rely on dense inputs.
In this work, we propose a real-time framework that incrementally builds a consistent 3D semantic scene graph of
a scene given an RGB image sequence. Our method consists of a novel incremental entity estimation pipeline and
a scene graph prediction network. The proposed pipeline
simultaneously reconstructs a sparse point map and fuses
entity estimation from the input images. The proposed network estimates 3D semantic scene graphs with iterative
message passing using multi-view and geometric features
extracted from the scene entities. Extensive experiments
on the 3RScan dataset show the effectiveness of the proposed method in this challenging task, outperforming stateof-the-art approaches. Our implementation is available at
https://shunchengwu.github.io/MonoSSG.

RGB sequence

Federico Tombari1,2
2
Google

d by

sup
frame: 93

porte

Cushion

Floor

Figure 1. We propose a real-time 3D semantic scene graph estimation method that relies on an abstract understanding of a scene geometry built with RGB input. Our method estimates scene graphs
incrementally by continuously estimating scene graphs and fusing
local predictions into a global 3D scene graph.

graphs depict the entire 3D scenes, enabling applications
requiring a holistic understanding of the whole scene, such
as path planning [47], camera localization, and loop closure detection [23]. However, existing 3D methods either
require dense 3D geometry of the scenes to estimate 3D
scene graphs [1, 23, 61, 64], which limits the use case since
dense geometry is not always available, or constraints the
scene graph estimation at the image-level [15,27,66], which
tend to fail inferring relationships among objects beyond the
individual viewpoints. A method that estimates 3D scene
graphs relies on sparse scene geometry and reasoning about
relationships globally has not been explored yet.
In this work, we propose a real-time framework that incrementally estimates a global 3D SSG of a scene simply
requiring an RGB sequence as input. The process is illustrated in Fig. 1. Our method simultaneously reconstructs
a segmented point cloud while estimating the SSGs of the
current map. The estimations are bound to the point map,
which allows us to fuse them into a consistent global scene

5064

