This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PillarNeXt: Rethinking Network Designs for 3D Object Detection
in LiDAR Point Clouds
Chenxu Luo
QCraft
90

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection in LiDAR point clouds is an essential
task in an autonomous driving system, as it provides crucial
information for subsequent onboard modules, ranging from
perception [24, 25], prediction [27, 42] to planning [2, 23].
There have been extensive research efforts on developing
sophisticated networks that are specifically designed to cope
with point clouds in this field [14, 32, 33, 43, 47].
Due to the sparse and irregular nature of point clouds,
most existing works adopt the grid based methods, which
convert point clouds into regular grids, such as pillar [14],
voxel [47] and range view [26], such that regular operators
can be applied. However, it is a common belief that the grid
based methods (especially for pillar) inevitably introduce
information loss, leading to inferior results, in particular for
small objects (e.g., pedestrians). Recent research [33] proposes the hybrid design for fine-grained geometrical modeling to combine the point and gird based representations.
We name all the above operators as local point aggregators
because they aim to aggregate point features in a certain
* Corresponding author xiaodong@qcraft.ai

75
72

88

BEV APH (%)

In order to deal with the sparse and unstructured raw
point clouds, most LiDAR based 3D object detection research focuses on designing dedicated local point aggregators for fine-grained geometrical modeling. In this paper, we revisit the local point aggregators from the perspective of allocating computational resources. We find that the
simplest pillar based models perform surprisingly well considering both accuracy and latency. Additionally, we show
that minimal adaptions from the success of 2D object detection, such as enlarging receptive field, significantly boost
the performance. Extensive experiments reveal that our pillar based networks with modernized designs in terms of architecture and training render the state-of-the-art performance on two popular benchmarks: Waymo Open Dataset
and nuScenes. Our results challenge the common intuition
that detailed geometry modeling is essential to achieve high
performance for 3D object detection.

Xiaodong Yang*

70

86

3D APH (%)

Jinyu Li

84

68
65
62

Pillar+
Voxel+
Pillar
Voxel
MVF

60

82

58
80

200

400

600

800 1000 1200

GFLOPs

55

200

400

600

800 1000 1200

GFLOPs

Figure 1. Overview of pillar, voxel and multi-view fusion (MVF)
based 3D object detection networks under different GFLOPs. The
Pillar/Voxel+ denote the corresponding models, which are trained
with an enhanced strategy. We report the L2 BEV and 3D APH of
vehicle on the validation set of Waymo Open Dataset.

neighborhood. We observe that the current mainstream of
3D object detection is to develop more specific operators
for point clouds, while leaving the network architectures almost unexplored. Most existing works are still built upon
the very original architectures of SECOND [44] or PointPillars [14], which lacks of modernized designs.
Meanwhile, in a closely related area, 2D object detection in images has achieved remarkable progress in both
accuracy and efficiency, which can be largely attributed
to the advances in network architectures. Among them,
the powerful backbones (e.g., ResNet [12], ViT [10] and
Swin Transformers [20]) as well as the effective necks (e.g.,
FPN [17], BiFPN [40] and YOLOF [6]) are in particular notable. Therefore, the research focus of 2D object detection
is largely different from that of 3D object detection.
In light of the aforementioned observations, we rethink
what should be the focus for 3D object detection in LiDAR
point clouds. Specifically, we revisit the two fundamental
issues in designing a 3D object detection model: the local
point aggregator and the network architecture.
First, we compare local point aggregators from a new
perspective, i.e., the computational budget. A fine-grained
aggregator usually demands more extensive computing resources than the coarse one. For instance, the voxel based
aggregator employs 3D convolutions, which require more
network parameters and run much slower than 2D convo-

17567

