This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ToThePoint: Efficient Contrastive Learning of 3D Point Clouds via Recycling
Xinglin Li†§ , Jiajing Chen‡ , Jinhui Ouyang†§ , Hanhui Deng†§ , Senem Velipasalar‡ , Di Wu†§
†
Hunan University, China, ‡ Syracuse University, NY, USA, § ExponentiAI Innovation, China *
Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant developments in
point cloud processing, including classification and segmentation. However, supervised learning approaches need
a lot of well-labeled data for training, and annotation is
labor- and time-intensive. Self-supervised learning, on the
other hand, uses unlabeled data, and pre-trains a backbone with a pretext task to extract latent representations to
be used with the downstream tasks. Compared to 2D images, self-supervised learning of 3D point clouds is underexplored. Existing models, for self-supervised learning of
3D point clouds, rely on a large number of data samples, and require significant amount of computational resources and training time. To address this issue, we propose a novel contrastive learning approach, referred to as
ToThePoint. Different from traditional contrastive learning
methods, which maximize agreement between features obtained from a pair of point clouds formed only with different types of augmentation, ToThePoint also maximizes
the agreement between the permutation invariant features
and features discarded after max pooling. We first perform self-supervised learning on the ShapeNet dataset, and
then evaluate the performance of the network on different
downstream tasks. In the downstream task experiments,
performed on the ModelNet40, ModelNet40C, ScanobjectNN and ShapeNet-Part datasets, our proposed ToThePoint achieves competitive, if not better results compared to
the state-of-the-art baselines, and does so with significantly
less training time (200 times faster than baselines).

1. Introduction
In recent years, self-supervised methods, which pretrain
a backbone with pretext tasks to extract useful latent representations, have become increasingly effective [16]. For
example, self-supervised tasks can be set to distinguish positive and negative samples or restore damaged images, and
* This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61972145 and 61932010,
and the Key R&D Program of Hunan Province under Grant No.
2022GK2069. D. Wu and X. Li are the corresponding authors (e-mail:
{dwu,lixinglin}@hnu.edu.cn).

Figure 1. A running example of ToThePoint. Raw 3D point
cloud data is streamed through two branches; in each branch, normalization and data augmentation are performed followed by traditional max-pooling operations. In our recycling mechanism, the
N × M dimensional features are sorted and a row of features is
randomly selected (from the remaining rows after max-pooling)
as the recycled aligned features to assist the representation of permutation invariant features. The four features extracted from the
two branches are next subjected to two stages of contrastive learning. Then the learning result would be mapped on the hypersphere.

these self-supervised pre-training tasks have been proven to
provide rich latent feature representations for downstream
tasks to improve their performance [5, 8, 10]. For the
tasks, for which dataset labeling is difficult, such as detection [33], segmentation [12] or video tracking tasks [27],
unsupervised pre-training can be especially helpful by alleviating the issue of insufficient labelled data. Moreover, it
has been shown that self-supervised pre-training combined
with supervised training provides better performance than
traditional fully supervised learning by itself [11, 34, 36].
With the ever increasing availability of LiDAR sensors and
stereo cameras, more and more point cloud data can be and
have been captured. However, annotating this data is difficult, providing additional incentive for self-supervised algorithms developed for 3D point clouds.

21781

