This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Asymmetric Feature Fusion for Image Retrieval
Hui Wu1
1

Min Wang2∗

Wengang Zhou1,2∗

Zhenbo Lu2

Houqiang Li1,2

CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

wh241300@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wangmin,luzhenbo}@iai.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Image retrieval [17, 30, 34, 40, 49, 53] has been studied
for a long time in the literature. Typically, high-performing
image retrieval systems deploy a large powerful model to
embed both query and gallery images, which is widely
known as symmetric image retrieval. However, in some
real-world applications, e.g., mobile search, the query side
is constrained by resource limitation and thus cannot meet
the overhead of deploying a large model. To this end, the
paradigm of asymmetric image retrieval is first proposed
in HVS [9] and AML [3], which has attracted increasing
attention from the community [26, 38, 43, 56, 62]. In such
*Corresponding Author: Min Wang and Wengang Zhou.

Asymmetric
Retrieval

Compatibility
Training

Efficiency

🙂
Accuracy

Gallery
Model 𝜙

Gallery
set 𝒢

Gallery feature

☹

(a) Previous single feature pipeline [3, 9, 38, 56].
Query
set 𝒬

Query
Model 𝜙

Gallery
Model 𝜙
Gallery
set 𝒢

Asymmetric
Retrieval
Query feature

Mixed gallery feature Efficiency

🙂
Gallery feature (1)
…

1. Introduction

Query feature

…

In asymmetric retrieval systems, models with different
capacities are deployed on platforms with different computational and storage resources. Despite the great progress,
existing approaches still suffer from a dilemma between
retrieval efficiency and asymmetric accuracy due to the
limited capacity of the lightweight query model. In this
work, we propose an Asymmetric Feature Fusion (AFF)
paradigm, which advances existing asymmetric retrieval
systems by considering the complementarity among different features just at the gallery side. Specifically, it first embeds each gallery image into various features, e.g., local
features and global features. Then, a dynamic mixer is introduced to aggregate these features into compact embedding for efficient search. On the query side, only a single lightweight model is deployed for feature extraction.
The query model and dynamic mixer are jointly trained
by sharing a momentum-updated classifier. Notably, the
proposed paradigm boosts the accuracy of asymmetric retrieval without introducing any extra overhead to the query
side. Exhaustive experiments on various landmark retrieval
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our paradigm.

Query
Model 𝜙

Query
set 𝒬

Gallery
Model 𝜙

Gallery feature (n)

Mixer
𝜙

Accuracy

🙂

(b) Our asymmetric feature fusion pipeline.

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) previous single-feature asymmetric retrieval pipeline and (b) our asymmetric feature fusion
paradigm. Due to limited capacity of the lightweight model, existing pipeline achieves efficiency for the query side at the cost
of retrieval accuracy degradation. In contrast, our approach enhances existing asymmetric retrieval pipeline from the perspective
of gallery feature fusion. For efficient retrieval, a dynamic mixer
is introduced to aggregate multiple gallery features into a compact
embedding. Query model and mixer are jointly trained with compatible constraints. Our method realizes high efficiency without
sacrificing retrieval accuracy.

a paradigm, deep representation models with different capacities are first trained to be compatible and then deployed
on platforms with different resources to strike a balance between retrieval accuracy and efficiency, as shown in Fig. 1a.
For an asymmetric retrieval system, the most crucial
thing is to ensure that the embedding spaces of different
models are well aligned. To this end, BCT [38] first proposes a backward-compatible learning framework, in which
the classifier of the gallery model is inherited to guide the
learning of the query model. Recently, various efforts have
been devoted to improving cross-model feature compatibility in terms of training objectives [3, 26, 51, 56, 57], model
structures [8, 9], etc. Despite the great progress, a dilemma

11082

