This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangled Representation Learning for Unsupervised Neural Quantization

1

Haechan Noh1 , Sangeek Hyun1 , Woojin Jeong1 , Hanshin Lim2 , Jae-Pil Heo1, *
Sungkyunkwan University, 2 Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
{noru0114, hsi1032, us03385, jaepilheo}@skku.edu, hslim@etri.re.kr

Abstract
The inverted index is a widely used data structure to
avoid the infeasible exhaustive search. It accelerates retrieval signiﬁcantly by splitting the database into multiple
disjoint sets and restricts distance computation to a small
fraction of the database. Moreover, it even improves search
quality by allowing quantizers to exploit the compact distribution of residual vector space. However, we ﬁrstly point
out a problem that an existing deep learning-based quantizer hardly beneﬁts from the residual vector space, unlike
conventional shallow quantizers. To cope with this problem,
we introduce a novel disentangled representation learning
for unsupervised neural quantization. Similar to the concept of residual vector space, the proposed method enables
more compact latent space by disentangling information of
the inverted index from the vectors. Experimental results on
large-scale datasets conﬁrm that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art retrieval systems by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Measuring the distances among feature vectors is a fundamental requirement in various ﬁelds of computer vision.
One of the tasks most relevant to distance measurement is
the nearest neighbor search, which ﬁnds the closest data
in the database from a query. The task is especially challenging in high-dimensional and large-scale databases due
to huge computational costs and memory overhead.
By relaxing the complexity, Approximate Nearest
Neighbor (ANN) search is popular in practice. Recent approaches for ANN typically learn the compact representation by exploiting Multi-Codebook Quantization (MCQ) [2,
9, 16]. Compared to hashing-based approaches [1, 10, 12],
the MCQ provides a more informative asymmetric distance
estimator where the query side is not compressed. Moreover, all possible distances between the query and codewords can be stored in a lookup table for efﬁciency.
Although the MCQ accelerates the distance computation
with the lookup table, exhaustive search on the large-scale
* Corresponding author

12001

dataset is still prohibited. The Inverted File with Asymmetric Distance Computation (IVFADC) [16] is proposed
for non-exhaustive ANN search by cooperating with the inverted index [30]. It splits the database into multiple disjoint
sets and restricts distance computations to small portions
close to the query to accelerate the retrieval speed. Moreover, the compactness of residual vector space between data
points and inverted indices substantially enhances the quantization quality.
Thanks to the rapid advances in deep learning, most areas of computer vision beneﬁt from its great learning capacity compared to shallow methods. However, the state-ofthe-art methods of unsupervised quantization remain shallow for a long time because selecting the maximum value
(i.e. argmax), which is an essential operation of quantization, is not differentiable. Inspired by a recent generative model with discrete hidden variables [35], the Unsupervised Neural Quantization (UNQ) [23] introduced an
encoder-decoder-based architecture for ANN search. The
large learning capacity of deep neural architecture signiﬁcantly improves the retrieval quality compared to conventional shallow methods.
Despite the outperforming performance of the UNQ, its
superiority is validated only on the exhaustive search. To
verify its effectiveness on non-exhaustive search, we conduct an experiment of non-exhaustive UNQ with an inverted
index. Interestingly, we observe that this deep architecture
does not beneﬁt from the residual vector space and it even
harms the search quality as reported in Table 1. We hypothesize the reasons for this performance degradation from two
perspectives. First, both the residual vector space and latent space of the neural network transform the data into a
quantization-friendly distribution, thus deep quantizer has
a scant margin to be improved by the residual space. Second, residual space sacriﬁces the distributional characteristics of each cluster, since the information of cluster center
in the original space is removed. For conventional shallow
quantizers, the drawback of residual space is obscured by
its huge advantage of making a compact distribution. However, deep quantizer only takes the disadvantages (information loss) from residual space without leveraging the effec-

