This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised Pre-training with
Masked Shape Prediction for 3D Scene Understanding
Li Jiang1
1

Zetong Yang2 Shaoshuai Shi1 Vladislav Golyanik1 Dengxin Dai1 Bernt Schiele1
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
CUHK

{lijiang, sshi, golyanik, ddai, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Masked signal modeling has greatly advanced selfsupervised pre-training for language and 2D images. However, it is still not fully explored in 3D scene understanding. Thus, this paper introduces Masked Shape Prediction
(MSP), a new framework to conduct masked signal modeling in 3D scenes. MSP uses the essential 3D semantic cue,
i.e., geometric shape, as the prediction target for masked
points. The context-enhanced shape target consisting of explicit shape context and implicit deep shape feature is proposed to facilitate exploiting contextual cues in shape prediction. Meanwhile, the pre-training architecture in MSP
is carefully designed to alleviate the masked shape leakage
from point coordinates. Experiments on multiple 3D understanding tasks on both indoor and outdoor datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of MSP in learning good feature representations to consistently boost downstream performance.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised pre-training has witnessed considerable
progress in natural language processing (NLP) [4, 10, 42]
and 2D computer vision [2, 15, 17, 18], the main idea of
which is to define a pretext task to leverage unlabeled data
to learn meaningful representations. With the development
of transformer [11,30,59], masked signal modeling (MSM)
has been proved to be an effective pretext task, attaining better results than other tasks like contrastive learning [6, 18].
An MSM architecture first partially masks out the input and
then reconstructs the masked part given the remaining content, forcing the network to learn semantic knowledge for
completing the missing part.
Compared to 2D images, the labeling of 3D real-scene
data is more labor-intensive. Therefore, self-supervised pretraining is important in 3D scene understanding for its ability in boosting the performance with limited labeled data.
Previous 3D scene-level pre-training methods mostly follow the contrastive pipeline [20, 21, 43, 64]. Though effective, MSM is less explored in 3D scene level. Some recent

tomztyang@gmail.com

methods [36, 74] also explore MSM with point clouds but
focus on single-object-level understanding. In contrast, we
investigate MSM for more practical scene-level understanding that contains complicated contextual environments, and
we propose a Masked Shape Prediction (MSP) framework
to conduct pre-training on point cloud scenes.
There are several key problems when performing
masked signal modeling in 3D scenes. The first is the design of the reconstruction target. In 2D images, pixel colors
constitute the semantic contents, making appearance signals [17,62] good choices as targets. In 3D, the most essential semantic clue is geometric shape, which motivates us
to explore shape information in target design. In 3D scenelevel understanding with complex object distribution, broad
contextual information is essential in achieving outstanding performance. Therefore, to promote the network to exploit contextual cues in shape prediction, we propose the
context-enhanced shape target, which includes two components: shape context and deep shape feature. Shape context explicitly describes the 3D shape by discretizing the
local space into multiple bins, which is robust to the uneven point distributions. Deep shape feature is extracted
from point clouds with complete shapes by a deep network.
As a learned shape descriptor, deep shape feature is able
to adaptively integrate contextual information in a larger
range, thanks to the large receptive field of the deep network. By combining shape context and deep shape feature
as our context-enhanced shape target, the network is promoted to not only focus on explicit shape patterns, but also
on contextual object relations in a larger scope.
Using the geometric shapes as reconstruction target,
however, raises another problem. Shape information can
be inferred from the point coordinates, yet masked signal
modeling requires the coordinates of masked points to specify the target positions for reconstruction, which may reveal
the masked shape and thus create a shortcut for network
learning. In this paper, we discuss several MSP network
designs to prevent the masked shape from being revealed
by the masked point coordinates. The core idea is to either
avoid the information interactions between masked points

1168

