This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IterativePFN: True Iterative Point Cloud Filtering
Dasith de Silva Edirimuni1 , Xuequan Lu1 *, Zhiwen Shao2†, Gang Li1 , Antonio Robles-Kelly1,4 , Ying He3
1
School of Information Technology, Deakin University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4
Defense Science and Technology Group, Australia
{dtdesilva, xuequan.lu, gang.li, antonio.robles-kelly}@deakin.edu.au,
zhiwen shao@cumt.edu.cn, yhe@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The quality of point clouds is often limited by noise introduced during their capture process. Consequently, a fundamental 3D vision task is the removal of noise, known as
point cloud filtering or denoising. State-of-the-art learning
based methods focus on training neural networks to infer filtered displacements and directly shift noisy points onto the
underlying clean surfaces. In high noise conditions, they iterate the filtering process. However, this iterative filtering is
only done at test time and is less effective at ensuring points
converge quickly onto the clean surfaces. We propose IterativePFN (iterative point cloud filtering network), which
consists of multiple IterationModules that model the true iterative filtering process internally, within a single network.
We train our IterativePFN network using a novel loss function that utilizes an adaptive ground truth target at each iteration to capture the relationship between intermediate filtering results during training. This ensures that the filtered
results converge faster to the clean surfaces. Our method is
able to obtain better performance compared to state-of-theart methods. The source code can be found at: https:
//github.com/ddsediri/IterativePFN .

1. Introduction
Point clouds are a natural representation of 3D geometric information and have a multitude of applications
in the field of 3D Computer Vision. These applications
range from robotics and autonomous driving to urban planning [14, 19, 35, 38]. They are captured using 3D sensors
and comprise of unordered points lacking connectivity information. Furthermore, the capturing of point cloud data is
error-prone as sensor quality and environmental factors may
* Corresponding author: X. Lu, supported by PJ03906.PG00507.F002.
† Z. Shao is supported by the NSFC (No. 62106268).

Figure 1. Histograms of filtered point distances from clean surface
after 1, 4, 8 and 24 test time iterations for ScoreDenoise [22] on
the Casting shape with 50K points and 2.5% Gaussian noise. We
compare it with our proposed IterativePFN where 1 IterationModule (ItM) corresponds to 1 internal iteration and 4 ItMs equal 1
external iteration (EI). There are 4 ItMs in the proposed network.
Note 1 ItM is analogous to 1 test time iteration of ScoreDenoise.
Our filtering results converge closer to the surface.

introduce noisy artifacts. The process of removing noise is
a fundamental research problem which motivates the field
of point cloud filtering, also known as denoising. Filtering
facilitates other tasks such as normal estimation and, by extension, 3D rendering and surface reconstruction.
Conventional point cloud filtering methods such as
MLS based methods [2, 12], bilateral filtering mechanisms [9] and edge recovery algorithms [18, 34] rely on local information of point sets, i.e., point normals, to filter
point clouds. However, such methods are limited by the
accuracy of normals. Alternatives include the Locally Optimal Projection (LOP) family of methods [13, 17, 25], which
downsample and regularize point clouds but incur the loss
of important geometric details. More recently, deep learning based filtering methods have been proposed to alleviate the disadvantages and limitations of conventional methods [22–24, 28, 41].

13530

