This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Imitation Learning as State Matching via Differentiable Physics

1

Siwei Chen12 , Xiao Ma2 , Zhongwen Xu2
National University of Singapore 2 Sea AI Lab

siwei-15@comp.nus.edu.sg {max,xuzw}@sea.com

Abstract

GER [32] by interacting with the environment and querying
experts online, which however requires significant human
effort to label the actions. Other IL methods mainly include
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), adversarial imitation
learning (AIL), and combinations of them. IRL learns a reward function to match expert demonstrations [11, 19, 41],
and AIL learns a discriminator to identify whether the action comes from an expert demonstration [18,24]. However,
both IRL and AIL learn an additional intermediate signal,
which introduces three main limitations: 1) the intermediate signal learning leads to a double-loop training process,
which means long training time and complex implementation; 2) the learning signal is a noisy and frequently updated
moving target, and as a result, the policy learning tends to
have a high variance; 3) the intermediate signal, e.g., the reward function in IRL, inevitably loses the rich information
embedded in the trajectories, e.g., environment dynamics.

Existing imitation learning (IL) methods such as inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL) usually have a double-loop
training process, alternating between learning a reward
function and a policy and tend to suffer long training time
and high variance. In this work, we identify the benefits
of differentiable physics simulators and propose a new IL
method, i.e., Imitation Learning as State Matching via Differentiable Physics (ILD), which gets rid of the double-loop
design and achieves significant improvements in final performance, convergence speed, and stability. The proposed
ILD incorporates the differentiable physics simulator as a
physics prior into its computational graph for policy learning. ILD unrolls the dynamics by sampling actions from a
parameterized policy and minimizing the distance between
the expert trajectory and the agent trajectory. It backpropagates the gradient into the policy via temporal physics
operators, which improves the transferability to unseen environments and yields higher final performance. ILD has a
single-loop structure that stabilizes and speeds up training.
It dynamically selects learning objectives for each state during optimization to simplify the complex optimization landscape. Experiments show that ILD outperforms state-of-theart methods in continuous control tasks with Brax, and can
be applied to deformable object manipulation tasks, generalized to unseen configurations. 1

In this work, we propose a new approach to IL, named
Imitation Learning as State Matching via Differentiable
Physics (ILD), which recovers expert behavior by exploiting
the Differentiable Physics Simulator (DPS) [12,20]. Different from standard environments, DPS implements low-level
physics operations with a differentiable function and allows
the gradients to flow through the dynamics. ILD takes advantage of DPSs by considering the environment dynamics
as a physics prior and incorporating it into its computational
graph during back-propagation of the policy, such that the
learned policy fully captures both the expert demonstration
and the environment specifications. To achieve this, ILD
simply minimizes the state-wise distance of a rollout trajectory generated by a parameterized policy to the expert
demonstration, which also gives a single-loop design and
avoids learning intermediate signals. Nevertheless, the gradients of physics operators are highly non-convex, which
often introduces a complex optimization landscape, and
consequently, a naive implementation is often stuck in local
minimum [12]. To alleviate this issue, we introduce a simple yet effective Chamfer-α distance for trajectory matching. For each state in the rollout trajectory, instead of exactly matching the corresponding expert state, we dynamically select the easiest local goal as the optimization target

1. Introduction
In a variety of applications ranging from games to realworld robotic tasks [13, 18, 38], imitation learning (IL) is
popularly applied. However, collecting high-quality expert
data is expensive, and existing IL methods tend to suffer
long training time, unstable training process, high variance
of learned IL policies, and suboptimal final performance.
Classical behavioral cloning (BC) methods learn policies directly from labeled data, but often suffer the covariate shift problem. This problem can be tackled in DAG‡ This work is completed at the SEA AI Lab.

1 The link to the code: https://github.com/sail-sg/ILD

7846

