This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense Network Expansion for Class Incremental Learning
Zhiyuan Hu1 Yunsheng Li2 Jiancheng Lyu3 Dashan Gao3 Nuno Vasconcelos1
1
UC San Diego 2 Microsoft Cloud + AI 3 Qualcomm AI Research
{z8hu, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu,

yunshengli@microsoft.com,

Abstract
The problem of class incremental learning (CIL) is considered. State-of-the-art approaches use a dynamic architecture based on network expansion (NE), in which a task
expert is added per task. While effective from a computational standpoint, these methods lead to models that grow
quickly with the number of tasks. A new NE method, dense
network expansion (DNE), is proposed to achieve a better
trade-off between accuracy and model complexity. This is
accomplished by the introduction of dense connections between the intermediate layers of the task expert networks,
that enable the transfer of knowledge from old to new tasks
via feature sharing and reusing. This sharing is implemented with a cross-task attention mechanism, based on
a new task attention block (TAB), that fuses information
across tasks. Unlike traditional attention mechanisms, TAB
operates at the level of the feature mixing and is decoupled
with spatial attentions. This is shown more effective than
a joint spatial-and-task attention for CIL. The proposed
DNE approach can strictly maintain the feature space of
old classes while growing the network and feature scale at
a much slower rate than previous methods. In result, it outperforms the previous SOTA methods by a margin of 4% in
terms of accuracy, with similar or even smaller model scale.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has enabled substantial progress in computer vision. However, existing systems lack the human
ability for continual learning, where tasks are learned incrementally. In this setting, tasks are introduced in sequential
time steps t, and the dataset used to learn task t is only available at the tth step. Standard gradient-based training is not
effective for this problem since it is prone to catastrophic
forgetting: the model overfits on task t and forgets the previous tasks. This is unlike humans, who easily learn new tasks
without forgetting what they know. While continual learning can be posed for any topic in computer vision, most research has addressed classification and the class incremental (CIL) setting [18]. In CIL, tasks consist of subsets of
disjoint classes that are introduced sequentially. Most ap-

{jianlyu, dgao}@qti.qualcomm.com

proaches also allow the learning of task t to access a small
buffer memory of examples from previous tasks.
Different strategies have been proposed to solve the CIL
problem. Distillation methods [3, 8, 9, 12, 14, 18, 23, 24, 29]
and parameter regularization methods [15, 32] regulate the
new model by the output logits, intermediate features or
important parameters. Gradient methods [16, 19, 28] estimate the null space of the existing feature space and project
the gradients of the next task into this null space, so that
the newly learned features are orthogonal to the previous
ones. These methods try to fit all tasks into a single model,
preserving properties of the feature space from one task to
the next. This is, however, difficult to guarantee due to the
scarcity of prior task data. Furthermore, as the number of
tasks grows, the model will eventually run out of capacity
to accommodate new tasks.
Network expansion (NE) methods [1, 22, 27, 30, 31] address these problems by freezing the model that solves the
previous tasks and adding a new subnetwork per task. As illustrated in Figure 1, a network f 1 learned for task 1 is augmented with new networks f t , denoted as task experts, for
each subsequent task t, and the feature spaces concatenated.
NE with cross connections (NEwC) methods [10,20,25] further add links across tasks (red lines in Figure 1) to further
transfer knowledge from old to new tasks. Since the original features are always accessible for examples from previous classes, these methods achieve the best performances on
CIL benchmarks. However, the process is very inefficient in
terms of both model size and complexity. The right side of
the figure shows the accuracy and size of several NE models
on the CIFAR100 dataset. Best accuracies are obtained with
larger networks and the model grows very quickly with the
number of tasks. For most practical applications, this rate
of growth is unsustainable.
While NE and NEwC achieve state of the art performance among CNN-based CIL methods, we show that they
do not translate well to the more recent transformer architecture [7]. Standard transformers learn spatial connections
across image patches through a spatial attention mechanism. A natural CIL extension is to feed the input image to
multiple heads, each corresponding to a task. Attention can

11858

