This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Camouflaged Object Detection with Feature Decomposition and
Edge Reconstruction
Chunming He1 , Kai Li2 *, Yachao Zhang1 , Longxiang Tang1 , Yulun Zhang3 , Zhenhua Guo4 , Xiu Li1 *
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
2
NEC Laboratories America, 3 ETH Zürich, 4 Tianyi Traffic Technology
{chunminghe19990224,li.gml.kai,lloong.x,yulun100,cszguo}@gmail.com
yachaozhang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Camouflaged object detection (COD) aims to detect and
segment objects “seamlessly” integrated into surrounding
* Corresponding author.

ED
IS+ED

Camouflaged object detection (COD) aims to address
the tough issue of identifying camouflaged objects visually
blended into the surrounding backgrounds. COD is a challenging task due to the intrinsic similarity of camouflaged
objects with the background, as well as their ambiguous
boundaries. Existing approaches to this problem have developed various techniques to mimic the human visual system. Albeit effective in many cases, these methods still
struggle when camouflaged objects are so deceptive to the
vision system. In this paper, we propose the FEature Decomposition and Edge Reconstruction (FEDER) model for
COD. The FEDER model addresses the intrinsic similarity
of foreground and background by decomposing the features
into different frequency bands using learnable wavelets. It
then focuses on the most informative bands to mine subtle cues that differentiate foreground and background. To
achieve this, a frequency attention module and a guidancebased feature aggregation module are developed. To combat the ambiguous boundary problem, we propose to learn
an auxiliary edge reconstruction task alongside the COD
task. We design an ordinary differential equation-inspired
edge reconstruction module that generates exact edges. By
learning the auxiliary task in conjunction with the COD
task, the FEDER model can generate precise prediction
maps with accurate object boundaries. Experiments show
that our FEDER model significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art methods with cheaper computational and memory
costs. The code will be available at https://github.
com/ChunmingHe/FEDER.

IS

Abstract

(a) Origin

(b) GT

(c) SegMaR

(d) FEDER

Figure 1. Results of SegMaR [14] and our method under the intrinsic similarity (IS) and edge disruption (ED) challenges. Our
method better localizes the objects and produces clearer edges.

environments. COD is a challenging task as it needs to combat against excellent camouflage strategies, including background matching [41], disruptive coloration [33], etc., and
distinguish the subtle differences between candidate objects
and their backgrounds. Research in COD can simultaneously facilitate the development of visual perception for nuance discrimination and promote various valuable real-life
applications, ranging from concealed defect detection [17]
in industry to pest monitoring [35] in agriculture.
COD faces two main challenges. The first is the intrinsic
similarity (IS) challenge, which occurs when camouflaged
objects share similar colors and patterns with their backgrounds. This makes it difficult to even roughly localize
those camouflaged objects. The second is the edge disruption (ED) challenge, which arises from extremely ambiguous object boundaries. Even if a rough localization is
achieved, precise segmentation can barely be obtained.

22046

