This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SinGRAF: Learning a 3D Generative Radiance Field for a Single Scene
Minjung Son* 1,2
Jeong Joon Park* 2
Leonidas Guibas2
Gordon Wetzstein2
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT) 2 Stanford University
minjungs.son@samsung.com, {jjpark3d,gordon.wetzstein,guibas}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Generative models have shown great promise in synthesizing photorealistic 3D objects, but they require large
amounts of training data. We introduce SinGRAF, a 3Daware generative model that is trained with a few input
images of a single scene. Once trained, SinGRAF generates different realizations of this 3D scene that preserve the
appearance of the input while varying scene layout. For
this purpose, we build on recent progress in 3D GAN architectures and introduce a novel progressive-scale patch
discrimination approach during training. With several experiments, we demonstrate that the results produced by SinGRAF outperform the closest related works in both quality
and diversity by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Creating a new 3D asset is a laborious task, which often
requires manual design of triangle meshes, texture maps,
and object placements. As such, numerous methods were
proposed to automatically create diverse and realistic variations of existing 3D assets. For example, procedural modeling techniques [11,27] produce variations in 3D assets given
predefined rules and grammars, and example-based modeling methods [13, 21] combine different 3D components to
generate new ones.
With our work, we propose a different, generative strategy that is able to create realistic variations of a single 3D
scene from a small number of photographs. Unlike existing
3D generative models, which typically require 3D assets as
input [13, 51], our approach only takes a set of unposed images as input and outputs a generative model of a single 3D
scene, represented as a neural radiance field [31].
Our method, dubbed SinGRAF, builds on recent
progress in unconditional 3D-aware GANs [5, 40] that train
generative radiance fields from a set of single-view images.
However, directly applying these 3D GANs to our problem
* Equal contribution.
Project page: computationalimaging.org/publications/singraf/

Figure 1. SinGRAF generates different plausible realizations of a
single 3D scene from a few unposed input images of that scene.
In this example, i.e., the “office 3” scene, we use 100 input images, four of which are shown in the top row. Next, we visualize
four realizations of the 3D scene as panoramas, rendered using the
generated neural radiance fields. Note the variations in scene layout, including chairs, tables, lamps, and other parts, while staying
faithful to the structure and style of the input images.

is challenging, because they typically require a large training set of diverse images and often limit their optimal operating ranges to objects, rather than entire scenes. SinGRAF
makes a first attempt to train a 3D generative radiance field
for individual indoor 3D scenes, creating realistic 3D variations in scene layout from unposed 2D images.

8507

