This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Annealing for Robust Geometric Estimation
Chitturi Sidhartha, Lalit Manam and Venu Madhav Govindu
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India-560012
{chitturis,lalitmanam,venug}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Geometric estimation problems in vision are often solved
via minimization of statistical loss functions which account
for the presence of outliers in the observations. The corresponding energy landscape often has many local minima.
Many approaches attempt to avoid local minima by annealing the scale parameter of loss functions using methods
such as graduated non-convexity (GNC). However, little attention has been paid to the annealing schedule, which is often carried out in a fixed manner, resulting in a poor speedaccuracy trade-off and unreliable convergence to the global
minimum. In this paper, we propose a principled approach
for adaptively annealing the scale for GNC by tracking the
positive-definiteness (i.e. local convexity) of the Hessian
of the cost function. We illustrate our approach using the
classic problem of registering 3D correspondences in the
presence of noise and outliers. We also develop approximations to the Hessian that significantly speeds up our method.
The effectiveness of our approach is validated by comparing its performance with state-of-the-art 3D registration approaches on a number of synthetic and real datasets. Our
approach is accurate and efficient and converges to the
global solution more reliably than the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Geometric estimation problems in computer vision use
point locations or correspondences extracted from images
or scans, e.g. epipolar geometry, bundle adjustment, 3D
registration etc. Such point observations are noisy and also
have a number of corrupting outliers. While RANSAC and
related approaches [11, 22, 40, 53] work by removing observations classified as outliers, an important class of methods
use M-estimation [2,52,56,57], which reduces the influence
of outliers. Denoting the geometric model parameters as x
and the residual of the model fitting of the i-th observation
as ri (x), the robust estimation problem is
min
x

N
X
i=1

ρσ (∥ri (x)∥)

(1)

Figure 1. Annealing of scale σ in GNC: We start with a large
value of σ that makes the problem easy to solve. The red curve
indicates the path of the minimum solution for robust estimation
as σ is gradually reduced. We desire an annealing scheme that will
ensure that we reach the final global minimum for σf inal .

where ρ(.) is a statistical loss function and σ is a scale
parameter. σ signifies the scale of the noise in the observations and defines the distinction between what we classify
as inliers and outliers.
Eqn. 1 is a non-linear optimization problem that is usually solved using a series of local optimization steps. A
common choice is the Iteratively Reweighted Least Squares
(IRLS) approach [28, 31]. In IRLS, we take the gradient of
the cost function and equate it to zero, resulting in
PN
′
∇ρσ (x) =
(2)
i=1 ρ (∥ri ∥)∇(∥ri ∥) = 0


PN
ρ′ (∥ri ∥)
∥ri ∥2
⇒
∇
= 0 (3)
i=1
∥ri ∥
2


PN
∥ri ∥2
⇒
ϕ(∥r
∥)∇
= 0 (4)
i
i=1
2
In a given iteration, we treat the weights ϕi = ϕ(∥ri ∥) as
constants, which gives us a weighted least squares problem.
Given a new estimate of x, these weights are updated, and
the process is repeated until convergence.

21929

