This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BiasBed – Rigorous Texture Bias Evaluation
Nikolai Kalischek1
Rodrigo Caye Daudt1
Torben Peters1
Reinhard Furrer2 Jan D. Wegner3 Konrad Schindler1
1
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zürich
2
Institute for Mathematics, University of Zurich
3
Institute for Computational Science, University of Zurich

Abstract
The well-documented presence of texture bias in modern
convolutional neural networks has led to a plethora of algorithms that promote an emphasis on shape cues, often
to support generalization to new domains. Yet, common
datasets, benchmarks and general model selection strategies are missing, and there is no agreed, rigorous evaluation
protocol. In this paper, we investigate difficulties and limitations when training networks with reduced texture bias. In
particular, we also show that proper evaluation and meaningful comparisons between methods are not trivial. We
introduce BiasBed, a testbed for texture- and style-biased
training, including multiple datasets and a range of existing algorithms. It comes with an extensive evaluation protocol that includes rigorous hypothesis testing to gauge the
significance of the results, despite the considerable training instability of some style bias methods. Our extensive
experiments, shed new light on the need for careful, statistically founded evaluation protocols for style bias (and
beyond). E.g., we find that some algorithms proposed in the
literature do not significantly mitigate the impact of style
bias at all. With the release of BiasBed, we hope to foster a common understanding of consistent and meaningful comparisons, and consequently faster progress towards
learning methods free of texture bias. Code is available at
https://github.com/D1noFuzi/BiasBed

1. Introduction
Visual object recognition is fundamental to our daily
lives. Identifying and categorizing objects in the environment is essential for human survival, indeed our brain is
able to assign the correct object class within a fraction of a
second, independent of substantial variations in appearance,
illumination and occlusion [28]. Recognition mainly takes
place along the ventral pathway [7], i.e., visual perception
induces a hierarchical processing stream from local patterns
to complex features, in feed-forward fashion [28]. Signals

are filtered to low frequency and used in parallel also in a
top-down manner [2], emphasizing the robustness and invariance to deviations in appearance.
Inspired by our brain’s visual perception, convolutional
neural architectures build upon the hierarchical intuition,
stacking multiple convolutional layers to induce feedforward learning of basic concepts to compositions of complex objects. Indeed, early findings suggested that neurons in deeper layers are activated by increasingly complex
shapes, while the first layers are mainly tailored towards
low-level features such as color, texture and basic geometry.
However, recent work indicates the opposite: convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) exhibit a strong bias to base their
decision on texture cues [11–13, 17], which heavily influences their performance, in particular under domain shifts,
which typically affect local texture more than global shape.
This inherent texture bias has led to a considerable body
of work that tries to minimize texture and style bias and
shift towards “human-like” shape bias in object recognition.
Common to all approaches is the principle of incorporating
adversarial texture cues into the learning pipeline – either
directly in input space [13, 15, 27] or implicitly in feature
space [20,22,30,33]. Perturbing the texture cues in the input
forces the neural network to make “texture-free” decisions,
thus focusing on the objects’ shapes that remain stable during training. While texture cues certainly boost performance in fine-grained classification tasks, where local texture patterns may indicate different classes, they can cause
serious harm when the test data exhibit a domain shift w.r.t.
training. In this light, texture bias can be seen as a main reason for degrading domain generalization performance, and
various algorithms have been developed to improve generalization to new domains with different texture properties (respectively image styles), e.g., [13, 15, 20, 22, 27, 30, 33, 40].
However, while a considerable number of algorithms
have been proposed to address texture bias, they are neither
evaluated on common datasets nor with common evaluation
metrics. Moreover they often employ inconsistent model
selection criteria or do not report at all how model selection

22221

