This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Polarimetric iToF: Measuring High-Fidelity Depth through Scattering Media
Daniel S. Jeon†

Andréas Meuleman†
†

KAIST

Seung-Hwan Baek*

Min H. Kim†

* POSTECH

Abstract

1. Introduction
Time-of-Flight (ToF) imaging is the cornerstone of modern 3D imaging technology that has received great attention
across diverse fields, including computer graphics and vision. Its notable applications include autonomous driving,
3D motion capture, digital-human reconstruction, humancomputer interfaces, robotics, etc. Modern ToF cameras
can be broadly categorized into direct and indirect systems. Direct ToF measures the round-trip time of photons emitted from an illumination source until they travel
back to the ToF detector. Indirect ToF, referred to as
amplitude-modulated continuous-wave ToF, utilizes a tem-

(b) GT depth without fog

(c) Input amplitude with fog

(d) Conventional iToF’s depth

(e) iToF’s depth with cross pol.

(f) Our method’s depth with fog

depth [cm]

60

(a) Input scene photo without fog

20

Indirect time-of-flight (iToF) imaging allows us to capture
dense depth information at a low cost. However, iToF imaging often suffers from multipath interference (MPI) artifacts in the presence of scattering media, resulting in severe depth-accuracy degradation. For instance, iToF cameras cannot measure depth accurately through fog because
ToF active illumination scatters back to the sensor before
reaching the farther target surface. In this work, we propose a polarimetric iToF imaging method that can capture
depth information robustly through scattering media. Our
observations on the principle of indirect ToF imaging and
polarization of light allow us to formulate a novel computational model of scattering-aware polarimetric phase measurements that enables us to correct MPI errors. We first
devise a scattering-aware polarimetric iToF model that can
estimate the phase of unpolarized backscattered light. We
then combine the optical filtering of polarization and our
computational modeling of unpolarized backscattered light
via scattering analysis of phase and amplitude. This allows
us to tackle the MPI problem by estimating the scattering
energy through the participating media. We validate our
method on an experimental setup using a customized offthe-shelf iToF camera. Our method outperforms baseline
methods by a significant margin by means of our scattering
model and polarimetric phase measurements.

Figure 1. We introduce a polarimetric iToF imaging method that
can estimate depth robustly through scattering media. (a) A photograph of the input scene without fog. (b) Ground-truth depth
measure without fog. (c) Input iToF amplitude map captured with
fog. (d) Depth estimated by a conventional iToF camera with fog.
(e) Depth improved by naı̈ve cross-polarization filtering. (f) Our
iToF depth measurement result is fairly close to the GT depth.

porally modulated illumination source and computationally
estimates the round-trip time of photons from modulation
phase changes [21]. The indirect acquisition principle lowers the system-building cost by departing from the necessity of the picosecond-accurate illumination, detector, and
synchronization module used in direct ToF. Furthermore,
indirect ToF achieves low-cost instant 3D imaging of the
entire field of view with flood-fill illumination. As a result, indirect ToF cameras have achieved remarkable success in commercial markets, e.g., Microsoft Azure Kinect
and PMD sensors.
However, it is also the indirect-imaging scheme that
poses critical limitations on robust 3D imaging. One of
the notable resulting challenges is multi-path interference
(MPI). Light emitted from the ToF illumination module
travels through a scene and reaches the ToF sensor. During
light transport, some photons interact with only one scene
point via direct reflection, thus providing accurate depth in-

12353

