This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TIPI: Test Time Adaptation with Transformation Invariance
A. Tuan Nguyen1 , Thanh Nguyen-Tang2 ,
Ser-Nam Lim3 *, Philip H.S. Torr1 *
1
University of Oxford, 2 Johns Hopkins University, 3 Meta AI
tuan@robots.ox.ac.uk, nguyent@cs.jhu.edu
sernamlim@meta.com, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
When deploying a machine learning model to a new environment, we often encounter the distribution shift problem – meaning the target data distribution is different from
the model’s training distribution. In this paper, we assume
that labels are not provided for this new domain, and that
we do not store the source data (e.g., for privacy reasons).
It has been shown that even small shifts in the data distribution can affect the model’s performance severely. Test
Time Adaptation offers a means to combat this problem,
as it allows the model to adapt during test time to the new
data distribution, using only unlabeled test data batches. To
achieve this, the predominant approach is to optimize a surrogate loss on the test-time unlabeled target data. In particular, minimizing the prediction’s entropy on target samples [34] has received much interest as it is task-agnostic
and does not require altering the model’s training phase
(e.g., does not require adding a self-supervised task during training on the source domain). However, as the target data’s batch size is often small in real-world scenarios
(e.g., autonomous driving models process each few frames
in real-time), we argue that this surrogate loss is not optimal since it often collapses with small batch sizes. To
tackle this problem, in this paper, we propose to use an invariance regularizer as the surrogate loss during test-time
adaptation, motivated by our theoretical results regarding
the model’s performance under input transformations. The
resulting method (TIPI – Test tIme adaPtation with transformation Invariance) is validated with extensive experiments
in various benchmarks (Cifar10-C, Cifar100-C, ImageNetC, DIGITS, and VisDA17). Remarkably, TIPI is robust
against small batch sizes (as small as 2 in our experiments),
and consistently outperforms TENT [34] in all settings. Our
code is released at https://github.com/atuannguyen/TIPI.

* The last two authors contributed equally

1. Introduction
Distribution shift is a common problem and is often
faced in real-world applications. Specifically, despite taking various precautions while training a machine learning
model to ensure a better generalization (e.g., collecting
and training on multiple source domains [17, 27], finding
flat minima [5], training with meta-learning objectives [16]
etc.), the model often still struggles when the test data distribution shifts slightly. Note that it is also common not
to have labels for the new shifted domain during test time.
To tackle this problem, test time adaptation (also known as
online domain adaptation) is a framework that allows the
model to adapt to the target distribution using unlabeled
test data batches. This is necessary since we typically do
not have time to annotate the data during test time and can
only make use of the unlabeled data. In this framework,
the model needs to give predictions for the target data while
simultaneously updating itself to improve its performance
on that particular target distribution. We assume a situation
in which the target data only arrive in small batches, which
makes the adaptation task extremely challenging and renders traditional domain adaptation techniques such as representation alignment (via a distance metric) ineffective.
Within this test time adaptation framework, a common
and effective approach is to optimize a surrogate objective
function in lieu of the true loss function on the target data.
The first group of surrogate objectives is the loss functions
of self-supervised tasks. In particular, one would formulate a user-defined task (such as predicting the rotation angle of an image) and train it alongside the main task on
the source domain; and keep training the self-supervised
task on the test-time target data [19, 33]. However, these
are not fully test-time adaptation methods, since they require altering the training procedure of the source domain.
The second line of surrogate objectives is unsupervised loss
functions. Among this group of unsupervised objectives,
entropy minimization (TENT) [34] is the most successful
method, and has been shown to be consistent across many
benchmarks. Furthermore, different from the former group,

24162

