This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Comprehensive and Delicate: An Efficient Transformer for Image Restoration
Haiyu Zhao,* Yuanbiao Gou,* Boyun Li, Dezhong Peng, Jiancheng Lv, Xi Peng†
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
{haiyuzhao.gm, gouyuanbiao, liboyun.gm, pengx.gm}@gmail.com;
{pengdz, lvjiancheng}@scu.edu.cn

Local Dependency Capture

Abstract
Vision Transformers have shown promising performance
in image restoration, which usually conduct window- or
channel-based attention to avoid intensive computations.
Although the promising performance has been achieved,
they go against the biggest success factor of Transformers to
a certain extent by capturing the local instead of global dependency among pixels. In this paper, we propose a novel
efficient image restoration Transformer that first captures
the superpixel-wise global dependency, and then transfers
it into each pixel. Such a coarse-to-fine paradigm is implemented through two neural blocks, i.e., condensed attention
neural block (CA) and dual adaptive neural block (DA). In
brief, CA employs feature aggregation, attention computation, and feature recovery to efficiently capture the global
dependency at the superpixel level. To embrace the pixelwise global dependency, DA takes a novel dual-way structure to adaptively encapsulate the globality from superpixels into pixels. Thanks to the two neural blocks, our method
achieves comparable performance while taking only ∼6%
FLOPs compared with SwinIR.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to recover the high-quality image from its degraded version, and huge success has been
achieved by plentiful methods in the past years [22, 30, 35,
54–56, 60]. In the era of deep learning, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown promising performance
in image restoration [25, 52, 67] thanks to the inductive biases of weight sharing and spatial locality [12]. However,
although a number of studies have shown the effectiveness
of CNNs, it has suffered from the following limitations [12],
i.e., i) non-dynamic weights of CNNs limit the model capacity of instance adaption, and ii) the sparse connections
of CNNs limit the capture of global dependency.
* indicates equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Sequentially

Channel Locality

Spatial Locality

Shifted Spatial Locality

Global Dependency Capture (Ours)

Aggregate

Recover
&
Distribute

Superpixel-wise Globality

Pixel-wise Globality

Figure 1. Illustration of the dependency capture in existing vision
Transformers and ours. The red boxes refer to the dependency
capture range of a given pixel marked by a red point. We generally summarize the dependency capture in existing vision Transformers as the three ways above the dashed line. Obviously, they
could only capture the dependency in a local range. In contrast,
our method could obtain a pixel-wise global dependency through
superpixel-wise dependency computation and distribution.

To overcome these limitations, some solutions [51,
60, 67, 68] have been specifically established, of which
Transformer-based methods [3, 5, 28, 47, 53] have achieved
huge success thanks to their high capacities of dynamic
weighting and global dependency capturing. Towards the
image-restoration-specific Transformers, the biggest roadblock might be the unacceptable cost caused by the global
attention computation. Therefore, some efficient attentions
have been proposed to trade-off the efficiency and dependency range, e.g., local window attention [49], shifted window attention [22], and channel attention [56]. Although
the promising performance has been achieved, these Transformers have still suffered from the following limitations.
First, the computation costs are still very high, thus limiting their applications in the mobile scenarios. Second, the
attention mechanisms could only capture the dependency
from a given range, and thus such a locality might not fully
explore the potential of Transformer.

14122

