This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Commonsense in Vision-Language Models via
Knowledge Graph Riddles
Shuquan Ye2

Yujia Xie1 Dongdong Chen1
1
Microsoft

Yichong Xu1

{yujiaxie,dochen,Yichong.Xu,luyuan,chezhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on analyzing and improving the commonsense ability of recent popular vision-language (VL)
models. Despite the great success, we observe that existing
VL-models still lack commonsense knowledge/reasoning
ability (e.g., “Lemons are sour”), which is a vital component towards artificial general intelligence. Through
our analysis, we find one important reason is that existing large-scale VL datasets do not contain much commonsense knowledge, which motivates us to improve the commonsense of VL-models from the data perspective. Rather
than collecting a new VL training dataset, we propose
a more scalable strategy, i.e., “Data Augmentation with
kNowledge graph linearization for CommonsensE capability” (DANCE). It can be viewed as one type of data augmentation technique, which can inject commonsense knowledge into existing VL datasets on the fly during training.
More specifically, we leverage the commonsense knowledge graph (e.g., ConceptNet) and create variants of text
description in VL datasets via bidirectional sub-graph sequentialization. For better commonsense evaluation, we
further propose the first retrieval-based commonsense diagnostic benchmark. By conducting extensive experiments
on some representative VL-models, we demonstrate that
our DANCE technique is able to significantly improve the
commonsense ability while maintaining the performance on
vanilla retrieval tasks. The code and data are available at
https:// github.com/ pleaseconnectwifi/ DANCE.

1. Introduction
Many vision-based problems in our daily life go beyond
perception and recognition. For example, when we hear
people say “It tastes sour”, we need to identify they are talking about lemons on the table instead of the chocolate cake.
Therefore, it is essential for artificial general intelligence to
* This work was partially supported by a GRF grant (Project No. CityU
11216122) from the Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong.

Lu Yuan1 Chenguang Zhu1 Jing Liao2 *
2
City University of Hong Kong
{shuquanye2-c,jingliao}@cityu.edu.hk

This tastes sour.

CLIP
A

ViLT

BLIP
(itc)

B

BLIP
(itm)

Figure 1. Illustration of the commonsense lacking problem of
various popular VL-models, including CLIP [45] pre-trained with
contrastive supervision, ViLT [24] with matching supervision, and
BLIP [28] with the both. The bar plots suggest the alignment
scores of the images to the text. All models fail in retrieving the
correct image with lemon (in blue).

develop commonsense capability. Vision-Language (VL)
models [45] recently show promising signals on mimicking the core cognitive activities of humans by understanding the visual and textual information in the same latent
space [74]. However, we observed that VL-models, e.g.,
CLIP [45], still struggle when minor commonsense knowledge is needed. For example, as shown in figure 1, none of
the existing models correctly identify the lemon with text
input “It tastes sour”.
In this work, we take a step towards injecting the VLmodels with commonsense capability. More specifically,
we find one important reason for the commonsense lacking
issue is that existing large-scale VL datasets do not contain much commonsense knowledge. On the one hand, regular VL data, e.g., COCO [32] and CC 12M [9] contain
more nouns and descriptive adjectives, with much fewer
verbs and particles compared to regular texts. This distribution difference suggests that it might be infeasible for VLmodels to gain commonsense ability by purely enlarging the
dataset, unlike language-only models [22, 44]. Also, other
objectives like visual question answering or generation are

2634

