This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConQueR: Query Contrast Voxel-DETR for 3D Object Detection
Benjin Zhu1

Zhe Wang1 Shaoshuai Shi2 Hang Xu3 Lanqing Hong3 Hongsheng Li1,4
1
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
4
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
{benjinzhu@link,hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Although DETR-based 3D detectors simplify the detection pipeline and achieve direct sparse predictions, their
performance still lags behind dense detectors with postprocessing for 3D object detection from point clouds. DETRs usually adopt a larger number of queries than GTs
(e.g., 300 queries v.s. ∼40 objects in Waymo) in a scene,
which inevitably incur many false positives during inference. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective sparse
3D detector, named Query Contrast Voxel-DETR (ConQueR), to eliminate the challenging false positives, and
achieve more accurate and sparser predictions. We observe
that most false positives are highly overlapping in local regions, caused by the lack of explicit supervision to discriminate locally similar queries. We thus propose a Query Contrast mechanism to explicitly enhance queries towards their
best-matched GTs over all unmatched query predictions.
This is achieved by the construction of positive and negative
GT-query pairs for each GT, and a contrastive loss to enhance positive GT-query pairs against negative ones based
on feature similarities. ConQueR closes the gap of sparse
and dense 3D detectors, and reduces ∼60% false positives.
Our single-frame ConQueR achieves 71.6 mAPH/L2 on the
challenging Waymo Open Dataset validation set, outperforming previous sota methods by over 2.0 mAPH/L2. Code

1. Introduction
3D object detection from point clouds has received much
attention in recent years [7, 32, 34, 47, 52] as its wide applications in autonomous driving, robots navigation, etc.
State-of-the-art 3D detectors [7, 31, 33, 53] still adopt dense
predictions with post-processing (e.g., NMS [2]) to obtain
final sparse detections. This indirect pipeline usually involves many hand-crafted components (e.g., anchors, center
masks) based on human experience, which involves much
effort for tuning, and prevents dense detectors from being

(a) Voxel-DETR

(b) ConQueR

Figure 1. Comparison of our baseline Voxel-DETR and ConQueR.
GTs (green) and predictions (blue) of an example scene in the
WOD is visualized. Sparse predictions of Voxel-DETR still contain many highly overlapped false positives (in the red dashed circle), while ConQueR can generate much sparser predictions.

optimized end-to-end to achieve optimal performance. Recently, DETR-based 2D detectors [3, 39, 49, 57] show that
transformers with direct sparse predictions can greatly simplify the detection pipeline, and lead to better performance.
However, although many efforts [1, 26, 27] have been made
towards direct sparse predictions for 3D object detection,
because of the different characteristics of images and point
clouds (i.e., dense and ordered images v.s. sparse and irregular points clouds), performance of sparse 3D object detectors still largely lags behind state-of-the-art dense detectors.
To achieve direct sparse predictions, DETRs usually
adopt a set of object queries [1, 3, 27, 39, 49, 57], and resort to the one-to-one Hungarian Matching [17] to assign
ground-truths (GTs) to object queries. However, to guarantee a high recall rate, those detectors need to impose much
more queries than the actual number of objects in a scene.
For example, recent works [1, 27] select top-300 scored
query predictions to cover only ∼40 objects in each scene
of Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) [36], while 2D DETR detectors [3, 39, 49, 57] use 10× more predictions than the average GT number of MS COCO [22]. As shown in Fig. 1(a),
we visualize an example scene by a baseline DETR-based

9296

