This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adjustment and Alignment for Unbiased Open Set Domain Adaptation
Wuyang Li1
1

City University of Hong Kong

Jie Liu1
2

Bo Han2

Hong Kong Baptist University

{wuyangli2,jliu.ee}-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Yixuan Yuan3, *
3

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

limits real-world applications [25, 29], e.g., product recommendation and pathology identification with unseen classes.

Open Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) transfers the
model from a label-rich domain to a label-free one containing novel-class samples. Existing OSDA works overlook abundant novel-class semantics hidden in the source
domain, leading to a biased model learning and transfer. Although the causality has been studied to remove the
semantic-level bias, the non-available novel-class samples
result in the failure of existing causal solutions in OSDA.
To break through this barrier, we propose a novel causalitydriven solution with the unexplored front-door adjustment
theory, and then implement it with a theoretically grounded
framework, coined Adjustment and Alignment (ANNA), to
achieve an unbiased OSDA. In a nutshell, ANNA consists of
Front-Door Adjustment (FDA) to correct the biased learning in the source domain and Decoupled Causal Alignment (DCA) to transfer the model unbiasedly. On the one
hand, FDA delves into fine-grained visual blocks to discover
novel-class regions hidden in the base-class image. Then,
it corrects the biased model optimization by implementing
causal debiasing. On the other hand, DCA disentangles the
base-class and novel-class regions with orthogonal masks,
and then adapts the decoupled distribution for an unbiased
model transfer. Extensive experiments show that ANNA
achieves state-of-the-art results. The code is available at
https://github.com/CityU-AIM-Group/Anna.

Aiming at addressing this issue, Open Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) [3, 17, 20, 29, 35] has been studied, which
also needs to recognize the novel-class samples in the target
domain as unknown. As shown in Figure 1(a) (top), following a similar pipeline, most existing works [3, 17, 20, 29, 35]
utilize labeled base-class data to train a closed-set classifier in the source domain. Then, in the target domain, they
adjust the model with two objectives, i.e., exploring novel
samples to achieve base/novel-class separation (novel-class
detection) and adapting the base-class distribution (domain
alignment). Based on this pipeline, these works can successfully recognize some novel samples in the unlabelled
target domain and align the base-class distribution well.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [5, 8, 11, 13]
has been well studied to transfer a model from a labeled
domain to an unlabeled novel one, notably saving the labeling labor for model re-implementation. However, existing
UDA research follows a strong assumption that the two domains must share the same class space, which cannot make
correct predictions for novel-class samples. This severely
* Corresponding author.

This work was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council
(RGC) General Research Fund 11211221, and Innovation and Technology
Commission-Innovation and Technology Fund ITS/100/20.

While achieving great success, existing works [17, 20,
29] only consider base-class semantics in the source domain, ignoring the novel-class spreading everywhere. This
leads to a semantic-level bias between the base and novel
class, further yielding a biased domain transfer for OSDA.
To explore the deficiency of this bias, we visualize the
base/novel-class activated regions, as shown in col. 1-2 of
Figure 1(a) (bottom). It can be observed that existing approaches can successfully find the base-class regions consistent with the image-level ground-truth chair, but cannot discover novel-class semantics, e.g., the yacht, sea, and
ground, etc. (The base and novel regions are highlighted
in Figure 1(c) for better view.) Further, we conduct a perpixel prediction on deepest features without global average
pooling (col. 3), illustrating that the novel regions are misclassified as some non-correlated base classes. These observations imply that this semantic-level bias severely affects
the judgment of the classifier even though the classifier can
give a correct prediction for the whole image.
Recently, several causality-based approaches [36, 44, 45]
have been proposed to solve the semantic-level bias in the
closed-set setting. These works [36,44,45] first conduct perclass statistics over the whole dataset to decouple the context, and then use decoupled components to correct the biased model training in a class-balanced manner. This causal
solution can successfully avoid biased model learning since

24110

