This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Looking Through the Glass: Neural Surface Reconstruction Against
High Specular Reflections
Jiaxiong Qiu1

Peng-Tao Jiang2 Yifan Zhu1 Ze-Xin Yin1 Ming-Ming Cheng1
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 Zhejiang University
View 1

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D object surfaces from multi-view images is a challenging task in computer vision and graphics. Recently, NeuS [45] combines the surface rendering [3, 12, 35, 52] and volume rendering [8, 29], for reconstructing objects with thin structures and achieves good performance on the input with slight specular reflections. However, when processing the scenes under high specular reflections (HSR), NeuS fails to recover the target object surfaces,
as shown in the second row of Fig. 1. High specular reflections are ubiquitous when we use a camera to capture the
target object through glasses. As shown in the first row of
Fig. 1, in the captured views with HSR, we can recognize
the virtual image in front of the target object. The virtual
* Bo Ren is the corresponding author.

View 27

…

View 56

NeuS
NeuS-HSR

Neural implicit methods have achieved high-quality 3D
object surfaces under slight specular highlights. However,
high specular reflections (HSR) often appear in front of target objects when we capture them through glasses. The
complex ambiguity in these scenes violates the multi-view
consistency, then makes it challenging for recent methods
to reconstruct target objects correctly. To remedy this issue, we present a novel surface reconstruction framework,
NeuS-HSR, based on implicit neural rendering. In NeuSHSR, the object surface is parameterized as an implicit
signed distance function (SDF). To reduce the interference
of HSR, we propose decomposing the rendered image into
two appearances: the target object and the auxiliary plane.
We design a novel auxiliary plane module by combining
physical assumptions and neural networks to generate the
auxiliary plane appearance. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that NeuS-HSR
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches for accurate and
robust target surface reconstruction against HSR. Code is
available at https://github.com/JiaxiongQ/
NeuS-HSR.

…

Supervision

Abstract

Bo Ren1 *

Figure 1. 3D object surface reconstruction under high specular
reflections (HSR). Top: A real-world scene captured by a mobile
phone. Middle: The state-of-the-art method NeuS [45] fails to reconstruct the target object (i.e., the Buddha). Bottom: We propose
NeuS-HSR, which recovers a more accurate target object surface
than NeuS.

image introduces the photometric variation on the object
surface visually, which degrades the multi-view consistency
and encodes extreme ambiguities for rendering, then confuses NeuS to reconstruct the reflected objects instead of
the target object.
To adapt to the HSR scenes, one intuitive solution is
firstly applying reflection removal methods to reduce HSR,
then reconstructing the target object with the enhanced target object appearance as the supervision. However, most
recent single-image reflection removal works [4, 9, 23, 24,
26, 40] need the ground-truth background or reflection as
supervision, which is hard to be acquired. Furthermore, for
these reflection removal methods, testing scenes should be
present in the training sets, which limits their generalization. These facts demonstrate that explicitly using the reflection removal methods to enhance the target object appearance is impractical. A recent unsupervised reflection
removal approach, NeRFReN [18] decomposes the rendered image into reflected and transmitted parts by implicit
representations. However, it is limited by constrained view
directions and simple planar reflectors. When we apply it to
scenes for multi-view reconstruction, as Fig. 3 presents, it
takes the target object as the content in the reflected image

20823

