This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanelNet: Understanding 360 Indoor Environment via Panel Representation
Haozheng Yu

Lu He

Bing Jian
Weiwei Feng
Tencent America

Shan Liu

{haozhengyu, lhluhe, bingjian, wfeng, shanl}@tencent.com

Abstract
Depth

Indoor 360 panoramas have two essential properties. (1)
The panoramas are continuous and seamless in the horizontal direction. (2) Gravity plays an important role in indoor environment design. By leveraging these properties, we
present PanelNet, a framework that understands indoor environments using a novel panel representation of 360 images.
We represent an equirectangular projection (ERP) as consecutive vertical panels with corresponding 3D panel geometry.
To reduce the negative impact of panoramic distortion, we incorporate a panel geometry embedding network that encodes
both the local and global geometric features of a panel. To
capture the geometric context in room design, we introduce
Local2Global Transformer, which aggregates local information within a panel and panel-wise global context. It greatly
improves the model performance with low training overhead.
Our method outperforms existing methods on indoor 360
depth estimation and shows competitive results against stateof-the-art approaches on the task of indoor layout estimation
and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Understanding indoor environments is an important topic
in computer vision as it is crucial for multiple practical applications such as room reconstruction, robot navigation, and
virtual reality applications. Early methods focus on modeling indoor scenes using perspective images [9, 10, 19].
With the development of CNNs and omnidirectional photography, many works turn to understand indoor scenes using panorama images. Compared to the perspective images,
panorama images have a larger field-of-view (FoV) [43] and
provide the geometric context of the indoor environment in
a continuous way [24].
There are several 360 input formats used in indoor scene
understanding. One of the most commonly-used formats is
the equirectangular projection (ERP). Modeling the holistic
scene from an ERP is challenging. The ERP distortion increases when pixels are close to the zenith or nadir of the
image, which may decrease the power of the convolutional

Semantic

PanelNet
Layout

Panel
Representation

Indoor
Scene Understanding

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed system. We present PanelNet, a network that learns the indoor environment using a novel
panel representation of ERP. We formulate the panel representation
as consecutive ERP panels with corresponding global and local
geometry. By slightly modifying the network structure, PanelNet is
capable of tackling major 360 indoor understanding tasks such as
depth estimation, semantic segmentation and layout prediction.

structures designed for distortion-free perspective images.
To eliminate the negative effects of ERP distortion, recent
works [8, 21, 28] focus on decomposing the whole panorama
into perspective patches, i.e., tangent images. However, partitioning a panorama into discontinuous patches breaks the
local continuity of gravity-aligned scenes and objects which
limits the performance of these works. To reduce the impact of distortion while preserving the local continuity, we
present PanelNet, a novel network to understand the indoor
scene from equirectangular projection.
We design our PanelNet based on two essential properties
of equirectangular projection. (1) The ERP is continuous
and seamless in the horizontal direction. (2) Gravity plays an
important role in indoor environment design, which makes
the gravity-aligned features crucial for indoor 360 understanding [24, 31]. Following these two properties, we tackle
the challenges above through a novel panel representation of
ERP. We represent an ERP as consecutive panels with corresponding global and local 3D geometry, which preserves
the gravity-aligned features within a panel and maintains
the global continuity of the indoor structure across panels.
Inspired by Omnifusion [21], we design a geometry embed-

878

