This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Completeness and Uncertainty of Pseudo Labels
for Weakly Supervised Video Anomaly Detection
Chen Zhang1,2 Guorong Li3 * Yuankai Qi4 Shuhui Wang5,6
Laiyun Qing3 Qingming Huang1,2,3,5 Ming-Hsuan Yang7,8
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
5
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 7 University of California, Merced, 8 Yonsei University
zhangchen@iie.ac.cn, liguorong@ucas.ac.cn, qykshr@gmail.com,
wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, {lyqing, qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Weakly supervised video anomaly detection aims to identify abnormal events in videos using only video-level labels.
Recently, two-stage self-training methods have achieved
significant improvements by self-generating pseudo labels
and self-refining anomaly scores with these labels. As the
pseudo labels play a crucial role, we propose an enhancement framework by exploiting completeness and uncertainty
properties for effective self-training. Specifically, we first
design a multi-head classification module (each head serves
as a classifier) with a diversity loss to maximize the distribution differences of predicted pseudo labels across heads.
This encourages the generated pseudo labels to cover as
many abnormal events as possible. We then devise an iterative uncertainty pseudo label refinement strategy, which
improves not only the initial pseudo labels but also the updated ones obtained by the desired classifier in the second stage. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the
proposed method performs favorably against state-of-theart approaches on the UCF-Crime, TAD, and XD-Violence
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Automatically detecting abnormal events in videos has
attracted increasing attention for its broad applications in
intelligent surveillance systems. Since abnormal events are
sparse in videos, recent studies are mainly developed within
the weakly supervised learning framework [5, 12, 19, 25, 27,
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of the completeness: (a) represents a video
that contains multiple abnormal clips (ground truth anomalies are
in the orange area). Existing methods tend to focus on the most
anomalous clip as shown in (b). We propose to use the multi-head
classification module together with a diversity loss to encourage
pseudo labels to cover the complete abnormal events as depicted
in (c).

29, 32, 34, 37–41], where only video-level annotations are
available. However, the goal of anomaly detection is to predict frame-level anomaly scores during test. This results in
great challenges for weakly supervised video anomaly detection.
Existing methods broadly fall into two categories: onestage methods based on Multiple Instance Learning (MIL)
and two-stage self-training methods. One-stage MIL-based

16271

