This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReDirTrans: Latent-to-Latent Translation for Gaze and Head Redirection
Shiwei Jin 1 , Zhen Wang 2 , Lei Wang 2 , Ning Bi 2 , Truong Nguyen 1
1
ECE Dept. UC San Diego, 2 Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
{sjin, tqn001}@eng.ucsd.edu, {zhewang, wlei, nbi}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Learning-based gaze estimation methods require large
amounts of training data with accurate gaze annotations.
Facing such demanding requirements of gaze data collection and annotation, several image synthesis methods were
proposed, which successfully redirected gaze directions precisely given the assigned conditions. However, these methods focused on changing gaze directions of the images that
only include eyes or restricted ranges of faces with low resolution (less than 128 × 128) to largely reduce interference
from other attributes such as hairs, which limits application scenarios. To cope with this limitation, we proposed
a portable network, called ReDirTrans, achieving latentto-latent translation for redirecting gaze directions and
head orientations in an interpretable manner. ReDirTrans
projects input latent vectors into aimed-attribute embeddings only and redirects these embeddings with assigned
pitch and yaw values. Then both the initial and edited
embeddings are projected back (deprojected) to the initial
latent space as residuals to modify the input latent vectors by subtraction and addition, representing old status removal and new status addition. The projection of aimed attributes only and subtraction-addition operations for status
replacement essentially mitigate impacts on other attributes
and the distribution of latent vectors. Thus, by combining
ReDirTrans with a pretrained ﬁxed e4e-StyleGAN pair, we
created ReDirTrans-GAN, which enables accurately redirecting gaze in full-face images with 1024×1024 resolution
while preserving other attributes such as identity, expression, and hairstyle. Furthermore, we presented improvements for the downstream learning-based gaze estimation
task, using redirected samples as dataset augmentation.

1. Introduction
Gaze is a crucial non-verbal cue that conveys attention
and awareness in interactions. Its potential applications include mental health assessment [5,18], social attitudes analysis [19], human-computer interaction [12], automotive assistance [30], AR/VR [6,34]. However, developing a robust

uniﬁed learning-based gaze estimation model requires large
amounts of data from multiple subjects with precise gaze
annotations [42, 44]. Collecting and annotating such an appropriate dataset is complex and expensive. To overcome
this challenge, several methods have been proposed to redirect gaze directions [17, 39, 41, 42, 44] in real images with
assigned directional values to obtain and augment training data. Some works focused on generating eye images
with new gaze directions by either 1) estimating warping
maps [41,42] to interpolate pixel values or 2) using encodergenerator pairs to generate redirected eye images [17, 39].
ST-ED [44] was the ﬁrst work to extend high-accuracy
gaze redirection from eye images to face images. By disentangling several attributes, including person-speciﬁc appearance, it can explicitly control gaze directions and head
orientations. However, due to the design of the encoderdecoder structure and limited ability to maintain appearance
features by a 1 × 1024 projected appearance embedding,
ST-ED generates low-resolution (128 × 128) images with
restricted face range (no hair area), which narrows the application ranges and scenarios of gaze redirection.
As for latent space manipulation for face editing tasks,
large amounts of works [2–4, 14, 31, 35] were proposed to
modify latent vectors in predeﬁned latent spaces (W [21],
W + [1] and S [40]). Latent vectors in these latent spaces
can work with StyleGAN [21, 22] to generate high-quality
and high-ﬁdelity face images with desired attribute editing.
Among these methods, Wu et.al [40] proposed the latent
space S working with StyleGAN, which achieved only one
degree-of-freedom gaze redirection by modifying a certain
channel of latent vectors in S by an uninterpreted value instead of pitch and yaw values of gaze directions.
Considering these, we proposed a new method, called
ReDirTrans, to achieve latent-to-latent translation for redirecting gaze directions and head orientations in highresolution full-face images based on assigned directional
values. Speciﬁcally, we designed a framework to project
input latent vectors from a latent space into the aimedattribute-only embedding space for an interpretable redirection process. This embedding space consists of estimated
pseudo conditions and embeddings of aimed attributes,

5547

