This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NoisyQuant: Noisy Bias-Enhanced Post-Training Activation Quantization for
Vision Transformers
Yijiang Liu∗1 , Huanrui Yang∗2 , Zhen Dong2 , Kurt Keutzer2 , Li Du1 , Shanghang Zhang3
1
Nanjing University, 2 University of California, Berkeley
3

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
liuyijiang@smail.nju.edu.cn, {huanrui, zhendong, keutzer}@berkeley.edu
ldu@nju.edu.cn, shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The complicated architecture and high training cost of vision transformers urge the exploration of post-training quantization. However, the heavy-tailed distribution of vision
transformer activations hinders the effectiveness of previous post-training quantization methods, even with advanced
quantizer designs. Instead of tuning the quantizer to better fit the complicated activation distribution, this paper
proposes NoisyQuant, a quantizer-agnostic enhancement
for the post-training activation quantization performance
of vision transformers. We make a surprising theoretical
discovery that for a given quantizer, adding a fixed Uniform
noisy bias to the values being quantized can significantly
reduce the quantization error under provable conditions.
Building on the theoretical insight, NoisyQuant achieves the
first success on actively altering the heavy-tailed activation
distribution with additive noisy bias to fit a given quantizer.
Extensive experiments show NoisyQuant largely improves
the post-training quantization performance of vision transformer with minimal computation overhead. For instance,
on linear uniform 6-bit activation quantization, NoisyQuant
improves SOTA top-1 accuracy on ImageNet by up to 1.7%,
1.1% and 0.5% for ViT, DeiT, and Swin Transformer respectively, achieving on-par or even higher performance than
previous nonlinear, mixed-precision quantization.

1. Introduction
Inspired by the success of Self Attention (SA)-based
transformer models in Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks [31], recent researches make significant progress in
applying transformer models to the field of computer vision [3, 10, 22, 30]. In the meantime, the typical design of
* Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.

transformer models induces large model sizes, high computational consumption, and long training time. For instance,
the widely used DeiT-Base model [30] contains 86M parameters, logs 18G floating-point operations for a single input,
and requires 300 epochs of training on the ImageNet dataset.
This leads to significant difficulties in hardware deployment.
In facing such difficulty, a number of compression and acceleration methods are applied to vision transformer models,
including pruning [6, 39], quantization [24, 42], and neural
architecture search [5], etc.
Among these methods, quantization appears as one of
the most effective and widely applied ways [11]. Quantization process uses a predefined “quantizer” function to
convert the continuous representation of weights and activations into a small number of discrete symbols, therefore
enabling low-precision representations for straightforward
memory savings. For DNN models, the approximation error made by the quantizer inevitably leads to performance
drop. A series of work focuses on Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) that finetunes the quantized model at low precision [8, 9, 25, 37, 47]. However, given the high training cost
and the complicated computation graph of vision transformer
models, retraining the model at low precision could be costly
and unstable [42]. Alternatively, Post-Training Quantization
(PTQ) is preferable for vision transformers as it eliminates
the need for re-training or finetuning the quantized model,
instead only adjusts the design of the quantizer based on the
full-precision pretrained model and a small set of sampled
calibration data [1, 2, 23, 32, 36]. For example, linear quantizers [7, 29, 36, 38] reduce quantization error by shifting,
clipping, and scaling the values to be quantized. Nonlinear
quantizers [13, 42, 44] further adjust the width and location
of each quantization bin to better fit the distribution.
Unfortunately, though progresses are made in designing
better PTQ quantizers, it still appears to be significantly challenging to quantize vision transformer models, especially
for activation quantization. Transformer layers produce up

20321

