This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDFusion: Multimodal 3D Shape Completion, Reconstruction, and Generation
Yen-Chi Cheng1

Hsin-Ying Lee2
Sergey Tulyakov2
Alexander Schwing1∗
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Snap Research

{yenchic3,aschwing,lgui}@illinois.edu

Liangyan Gui1∗

{hlee5,stulyakov}@snap.com

Shape
Completion

https://yccyenchicheng.github.io/SDFusion/

Text-guided
Completion
square couch

with shelf

table with net

cheesecake

wooden table

table tennis table

ice cream

summer house

Japanese castle

Text-guided
Generation

3D
Recon.

Missing

a rocking chair

square table, curved legs

Multi-condition

condition
strength

a chair with arms

Text-guided Colorization

Figure 1. Applications of SDFusion. The proposed diffusion-based model enables various applications. (left) SDFusion can generate
shapes conditioned on different input modalities, including partial shapes, images, and text. SDFusion can even jointly handle multiple
conditioning modalities while controlling the strength for each of them. (right) We leverage pretrained 2D models to texture 3D shapes
generated by SDFusion.

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel framework built to simplify 3D asset generation for amateur users. To enable interactive generation, our method supports a variety of input modalities that can be easily provided by a human, including images, text, partially observed shapes and combinations of these, further allowing to adjust the strength
of each input. At the core of our approach is an encoderdecoder, compressing 3D shapes into a compact latent representation, upon which a diffusion model is learned. To
enable a variety of multi-modal inputs, we employ taskspecific encoders with dropout followed by a cross-attention

mechanism. Due to its flexibility, our model naturally supports a variety of tasks, outperforming prior works on shape
completion, image-based 3D reconstruction, and text-to3D. Most interestingly, our model can combine all these
tasks into one swiss-army-knife tool, enabling the user to
perform shape generation using incomplete shapes, images,
and textual descriptions at the same time, providing the relative weights for each input and facilitating interactivity.
Despite our approach being shape-only, we further show an
efficient method to texture the generated shape using largescale text-to-image models.

4456

