This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PersonNeRF :
Personalized Reconstruction from Photo Collections
Chung-Yi Weng1 Pratul P. Srinivasan2 Brian Curless1,2 Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1,2
1
University of Washington 2 Google Research
https://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/personnerf/

Figure 1. Given a photo collection of a subject (e.g., Roger Federer) (a), our method PersonNeRF builds a space of the subject spanned
by camera view, body pose, and appearance (b). PersonNeRF enables traversing this space and exploring unobserved combinations of
these attributes (c). Here we render novel views (top row), various body poses (middle row), and different appearances (bottom row) by
traversing the corresponding axes. Among all of the renderings shown here, only the central images of rows correspond to a photo actually
observed in the training data (corresponding input photo marked with a red square). Photo credits to Getty Images.

Abstract
We present PersonNeRF, a method that takes a collection of photos of a subject (e.g. Roger Federer) captured
across multiple years with arbitrary body poses and appearances, and enables rendering the subject with arbitrary
novel combinations of viewpoint, body pose, and appearance. PersonNeRF builds a customized neural volumetric
3D model of the subject that is able to render an entire space
spanned by camera viewpoint, body pose, and appearance.
A central challenge in this task is dealing with sparse observations; a given body pose is likely only observed by
a single viewpoint with a single appearance, and a given

appearance is only observed under a handful of different
body poses. We address this issue by recovering a canonical T-pose neural volumetric representation of the subject
that allows for changing appearance across different observations, but uses a shared pose-dependent motion field
across all observations. We demonstrate that this approach,
along with regularization of the recovered volumetric geometry to encourage smoothness, is able to recover a model
that renders compelling images from novel combinations of
viewpoint, pose, and appearance from these challenging unstructured photo collections, outperforming prior work for
free-viewpoint human rendering.

524

