This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FCC: Feature Clusters Compression for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Jian Li1 , Ziyao Meng2 , Daqian Shi3 , Rui Song1 , Xiaolei Diao3 , Jingwen Wang1 , Hao Xu1, *
1
Jilin University, 2 University of Minho, 3 University of Trento
lijianjlu@126.com, id9272@alunos.uminho.pt, daqian.shi@unitn.it, songrui20@mails.jlu.edu.cn,
xiaolei.diao@unitn.it, wangjingwen jlu@163.com, xuhao@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are rather restrictive in
long-tailed data, since they commonly exhibit an underrepresentation for minority classes. Various remedies have
been proposed to tackle this problem from different perspectives, but they ignore the impact of the density of Backbone Features (BFs) on this issue. Through representation
learning, DNNs can map BFs into dense clusters in feature space, while the features of minority classes often show
sparse clusters. In practical applications, these features are
discretely mapped or even cross the decision boundary resulting in misclassification. Inspired by this observation, we
propose a simple and generic method, namely Feature Clusters Compression (FCC), to increase the density of BFs by
compressing backbone feature clusters. The proposed FCC
can be easily achieved by only multiplying original BFs by
a scaling factor in training phase, which establishes a linear compression relationship between the original and multiplied features, and forces DNNs to map the former into
denser clusters. In test phase, we directly feed original features without multiplying the factor to the classifier, such
that BFs of test samples are mapped closer together and do
not easily cross the decision boundary. Meanwhile, FCC
can be friendly combined with existing long-tailed methods
and further boost them. We apply FCC to numerous stateof-the-art methods and evaluate them on widely used longtailed benchmark datasets. Extensive experiments fully verify the effectiveness and generality of our method. Code is
available at https://github.com/lijian16/FCC.

1. Introduction
Recently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved
considerable success in a variety of visual tasks, such as object detection [5,12] and visual recognition [18,38]. Despite
with ingenious networks and powerful learning capabilities,
the great success is inseparable from large-scale balanced
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) DNNs can map backbone features into different clusters, while minority classes are mapped into sparse clusters compared to majority classes. The sparsity causes boundary points
mapped far from their clusters or even cross the boundary. (b) FCC
can compress original features compared with multiplied features,
which makes these features are mapped closer together. Because
the decision boundary remains unchanged in test phase, boundary
points will be brought back within the boundary.

datasets, such as ImageNet [8]. However, datasets collected
from real-world scenarios normally follow imbalanced and
long-tailed distributions, in which few categories (majority
classes) occupy most of the data while many categories (minority classes) are under-represented [15]. DNNs trained
on such datasets commonly exhibit a bias towards overrepresented majority classes and produce low recognition
accuracy for minority classes [19, 24, 33].
A number of remedies have been proposed to deal with
this problem from different perspectives. For instance,
re-sampling methods aim to balance the data distribution
by designing different sampling strategies [13, 23]. Reweighting methods attempt to alleviate the dominance of
majority classes by assigning different weights to each class
[1, 3, 21]. Two-stage training methods divide the vanilla
training procedure into imbalanced learning and balanced
fine-tuning [11, 19]. More recently, multi-expert networks
have been proposed to employ multiple models to learn representation from different aspects [32, 37]. These methods
show the outstanding performance on long-tailed recognition, but they ignore the impact of the density of Backbone

24080

