This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Habitat-Matterport 3D Semantics Dataset
Karmesh Yadav1 *, Ram Ramrakhya2 *, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan3 *,
Theo Gervet6 , John Turner1 , Aaron Gokaslan4 , Noah Maestre1 , Angel Xuan Chang5 ,
Dhruv Batra1,2 , Manolis Savva5 , Alexander William Clegg1†, Devendra Singh Chaplot1†
1
Meta AI 2 Georgia Tech 3 UT Austin
4
Cornell University 5 Simon Fraser University 6 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We present the Habitat-Matterport 3D Semantics
(HM3DS EM) dataset. HM3DS EM is the largest dataset
of 3D real-world spaces with densely annotated semantics that is currently available to the academic community. It consists of 142,646 object instance annotations
across 216 3D spaces and 3,100 rooms within those spaces.
The scale, quality, and diversity of object annotations far
exceed those of prior datasets. A key difference setting
apart HM3DS EM from other datasets is the use of texture information to annotate pixel-accurate object boundaries. We demonstrate the effectiveness of HM3DS EM
dataset for the Object Goal Navigation task using different methods. Policies trained using HM3DS EM perform
outperform those trained on prior datasets. Introduction
of HM3DS EM in the Habitat ObjectNav Challenge lead
to an increase in participation from 400 submissions in
2021 to 1022 submissions in 2022. Project page: https:
//aihabitat.org/datasets/hm3d-semantics/

1. Introduction
Over the recent past, work on acquiring and semantically
annotating datasets of real-world spaces has significantly
accelerated research into embodied AI agents that can perceive, navigate and interact with realistic indoor scenes [1–5].
However, the acquisition of such datasets at scale is a laborious process. HM3D [5] which is one of the largest available
datasets with 1000 high-quality and complete indoor space
reconstructions, reportedly required 800+ hours of human
effort to carry out mainly data curation and verification of
3D reconstructions. Moreover, dense semantic annotation of
such acquired spaces remains incredibly challenging.
We present the Habitat-Matterport 3D Dataset Semantics (HM3DS EM). This dataset provides a dense semantic
annotation ‘layer’ augmenting the spaces from the original
* Equal Contribution, Correspondence: karmeshyadav@meta.com
† Equal Contribution

HM3D dataset. This semantic ‘layer’ is implemented as a
set of textures that encode object instance semantics and
cluster objects into distinct rooms. The semantics include
architectural elements (walls, floors, ceilings), large objects
(furniture, appliances etc.), as well as ‘stuff’ categories (aggregations of smaller items such as books on bookcases).
This semantic instance information is specified in the semantic texture layer, providing pixel-accurate correspondences
to the original acquired RGB surface texture and underlying
geometry of the objects.
The HM3DS EM dataset currently contains annotations
for 142,646 object instances distributed across 216 spaces
and 3,100 rooms within those spaces. Figure 1 shows some
examples of the semantic annotations from the HM3DS EM
dataset. The achieved scale is larger than prior work (2.8x relative to Matterport3D [6] (MP3D) and 2.1x relative to ARKitScenes [7] in terms of total number of object instances).
We demonstrate the usefulness of HM3DS EM on the ObjectGoal navigation task. Training on HM3DS EM results
in higher cross-dataset generalization performance. Surprisingly, the policies trained on HM3DS EM perform better on
average across scene datasets compared to training on the
datasets themselves. We also show that increasing the size of
training datasets improve the navigation performance. These
results highlight the importance of improving the quality
and scale of 3D datasets with dense semantic annotations for
improving downstream embodied AI task performance.

2. Related Work
3D reconstruction datasets with semantics. There is a
relatively small number of prior works that focus on semantically annotated 3D interior spaces acquired from the real
world. Collecting, reconstructing, and annotating such data
at scale is a significant effort that requires complex pipelines
and annotation tools. Earlier work has therefore focused
on scenes at the scale of single rooms. For example, ScanNet [8] provided 707 typically room-scale reconstructions
annotated with object semantic instances through labeling

4927

