This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DegAE: A New Pretraining Paradigm for Low-level Vision
Yihao Liu1,2,3
1

Jingwen He1

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

Jinjin Gu1,4
2

Xiangtao Kong1,2,3

Yu Qiao1,2

Chao Dong2,1*

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen Institute

of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

3

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Self-supervised pretraining has achieved remarkable
success in high-level vision, but its application in low-level
vision remains ambiguous and not well-established. What
is the primitive intention of pretraining? What is the core
problem of pretraining in low-level vision? In this paper,
we aim to answer these essential questions and establish
a new pretraining scheme for low-level vision. Specifically,
we examine previous pretraining methods in both high-level
and low-level vision, and categorize current low-level vision
tasks into two groups based on the difficulty of data acquisition: low-cost and high-cost tasks. Existing literature has
mainly focused on pretraining for low-cost tasks, where the
observed performance improvement is often limited. However, we argue that pretraining is more significant for highcost tasks, where data acquisition is more challenging. To
learn a general low-level vision representation that can improve the performance of various tasks, we propose a new
pretraining paradigm called degradation autoencoder (DegAE). DegAE follows the philosophy of designing pretext
task for self-supervised pretraining and is elaborately tailored to low-level vision. With DegAE pretraining, SwinIR
achieves a 6.88dB performance gain on image dehaze task,
while Uformer obtains 3.22dB and 0.54dB improvement on
dehaze and derain tasks, respectively.

1. Introduction
With the phenomenal success of self-supervised pretraining in natural language processing (NLP), a large number of attempts have also been proposed in the field of computer vision [20,21,66,67]. The idea behind self-supervised
pretraining is to learn a general visual representation by devising an appropriate pretext task that does not rely on any
manual annotation. Owing to large-scale pretraining, models with a voracious appetite for data can alleviate the overfitting problem and achieve further improvement.
* Corresponding author. Email: chao.dong@siat.ac.cn.

4

The University of Sydney

Recently, referring to the philosophy of masked language
modeling (MLM) in NLP [27, 51], masked image modeling
(MIM) [20,67] has been proposed and proven to be extraordinarily effective in high-level vision tasks, e.g., image classification, object detection, and image segmentation. However, the notion of low-level vision pretraining is not yet
well-established, due to the distinctions between high-level
and low-level vision tasks. Specifically, the representative
high-level vision tasks take fixed-size images as inputs and
predict manually annotated labels as targets [15, 23], while
most low-level vision methods accept low-quality (LQ) images as inputs and produce high-quality (HQ) images as
targets [31, 78]. More importantly, the annotation manner in low-level vision is quite different. To obtain LQHQ pairs, a wide range of tasks choose to synthesize input LQ images from collected HQ images, such as classical super-resolution [11] and Gaussian denoise [77]. Based
on the difficulty of paired-data acquisition, we can roughly
categorize low-level vision tasks into two groups: 1) lowcost task: tasks with low-cost data acquisition (e.g., superresolution), and 2) high-cost task: tasks with high-cost data
acquisition (e.g., dehaze). This analysis is absent in existing low-level vision literatures [4, 7, 34]. They only consider low-cost tasks and simply adopt a straightforward pretraining strategy that has the same objectives as the downstream tasks. Such a pretraining paradigm lacks generality
and only brings marginal improvement. In this paper, we
claim that pretraining could potentially be more effective
for high-cost tasks and that a new pretraining paradigm tailored to low-level vision would be highly beneficial.
To this end, we devise a novel pretraining paradigm for
low-level vision. Since the goal of low-level vision is to
process LQ images with various degradations, we propose
a degradation autoencoder (DegAE) to achieve contentdegradation disentanglement and generation. DegAE accepts an input image with degradation D1 and a reference
image with degradation D2 . It attempts to transfer the
degradation D2 of the reference image to the input image,
obtaining an output image with input image content, but
with degradation D2 , as described in Fig. 1. Through such
a learning paradigm, the model is expected to learn both

23292

