This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C-SFDA: A Curriculum Learning Aided Self-Training Framework for Efficient
Source Free Domain Adaptation
Nazmul Karim∗ , Niluthpol Chowdhury Mithun† , Abhinav Rajvanshi† , Han-pang Chiu†
Supun Samarasekera† , Nazanin Rahnavard∗
∗

†

Department of ECE, UCF, Orlando FL USA
∗

†

nazmul.karim18@knights.ucf.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) approaches focus on adapting models trained on a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain. In contrast to UDA,
source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) is a more practical setup as access to source data is no longer required
during adaptation. Recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
on SFDA mostly focus on pseudo-label refinement based
self-training which generally suffers from two issues: i) inevitable occurrence of noisy pseudo-labels that could lead
to early training time memorization, ii) refinement process
requires maintaining a memory bank which creates a significant burden in resource constraint scenarios. To address
these concerns, we propose C-SFDA, a curriculum learning aided self-training framework for SFDA that adapts efficiently and reliably to changes across domains based on selective pseudo-labeling. Specifically, we employ a curriculum learning scheme to promote learning from a restricted
amount of pseudo labels selected based on their reliabilities. This simple yet effective step successfully prevents label noise propagation during different stages of adaptation
and eliminates the need for costly memory-bank based label
refinement. Our extensive experimental evaluations on both
image recognition and semantic segmentation tasks confirm
the effectiveness of our method. C-SFDA is also applicable to online test-time domain adaptation and outperforms
previous SOTA methods in this task.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network (DNN) models have achieved remarkable success in various visual recognition tasks [16,
22, 41, 44]. However, even very large DNN models often suffer significant performance degradation when there
* Most of this work was done during Nazmul Karim’s internship with

SRI International. Project Page: https://sites.google.com/
view/csfdacvpr2023/home

SRI International, Princeton, NJ, USA

firstname.lastname@sri.com

is a distribution or domain shift [54, 78] between training
(source) and test (target) domains. To address the problem of domain shifts, various Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [19, 31] algorithms have been developed over
recent years. Most UDA techniques require access to labeled source domain data during adaptation, which limits
their application in many real-world scenarios, e.g. source
data is private, or adaptation in edge devices with limited computational capacity. In this regard, source-free domain adaptation setting has recently gained significant interest [34, 35, 84], which considers the availability of only
source pre-trained model and unlabeled target domain data.
Recent state-of-the-art SFDA methods (e.g., SHOT [42],
NRC [83], G-SFDA [85], AdaContrast [4]) mostly rely on
the self-training mechanism that is guided by the source pretrained model generated pseudo-labels (PLs). Label refinement using the knowledge of per-class cluster structure in
feature space is recurrently used in these methods. At early
stages of adaptation, the label information formulated based
on cluster structure can be severely misleading or noisy;
shown in Fig. 1. As the adaptation progresses, this label
noise can negatively impact the subsequent cluster structure as the key to learning meaningful clusters hinges on
the quality of pseudo-labels itself. Therefore, the inevitable
presence of label noise at early training time is a critical issue in SFDA and requires proper attention. Furthermore,
distributing cluster knowledge among neighbor samples requires a memory bank [4, 42] which creates a significant
burden in resource-constraint scenarios. In addition, most
memory bank dependent SFDA techniques are not suitable
for online test-time domain adaptation [73,76]; an emerging
area of UDA that has gained traction in recent times. Designing a memory-bank-free SFDA approach that can guide
the self-training with highly precise pseudo-labels is a very
challenging task and a major focus of this work.
In our work, we focus on increasing the reliability
of generated pseudo-labels without using a memory-bank
and clustering-based pseudo-label refinement. Our analy-

24120

