This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quantum Multi-Model Fitting
Matteo Farina1 Luca Magri2 Willi Menapace1
Elisa Ricci1,3 Vladislav Golyanik4 Federica Arrigoni2
1

University of Trento

2

Politecnico di Milano

3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

1. Introduction
Since the data volumes that AI technologies are required
to process are continuously growing every year, the pressure
to devise more powerful hardware solutions is also increasing. To face this challenge, a promising direction currently
pursued both in academic research labs and in leading companies is to exploit the potential of quantum computing.
Such paradigm leverages quantum mechanical effects for
computations and optimization, accelerating several important problems such as prime number factorization, database
search [36] and combinatorial optimization [33]. The reason for such acceleration is that quantum computers leverage quantum parallelism of qubits, i.e., the property that a
quantum system can be in a superposition of multiple (exponentially many) states and perform calculations simultaneously on all of them.
Among the two quantum computing models, i.e., gatebased and Adiabatic Quantum Computers (AQCs), the latter recently gained attention in the computer vision community thanks to advances in experimental hardware realizations [2, 6, 17, 34, 41, 51, 53]. At the present, AQCs pro-

MPI for Informatics, SIC

Quantum
HW

Abstract
Re

m
Si

at
ul

al

n
io

Ours

HQC-RF

Si
m ngl
od e
el
M
m ult
od i
el

Geometric model fitting is a challenging but fundamental computer vision problem. Recently, quantum optimization has been shown to enhance robust fitting for the case
of a single model, while leaving the question of multi-model
fitting open. In response to this challenge, this paper shows
that the latter case can significantly benefit from quantum
hardware and proposes the first quantum approach to multimodel fitting (MMF). We formulate MMF as a problem
that can be efficiently sampled by modern adiabatic quantum computers without the relaxation of the objective function. We also propose an iterative and decomposed version of our method, which supports real-world-sized problems. The experimental evaluation demonstrates promising
results on a variety of datasets. The source code is available at: https://github.com/FarinaMatteo/qmmf .

4

Num
models

Figure 1. Left: Differences between our method and H QC -RF
[17]. While H QC -RF considers only a single model and is tested
on quantum hardware with synthetic data, Q U MF is also evaluated
on real data on real quantum hardware. Although devised for multiple models, our method supports a single model likewise. Right:
Qualitative results of Q U MF on motion segmentation on the AdelaideRMF dataset [49].

vide sufficient resources in terms of the number of qubits,
qubit connectivity and admissible problem sizes which they
can tackle [7], to be applied to a wide range of problems in
computer vision. The AQC model is based on the adiabatic
theorem of quantum mechanics [8] and designed for combinatorial problems (including N P-hard) that are notoriously
difficult to solve on classical hardware. Modern AQCs operate by optimizing objectives in the quadratic unconstrained
binary optimization (QUBO) form (see Sec. 2). However,
many relevant tasks in computer vision cannot be trivially
expressed in this form. Hence, currently, two prominent
research questions in the field are: 1) Which problems in
computer vision could benefit from an AQC?, and 2) How
can these problems be mapped to a QUBO form in order to
use an AQC?
Several efforts have been recently undertaken to bring
classical vision problems in this direction. Notable examples are works on graph matching [40, 41], multi-image
matching [6], point-set registration [20, 34], object detection [26], multi-object tracking [53], motion segmentation
[2] and robust fitting [17]. Focusing on geometric model
fitting, Doan et al. [17] proposed an iterative consensus
maximization approach to robustly fit a single geometric
model to noisy data. This work was the first to demonstrate
the advantages of quantum hardware in robust single-model
fitting with error bounds, which is an important and chal-

13640

