This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Sample Relationship for Exposure Correction
Jie Huang,* Feng Zhao†, Man Zhou*†, Jie Xiao, Naishan Zheng, Kaiwen Zheng, Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China
{hj0117,manman,ustchbxj,nszheng,kezh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {fzhao956,zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Exposure correction task aims to correct the underexposure and its adverse overexposure images to the normal
exposure in a single network. As well recognized, the optimization flow is the opposite. Despite great advancement,
existing exposure correction methods are usually trained
with a mini-batch of both underexposure and overexposure
mixed samples and have not explored the relationship between them to solve the optimization inconsistency.
In this paper, we introduce a new perspective to conjunct their optimization processes by correlating and constraining the relationship of correction procedure in a minibatch. The core designs of our framework consist of two
steps: 1) formulating the exposure relationship of samples
across the batch dimension via a context-irrelevant pretext task. 2) delivering the above sample relationship design as the regularization term within the loss function to
promote optimization consistency. The proposed sample
relationship design as a general term can be easily integrated into existing exposure correction methods without
any computational burden in inference time. Extensive experiments over multiple representative exposure correction
benchmarks demonstrate consistent performance gains by
introducing our sample relationship design.

1. Introduction
The images captured under non-ideal illumination conditions, i.e., underexposure or overexposure scenes, usually
suffer from unpleasant visual effects and thus count against
the down-streaming vision tasks. To this end, exposure
correction techniques have been developed, which aim to
correct both underexposure and overexposure images to the
normal exposure automatically. It is recognized that a single algorithm is challenging to take for exposure correction
since the mapping flows of correcting underexposure and
overexposure are quite different [12].
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

Recent years have witnessed explosive advancement
only on the single underexposure correction, including conventional methods that rely on manually designed strategies [2, 8, 10, 20, 28, 31], and deep-learning-driven methods
that account for the powerful learning capability of complicated neural networks [32–34, 39], where deep-learning
methods have achieved improvement in restoring corruptions [25, 35–37]. Seldom efforts have been devoted to both
underexposure and overexposure scenes within a single algorithm for meeting the practical application. Very recently,
some promising works [1, 12, 14, 24] attempt to solve the
above issue. Both of them follow the common principle of
alleviating the optimization process inconsistency by conjugating their exposure representations in spatial domain
[12, 14, 24, 29] or in frequency transform domain [13].
In fact, most above exposure correction approaches are
trained with a mini-batch that contains both underexposure
and overexposure mixed samples (see Fig. 1). Within the
mini-batch, the optimization process of a single network is
the opposite. On the other hand, correlating the relationship
of samples across the mini-batch could conjunct their optimization processes [11]. Therefore, by constraining the relationship across the batch dimension, the adverse effect of
opposite optimization in the mini-batch could be relieved.
To this end, in this paper, we introduce a new perspective that conjuncts the optimization processes across
the batch dimension via sample relationship learning and
further improves the optimization processes of exposure
correction. To achieve this, we construct an exposurerelationship learning (ERL) framework consisting of two
steps (see Fig. 2). In the first step (see Fig. 3), we devise
a batch-correlation module (BCM) that captures the relationship of samples across the batch dimension. To enable
such a relationship focusing on the exposure-related representations, we train BCM via a pretext task that excludes
context information correlation. Then, in the second step
(see Fig. 4), we deliver the above sample relationship as the
additional training regularization term within the loss function of exposure correction algorithms, where the relationship of corrected results is optimized on the trained BCM.
In this way, the optimization processes within a mini-batch

9904

