This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi3D: Bi-domain Active Learning for Cross-domain 3D Object Detection
Jiakang Yuan∗,1 , Bo Zhang†,2 , Xiangchao Yan2 , Tao Chen†,1 , Botian Shi2 , Yikang Li2 , Yu Qiao2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
jkyuan22@m.fudan.edu.cn, {yanxiangchao,shibotian,liyikang,qiaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn

(a) General 3D Object Detection

LiDAR-based 3D Object Detection (3DOD) [5, 13, 26,
28, 40] has advanced a lot recently. However, the generalization of a well-trained 3DOD model from a source
point cloud dataset (domain) to another one, namely cross∗ This work was done when Jiakang Yuan was an intern at Shanghai
AI Laboratory.
† Corresponding to: Tao Chen (eetchen@fudan.edu.cn), Bo Zhang
(zhangbo@pjlab.org.cn)

15599

Detector Head

1. Introduction

3D backbone
Data Augmentation

RPN

Map to BEV

Train

BEV features

(b) Self-training based UDA for 3D
Object Detection
Train

Instance categories
Bounding boxes

Detector

NMS

Pseudo Label

Predicted
Bounding Boxes
Filtering low confidence
bounding boxes

Source

(c) ADA for 3D Object Detection

Target

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) technique has
been explored in 3D cross-domain tasks recently. Though
preliminary progress has been made, the performance gap
between the UDA-based 3D model and the supervised
one trained with fully annotated target domain is still
large. This motivates us to consider selecting partial-yetimportant target data and labeling them at a minimum cost,
to achieve a good trade-off between high performance and
low annotation cost. To this end, we propose a Bi-domain
active learning approach, namely Bi3D, to solve the crossdomain 3D object detection task. The Bi3D ﬁrst develops a
domainness-aware source sampling strategy, which identiﬁes target-domain-like samples from the source domain to
avoid the model being interfered by irrelevant source data.
Then a diversity-based target sampling strategy is developed, which selects the most informative subset of target domain to improve the model adaptability to the target domain
using as little annotation budget as possible. Experiments
are conducted on typical cross-domain adaptation scenarios including cross-LiDAR-beam, cross-country, and crosssensor, where Bi3D achieves a promising target-domain detection accuracy (89.63% on KITTI) compared with UDAbased work (84.29%), even surpassing the detector trained
on the full set of the labeled target domain (88.98%). Our
code is available at: https://github.com/PJLabADG/3DTrans.

2D Backbone

Abstract

Train

Detector

Annotate
Oracle

Instance-level
features
Scene-level
features

Selected representative
unlabel target frames

Active sampling
criteria

Figure 1. Comparisons among (a) The general 3DOD pipeline,
(b) Self-training based Unsupervised Domain Adaptation 3DOD
pipeline, and (c) Active Domain Adaptation 3DOD pipeline that
selects representative target data, and then annotates them by an
oracle (human expert) for subsequent model reﬁnement.

domain 3DOD, is still under-explored. Such a task in fact
is important in many real-world applications. For example,
in the autonomous driving scenario, the target scene distribution frequently changes due to unforeseen differences in
dynamically changing environments, making cross-domain
3DOD an urgent problem to be resolved.
Beneﬁting from the success of Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) technique in 2D cross-domain tasks [3,
7,10,14,32,45,48], several attempts are made to apply UDA
for tackling 3D cross-domain tasks [15,20,22,36,39,42,46].
ST3D [42] designs a self-training-based framework to adapt
a pre-trained detector from the source domain to a new target domain. LiDAR distillation [36] exploits transferable
knowledge learned from high-beam LiDAR data to the low
one. Although these UDA 3D models have achieved signiﬁcant performance gains for the cross-domain task, there

