This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structured 3D Features for Reconstructing Controllable Avatars
Enric Corona1,3† Mihai Zanfir2† Thiemo Alldieck3
Eduard Gabriel Bazavan3 Andrei Zanfir3 Cristian Sminchisescu3
1

Geometry

Monocular image

UPC, Barcelona

2

Newton

Albedo

Shading

3

Google Research

New Illumination

New view

New pose

New clothing

View synthesis and 3D editing

3D Reconstruction

Figure 1. We introduce Structured 3D Features (S3F), a new feature representation for monocular 3D Human Reconstruction. Using
S3Fs, we train a new implicit reconstruction model for creating rigged and relightable avatars – without the need for post-processing.
S3Fs store features in a dense 3D point cloud around a human body model, allowing for various applications: our model can produce 3D
reconstructions in novel poses, under new illumination, under novel views, or with altered clothing for virtual try-on.

Abstract
We introduce Structured 3D Features, a model based on
a novel implicit 3D representation that pools pixel-aligned
image features onto dense 3D points sampled from a parametric, statistical human mesh surface. The 3D points have
associated semantics and can move freely in 3D space. This
allows for optimal coverage of the person of interest, beyond just the body shape, which in turn, additionally helps
modeling accessories, hair, and loose clothing. Owing to
this, we present a complete 3D transformer-based attention
framework which, given a single image of a person in an unconstrained pose, generates an animatable 3D reconstruction with albedo and illumination decomposition, as a result of a single end-to-end model, trained semi-supervised,
and with no additional postprocessing. We show that our
S3F model surpasses the previous state-of-the-art on various tasks, including monocular 3D reconstruction, as well
as albedo & shading estimation. Moreover, we show that
the proposed methodology allows novel view synthesis, relighting, and re-posing the reconstruction, and can naturally be extended to handle multiple input images (e.g. different views of a person, or the same view, in different poses,
in video). Finally, we demonstrate the editing capabilities
of our model for 3D virtual try-on applications.
† Work was done while Enric and Mihai were with Google Research.

1. Introduction
Human digitization is playing a major role in several important applications, including AR/VR, video games, social
telepresence, virtual try-on, or the movie industry. Traditionally, 3D virtual avatars have been created using multiview stereo [33] or expensive equipment [48]. More flexible or low-cost solutions are often template-based [1, 4],
but these lack expressiveness for representing details such
as hair. Recently, research on implicit representations [6,
16, 22, 52, 53] and neural fields [24, 46, 63, 70] has made
significant progress in improving the realism of avatars.The
proposed models produce detailed results and are also capable, within limits, to represent loose hair or clothing.
Even though model-free methods yield high-fidelity
avatars, they are not suited for downstream tasks such as
animation. Furthermore, proficiency is often limited to
a certain range of imaged body poses. Aiming at these
problems, different efforts have been made to combine
parametric models with more flexible implicit representations [21, 22, 62, 71]. These methods support animation [21,22] or tackle challenging body poses [62,71]. However, most work relies on 2D pixel-aligned features. This
leads to two important problems: (1) First, errors in body
pose or camera parameter estimation will result in misalignment between the projections of 3D points on the body surface and image features, which ultimately results in low

16954

