This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPF: Learning Dense Prediction Fields with Weak Supervision
Xiaoxue Chen1 , Yuhang Zheng2 , Yupeng Zheng3
Qiang Zhou1 , Hao Zhao1 , Guyue Zhou1 , Ya-Qin Zhang1
1
AIR, Tsinghua University 2 BUAA 3 CASIA
{chenxiaoxue, zhaohao}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn, zyh 021@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Nowadays, many visual scene understanding problems
are addressed by dense prediction networks. But pixel-wise
dense annotations are very expensive (e.g., for scene parsing) or impossible (e.g., for intrinsic image decomposition),
motivating us to leverage cheap point-level weak supervision. However, existing pointly-supervised methods still use
the same architecture designed for full supervision. In stark
contrast to them, we propose a new paradigm that makes
predictions for point coordinate queries, as inspired by the
recent success of implicit representations, like distance or
radiance fields. As such, the method is named as dense prediction fields (DPFs). DPFs generate expressive intermediate features for continuous sub-pixel locations, thus allowing outputs of an arbitrary resolution. DPFs are naturally compatible with point-level supervision. We showcase the effectiveness of DPFs using two substantially different tasks: high-level semantic parsing and low-level intrinsic image decomposition. In these two cases, supervision comes in the form of single-point semantic category
and two-point relative reflectance, respectively. As benchmarked by three large-scale public datasets PASCALContext, ADE20K and IIW, DPFs set new state-of-the-art performance on all of them with significant margins. Code can
be accessed at https://github.com/cxx226/DPF.

1. Introduction
The field of visual scene understanding aims to recover
various scene properties from input images, e.g., semantic labels [24], depth values [49] [66], edge existence [1]
or action affordance [10]. Successful and comprehensive
scene understanding is the cornerstone of various emerging
artificial intelligence applications, like autonomous driving,
intelligent robots or smart manufacturing. Albeit difficult,
this field has seen great progress thanks to end-to-end dense
prediction networks like DPT [48] and large-scale denselylabelled datasets like ADE20K [67]. If we can densely label

Point query

Implicit Function
Dense Prediction
Backbone

Latent code

Dense Prediction
Backbone

:cat

:cloth

:tree

:others

(c) Point semantic annotation

Guidance
Encoder

(x,y)

Input
(a) General
formulation

Input

Guidance

(b) DPF (ours)

Query

A

B: A is darker

:same reflectance

(d) Pairwise reflectance comparison

Figure 1. (a) Existing dense prediction formulation. (b) Our DPF
formulation. (c) Semantic annotation for single points. (d) Pairwise reflectance annotation between two points.

every property that we care about, totally solving the visual
scene understanding problem seems a matter of time.
However, dense annotations are usually too expensive
or impossible to obtain. According to the Cityscapes paper [13], it takes 1.5 hours to generate a high-quality semantic annotation map for a single image. What’s worse, for
the problem of decomposing an image into reflectance and
shading 1 , it’s impossible for humans to provide pixel-wise
ground truth values. As such, the largest intrinsic image
decomposition dataset IIW [7] is annotated in the form of
pair-wise reflectance comparison between two points. Annotators are guided to judge whether the reflectance of one
point is darker than that of another point or not.
Given the importance of dense prediction and the difficulty of obtaining dense annotations, we focus on learning
with point-level weak supervision. Fig. 1-c shows an example of point-level semantic scene parsing annotation. The
sole red point on the cat is annotated as cat, which is much
more cheaper than delineating the cat’s contours. Fig. 1-d
shows human judgement of relative reflectance annotation
between every pair of two points. Since the floor has a constant reflectance, point pairs on the floor are annotated with
1 Intrinsic image decomposition.

15347

