This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-Learning with a Geometry-Adaptive Preconditioner
Suhyun Kang1 ,* Duhun Hwang1 ,* Moonjung Eo1 , Taesup Kim2 , Wonjong Rhee1,3†
1
Department of Intelligence and Information, Seoul National University
2
Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul National University
3
IPAI and AIIS, Seoul National University
{su_hyun, yelobean, eod87, taesup.kim, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) is one of the most
successful meta-learning algorithms. It has a bi-level optimization structure where the outer-loop process learns a
shared initialization and the inner-loop process optimizes
task-specific weights. Although MAML relies on the standard gradient descent in the inner-loop, recent studies have
shown that controlling the inner-loop’s gradient descent with
a meta-learned preconditioner can be beneficial. Existing
preconditioners, however, cannot simultaneously adapt in
a task-specific and path-dependent way. Additionally, they
do not satisfy the Riemannian metric condition, which can
enable the steepest descent learning with preconditioned
gradient. In this study, we propose Geometry-Adaptive Preconditioned gradient descent (GAP) that can overcome the
limitations in MAML; GAP can efficiently meta-learn a
preconditioner that is dependent on task-specific parameters, and its preconditioner can be shown to be a Riemannian metric. Thanks to the two properties, the geometryadaptive preconditioner is effective for improving the innerloop optimization. Experiment results show that GAP outperforms the state-of-the-art MAML family and preconditioned gradient descent-MAML (PGD-MAML) family in a
variety of few-shot learning tasks. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Suhyun777/CVPR23-GAP.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning, or learning to learn, enables algorithms
to quickly learn new concepts with only a small number
of samples by extracting prior-knowledge known as metaknowledge from a variety of tasks and by improving the generalization capability over the new tasks. Among the metalearning algorithms, the category of optimization-based
meta-learning [8, 17, 20, 21, 48] has been gaining popularity
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

due to its flexible applicability over diverse fields including
robotics [55, 59], medical image analysis [40, 54], language
modeling [37,42], and object detection [46,61]. In particular,
Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) [20] is one of the
most prevalent gradient-based meta-learning algorithms.
Many recent studies have improved MAML by adopting
a Preconditioned Gradient Descent (PGD1 ) for inner-loop
optimization [34, 36, 44, 49, 53, 57, 66]. In this paper, we
collectively address PGD-based MAML algorithms as the
PGD-MAML family. A PGD is different from the ordinary
gradient descent because it performs a preconditioning on
the gradient using a preconditioning matrix P, also called a
preconditioner. A PGD-MAML algorithm meta-learns not
only the initialization parameter θ0 of the network but also
the meta-parameter ϕ of the preconditioner P.
For the inner-loop optimization, P was kept static in
most of the previous works (Figure 1(b)) [34, 36, 44, 57,
66]. Some of the previous works considered adapting the
preconditioner P with the inner-step k (Figure 1(c)) [49]
and some others with the individual task (Figure 1(d)) [53].
They achieved performance improvement by considering
individual tasks and inner-step, respectively, and showed
that both factors were valuable. However, both factors have
not been considered simultaneously in the existing studies.
When a parameter space has a certain underlying structure, there exists a Riemannian metric corresponding the parameter space [3, 4]. If the preconditioning matrix is the Riemannian metric, the preconditioned gradient is known to become the steepest descent on the parameter space [2–4,6,27].
An illustration of a toy example is shown in Figure 2. The
optimization path of an ordinary gradient descent is shown
in Figure 2(a). Compared to the ordinary gradient descent, a
preconditioned gradient descent with a preconditioner that
does not satisfy the Riemannian metric condition can actually
harm the optimization. For the example in Figure 2(b), the
preconditioner affects the optimization into an undesirable
direction and negatively affects the gradient descent. On the
1 PGD in our work should not be confused with Projected Gradient
Descent [13].

16080

