This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Auto-Encoders Meet Generative Adversarial Networks and Beyond
Zhengcong Fei, Mingyuan Fan, Li Zhu, Junshi Huang*
Xiaoming Wei, Xiaolin Wei
Meituan
{feizhengcong, fanmingyuan, zhuli09, huangjunshi}@meituan.com
{weixiaoming, weixiaolin02}@meituan.com

Abstract
85.0

1. Introduction
In recent years, Transformer [62] has become the de
facto standard architecture in computer vision, and has
surpassed state-of-the-art Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [31, 58] feature extractors in vision tasks through
models such as the Vision Transformer [21]. Meanwhile,
self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms [12, 14, 27, 29]
aims to learn transferable representation from unlabeled
* The corresponding author.

84.5
Top-1 Acc.

Masked Auto-Encoder (MAE) pretraining methods randomly mask image patches and then train a vision Transformer to reconstruct the original pixels based on the unmasked patches. While they demonstrates impressive performance for downstream vision tasks, it generally requires
a large amount of training resource. In this paper, we introduce a novel Generative Adversarial Networks alike framework, referred to as GAN-MAE, where a generator is used
to generate the masked patches according to the remaining visible patches, and a discriminator is employed to predict whether the patch is synthesized by the generator. We
believe this capacity of distinguishing whether the image
patch is predicted or original is benefit to representation
learning. Another key point lies in that the parameters
of the vision Transformer backbone in the generator and
discriminator are shared. Extensive experiments demonstrate that adversarial training of GAN-MAE framework
is more efficient and accordingly outperforms the standard
MAE given the same model size, training data, and computation resource. The gains are substantially robust for
different model sizes and datasets, in particular, a ViT-B
model trained with GAN-MAE for 200 epochs outperforms
the MAE with 1600 epochs on fine-tuning top-1 accuracy of
ImageNet-1k with much less FLOPs. Besides, our approach
also works well at transferring downstream tasks.

MAE
GAN-MAE
Pre-training time

84.0
256.4h
83.5

79.4h

83.0
82.5

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
Epoch

Figure 1. Performance comparison in different pre-training
epochs for ImageNet-1K Fine-tuning top-1 accuracy. Compared to MAE trained for 1600 epochs, GAN-MAE achieves comparable accuracy with much less training time at 200 epochs.

data by performing instance-level pretext tasks, and has
been a long-standing target in the vision community. Particularly, masked image modeling (MIM) in SSL for vision transformers has shown remarkably impressive downstream performance in a wide variety of computer vision
tasks [3, 28], attracting increasing attention.
MIM is a simple pretext task that first randomly masks
some patches of an image, and then predicts the contents
of the masked patches according to the remaining, using
various reconstruction targets, e.g., visual tokens [3,19], semantic features [1, 77] and raw pixels [28, 70]. Essentially,
it learns the transferable representation by modeling the image structure itself as content prediction. While more effective than conventional pre-training, masked autoencoder
modeling approaches still exist some issues: (i) reconstruction optimization with MSE loss leads to blurrier output images than the raw input, it would be better to use a more
perceptual loss over pixels to guide the fine-grained seman-

24449

