This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShapeTalk: A Language Dataset and Framework for
3D Shape Edits and Deformations
Panos Achlioptas1,3 Ian Huang1 Minhyuk Sung2
Sergey Tulyakov3 Leonidas Guibas1
1

Stanford University

Abstract
Editing 3D geometry is a challenging task requiring specialized skills. In this work, we aim to facilitate the task
of editing the geometry of 3D models through the use of
natural language. For example, we may want to modify
a 3D chair model to “make its legs thinner” or to “open
a hole in its back”. To tackle this problem in a manner that promotes open-ended language use and enables
fine-grained shape edits, we introduce the most extensive
existing corpus of natural language utterances describing
shape differences: ShapeTalk. ShapeTalk contains over
half a million discriminative utterances produced by contrasting the shapes of common 3D objects for a variety
of object classes and degrees of similarity. We also introduce a generic framework, ChangeIt3D, which builds on
ShapeTalk and can use an arbitrary 3D generative model
of shapes to produce edits that align the output better with
the edit or deformation description. Finally, we introduce
metrics for the quantitative evaluation of language-assisted
shape editing methods that reflect key desiderata within this
editing setup. We note that ShapeTalk allows methods to
be trained with explicit 3D-to-language data, bypassing the
necessity of “lifting” 2D to 3D using methods like neural
rendering, as required by extant 2D image-language foundation models. Our code and data are publicly available at
https://changeit3d.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Visual content creation and adaptation, whether in 2D
or 3D scenes, has traditionally been a time-consuming effort, requiring specialized skills, software, and multiple iterations. The use of natural language promises to democratize this process and let ordinary users perform semantically plausible content synthesis, as well as addition, deletion, and modification by describing their intent in words
– and then letting AI-powered tools translate that into edits

2

KAIST

3

Snap Inc.

of their content. There has been very strong recent interest
in and impressive results from large visual language models
able to transform text into 2D images, such as DALL-E 2
from OpenAI, or Imagen from Google. The same need exists for 3D asset creation for video games, movies, as well
as mixed-reality experiences – though fully automated tools
in the 3D area are only now starting to appear [26, 33, 35].
The task of editing 2D or 3D content via language is even
more challenging, as references to extant scene components
have to be resolved, while unreferenced parts of the scene
should be kept unchanged as much as possible.
This work focuses on the task of modifying the shape
of a 3D object in a fine-grained manner according to the
semantics of free-form natural language. Operating directly
in a 3D representation has many advantages for downstream
tasks that need to be 3D-aware, such as scene composition
and manipulation, interaction, etc. Even if only 2D views
are needed, 3D provides superior attribute disentanglement
and guarantees view consistency. Furthermore, note that
modifying the 3D geometry of an object in ways that are
faithful to its class semantics is itself a highly non-trivial
undertaking (e.g., stretching a sedan should keep the wheels
circular) and has been the focus of recent work [44, 45].
Our language-driven shape deformation task is applicable to many real-world situations: e.g., in assisting visuallyimpaired users, graphic designers, or artists to interact with
objects of interest and change them to better fit their design
needs. We build a framework, ChangeIt3D, to address this
task, consisting of three major components: the ShapeTalk
large-scale dataset with an order of magnitude more utterances than in previous work (Section 2), a modular architecture for implementing edits on top of a variety of 3D shape
representations, and a set of evaluation metrics to quantify
the quality of the performed transformations.
The ShapeTalk dataset, linking 3D shapes and free-form
language, contains over half a million discriminative utterances produced by contrasting pairs of common 3D objects for a variety of object classes and degrees of similarity. Shape differentiation helps focus the language on fine-

12685

