This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guided Recommendation for Model Fine-Tuning
Hao Li, Charless Fowlkes, Hao Yang, Onkar Dabeer, Zhuowen Tu, Stefano Soatto
AWS AI Labs
{haolimax, fowlkec, haoyng, onkardab, ztu, soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
Model selection is essential for reducing the search cost of
the best pre-trained model over a large-scale model zoo for
a downstream task. After analyzing recent hand-designed
model selection criteria with 400+ ImageNet pre-trained
models and 40 downstream tasks, we find that they can fail
due to invalid assumptions and intrinsic limitations. The
prior knowledge on model capacity and dataset also can not
be easily integrated into the existing criteria. To address
these issues, we propose to convert model selection as a
recommendation problem and to learn from the past training
history. Specifically, we characterize the meta information
of datasets and models as features, and use their transfer
learning performance as the guided score. With thousands
of historical training jobs, a recommendation system can
be learned to predict the model selection score given the
features of the dataset and the model as input. Our approach
enables integrating existing model selection scores as additional features and scales with more historical data. We
evaluate the prediction accuracy with 22 pre-trained models over 40 downstream tasks. With extensive evaluations,
we show that the learned approach can outperform prior
hand-designed model selection methods significantly when
relevant training history is available.

1. Introduction
Much of the success of deep learning can be ascribed to its
flexibility: One can train a neural network on a task, and then
use it on a different one, typically after fine-tuning. There
are currently two trends for scaling this practice: One is to
pre-train a large number of specialized models (a “Model
Zoo” [10]) and then select one to fine-tune once the downstream task of interest becomes manifest, typically with a
smaller fine-tuning dataset. Another is to pre-train a single
“Foundation Model” which is then used to support any and
all downstream tasks [47, 57].
Without additional specifications, the second case is a
subset of the first, for one can take the Model Zoo and
Model Selection (MS) mechanism and call it a single model.

For this reason, Foundation Models are characterized as
homogeneous and task-agnostic, where homogeneity refers
to a single neural network architecture, in contrast with the
heterogeneous collection of models in a zoo. Even with
this restriction, the model zoo is more general, for nothing
prevents a Foundation Model to be part of a zoo. In addition,
selecting a smaller dedicated model pretrained for a task can
be much more efficient than using a giant monolithic model
For these reasons, we focus on model selection over a large
heterogeneous model zoo for fine-tuning as the key solution
for scaling inference to a wide variety of downstream tasks.
Brute-force model selection [1, 12] requires fine-tuning
each pre-trained model on the task of interest, and then ranking them using the test error on a held-out dataset as a model
selection score. This is not feasible for large model zoos.
Current model-selection methods therefore aim to predict
the model selection score without actually fine-tuning.
However, current model selection methods do not take
into explicit account even basic characteristics of the finetuning dataset, such as the number of classes or the number
of images, nor of the pre-trained model, such as the model
family, the size of the input, the number of parameters and
the dataset on which it is pre-trained. While coarse, these features can affect the best model to fine-tune, since a mismatch
between fine-tuning dataset size and pre-trained model, or
input dimensions, or number of classes, can influence the
success of downstream performance.
Instead of proposing yet another model selection score,
we propose re-framing model selection as a recommender
system, and directly predict the selection score and corresponding ranking, from whatever existing model selection
scores are readily available, in addition to whatever coarse
features a user deems informative – which may be context
dependent, as some users may wish to penalize large models,
or models that require high-resolution input. Such features
help guide the model selection using criteria beyond raw
downstream validation error. For this reason, we refer to our
recommendation approach as guided, in addition to trained.
We find that incorporating model size, dataset size, cardinality of the hypothesis set and other simple features already
improves the prediction of the expected model selection

3633

