This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AsyFOD: An Asymmetric Adaptation Paradigm for
Few-Shot Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Yipeng Gao1,3∗ , Kun-Yu Lin1,3 *, Junkai Yan1,3 , Yaowei Wang2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China, 2 Pengcheng Lab.
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{gaoyp23, linky5, yanjk3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
In this work, we study few-shot domain adaptive object detection (FSDAOD), where only a few target labeled
images are available for training in addition to sufficient
source labeled images. Critically, in FSDAOD, the data
scarcity in the target domain leads to an extreme data
imbalance between the source and target domains, which
potentially causes over-adaptation in traditional feature
alignment. To address the data imbalance problem, we propose an asymmetric adaptation paradigm, namely AsyFOD,
which leverages the source and target instances from different perspectives. Specifically, by using target distribution
estimation, the AsyFOD first identifies the target-similar
source instances, which serves to augment the limited target instances. Then, we conduct asynchronous alignment
between target-dissimilar source instances and augmented
target instances, which is simple yet effective for alleviating the over-adaptation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed AsyFOD outperforms all state-ofthe-art methods on four FSDAOD benchmarks with various environmental variances, e.g., 3.1% mAP improvement on Cityscapes-to-FoggyCityscapes and 2.9% mAP increase on Sim10k-to-Cityscapes. The code is available at
https://github.com/Hlings/AsyFOD.

Traditional Symmetric Adaptation

Proposed Asymmetric Adaptation

Synchronous Feature Alignment

Asynchronous Feature Alignment

Source Instances

Target Instances

Target-dissimilar Source Instances

Unobserved Target Instances
Target-similar Source Instances

Figure 1. A few target instances are biased to represent the overall target data distribution, i.e., many light orange target instances
are not observed, as shown in the top left. And, the data scarcity
in the target domain leads to a data imbalance between the source
and target domains. Therefore, traditional symmetric adaptation
(such as MMD [38, 40, 41, 56]) easily causes over-adaptation, i.e.,
the detector concentrates on a small area for observed target instances but ignores many other unobserved ones, as shown in the
top right. By contrast, our proposed asymmetric adaptation alleviates the over-adaptation via source instance division and asynchronous alignment.

1. Introduction
Object detection [4, 18, 47–50], which aims to localize
and classify objects simultaneously, is widely used in realworld applications such as video surveillance [29,42,67,70]
and autonomous driving [57, 69]. Unfortunately, detectors suffer a significant performance drop when deployed in
an unseen domain due to the domain discrepancy between
training and test data [36,37,43,63,66,68]. And usually, repeatedly collecting a large amount of labeled data in new
* denotes the authors contributed equally to this work.
† denotes the corresponding author.

domains requires expensive labor and time cost. In this
work, we explore the Few-Shot Domain Adaptive Object
Detection (FSDAOD) [16, 61, 72], which attempts to generalize detectors with minor cost. In addition to adequate
labeled source images, the FSDAOD assumes that only a
few (usually eight) labeled target images are available for
adapting a detector in the target domain.
A critical challenge of the FSDAOD is the data scarcity
in the target domain, which leads to an extreme data imbalance between the source and target domains. As shown
in Figure 1, it is difficult to comprehensively describe the

3261

