This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Resource Problem of Using Linear Layer Leakage Attack in Federated
Learning
Joshua C. Zhao1 , Ahmed Roushdy Elkordy2 , Atul Sharma1 , Yahya H. Ezzeldin2
Salman Avestimehr2 , Saurabh Bagchi1
1
Purdue University
2
University of Southern California
{zhao1207,sharm438,sbagchi}@purdue.edu, {aelkordy,yessa,avestime}@usc.edu

Abstract
Secure aggregation promises a heightened level of privacy in federated learning, maintaining that a server only
has access to a decrypted aggregate update. Within this
setting, linear layer leakage methods are the only data reconstruction attacks able to scale and achieve a high leakage rate regardless of the number of clients or batch size.
This is done through increasing the size of an injected fullyconnected (FC) layer. However, this results in a resource
overhead which grows larger with an increasing number of
clients. We show that this resource overhead is caused by
an incorrect perspective in all prior work that treats an attack on an aggregate update in the same way as an individual update with a larger batch size. Instead, by attacking
the update from the perspective that aggregation is combining multiple individual updates, this allows the application
of sparsity to alleviate resource overhead. We show that
the use of sparsity can decrease the model size overhead by
over 327× and the computation time by 3.34× compared to
SOTA while maintaining equivalent total leakage rate, 77%
even with 1000 clients in aggregation.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [17] has been hailed as a
privacy-preserving method of training. FL involves multiple clients which train their model on their private data
before sending the update back to a server. The promise is
that FL will keep the client data private from all (server as
well as other clients) as the update cannot be used to infer
information about client training data.
However, many recent works have shown that client gradients are not truly privacy preserving. Specifically, data
reconstruction attacks [3, 8, 9, 12, 18, 26, 28, 34] use a model
update to directly recover the private training data. These
methods typically consist of gradient inversion [9, 28, 34]
and analytic attacks [3, 8, 12, 14, 18, 26]. Gradient inversion attacks observe an honest client gradient and iteratively

optimizes randomly initialized dummy data such that the
resulting gradient becomes closer to the honest gradient.
The goal is that dummy data that creates a similar gradient will be close to the ground truth data. These methods
have shown success on smaller batch sizes, but fail when
batch sizes become too large. Prior work has shown that
reconstruction on ImageNet is possible up to a batch size
of 48, although the reconstruction quality is low [28]. Analytic attacks cover a wide range of methods. Primarily,
they use a malicious modification of model architecture and
parameters [18, 26], linear layer leakage methods [3, 8], observe updates over multiple training rounds [14], or treat
images as a blind-source separation problem [12]. However, most of these approaches fail when secure aggregation is applied [4, 6, 7, 23, 24]. Particularly, when a server
can only access the updates aggregated across hundreds or
thousands of training images, the reconstruction process becomes very challenging. Gradient inversion attacks are impossible without additional model modifications or training
rounds. This is where linear layer leakage attacks [3,8] have
shown their superiority.
This sub-class of analytic data reconstruction attacks is
based on the server crafting maliciously modified models
that it sends to the clients. In particular, the server uses a
fully-connected (FC) layer to leak the input images. Compared to any other attack, linear layer leakage attacks are
the only methods able to scale to an increasing number of
clients or batch size, maintaining a high total leakage rate.
This is done by continually increasing the size of an FC
layer used to leak the images. For example, with 100 clients
and a batch size of 64 on CIFAR-100, an attacker can leak
77.2% of all images in a single training round using an inserted FC layer of size 25,600. In this case, the number
of units in the layer is 4× the number of total images, and
maintaining this ratio when the number of clients or batch
size increases allows the attack to still achieve roughly the
same leakage rate. Despite the potential of linear layer leak-

3974

