This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V2X-Seq: A Large-Scale Sequential Dataset for
Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperative Perception and Forecasting
Haibao Yu1,2 , Wenxian Yang1 , Hongzhi Ruan1,5 , Zhenwei Yang1,6 , Yingjuan Tang1,7 , Xu Gao3 , Xin Hao3 ,
1

Yifeng Shi3 , Yifeng Pan3 , Ning Sun4 , Juan Song4 , Jirui Yuan1 , Ping Luo2 , Zaiqing Nie1 *
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Baidu Inc. 4 Beijing Connected and Autonomous Vehicles Technology Co., Ltd
5
University of Chinese Academy of Science
6
University of Science and Technology Beijing 7 Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract
Utilizing infrastructure and vehicle-side information
to track and forecast the behaviors of surrounding traffic participants can significantly improve decision-making
and safety in autonomous driving. However, the lack
of real-world sequential datasets limits research in this
area. To address this issue, we introduce V2X-Seq, the
first large-scale sequential V2X dataset, which includes
data frames, trajectories, vector maps, and traffic lights
captured from natural scenery. V2X-Seq comprises two
parts: the sequential perception dataset, which includes
more than 15,000 frames captured from 95 scenarios, and
the trajectory forecasting dataset, which contains about
80,000 infrastructure-view scenarios, 80,000 vehicle-view
scenarios, and 50,000 cooperative-view scenarios captured from 28 intersections’ areas, covering 672 hours of
data. Based on V2X-Seq, we introduce three new tasks for
vehicle-infrastructure cooperative (VIC) autonomous driving: VIC3D Tracking, Online-VIC Forecasting, and OfflineVIC Forecasting. We also provide benchmarks for the introduced tasks. Find data, code, and more up-to-date information at https://github.com/AIR-THU/DAIR-V2X-Seq.

1. Introduction
Although single-vehicle autonomous driving has made
significant advancements in recent years, it still faces significant safety challenges due to its limited perceptual field
and inability to accurately forecast the behaviors of traffic
participants. These challenges hinder autonomous vehicles
from making well-informed decisions and driving safer. A
promising solution to address these challenges is to leverage
infrastructure information via Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X)
* Corresponding author. Work done while at AIR. For any questions or
discussions, please email dair@air.tsinghua.edu.cn.

V2X Vie
Sim.

Real

DAIR-V2X-C
V2X-Se
V2X-Sim
OPV2V

Wi h
T ajec

101

102

103

10

10

10

Wi h
La ge- ca e
T ajec

NGSIM
WIBAM
R

n Scence
KITTI

e3D

A

Wa m

Ag

e e

ll Sca e
HighD

Si g e-age

Vie

Figure 1. Autonomous driving datasets. V2X-Seq is the first largescale, real-world, and sequential V2X dataset. The green circle denotes the real-world dataset, and the pink triangle denotes the simulated dataset. The abscissa represents the number of sequences.

communication, which has been shown to significantly expand perception range and enhance autonomous driving
safety [1, 38]. However, current research primarily focuses
on utilizing infrastructure data to improve the perception
ability of autonomous driving, particularly in the context
of frame-by-frame 3D detection. To enable well-informed
decision-making for autonomous vehicles, it is critical to
also incorporate infrastructure data to track and predict the
behavior of surrounding traffic participants.
To accelerate the research on cooperative sequential perception and forecasting, we release a large-scale sequential
V2X dataset, V2X-Seq. All elements of this dataset were
captured and generated from real-world scenarios. Compared with DAIR-V2X [38], which focuses on 3D object
detection tasks, V2X-Seq is specifically designed for tracking and trajectory forecasting tasks. The V2X-Seq dataset
is divided into two parts: the sequential perception dataset

5486

