This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Strong Baseline for Generalized Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Sina Hajimiri*

Malik Boudiaf
Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal

Abstract
This paper introduces a generalized few-shot segmentation framework with a straightforward training process and
an easy-to-optimize inference phase. In particular, we propose a simple yet effective model based on the well-known
InfoMax principle, where the Mutual Information (MI) between the learned feature representations and their corresponding predictions is maximized. In addition, the terms
derived from our MI-based formulation are coupled with
a knowledge distillation term to retain the knowledge on
base classes. With a simple training process, our inference
model can be applied on top of any segmentation network
trained on base classes. The proposed inference yields substantial improvements on the popular few-shot segmentation benchmarks, PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i . Particularly,
for novel classes, the improvement gains range from 7%
to 26% (PASCAL-5i ) and from 3% to 12% (COCO-20i ) in
the 1-shot and 5-shot scenarios, respectively. Furthermore,
we propose a more challenging setting, where performance
gaps are further exacerbated. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/sinahmr/DIaM .

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep learning methods, the automatic
interpretation and semantic understanding of image content
have drastically improved in recent years. These models are
nowadays at the core of a broad span of visual recognition
tasks and have enormous potential in strategic domains for
our society, such as autonomous driving, healthcare, or security. Particularly, semantic segmentation, whose goal is
to assign pixel-level categories, lies as one of the mainstays
in visual interpretation. Nevertheless, the remarkable performance achieved by deep learning segmentation models
is typically limited by the amount of available training data.
Indeed, standard segmentation approaches are often trained
on a fixed set of predefined semantic categories, commonly
requiring hundreds of examples per class. This limits their
scalability to novel classes, as obtaining annotations for new
categories is a cumbersome and labor-intensive process.
* Corresponding author: seyed-mohammadsina.hajimiri.1@etsmtl.net

Jose Dolz

Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) has recently
emerged as an appealing alternative to overcome this limitation [1,30,33]. Under this learning paradigm, models are
trained with an abundant labeled dataset on base classes,
and only a few instances of novel classes are seen during the
adaptation stage. However, [29] identified two important
limitations that hamper the application of these methods in
real-life scenarios. First, existing literature on FSS assumes
that the support samples contain the categories present in
the query images, which may incur costly manual selection
processes. Second, even though significant achievements
have been made, all these methods focus on leveraging supports as much as possible to extract effective target information, but neglect to preserve the performance on known
categories. Furthermore, while in many practical applications the number of novel classes is not limited, most FSS
approaches are designed to work on a binary basis, which is
suboptimal in the case of multiple novel categories.
Inspired by these limitations, a novel Generalized FewShot Semantic Segmentation (GFSS) setting has been recently introduced in [29]. In particular, GFSS relaxes the
strong assumption that the support and query categories
are the same. This means that, under this new learning
paradigm, providing support images that contain the same
target categories as the query images is not required. Furthermore, the evaluation in this setting involves not only
novel classes but also base categories, which provides a
more realistic scenario.
Although the setting in [29] overcomes the limitations of
few-shot semantic segmentation, we argue that a gap still
remains between current experimental protocols and realworld applications. Hereafter, we highlight limiting points
of the current literature and further discuss them in Sec. 3.2.

Unrealistic prior knowledge. We found that existing
works explicitly rely on prior knowledge of the novel
classes (supposed to be seen at test-time only) during the
training phase. This, for instance, allows to filter out images containing novel objects [14, 29] from the training set.
Recent empirical evidence [28] found out that such assumptions indeed boost the results in a significant manner.

11269

