This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iQuery: Instruments as Queries for Audio-Visual Sound Separation
Jiaben Chen1 , Renrui Zhang2 , Dongze Lian3 , Jiaqi Yang4 , Ziyao Zeng4 , Jianbo Shi5
1

3

UC San Diego
National University of Singapore

2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
ShanghaiTech University 5 University of Pennsylvania

4

Abstract
Current audio-visual separation methods share a standard architecture design where an audio encoder-decoder
network is fused with visual encoding features at the encoder bottleneck. This design confounds the learning of
multi-modal feature encoding with robust sound decoding for audio separation. To generalize to a new instrument, one must fine-tune the entire visual and audio network for all musical instruments. We re-formulate the
visual-sound separation task and propose Instruments as
Queries (iQuery) with a flexible query expansion mechanism. Our approach ensures cross-modal consistency
and cross-instrument disentanglement. We utilize “visually
named” queries to initiate the learning of audio queries
and use cross-modal attention to remove potential sound
source interference at the estimated waveforms. To generalize to a new instrument or event class, drawing inspiration from the text-prompt design, we insert additional
queries as audio prompts while freezing the attention mechanism. Experimental results on three benchmarks demonstrate that our iQuery improves audio-visual sound source
separation performance. Code is available at https:
//github.com/JiabenChen/iQuery.

1. Introduction
Humans use multi-modal perception to understand complex activities. To mimic this skill, researchers have studied
audio-visual learning [3, 17, 33] by exploiting the synchronization and correlation between auditory and visual information. In this paper, we focus on the sound source separation task, where we aim to identify and separate different
sound components within a given sound mixture [60, 74].
Following the “Mix-and-Separate” framework [32, 34, 81],
we learn to separate sounds by mixing multiple audio signals to generate an artificially complex auditory representation and then use it as a self-supervised task to separate
individual sounds from the mixture. The works [26, 53, 89]
showed that visually-guided sound separation is achievable

by leveraging visual information of the sound source.
Prevalent architectures take a paradigm of a visualconditioned encoder-decoder architecture [23, 26, 58, 88],
where encoded features from audio and visual modalities
are fused at the bottleneck for decoding to yield separated
spectrogram masks. However, it is noticed that this design
often creates a “muddy” sound and “cross-talk” that leaks
from one instrument to another. To create a clean sound
separation, one would like the audio-visual encoders to be
(1) self-consistent within the music instrument and (2) contrasting across. One approach [27] added critic functions
explicitly to enforce these properties. Another method [99]
used a two-step process with the second motion-conditioned
generation process to filter out unwanted cross-talks. We
call these approaches decoder-centric.
Most recent works focus on addressing the “muddy” and
“cross-talk” issue by improving fine details of audio-visual
feature extraction: for example, adding human motion encoding as in [23, 88, 99], or cross-modality representations
[58] via self-supervised learning. Once the feature representations are learned, the standard encoder-decoder FCN
style segmentation is used as an afterthought. We consider
these methods feature-centric. The standard designs have
two limitations. First, it is hard to balance decoder-centric
and feature-centric approaches that enforce a common goal
of cross-modality consistency and cross-instrument contrast. Second, to learn a new musical instrument, one has
to retrain the entire network via self-supervision.
To tackle these limitations, we propose a query-based
sound separation framework, iQuery. We recast this problem from a query-based transformer segmentation view,
where each query learns to segment one instrument, similar
to visual segmentation [15, 16, 65, 78]. We treat each audio query as a learnable prototype that parametrically models one sound class. We fuse visual modality with audio
by “visually naming” the audio query: using object detection to assign visual features to the corresponding audio
query. Within the transformer decoder, the visually initialized queries interact with the audio features through crossattention, thus ensuring cross-modality consistency. Self-

14675

