This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ham2Pose: Animating Sign Language Notation into Pose Sequences
Rotem Shalev Arkushin
Reichman University

Amit Moryossef
Bar-Ilan University

Ohad Fried
Reichman University

rotemroo@gmail.com

amitmoryossef@gmail.com

ofried@runi.ac.il

https://rotem-shalev.github.io/ham-to-pose

Gloss

Abstract

HOUSE3

HamNoSys

Translating spoken languages into Sign languages is
necessary for open communication between the hearing and
hearing-impaired communities. To achieve this goal, we
propose the first method for animating a text written in
HamNoSys, a lexical Sign language notation, into signed
pose sequences. As HamNoSys is universal by design, our
proposed method offers a generic solution invariant to the
target Sign language. Our method gradually generates pose
predictions using transformer encoders that create meaningful representations of the text and poses while considering their spatial and temporal information. We use weak supervision for the training process and show that our method
succeeds in learning from partial and inaccurate data. Additionally, we offer a new distance measurement that considers missing keypoints, to measure the distance between
pose sequences using DTW-MJE. We validate its correctness using AUTSL, a large-scale Sign language dataset,
show that it measures the distance between pose sequences
more accurately than existing measurements, and use it to
assess the quality of our generated pose sequences. Code
for the data pre-processing, the model, and the distance
measurement is publicly released for future research.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are an important communicative tool
within the deaf and hard-of-hearing (DHH) community and
a central property of Deaf culture. According to the World
Health Organization, there are more than 70 million deaf
people worldwide [56], who collectively use more than 300
different Sign languages [29]. Using the visual-gestural
modality to convey meaning, Sign languages are considered
natural languages [40], with their own grammar and lexicons. They are not universal and are mostly independent
of spoken languages. For example, American Sign Language (ASL)—used predominantly in the United States—
and British Sign Language (BSL)—used predominantly in

SignWriting

󲇚􂇒
􂇚
󲇒
󷀴
􇀴
󷀦
􇀦

Figure 1. German Sign Language sign for “Haus”.
Gloss is a unique semantic identifier; HamNoSys and SignWriting describe the phonology of a sign: Two flat hands with fingers
closed, rotated towards each other, touching, then symmetrically
moving diagonally downwards.

the United Kingdom—are entirely different, despite English
being the predominant spoken language in both. As such,
the translation task between each signed and spoken language pair is different and requires different data. Building a robust system that translates spoken languages into
Sign languages and vice versa is fundamental to alleviate
communication gaps between the hearing-impaired and the
hearing communities.
While translation research from Sign languages into
spoken languages has rapidly advanced in recent years
[2, 5, 6, 30, 36, 37], translating spoken languages into Sign
languages, also known as Sign Language Production (SLP),
remains a challenge [41, 42, 47, 48]. This is partially due to
a misconception that deaf people are comfortable reading
spoken language and do not require translation into Sign
language. However, there is no guarantee that someone
whose first language is, for example, BSL, exhibits high
literacy in written English. SLP is usually done through
an intermediate notation system such as a semantic notation system, e.g. gloss (Sec. 2.1), or a lexical notation system, e.g. HamNoSys, SignWriting (Sec. 2.2). The spoken
language text is translated into the intermediate notation,
which is then translated into the relevant signs. The signs
can either be animated avatars or pose sequences later converted into videos. Previous work has shown progress in
translating spoken language text to Sign language lexical
notations, namely HamNoSys [54] and SignWriting [21],
and in converting pose sequences into videos [8, 43, 55].
There has been some work on animating HamNoSys into
avatars [3, 12, 13, 58], with unsatisfactory results (Sec. 3.1),

21046

