This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X3 KD: Knowledge Distillation Across Modalities, Tasks and Stages
for Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection
Marvin Klingner *,†
Shubhankar Borse *,‡
Varun Ravi Kumar *,†
†
†
Behnaz Rezaei
Venkatraman Narayanan
Senthil Yogamani §
Fatih Porikli ‡
{mklingne, sborse, vravikum, brezaei, vennara, syogaman, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D object detection (3DOD) have
obtained remarkably strong results for LiDAR-based models. In contrast, surround-view 3DOD models based on
multiple camera images underperform due to the necessary view transformation of features from perspective view
(PV) to a 3D world representation which is ambiguous
due to missing depth information. This paper introduces
X3 KD, a comprehensive knowledge distillation framework
across different modalities, tasks, and stages for multicamera 3DOD. Specifically, we propose cross-task distillation from an instance segmentation teacher (X-IS) in the
PV feature extraction stage providing supervision without
ambiguous error backpropagation through the view transformation. After the transformation, we apply cross-modal
feature distillation (X-FD) and adversarial training (X-AT)
to improve the 3D world representation of multi-camera
features through the information contained in a LiDARbased 3DOD teacher. Finally, we also employ this teacher
for cross-modal output distillation (X-OD), providing dense
supervision at the prediction stage. We perform extensive
ablations of knowledge distillation at different stages of
multi-camera 3DOD. Our final X3 KD model outperforms
previous state-of-the-art approaches on the nuScenes and
Waymo datasets and generalizes to RADAR-based 3DOD.
Qualitative results video at https://youtu.be/1do9DPFmr38.

1. Introduction
3D object detection (3DOD) is an essential task in various real-world computer vision applications, especially autonomous driving. Current 3DOD approaches can be categorized by their utilized input modalities, e.g., camera images [28, 40, 46] or LiDAR point clouds [25, 55, 60], which
dictates the necessary sensor suite during inference. Recently, there has been significant interest in surround-view
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Automated Driving, Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
‡ Qualcomm AI Research, an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
§ Automated Driving, QT Technologies Ireland Limited

Figure 1. While previous approaches considered multi-camera
3DOD in a standalone fashion or with depth supervision, we propose X3 KD, a knowledge distillation framework using crossmodal and cross-task information by distilling information from
LiDAR-based 3DOD and instance segmentation teachers into different stages (marked by red arrows) of the multi-camera 3DOD.

multi-camera 3DOD, aiming to leverage multiple low-cost
monocular cameras, which are conveniently embedded in
current vehicle designs in contrast to expensive LiDAR
scanners. Existing solutions to 3DOD are mainly based on
extracting a unified representation from multiple cameras
[28,30,37,41] such as the bird’s-eye view (BEV) grid. However, predicting 3D bounding boxes from 2D perspectiveview (PV) images involves an ambiguous 2D to 3D transformation without depth information, which leads to lower performance compared to LiDAR-based 3DOD [1, 28, 30, 55].
While LiDAR scanners may not be available in commercially deployed vehicle fleets, they are typically available in
training data collection vehicles to facilitate 3D annotation.
Therefore, LiDAR data is privileged; it is often available

13343

