This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Pixel Composition for 3D-4D View Synthesis from Multi-Views
Aayush Bansal
Michael Zollhoefer
Reality Labs Research, Pittsburgh, USA
https://www.aayushbansal.xyz/npc

Figure 1. Our approach allows us to capture small details better than existing methods. We show novel views (top-row) synthesized using
our approach and zoom on the details for each view (bottom-row). Our model is trained for 10 minutes. Best viewed in electronic format.

Abstract
We present Neural Pixel Composition (NPC), a novel approach for continuous 3D-4D view synthesis given a discrete set of multi-view observations as input. Existing
state-of-the-art approaches require dense multi-view supervision and an extensive computational budget. The proposed formulation reliably operates on sparse and widebaseline multi-view images/videos and can be trained efficiently within a few seconds to 10 minutes for hi-res (12MP)
content. Crucial to our approach are two core novelties: 1)
a representation of a pixel that contains color and depth
information accumulated from multi-views for a particular
location and time along a line of sight, and 2) a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) that enables the composition of this rich
information provided for a pixel location to obtain the final color output. We experiment with a large variety of
multi-view sequences, compare to existing approaches, and
achieve better results in diverse and challenging settings.

1. Introduction
Novel views can be readily generated if we have access
to the underlying 6D plenoptic function R(✓, d, ⌧ ) [1, 23]
of the scene that models the radiance incident from direction ✓ 2 R2 to a camera placed at position d 2 R3 at time
⌧ . Currently, no approach exists that can automatically reconstruct an efficient space- and-time representation of the
plenoptic function given only a (potentially sparse) set of
multi-view measurements of the scene as input. The core
idea of image-based rendering [22, 38] is to generate novel
views based on re-projected information from a set of calibrated source views. This re-projection requires a highquality estimate of the scene’s geometry and is only correct
for Lambertian materials, since the appearance of specular surfaces is highly view-dependent. Building a dense 3D
volume from multi-view inputs that provides correct 3D information for a pixel is a non-trivial task.
Recent approaches such as Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [27] and Neural Volumes (NV) [20] attempt to create rich 3D information along a ray of light by sampling 3D

290

