This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward RAW Object Detection: A New Benchmark and A New Model
Ruikang Xu1 *
Chang Chen2 *
2
Yibin Huang
Fenglong Song2
1

Jingyang Peng2 *
Cheng Li2
2
Youliang Yan
Zhiwei Xiong1†

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

xurk@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn,
{chenchang25, pengjingyang1, licheng89, huangyibin1, songfenglong, yanyouliang}@huawei.com

Abstract
In many computer vision applications (e.g., robotics and
autonomous driving), high dynamic range (HDR) data is
necessary for object detection algorithms to handle a variety of lighting conditions, such as strong glare. In this paper, we aim to achieve object detection on RAW sensor data,
which naturally saves the HDR information from image sensors without extra equipment costs. We build a novel RAW
sensor dataset, named ROD, for Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs)-based object detection algorithms to be applied to
HDR data. The ROD dataset contains a large amount of annotated instances of day and night driving scenes in 24-bit
dynamic range. Based on the dataset, we ﬁrst investigate
the impact of dynamic range for DNNs-based detectors and
demonstrate the importance of dynamic range adjustment
for detection on RAW sensor data. Then, we propose a simple and effective adjustment method for object detection on
HDR RAW sensor data, which is image adaptive and jointly
optimized with the downstream detector in an end-to-end
scheme. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the performance of detection on RAW sensor data is signiﬁcantly
superior to standard dynamic range (SDR) data in different
situations. Moreover, we analyze the inﬂuence of texture information and pixel distribution of input data on the performance of the DNNs-based detector. Code and dataset will
be available at https://gitee.com//mindspore/
models/tree/master/research/cv/RAOD.

1. Introduction
Real-world scenes are complex and of high dynamic
range (HDR), especially in extreme situations like the direct
light of other vehicles. In many computer vision applications, such as autonomous driving and robotics, HDR data
is important and necessary for making safety-critical decisions [34] since it extends the captured luminance. For instance, images may easily get over-exposed in brighter areas
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was done when
Ruikang Xu was a research intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

13384

on standard dynamic range (SDR) images, but there may be
important information in corresponding raw regions. To obtain the HDR data, recent works use additional cameras and
even unconventional sensors, such as neuromorphic cameras and infrared cameras [13, 25], which inevitably brings
extra costs. In this paper, we make the ﬁrst effort to achieve
object detection on RAW sensor data, which naturally stores
HDR information without any additional burden.
RAW sensor data is generated from the image sensor,
and is the input data of the image signal processor (ISP),
rendering SDR images suitable for human perception and
understanding. RAW sensor data is naturally HDR and save
all information from image sensors. However, datasets from
the RAW domain are difﬁcult to collect, store and annotate.
And, to the best of our knowledge, there is no large-scale
HDR RAW sensor dataset available for object detection.
Existing RAW sensor datasets are no more than 14-bit and
not large enough for practical applications. For instance,
PASCALRAW dataset [27] is of only 12-bit, which is not
wide enough to handle complex lighting conditions. To ﬁll
this gap, we create a novel RAW sensor dataset for object
detection on the driving scene, named as ROD, which consists of 25k annotated RAW sensor data in a 24-bit dynamic
range on day and night scenarios.
On the other hand, most Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)based object detection algorithms are designed for the common SDR data, which only records information in the 8-bit
dynamic range. Hence, we ﬁrst investigate the impact of dynamic range for DNNs-based detection algorithms and experimentally ﬁnd that directly applying these DNNs-based
detectors on HDR RAW sensor data results in signiﬁcant
performance degradation, and it gets worse when the dynamic range increases. Then, we analyze the key component of the ISP system and demonstrate the importance of
dynamic range adjustment for RAW detection.
In this paper, we propose an adjustment method for the
effective detection on RAW sensor data, which is jointly optimized with the downstream detection network in an endto-end scheme. Note that our proposed method is trained
together with the detector from scratch only using object an-

