This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FFCV: Accelerating Training by Removing Data Bottlenecks
Guillaume Leclerc,* Andrew Ilyas,* Logan Engstrom,*
Sung Min Park, Hadi Salman, Aleksander M ˛
adry
Massachussets Institute of Technology
{leclerc,ailyas,engstrom,sp765,hady,madry}@mit.edu

Abstract
We present FFCV, a library for easy and fast machine
learning model training. FFCV speeds up model training by
eliminating (often subtle) data bottlenecks from the training
process. In particular, we combine techniques such as an efficient file storage format, caching, data pre-loading, asynchronous data transfer, and just-in-time compilation to (a)
make data loading and transfer significantly more efficient,
ensuring that GPUs can reach full utilization; and (b) offload as much data processing as possible to the CPU asynchronously, freeing GPU cycles for training. Using FFCV,
we train ResNet-18 and ResNet-50 on the ImageNet dataset
with a state-of-the-art tradeoff between accuracy and training time. For example, across the range of ResNet-50 models we test, we obtain the same accuracy as the best baselines in half the time. We demonstrate FFCV’s performance,
ease-of-use, extensibility, and ability to adapt to resource
constraints through several case studies. Detailed installation instructions, documentation, and Slack support channel are available at https://ffcv.io/.

1. Introduction
What’s the limiting factor in faster model training? Hint:
it isn’t always the GPUs. When training a machine learning
model, the life cycle of an individual example spans three
stages: reading the example into memory, processing the
example in memory, and finally updating model parameters
with the example on GPU (e.g. by calculating and then following the gradient). The stage with the lowest throughput
determines the overall learning system’s throughput.
Our investigations (and others’ [Mohan et al.(2021)])
show that in practice the limiting factor is often not computing model updates but rather the data reading and data
processing stages. Indeed, in standard training setups, the
GPUs can spend a majority of cycles just waiting for inputs
to process!
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Accuracy vs. training time when training a ResNet-50 on
8 A100s. The FFCV accuracy/training time tradeoff outperforms
all baselines. As an example, we can train ImageNet to 75% accuracy in less than 20 minutes on a single machine.

To better saturate GPUs and thereby increase training
throughput, we present FFCV, a system designed to reduce
data loading and processing bottlenecks while remaining
simple to use. FFCV operates in two successive stages: preprocessing and train-time loading.
In the first stage, FFCV preprocesses the dataset into a
format more amenable to high throughput loading. Then,
in the train-time loading stage, FFCV’s data loader replaces
the original learning system’s data loader without requiring
any other implementation changes.
Together, FFCV data preprocessing and the FFCV data
loader can drastically increase training speeds without any
learning algorithm modifications. To demonstrate, we train
machine learning models for a number of tasks much faster
than previous general purpose data loaders can support, including single-node ResNet-50 [He et al.(2015)] training
(2x faster than the previous state-of-the-art to reach the
same accuracies) and parallel ResNet-18 training (we can
train 14 models per minute on an 8 GPU machine). While
FFCV improves performance on most GPUs, its effect is
most pronounced on faster GPUs, which require higher
throughput data loading to saturate available compute capacity. We expect FFCV will only increase in utility as new
GPUs become faster.
Contributions. We introduce FFCV, a drop-in, general
purpose training system for high throughput data loading.
Using FFCV requires no algorithmic changes, and involves

12011

