This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning on Gradients: Generalized Artifacts Representation for
GAN-Generated Images Detection
Chuangchuang Tan1,2 , Yao Zhao1,2 *, Shikui Wei1,2 , Guanghua Gu3,4 , Yunchao Wei1,2
1
2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University

Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3
4

School of Information Science and Engineering, Yanshan University

Hebei Key Laboratory of Information Transmission and Signal Processing

1. Introduction
Over the past years, remarkable progress has been made
in deep generative models, i.e. generative adversarial networks (GAN) [14], its variations [3, 21–23, 36], and VAE
[25]. The generated media is highly realistic and indistin* Corresponding author

ProGAN
StyleGAN

Recently, there has been a significant advancement in
image generation technology, known as GAN. It can easily
generate realistic fake images, leading to an increased risk
of abuse. However, most image detectors suffer from sharp
performance drops in unseen domains. The key of fake image detection is to develop a generalized representation to
describe the artifacts produced by generation models. In
this work, we introduce a novel detection framework, named
Learning on Gradients (LGrad), designed for identifying
GAN-generated images, with the aim of constructing a generalized detector with cross-model and cross-data. Specifically, a pretrained CNN model is employed as a transformation model to convert images into gradients. Subsequently, we leverage these gradients to present the generalized artifacts, which are fed into the classifier to ascertain the authenticity of the images. In our framework,
we turn the data-dependent problem into a transformationmodel-dependent problem. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first study to utilize gradients as the representation of artifacts in GAN-generated images. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of
gradients as generalized artifact representations. Our detector achieves a new state-of-the-art performance with a
remarkable gain of 11.4%. The code is released at https:
//github.com/chuangchuangtan/LGrad.

StyleGAN2

Abstract

CelebaHQ

{21112002, yzhao, shkwei}@bjtu.edu.cn, guguanghua@ysu.edu.cn, wychao1987@gmail.com

(a) Images

(b)Gradients

(c)Grad-R

(d)Grad-G

(e)Grad-B

Figure 1. Visualization of gradients of real images and GANgenerated images extracted from a pre-trained model. To fully
understand the gradients, heatmaps for R, G, and B channels also
are shown, where red is high. In the gradients, the content of images is filtered out, and only the discriminative pixels are retained
for the pre-trained model’s target task. We utilize the gradients as
the generalized artifacts representation to develop a novel detection framework.

guishable from real to human eyes. Although it has the potential for many novel applications [8], it also brings new
risks due to the abuse of fake information. The misuse
of DeepFakes has been confirmed that some people swap
the faces of women onto pornographic videos [8]. In addition, some individuals, even non-experts, can malevolently
manipulate or create fake images or videos for political or
economic purposes, leading to serious social problems [17].
Thus, it is extremely necessary to develop forgery detection
techniques to help people determine the credibility of the

12105

