This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Variational Distribution Learning for Unsupervised Text-to-Image Generation
Minsoo Kang1∗
Doyup Lee3
Jiseob Kim3
Saehoon Kim3
Bohyung Han1,2
1
ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University 3 Kakao Brain
{kminsoo, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

{doyup.lee, jiseob.kim, shkim}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
We propose a text-to-image generation algorithm based
on deep neural networks when text captions for images are
unavailable during training. In this work, instead of simply
generating pseudo-ground-truth sentences of training images using existing image captioning methods, we employ a
pretrained CLIP model, which is capable of properly aligning embeddings of images and corresponding texts in a joint
space and, consequently, works well on zero-shot recognition tasks. We optimize a text-to-image generation model
by maximizing the data log-likelihood conditioned on pairs
of image-text CLIP embeddings. To better align data in the
two domains, we employ a principled way based on a variational inference, which efficiently estimates an approximate
posterior of the hidden text embedding given an image and
its CLIP feature. Experimental results validate that the proposed framework outperforms existing approaches by large
margins under unsupervised and semi-supervised text-toimage generation settings.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in text-to-image (T2I) generation techniques [6, 8, 17, 18, 21, 26–29, 36] have shown promising
results by employing generative adversarial networks [9],
autoregressive models [33], or diffusion models [11, 32] to
synthesize images based on their text captions. However,
these approaches require a paired dataset that consists of
images and their corresponding text captions, and, consequently, incur significant annotation costs, especially for labeling image captions. To alleviate this limitation, unsupervised learning methods for T2I generation have recently
drawn attention to the computer vision community, where
the models learn to generate images without paired text captions.
Existing T2I models [1, 2, 34, 38] based on unsupervised
learning exploit Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining
(CLIP) [25] to sidestep the absence of text captions dur∗ This work was partly done during an internship at Kakao Brain.

ing training. Specifically, after a text embedding is estimated using a given image embedding, the T2I model is
trained to synthesize an image conditioned on the estimated
text embedding. However, although image and text embeddings extracted by CLIP are not accurately aligned, existing approaches assume that the distinction is ignorable [34]
or simple to recover by just adding Gaussian noises [38]
without considering the underlying structure of text embeddings. Thus, those algorithms may suffer from large discrepancies between true and estimated text embeddings at
both training and testing.
To tackle the challenge, we propose a variational distribution learning technique for unsupervised T2I generation,
where the lower-bound of the data log-likelihood is maximized in a principled way. Specifically, we first regard a text
embedding as a hidden random variable while an image and
its CLIP embedding are observable random variables. Then,
we decompose the variational lower-bound into three parts:
1) the similarity between the text embedding prior and posterior, 2) the log-likelihood of the image embedding given
the text embedding, 3) the log-likelihood of the image given
the image and text embeddings in the trained T2I model.
Since the lower-bound formulation enforces the matching
between the prior and posterior distributions of text embedding, our method achieves a more accurate estimation of the
embedding and reduces the discrepancy between the true
and estimated embeddings.
For the optimization of the variational objective, we employ a two-stage training strategy for T2I models. In the first
stage, we learn an encode-decoder architecture that takes
the image embedding as an input and the estimated text embedding as a latent bottleneck. Then, our network estimates
two conditional distributions of CLIP embeddings, one for
the variational distribution of the text embedding given the
image embedding and the other for the model distribution of
the image embedding given the text embedding. The parameters of the two distributions are obtained from the first two
terms in the variational lower-bound objective. Note that
we relax the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term in the
training objective of the first stage to an adversarial training loss, specifically, the Jensen-Shannon divergence. Since

23380

