This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Expansion of Image Generators
Yotam Nitzan1,2

Michaël Gharbi1

Richard Zhang1

Daniel Cohen-Or2
1

Adobe Research

2

Taesung Park1

Jun-Yan Zhu3

Eli Shechtman1

Tel-Aviv University

3

Carnegie Mellon University

Dormant
direction

Dormant
direction

Zombie
direction

Domain Adaptation

Source Generator

Domain Expansion (Ours)

Figure 1. (center) Traversing the latent space of generative models along some directions changes the image significantly while traversing
others has no perceptible effect. We call such directions dormant. (left) Domain adaptation methods, transform the entire generator from
a source domain to a target domain. (right) We introduce an approach for a new task – domain expansion. Rather than transforming the
generator fully, we expand it to include new data domains. Our method learns to represent the new domain in a disentangled manner by
repurposing a single dormant direction.

Abstract
Can one inject new concepts into an already trained generative model, while respecting its existing structure and
knowledge? We propose a new task – domain expansion
– to address this. Given a pretrained generator and novel
(but related) domains, we expand the generator to jointly
model all domains, old and new, harmoniously. First, we
note the generator contains a meaningful, pretrained latent
space. Is it possible to minimally perturb this hard-earned
representation, while maximally representing the new domains? Interestingly, we find that the latent space offers unused, “dormant” directions, which do not affect the output.
This provides an opportunity: By “repurposing” these directions, we can represent new domains without perturbing
the original representation. In fact, we find that pretrained
generators have the capacity to add several – even hundreds
– of new domains! Using our expansion method, one “expanded” model can supersede numerous domain-specific
models, without expanding the model size. Additionally, a
single expanded generator natively supports smooth transitions between domains, as well as composition of domains.
Code and project page available here.

1. Introduction
Recent domain adaptation techniques piggyback on the
tremendous success of modern generative image models [3,
12, 32, 40], by adapting a pretrained generator so it can
generate images from a new target domain. Oftentimes,
the target domain is defined with respect to the source domain [5,21,22], e.g., changing the “stylization” from a photorealistic image to a sketch. When such a relationship
holds, domain adaptation typically seeks to preserve the factors of variations learned in the source domain, and transfer
them to the new one (e.g., making the human depicted in
a sketch smile based on the prior from a face generator).
With existing techniques, however, the adapted model loses
the ability to generate images from the original domain.
In this work, we introduce a novel task — domain expansion. Unlike domain adaptation, we aim to augment the
space of images a single model can generate, without overriding its original behavior (see Fig. 1). Rather than viewing similar image domains as disjoint data distributions, we
treat them as different modes in a joint distribution. As a
result, the domains share a semantic prior inherited from
the original data domain. For example, the inherent factors
of variation for photorealistic faces, such as pose and face
shape, can equally apply to the domain of “zombies”.

15933

