This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Focus-aware Positional Queries for Semantic Segmentation
Haoyu He1 Jianfei Cai1 Zizheng Pan1 Jing Liu1
Jing Zhang2 Dacheng Tao2 Bohan Zhuang1†
1

ZIP Lab, Monash University

2

The University of Sydney

Abstract

senting the class prototypes or target segments and achieve
state-of-the-art performance on semantic segmentation.

The DETR-like segmentors have underpinned the most
recent breakthroughs in semantic segmentation, which endto-end train a set of queries representing the class prototypes or target segments. Recently, masked attention [8] is
proposed to restrict each query to only attend to the foreground regions predicted by the preceding decoder block
for easier optimization. Although promising, it relies on the
learnable parameterized positional queries which tend to
encode the dataset statistics, leading to inaccurate localization for distinct individual queries. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective query design for semantic segmentation termed Dynamic Focus-aware Positional Queries
(DFPQ), which dynamically generates positional queries
conditioned on the cross-attention scores from the preceding decoder block and the positional encodings for the corresponding image features, simultaneously. Therefore, our
DFPQ preserves rich localization information for the target segments and provides accurate and fine-grained positional priors. In addition, we propose to efficiently deal with
high-resolution cross-attention by only aggregating the contextual tokens based on the low-resolution cross-attention
scores to perform local relation aggregation. Extensive experiments on ADE20K and Cityscapes show that with the
two modifications on Mask2former, our framework achieves
SOTA performance and outperforms Mask2former by clear
margins of 1.1%, 1.9%, and 1.1% single-scale mIoU with
ResNet-50, Swin-T, and Swin-B backbones on the ADE20K
validation set, respectively. Source code is available at
https://github.com/ziplab/FASeg.

In DETR-like frameworks, providing the queries with
meaningful positional priors and encourage each query to
concentrate on specific regions is essential to learn representative queries [28, 43, 49, 58]. In this spirit, masked attention [8] is proposed, which restricts each query to only
attend to a foreground region predicted by the previous decoder block with binary masks. Although promising, the
positional priors in masked attention may be inaccurate and
deteriorate performance for two reasons. First, each query
comprises a content query that contains semantic information and a positional query that provides positional information for the likely locations of the target segments. However, masked attention still relies on positional queries that
are randomly initialized learnable parameters [3, 40] (Figure 1 (a)), which tend to encode the average statistics across
the dataset and cannot reflect the segments with large location variances. Second, since each query only attends
to the predicted foreground regions, inaccurate predictions
lead to error accumulation across the decoder blocks, especially during an early training stage.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at assigning each pixel in
an image with a semantic class label. As the end-to-end Detection Transfomer (DETR) [3,42,49,58] is revolutionizing
the paradigm of the object detection task, recent segmentors [2, 8, 9, 54] follow DETR to learn a set of queries repre† Corresponding author. E-mail: bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

To this end, recent detectors propose to dynamically encode the anchor points into the positional queries to guide
queries concentrating around the anchor positions [28, 30,
43] (Figure 1 (b)). The anchor-based query design mitigates the mentioned issues as the positional queries are dynamically generated for each target object, thus providing
more accurate positional priors. In addition, it avoids restricting the queries to only attend to the foreground regions
with binary masks to mitigate the error accumulation issue.
However, the anchor-based queries cannot describe the finegrained positional priors for semantic segmentation, which
has details, edges, and boundaries [5, 6].
Motivated by the observations that attention scores imply the salient regions for token pruning [24, 26], selfsupervised learning [4], and semantic segmentation [34,56],
in this paper, we propose a simple yet effective query design
for semantic segmentation, dubbed Dynamic Focus-aware
Positional Queries (DFPQ), which dynamically generates

11299

