This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rigidity-Aware Detection for 6D Object Pose Estimation
Yang Hai 1 ,
1

Rui Song 1 ,

Jiaojiao Li 1 ,

Mathieu Salzmann 2,3 ,
2

State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian University,

EPFL,

3

ClearSpace,

4

Yinlin Hu 4
MagicLeap

Abstract
Most recent 6D object pose estimation methods first use
object detection to obtain 2D bounding boxes before actually regressing the pose. However, the general object detection methods they use are ill-suited to handle cluttered
scenes, thus producing poor initialization to the subsequent
pose network. To address this, we propose a rigidity-aware
detection method exploiting the fact that, in 6D pose estimation, the target objects are rigid. This lets us introduce
an approach to sampling positive object regions from the
entire visible object area during training, instead of naively
drawing samples from the bounding box center where the
object might be occluded. As such, every visible object
part can contribute to the final bounding box prediction,
yielding better detection robustness. Key to the success
of our approach is a visibility map, which we propose to
build using a minimum barrier distance between every pixel
in the bounding box and the box boundary. Our results
on seven challenging 6D pose estimation datasets evidence
that our method outperforms general detection frameworks
by a large margin. Furthermore, combined with a pose regression network, we obtain state-of-the-art pose estimation
results on the challenging BOP benchmark.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6D pose of objects, i.e., their 3D rotation and 3D translation with respect to the camera, is a fundamental computer vision problem with many applications
in, e.g., robotics, quality control, and augmented reality.
Most recent methods [2, 5, 9, 25, 42, 45] follow a two-stage
pipeline: First, they detect the objects, and then estimate
their 6D pose from a resized version of the resulting detected image patches. While this approach works well in
simple scenarios, its performance drops significantly in the
presence of cluttered scenes. In particular, and as illustrated
in Fig. 1, we observed this to be mainly caused by detection
failures.
Specifically, most 6D pose estimation methods rely on
standard object detection methods [10, 22, 37, 43, 44, 50],
which were designed to handle significantly different scenes

(a) General detection

(b) Detection in 6D pose

(c) Baseline detection results

(d) Our detection results

(e) Baseline pose results

(f) Our pose results

Figure 1. The challenges of detection in 6D object pose. (a) The
general detection scenario (COCO [29]) exhibits small occlusions.
(b) The occlusion problem in 6D object pose, however, is much
more severe, (c) making the general detection method [44] based
on center-oriented sampling unreliable (glue) or fail completely
(cat). (d) By contrast, our new detection strategy is effective in
these challenging scenarios, (e,f) and provides significantly more
robust 2D box initialization for the following 6D regression networks [15], yielding more accurate pose estimates.

than those observed in 6D object pose estimation benchmarks, typically with much smaller occlusions, as shown in
Fig. 1(a). Because of these smaller occlusions, standard detection methods make the assumption that the regions in the
center of the ground-truth bounding boxes depict the object
of interest, and thus focus on learning to predict the bounding box parameters from samples drawn from these regions
only. However, as shown in Fig. 2, this is ill-suited to 6D
pose estimation in cluttered scenes, where the center of the
objects is often occluded by other objects or scene elements.

8927

