This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SliceMatch: Geometry-guided Aggregation for Cross-View Pose Estimation
Ted Lentsch*
Zimin Xia*
Holger Caesar
Julian F. P. Kooij
Intelligent Vehicles Group, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
{T.deVriesLentsch,Z.Xia,H.Caesar,J.F.P.Kooij}@tudelft.nl

(a) Ground image

Abstract
1 2
This work addresses cross-view camera pose estimation,
i.e., determining the 3-Degrees-of-Freedom camera pose of
a given ground-level image w.r.t. an aerial image of the local area. We propose SliceMatch, which consists of ground
and aerial feature extractors, feature aggregators, and a
pose predictor. The feature extractors extract dense features
from the ground and aerial images. Given a set of candidate camera poses, the feature aggregators construct a
single ground descriptor and a set of pose-dependent aerial
descriptors. Notably, our novel aerial feature aggregator
has a cross-view attention module for ground-view guided
aerial feature selection and utilizes the geometric projection of the ground camera’s viewing frustum on the aerial
image to pool features. The efficient construction of aerial
descriptors is achieved using precomputed masks. SliceMatch is trained using contrastive learning and pose estimation is formulated as a similarity comparison between
the ground descriptor and the aerial descriptors. Compared
to the state-of-the-art, SliceMatch achieves a 19% lower
median localization error on the VIGOR benchmark using
the same VGG16 backbone at 150 frames per second, and
a 50% lower error when using a ResNet50 backbone.

1. Introduction
Cross-view camera pose estimation aims to estimate the
3-Degrees-of-Freedom (3-DoF) ground camera pose, i.e.,
planar location and orientation, by comparing the captured
ground-level image to a geo-referenced overhead aerial image containing the camera’s local surroundings. In practice, the local aerial image can be obtained from a reference
database using any rough localization prior, e.g., Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS), image retrieval [19],
or dead reckoning [13]. However, this prior is not necessarily accurate, for example, GNSS can contain errors
up to tens of meters in urban canyons [2, 48, 49]. The
cross-view formulation provides a promising alternative to
* indicates equal contribution.

180°

3

270°

4

5

(b) Aerial image

6

0°

7

90°

8

180°

(d) Pose heatmap

(c) Aerial slicing

Cross-view
attention

…
2

Slice masks for a
candidate pose

4

…
2

4

Figure 1. SliceMatch identifies for a ground-level image (a) its
camera’s 3-DoF pose within a corresponding aerial image (b).
It divides the camera’s Horizontal Field-of-View (HFoV) into
‘slices’, i.e., vertical regions in (a). After self-attention, our novel
aggregation step (c) applies cross-view attention to create ground
slice-specific aerial feature maps. To efficiently test many candidate poses, the slice features are aggregated using pose-dependent
aerial slice masks that represent the camera’s sliced HFoV at that
pose. The slice masks for each pose are precomputed. All aerial
pose descriptors are compared to the ground descriptor, resulting
in a dense scoring map (d). Our output is the best-scoring pose.

ground-level camera pose estimation techniques that require
detailed 3D point cloud maps [31] or semantic maps [3,43],
since the aerial imagery provides continuous coverage of
the Earth’s surface including the area where accurate point
clouds are difficult to collect. Moreover, acquiring up-todate aerial imagery is less costly than maintaining and updating large-scale 3D point clouds or semantics maps.
Recently, several works have addressed cross-view camera localization [55] or 3-DoF pose estimation [33, 36,
44, 50]. Roughly, those methods can be categorized into
global image descriptor-based [50, 55] and dense pixellevel feature-based [33, 36, 44] methods. Global descriptorbased methods take advantage of the compactness of the
image representation and often have relatively fast inference time [50, 55]. Dense pixel-level feature-based meth-

17225

