This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProphNet: Efficient Agent-Centric Motion Forecasting with
Anchor-Informed Proposals
Xishun Wang

Tong Su Fang Da
QCraft

Xiaodong Yang*

Abstract
Motion forecasting is a key module in an autonomous
driving system. Due to the heterogeneous nature of multisourced input, multimodality in agent behavior, and low latency required by onboard deployment, this task is notoriously challenging. To cope with these difficulties, this paper
proposes a novel agent-centric model with anchor-informed
proposals for efficient multimodal motion prediction. We
design a modality-agnostic strategy to concisely encode the
complex input in a unified manner. We generate diverse
proposals, fused with anchors bearing goal-oriented scene
context, to induce multimodal prediction that covers a wide
range of future trajectories. Our network architecture is
highly uniform and succinct, leading to an efficient model
amenable for real-world driving deployment. Experiments
reveal that our agent-centric network compares favorably
with the state-of-the-art methods in prediction accuracy,
while achieving scene-centric level inference latency.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future behaviors of various road participants is an essential task for autonomous driving systems
to be able to safely and comfortably operate in dynamic
driving environments. However, motion forecasting is extremely challenging in the sense that (i) the input consists of
interrelated modalities from multiple sources; (ii) the output
is inherently stochastic and multimodal; and (iii) the whole
prediction pipeline must fulfill tight run time requirements
with a limited computation budget.
A motion forecasting model typically collects the comprehensive information from perception signals and highdefinition (HD) maps, such as traffic light states, motion
history of agents, and the road graph [11, 13, 14, 23]. Such
a collection of information is a heterogeneous mix of static
and dynamic, as well as discrete and continuous elements.
Moreover, there exist complex semantic relations between
these components, including agent-to-agent, agent-to-road,
* Corresponding author xiaodong@qcraft.ai

Figure 1. Overview of accuracy-and–latency trade-off for the task
of motion forecasting on Argoverse-1. ProphNet outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods in prediction accuracy and considerably
speeds up the agent-centric inference latency, leading to the best
balance between accuracy and latency.

and road-to-road interactions. Previous methods in the field
usually model this diverse set of input via an equally intricate system with modality-specific designs. LaneGCN [9]
adopts four sub-networks to separately process the interactions of agent-to-agent, agent-to-road, road-to-agent and
road-to-road. MultiPath++ is developed in [21] to employ
multi-context gating to first capture the interactions between
a target agent and other agents, and then fuse them with the
map in a hierarchical manner.
Due to the unknown intent of an agent, motion prediction output is highly multimodal by nature. It is often impossible to assert with full certainty whether a vehicle will
go straight or turn right as it approaches an intersection.
The motion prediction model is therefore required to accurately model the underlying probability distribution of future behaviors. Recently, there have been various efforts
on improving output multimodality. TNT [30] introduces
three stages including goal (endpoint of a predicted trajectory) prediction, goal-conditioned motion estimation, and
trajectory scoring. DenseTNT is proposed in [7] to improve
upon the former by predicting from dense goal candidates

21995

