This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PD-Quant: Post-Training Quantization Based on
Prediction Difference Metric
Jiawei Liu1,⋆,⋄ Lin Niu1,⋆,⋄ Zhihang Yuan2,† Dawei Yang2 Xinggang Wang1 Wenyu Liu1,†
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology 2 Houmo AI
{jiaweiliu, linniu}@hust.edu.cn

hahnyuan@gmail.com

dawei.yang@houmo.ai

{xgwang, liuwy}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) is a neural network
compression technique that converts a full-precision model
into a quantized model using lower-precision data types.
Although it can help reduce the size and computational cost
of deep neural networks, it can also introduce quantization noise and reduce prediction accuracy, especially in extremely low-bit settings. How to determine the appropriate
quantization parameters (e.g., scaling factors and rounding of weights) is the main problem facing now. Existing
methods attempt to determine these parameters by minimize
the distance between features before and after quantization,
but such an approach only considers local information and
may not result in the most optimal quantization parameters.
We analyze this issue and propose PD-Quant, a method
that addresses this limitation by considering global information. It determines the quantization parameters by using the information of differences between network prediction before and after quantization. In addition, PD-Quant
can alleviate the overfitting problem in PTQ caused by the
small number of calibration sets by adjusting the distribution of activations. Experiments show that PD-Quant leads
to better quantization parameters and improves the prediction accuracy of quantized models, especially in low-bit
settings. For example, PD-Quant pushes the accuracy of
ResNet-18 up to 53.14% and RegNetX-600MF up to 40.67%
in weight 2-bit activation 2-bit. The code is released at
https://github.com/hustvl/PD-Quant.

1. Introduction
Various neural networks have been used in many realworld applications with high prediction accuracy. When deployed on resource-limited devices, networks’ vast memory
and computation costs become significant challenges. Re⋆ Equal contribution. ⋄ This work was done when Jiawei Liu and Lin

Niu were interns at Houmo AI. † Corresponding authors.

ducing overhead while maintaining the model accuracy has
received considerable attention. Network quantization is an
effective technique that can compress the neural networks
by converting the format of values from floating-point to
low-bit [10, 12, 27]. There are two types of quantization:
post-training quantization (PTQ) [32] and quantizationaware training (QAT) [18]. QAT requires retraining a model
on the labeled training dataset, which is time-consuming
and computationally expensive. While PTQ only requires a
small number of unlabeled calibration samples to quantize
the pre-trained models without retraining, which is suitable
for quick deployment. Existing PTQ methods can achieve
good prediction accuracy with 8-bit or 4-bit quantization by
selecting appropriate quantization parameters. [22, 23, 30].
Local metrics (such as MSE [7] or cosine distance [45] of
the activation before and after quantization in layers) are
commonly used to search for quantization scaling factors.
These factors are chosen layer by layer by minimizing the
local metric with a small number of calibration samples. In
this paper, we observe that there is a gap between the selected scaling factors and the optimal scaling factors .
Since the noise from quantization will be more severe
at low-bit, the prediction accuracy of the quantized model
significantly decreases at 2-bit. Recently, some methods [24, 25, 44] have added a new class of quantization parameters, weight rounding value, to adjust the rounding of
weights. They optimize both quantization scaling factors
and rounding values by reconstructing features layer-wisely
or block-wisely. Besides, the quantized model by PTQ reconstruction is more likely to be overfitting to the calibration samples because adjusting the rounding of weights will
significantly increase the PTQ’s degree of freedom.
We propose an effective PTQ method, PD-Quant, to address the above-mentioned issues. In this paper, we focus on improving the performance of PTQ on extremely
low bit-width. PD-Quant uses the metric that considers the
We define the optimal quantization scaling factors as the factors that
make the quantized model have the lowest task loss (cross-entropy loss
calculated by real label) on the validation set.

24427

