This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PlaneDepth: Self-supervised Depth Estimation via Orthogonal Planes
Ruoyu Wang1
Zehao Yu2
Shenghua Gao1,3,4 *
1
2
ShanghaiTech University
University of Tübingen
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC
{wangry3, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, zehao.yu@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Multiple near frontal-parallel planes based depth representation demonstrated impressive results in self-supervised
monocular depth estimation (MDE). Whereas, such a representation would cause the discontinuity of the ground as it is
perpendicular to the frontal-parallel planes, which is detrimental to the identification of drivable space in autonomous
driving. In this paper, we propose the PlaneDepth, a novel
orthogonal planes based presentation, including vertical
planes and ground planes. PlaneDepth estimates the depth
distribution using a Laplacian Mixture Model based on
orthogonal planes for an input image. These planes are
used to synthesize a reference view to provide the selfsupervision signal. Further, we find that the widely used
resizing and cropping data augmentation breaks the orthogonality assumptions, leading to inferior plane predictions. We address this problem by explicitly constructing
the resizing cropping transformation to rectify the predefined planes and predicted camera pose. Moreover, we
propose an augmented self-distillation loss supervised with
a bilateral occlusion mask to boost the robustness of orthogonal planes representation for occlusions. Thanks to
our orthogonal planes representation, we can extract the
ground plane in an unsupervised manner, which is important for autonomous driving. Extensive experiments on
the KITTI dataset demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method. The code is available at https:
//github.com/svip-lab/PlaneDepth.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation (MDE) is an important task
in computer vision and it has tremendous potential applications, such as autonomous driving. However, the expensive
data and labels acquisition process restricts the data scale
in supervised MDE [3, 4, 9, 16, 26, 27]. Thus, researchers
* Corresponding Author.

turn to solve the data constraints in supervised MDE with
the self-supervised MDE framework by leveraging videos
or stereo image pairs.
Most of the early works in self-supervised MDE leverage
a regression module to estimate pixel-wise depth map [11,
12, 15, 29, 36, 40] and warp the reference view image to the
target view based on the estimated depth. Then, a photometric consistency loss is used to guide the learning of the
depth regression module. However, these methods usually
encounter the local minimum issue because of the locality
of bilinear interpolation on the reference view. To avoid this
issue, rather than using simple depth regression, multiple
frontal-parallel planes based depth representation is introduced where depth space is divided into a fixed number of
frontal-parallel planes, and the depth network learns to classify which predefined plane each pixel belongs to [13, 14].
It has been shown that such representation could produce
much sharper depth on the edges of the object. However,
they are insufficient to represent the ground because the
ground plane is perpendicular to these predefined frontalparallel planes. As shown in Fig. 1, such vertical depth
planes only solution would lead to discontinuity on the
ground, which is obviously detrimental to the identification
of drivable space in autonomous driving. Further, photometric consistency loss is applied to the weighted composition of each plane-warped image, which is sub-optimal as
the combination of different weights may lead to exactly the
same color image [30], resulting in ambiguous solutions for
depth plane classification.
Considering the ground is perpendicular to the frontalparallel planes, in this paper, we propose to leverage orthogonal planes to represent the scene where the ground planes
favor the depth estimation in the ground region. Further, we
propose to model the depth as a mixture of Laplace distributions of orthogonal planes [38], where each Laplacian is
centered at one plane. We compute the photometric consistency loss independently on the color image warped by each
plane, resulting in a more deterministic and less ambiguous
optimization objective compared with the weighted compo-

21425

