This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Map Prior for Autonomous Driving
Xuan Xiong1

Yicheng Liu1
1

Tianyuan Yuan2

Yue Wang3

Yilun Wang2

Hang Zhao2,1 *

Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 2 IIIS, Tsinghua University 3 MIT

Abstract
High-definition (HD) semantic maps are crucial for autonomous vehicles navigating urban environments. Traditional offline HD maps, created through labor-intensive
manual annotation processes, are both costly and incapable
of accommodating timely updates. Recently, researchers
have proposed inferring local maps based on online sensor
observations; however, this approach is constrained by the
sensor perception range and is susceptible to occlusions. In
this work, we propose Neural Map Prior (NMP), a neural representation of global maps that facilitates automatic
global map updates and improves local map inference performance. To incorporate the strong map prior into local
map inference, we employ cross-attention that dynamically
captures correlations between current features and prior
features. For updating the global neural map prior, we
use a learning-based fusion module to guide the network
in fusing features from previous traversals. This design
allows the network to capture a global neural map prior
during sequential online map predictions. Experimental results on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate that our framework is highly compatible with various map segmentation
and detection architectures and considerably strengthens
map prediction performance, even under adverse weather
conditions and across longer horizons. To the best of our
knowledge, this represents the first learning-based system
for constructing a global map prior.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles require high-definition (HD) semantic maps to accurately predict the future trajectories
of other agents and safely navigate urban streets. However, most autonomous vehicles depend on labor-intensive
and costly pre-annotated offline HD maps, which are constructed through a complex pipeline involving multi-trip
LiDAR scanning with survey vehicles, global point cloud
alignment, and manual map element annotation. Despite
their high precision, the scalability of these offline mapping
* Corresponding at: hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Offline Global Map Construction
LiDAR
Scans

Manual
Annotation

Alignment

IMU

Data Collection

GPS

Globally Consistent Point Cloud

Online Local Map Prediction

Global Semantic Map
Local Semantic Map

Encoder

Decoder

BEV features
Surrounding Camera Images

Neural Map Prior (Ours)

Local Semantic Map

refined BEV features
Encoder

Fusion

Decoder

Surrounding Camera Images

Query

Global Neural Map Prior

Ego Location

Online Local Map Inference
Offline Global Map Prior Update
Update

Prior features
Map Tile

Figure 1. Comparison of semantic map construction methods.
Traditional offline semantic mapping pipelines (the first row) involve a complex manual annotation pipeline and do not support
timely map updates. Online HD semantic map learning methods
(the second row) rely entirely on onboard sensor observations and
are susceptible to occlusions. We propose the Neural Map Prior
(NMP, the third row), an innovative neural representation of global
maps designed to aid onboard map prediction. NMP is incrementally updated as it continuously integrates new observations from
a fleet of autonomous vehicles.

solutions is limited, and they do not support timely updates
when road conditions change. Consequently, autonomous
vehicles may rely on out-of-date maps, negatively impacting driving safety. Recent research has explored alternative methods for learning HD semantic maps using onboard
sensor observations, such as camera images and LiDAR
point clouds [11, 13, 15]. These methods typically use deep
learning techniques to infer map elements in real-time, addressing the map update issue associated with offline maps.
However, the quality of the inferred maps is generally infe-

17535

