This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data-Free Knowledge Distillation via Feature Exchange and Activation Region
Constraint

1

Shikang Yu1,2∗ Jiachen Chen1,2∗ Hu Han1,2,3 Shuqiang Jiang1,2
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China

shikang.yu@vipl.ict.ac.cn; chenjiachen20@mails.ucas.edu.cn; {hanhu, sqjiang}@ict.ac.cn

1. Introduction
Abstract
Despite the tremendous progress on data-free knowledge
distillation (DFKD) based on synthetic data generation,
there are still limitations in diverse and efficient data synthesis. It is naive to expect that a simple combination of
generative network-based data synthesis and data augmentation will solve these issues. Therefore, this paper proposes
a novel data-free knowledge distillation method (SpaceshipNet) based on channel-wise feature exchange (CFE) and
multi-scale spatial activation region consistency (mSARC)
constraint. Specifically, CFE allows our generative network to better sample from the feature space and efficiently
synthesize diverse images for learning the student network.
However, using CFE alone can severely amplify the unwanted noises in the synthesized images, which may result
in failure to improve distillation learning and even have
negative effects. Therefore, we propose mSARC to assure
the student network can imitate not only the logit output but
also the spatial activation region of the teacher network in
order to alleviate the influence of unwanted noises in diverse synthetic images on distillation learning. Extensive
experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Tiny-ImageNet, Imagenette, and ImageNet100 show that our method can work
well with different backbone networks, and outperform the
state-of-the-art DFKD methods. Code will be available at:
https://github.com/skgyu/SpaceshipNet.

*Equal contribution
This research was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China (grant 2018AAA0102500), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant 62176249).

Knowledge distillation (KD) aims to train a lightweight
student model that can imitate the capability of a pre-trained
complicated teacher model. In the past decade, KD has been
studied in a wide range of fields such as image recognition, speech recognition, and natural language processing.
Traditional KD methods usually assume that the whole or
part of the training set used by the teacher network is accessible by the student network [17, 24, 34]. But in practical applications, there can be various kinds of constraints
in accessing the original training data, e.g., due to privacy issues in medical data [1, 2, 5, 20, 28, 35] and portrait
data [3], and copyright and privateness of large data volume such as JFT-300M [40] and text-image data [37]. The
traditional KD methods no longer work under these scenarios. Recently, data-free knowledge distillation (DFKD)
[4,7,10,13,14,22,25,27,29,43,46] seeks to perform KD by
generating synthetic data instead of accessing the original
training data used by the teacher network to train the student
network. Thus, the general framework of DFKD consists of
two parts: synthetic data generation that replicates the original data distribution and constraint design between student
and teacher network during distillation learning. Synthetic
data generation methods in DFKD mainly consist of noise
image optimization-based methods [4, 26, 31, 44] and generative network-based methods [8, 9, 12, 13, 27, 29, 45]. The
former approaches optimize randomly initialized noise images to make them have the similar distribution to the original training data. These methods can theoretically generate an infinite number of independent and identically distributed images for student network learning, but they are
usually extremely time-consuming, and thus are difficult
in generating sufficient synthetic data with high diversity.
The later approaches learn a generator to synthesize images that approximate the distribution of the original training data. These methods can be much faster than the image

24266

