This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot Generative Model Adaptation via Image-specific Prompt Learning
Jiayi Guo1 * Chaofei Wang1 * You Wu2 Eric Zhang3 Kai Wang3 Xingqian Xu3
Humphrey Shi3,4† Gao Huang1†
1

Tsinghua University, BNRist

2

UCAS

3

SHI Labs @ Oregon & UIUC

4

Shiji Song1

Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/IPL-Zero-Shot-Generative-Model-Adaptation

Examples from
the internet

“Photo”

Source

“Disney”

Ours

NADA

“Anime painting”

Ours

“Wall painting”

NADA

Ours

NADA

“Ukiyo-e”

Ours

NADA

Figure 1. The mode collapse issue. For NADA [21] and our method, the same generator pre-trained on the source domain of “Photo” is
adapted to the unseen target domains of “Disney”, “Anime painting”, “Wall painting” and “Ukiyo-e” only with the domain labels. The
images above the dotted line are some examples from the internet. The generated images of NADA exhibit some similar unseen patterns
(yellow box areas) which are undesired in terms of quality and diversity. This issue is largely addressed by our method.

Abstract
Recently, CLIP-guided image synthesis has shown appealing performance on adapting a pre-trained sourcedomain generator to an unseen target domain. It does not
require any target-domain samples but only the textual domain labels. The training is highly efficient, e.g., a few
minutes. However, existing methods still have some limitations in the quality of generated images and may suffer from the mode collapse issue. A key reason is that a
fixed adaptation direction is applied for all cross-domain
image pairs, which leads to identical supervision signals.
To address this issue, we propose an Image-specific Prompt
Learning (IPL) method, which learns specific prompt vec* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

tors for each source-domain image. This produces a more
precise adaptation direction for every cross-domain image
pair, endowing the target-domain generator with greatly
enhanced flexibility. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations on various domains demonstrate that IPL effectively
improves the quality and diversity of synthesized images
and alleviates the mode collapse. Moreover, IPL is independent of the structure of the generative model, such as
generative adversarial networks or diffusion models. Code
is available at https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/IPLZero-Shot-Generative-Model-Adaptation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, image synthesis using generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11] has been rapidly developed.

11494

