This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizing Dataset Distillation via Deep Generative Prior
George Cazenavette1
1

Tongzhou Wang1

Antonio Torralba1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

2

UC Berkeley

Alexei A. Efros2
3

Jun-Yan Zhu3

Carnegie Mellon University

ImageNet-Birds

georgecazenavette.github.io/glad

Flamingo

Macaw

Penguin

Pelican

Toucan

Eagle

Black Swan

Ostrich

Cockatoo

Pineapple

Banana

Strawberry

Orange

Lemon

Bell Pepper

Pomegranate

Fig

Cucumber

Granny Smith

Egyptian

Siamese

Tabby

Bengal

Persian

Tiger

Jaguar

Lion

Snow Leopard

Lynx

ImageNet-Cats

ImageNet-Fruits

Peacock

Figure 1. Visualizations of distilled images from three ImageNet subsets. Rather than distilling into pixel space, our Deep Generative Prior
constrains the images to be more coherent, leading to better cross-architectural generalization.

Abstract
Dataset Distillation aims to distill an entire dataset’s
knowledge into a few synthetic images. The idea is to synthesize a small number of synthetic data points that, when given
to a learning algorithm as training data, result in a model
approximating one trained on the original data. Despite a
recent upsurge of progress in the field, existing dataset distillation methods fail to generalize to new architectures and
scale to high-resolution datasets. To overcome the above
issues, we propose to use the learned prior from pre-trained
deep generative models to synthesize the distilled data. To
achieve this, we present a new optimization algorithm that
distills a large number of images into a few intermediate
feature vectors in the generative model’s latent space. Our
method augments existing techniques, significantly improving cross-architecture generalization in all settings.

1. Introduction
Many recent advancements in machine learning come
from combining large networks and big data. Such trained
models have shown strong capabilities to perform a wide
range of diverse tasks [12, 22, 48] and are considered by

some as an ongoing paradigm shift [9]. While such approaches show great potential to improve the frontier of AI,
we, as a scientific community, are also curious about the underlying principles and limitations. Do networks have to be
large to express the functions of interest? Do datasets have to
be big? Can training on “small data” be equally successful?
The seminal work on Knowledge Distillation [31] and recent discoveries such as Lottery Ticket Hypothesis [26] have
revealed small models are often sufficient to approximate
the same functions as large trained models (which are sometimes useful in optimization). Dataset Distillation, proposed
by [61], investigates the analogous yet orthogonal question
on datasets: is there a small succinct dataset sufficient for
training models? In other words, Dataset Distillation aims to
distill a large dataset into a small (synthetic) one, such that
training on the small dataset yields comparable performance
(Figure 2). Since its proposal, Dataset Distillation has
gained much attention in the research community, leading
to many applications [14, 23, 43, 53], and a growing series
of methods that solve the distillation problem: generating
a discrete set of images capable of effectively training a
model [13, 60, 61, 64, 66–68]. In optimizing for a small,
synthetic vision dataset, such methods typically optimize
the raw pixel values of the images.

3739

