This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visibility Aware Human-Object Interaction Tracking from Single RGB Camera
Xianghui Xie

Bharat Lal Bhatnagar

Gerard Pons-Moll

University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{xxie, bbhatnag}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, gerard.pons-moll@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Capturing the interactions between humans and their
environment in 3D is important for many applications in
robotics, graphics, and vision. Recent works to reconstruct
the 3D human and object from a single RGB image do not
have consistent relative translation across frames because
they assume a fixed depth. Moreover, their performance
drops significantly when the object is occluded. In this
work, we propose a novel method to track the 3D human,
object, contacts, and relative translation across frames from
a single RGB camera, while being robust to heavy occlusions. Our method is built on two key insights. First, we
condition our neural field reconstructions for human and
object on per-frame SMPL model estimates obtained by
pre-fitting SMPL to a video sequence. This improves neural reconstruction accuracy and produces coherent relative
translation across frames. Second, human and object motion from visible frames provides valuable information to
infer the occluded object. We propose a novel transformerbased neural network that explicitly uses object visibility and human motion to leverage neighboring frames to
make predictions for the occluded frames. Building on
these insights, our method is able to track both human
and object robustly even under occlusions. Experiments
on two datasets show that our method significantly improves over the state-of-the-art methods. Our code and pretrained models are available at: https://virtualhumans.mpiinf.mpg.de/VisTracker.

1. Introduction
Perceiving and understanding human as well as their interaction with the surroundings has lots of applications in
robotics, gaming, animation and virtual reality etc. Accurate interaction capture is however very hard. Early
works employ high-end systems such as dense camera arrays [8, 17, 37] that allow accurate capture but are expensive to deploy. Recent works [6, 34, 36] reduce the require-

Figure 1. From a monocular RGB video, our method tracks the
human, object and contacts between them even under occlusions.

ment to multi-view RGBD cameras but it is still complicated to setup the full capture system hence is not friendly
for consumer-level usage. This calls for methods that can
capture human-object interaction from a single RGB camera, which is more convenient and user-friendly.
However, reasoning about the 3D human and object
from monocular RGB images is very challenging. The
lack of depth information makes the predictions susceptible to depth-scale ambiguity, leading to temporally incoherent tracking. Furthermore, the object or human can get
heavily occluded, making inference very hard. Prior work
PHOSA [89] relies on hand-crafted heuristics to reduce the
ambiguity but such heuristic-based method is neither very
accurate nor scalable. More recently, CHORE [79] combines neural field reconstructions with model based fitting
obtaining promising results. However, CHORE, assumes
humans are at a fixed depth from the camera and predicts
scale alone, thereby losing the important relative translation across frames. Another limitation of CHORE is that it
is not robust under occlusions as little information is available from single-frame when the object is barely visible.
Hence CHORE often fails in these cases, see Fig. 3.
In this work, we propose the first method that can track

4757

