This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CR-FIQA: Face Image Quality Assessment by Learning Sample Relative
Classifiability

1

Fadi Boutros1 , Meiling Fang1,2 ,Marcel Klemt1 , Biying Fu1 , Naser Damer1,2
Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics Research IGD, Darmstadt, Germany
2
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
Email: fadi.boutros@igd.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
Face image quality assessment (FIQA) estimates the utility of the captured image in achieving reliable and accurate
recognition performance. This work proposes a novel FIQA
method, CR-FIQA, that estimates the face image quality of
a sample by learning to predict its relative classifiability.
This classifiability is measured based on the allocation of
the training sample feature representation in angular space
with respect to its class center and the nearest negative class
center. We experimentally illustrate the correlation between
the face image quality and the sample relative classifiability.
As such property is only observable for the training dataset,
we propose to learn this property by probing internal network observations during the training process and utilizing
it to predict the quality of unseen samples. Through extensive evaluation experiments on eight benchmarks and four
face recognition models, we demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed CR-FIQA over state-of-the-art (SOTA) FIQA
algorithms. 1

1. Introduction
Face image utility indicates the utility (value) of an image to face recognition (FR) algorithms [1, 19]. This utility is measured with a scalar, namely the face image quality (FIQ) score, following the definition in ISO/IEC 238237 [20] and the FR Vendor Test (FRVT) for FIQA [10].
As FIQA measures the face utility to FR algorithm, it
does not necessary reflects, and does not aim at measuring,
the perceived image quality, e.g. a profile face image can
be of high perceived quality but of low utility to FR algorithm [35]. Assessing this perceived image quality has been
addressed in the literature by general image quality assessment (IQA) methods [26, 29, 30] and is different than assessing the utility of an the image for FR . This is reflected
by FIQA methods [28, 32, 36] significantly outperforming
IQA methods [26, 29, 30] in measuring the utility [19] of
face images in FR, as demonstrated in [8, 28, 36].
1 https://github.com/fdbtrs/CR-FIQA

SOTA FIQA methods focused either on creating concepts to label the training data with FIQ scores and then
learn a regression problem [14, 15, 32], or on developing
a link between face embedding properties under certain
scenarios and the FIQ [28, 34, 36]. Generally, the second approach led to better FIQA performances with most
works mentioning the error-prone labeling of the ground
truth quality in the first research direction as a possible reason [28, 36]. However, in the second category, transferring
the information in network embeddings into an FIQ score
is not a learnable process, but rather a form of statistical
analysis, which might not be optimal.
This paper proposes a novel learning paradigm to assess
FIQ, namely the CR-FIQA. Our concept is based on learning to predict the classifiability of FR training samples by
probing internal network observations that point to the relative proximity of these samples to their class centers and
negative class centers. This regression is learned simultaneously with a conventional FR training process that minimizes the distance between the training samples and their
class centers. Linking the properties that cause high/low
classifiability of a training sample to the properties leading
to high/low FIQ, we can use our CR-FIQA to predict the
FIQ of any given sample. We empirically prove the theorized link between classifiability (Section 3.3) and FIQ and
conduct thorough ablation studies on key aspects of our CRFIQA design (Section 5). The proposed CR-FIQA is evaluated on eight benchmarks along with SOTA FIQAs. The
reported results on four FR models demonstrate the superiority of our proposed CR-FIQA over SOTA methods and
the stability of its performance across different FR models.
An overview of the proposed CR-FIQA is presented in Figure 1 and will be clarified in detail in this paper.

2. Related work
The recent SOTA FIQA approaches can be roughly
grouped into two main categories. The first are approaches
that learn a straight forward regressions problem to assess a
FIQ score [1,14,15,32,38]. The second category uses prop-

5836

