This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP is Also an Efficient Segmenter: A Text-Driven Approach for
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yuqi Lin1∗

Minghao Chen1∗† Wenxiao Wang2 Boxi Wu2 Ke Li3
Binbin Lin2 Haifeng Liu1 Xiaofei He1
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University 3 Fullong Technology
{linyq5566, minghaochen01}@gmail.com

train

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) with
image-level labels is a challenging task. Mainstream approaches follow a multi-stage framework and suffer from
high training costs. In this paper, we explore the potential of
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training models (CLIP)
to localize different categories with only image-level labels
and without further training. To efficiently generate highquality segmentation masks from CLIP, we propose a novel
WSSS framework called CLIP-ES. Our framework improves
all three stages of WSSS with special designs for CLIP: 1)
We introduce the softmax function into GradCAM and exploit the zero-shot ability of CLIP to suppress the confusion caused by non-target classes and backgrounds. Meanwhile, to take full advantage of CLIP, we re-explore text inputs under the WSSS setting and customize two text-driven
strategies: sharpness-based prompt selection and synonym
fusion. 2) To simplify the stage of CAM refinement, we propose a real-time class-aware attention-based affinity (CAA)
module based on the inherent multi-head self-attention
(MHSA) in CLIP-ViTs. 3) When training the final segmentation model with the masks generated by CLIP, we introduced
a confidence-guided loss (CGL) focus on confident regions.
Our CLIP-ES achieves SOTA performance on Pascal VOC
2012 and MS COCO 2014 while only taking 10% time of
previous methods for the pseudo mask generation. Code is
available at https://github.com/linyq2117/CLIP-ES.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation [7,40] aims to predict pixel-level
labels but requires labor-intensive pixel-level annotations.
*Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

boat

person

boat

Original
GradCAM

Ours

Image

Confusion with
background

Confusion with
other categories

Figure 1. Effect of the softmax function on GradCAM of CLIP.
The original GradCAM uses the logit (before the softmax) of the
target class to compute gradient. We propose to compute gradient
based on the probability (after the softmax). It can avoid confusion
between the target class and background (the first two columns)
and other object classes in the dataset (the last two columns).

Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) is proposed to reduce the annotation cost. WSSS only requires
weak supervision, e.g., image-level labels [2], bounding
boxes [10, 33], points [4] or scribbles [31, 42]. The most
commonly used one is WSSS with image-level annotations,
which is the focus of our paper.
Previous WSSS approaches [24, 43, 46, 48] with imagelevel labels typically follow a three-stage framework. First,
a classification model is trained on the specific dataset to
generate initial CAMs (Class Activation Maps). Then, the
initial CAMs are refined by the pixel affinity network [1, 2]
or extra saliency maps [18, 41]. At last, the refined CAMs
serve as the pseudo masks to train a semantic segmentation
model. Obviously, this multi-stage framework is compli-

15305

