This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Conflict-Based Cross-View Consistency for Semi-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation

1

Zicheng Wang1,3 * Zhen Zhao1 Xiaoxia Xing3 Dong Xu2
2
University of Sydney
University of Hong Kong
zwan4733@uni.sydney.edu.au

Xiangyu Kong3 Luping Zhou1†
3
Samsung Research China-Beijing

{zhen.zhao, luping.zhou}@sydney.edu.au

dongxu@cs.hku.hk

{xx.xing, xiangyu.kong}@samsung.com

Abstract
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation (SSS) has recently gained increasing research interest as it can reduce the requirement for large-scale fully-annotated training data. The current methods often suffer from the confirmation bias from the pseudo-labelling process, which can
be alleviated by the co-training framework. The current
co-training-based SSS methods rely on hand-crafted perturbations to prevent the different sub-nets from collapsing into each other, but these artificial perturbations cannot lead to the optimal solution. In this work, we propose a
new conflict-based cross-view consistency (CCVC) method
based on a two-branch co-training framework which aims
at enforcing the two sub-nets to learn informative features
from irrelevant views. In particular, we first propose a new
cross-view consistency (CVC) strategy that encourages the
two sub-nets to learn distinct features from the same input
by introducing a feature discrepancy loss, while these distinct features are expected to generate consistent prediction
scores of the input. The CVC strategy helps to prevent the
two sub-nets from stepping into the collapse. In addition,
we further propose a conflict-based pseudo-labelling (CPL)
method to guarantee the model will learn more useful information from conflicting predictions, which will lead to a stable training process. We validate our new CCVC approach
on the SSS benchmark datasets where our method achieves
new state-of-the-art performance. Our code is available at
https://github.com/xiaoyao3302/CCVC.

1. Introduction
Among different vision tasks, semantic segmentation is
a fundamental vision task that enables the network to understand the world [3, 11, 12, 32, 33]. In recent years, deep neu* This work was done during an internship at Samsung Research ChinaBeijing. This work is supported by Australian Research Council (ARC
DP200103223).
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. We compare the cosine similarity values between the
features extracted by the two sub-nets of the traditional crossconsistency regularization (CCR) method and our CVC method.
We also compare the prediction accuracies of the two methods,
measured by mIoU. We show that our CVC method can prevent
the two sub-nets from collapsing into each other and inferring the
input from irrelevant views, while CCR cannot guarantee the inferred views are different. We show our new method can increase
the perception of the model, which produces more reliable predictions. The experiments are implemented on the original Pascal
VOC dataset, under the 1/4 split partition with ResNet-101 as the
backbone of the encoder.

ral networks (DNNs) have shown great potential in semantic segmentation [18,31,57]. However, the success of DNNs
is mainly due to the huge amount of annotated datasets. For
the task of semantic segmentation, pixel-level annotations
are often required, which means the annotators need to manually label up to hundreds of thousands of pixels per image.
Therefore, it takes great effort to collect precisely labelled
data for training DNNs [1, 27, 30].
Various semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods are
proposed to tackle the problem, which aim at learning a
network by using only a small set of pixel-wise precisely
annotated data and a large set of unlabelled data for semantic segmentation [2, 34, 37, 53, 54, 58]. It is obvious that
the information from the labelled data is very limited as the
number of labelled data is far less than the number of unlabelled data. Therefore, it becomes a key issue to fully
exploit the unlabelled data to assist the labelled data for the
model training.
One intuitive way to tackle this issue is pseudo-

19585

