This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detecting Backdoors During the Inference Stage Based on Corruption
Robustness Consistency
Xiaogeng Liu1, 4, 5, 6, 7 , Minghui Li3 , Haoyu Wang1, 4, 5, 6, 7 , Shengshan Hu1, 4, 5, 6, 7
Dengpan Ye9 , Hai Jin2, 4, 5, 8 , Libing Wu9 , Chaowei Xiao10
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
5
Services Computing Technology and System Lab
6
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
7
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security 8 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
9
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University 10 Arizona State University
{liuxiaogeng, minghuili, wwwwhy, hushengshan, hjin}@hust.edu.cn
{yedp, wu}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are proven to be vulnerable to
backdoor attacks. Detecting the trigger samples during the
inference stage, i.e., the test-time trigger sample detection,
can prevent the backdoor from being triggered. However,
existing detection methods often require the defenders to
have high accessibility to victim models, extra clean data,
or knowledge about the appearance of backdoor triggers,
limiting their practicality.
In this paper, we propose the test-time corruption robustness consistency evaluation (TeCo)1 , a novel test-time
trigger sample detection method that only needs the hardlabel outputs of the victim models without any extra information. Our journey begins with the intriguing observation that the backdoor-infected models have similar performance across different image corruptions for the clean
images, but perform discrepantly for the trigger samples.
Based on this phenomenon, we design TeCo to evaluate testtime robustness consistency by calculating the deviation of
severity that leads to predictions’ transition across different
corruptions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that compared with state-of-the-art defenses, which even require either certain information about the trigger types or accessibility of clean data, TeCo outperforms them on different
backdoor attacks, datasets, and model architectures, enjoying a higher AUROC by 10% and 5 times of stability.

xiaocw@asu.edu

1. Introduction
Backdoor attacks have been shown to be a threat to
deep neural networks (DNNs) [14, 26, 32, 38]. A backdoorinfected DNN will perform normally on clean input data,
but output the adversarially desirable target label when the
input data are tampered with a special pattern (i.e., the backdoor trigger), which may cause serious safety issues.
A critical dependency of a successful backdoor attack
is that the attacker must provide the samples with backdoor triggers (we call them trigger samples for short hereafter) to the infected models on the inference stage, otherwise, the backdoor will not be triggered. Thus, one way
to counter the backdoor attacks is to judge whether the test
data have triggers on it, i.e., the test-time trigger sample detection (TTSD) defense2 [5, 12, 42]. This kind of defense
can work corporately with other backdoor defenses such as
model diagnosis defense [9, 15, 46] or trigger reverse engineering [40, 43], and also provide prior knowledge of the
trigger samples in a comprehensive defense pipeline, which
can help the down-steam defenses to statistically analyze
the backdoor samples and mitigate the backdoor more effectively.
On the other hand, the TTSD method, especially the
black-box TTSD method can also serve as the last line of
defense when someone adopts models with unknown credibility and has no authority to get access to the training data
or model parameters, this scenario exists widely in the pre-

1 https://github.com/CGCL-codes/TeCo

2 Some paper also call it online backdoor defense [30, 39].

16363

