This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discovering the Real Association: Multimodal Causal Reasoning in Video
Question Answering
1

Chuanqi Zang1 , Hanqing Wang1 , Mingtao Pei1 , Wei Liang1,2 *
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Yangtze Delta Region Academy of Beijing Institute of Technology, Jiaxing

Abstract
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is challenging as
it requires capturing accurate correlations between modalities from redundant information. Recent methods focus
on the explicit challenges of the task, e.g. multimodal
feature extraction, video-text alignment and fusion. Their
frameworks reason the answer relying on statistical evidence causes, which ignores potential bias in the multimodal data. In our work, we investigate relational structure
from a causal representation perspective on multimodal
data and propose a novel inference framework. For visual data, question-irrelevant objects may establish simple
matching associations with the answer. For textual data,
the model prefers the local phrase semantics which may deviate from the global semantics in long sentences. Therefore, to enhance the generalization of the model, we discover the real association by explicitly capturing visual
features that are causally related to the question semantics and weakening the impact of local language semantics on question answering. The experimental results on
two large causal VideoQA datasets verify that our proposed framework 1) improves the accuracy of the existing
VideoQA backbone, 2) demonstrates robustness on complex scenes and questions. The code will be released at
https:// github.com/ Chuanqi-Zang/ Discoveringthe-Real-Association.

1. Introduction
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) aims to understand visual information and describe it in language
question-answer format, which is a natural cognitive capability for humans. Computer Vision (CV) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) as the base models for VideoQA
have shown significant progress due to the successful application of deep learning, such as action classification [25],
object detection [10], instance segmentation [31], and largescale pre-trained language model [6,19]. These tremendous
*Wei Liang is the corresponding author.

Question: What will happen if the power is cut off?
TV, indoor singing karaoke
Answer:
A. [person_1] will stop singing karaoke.
B. [person_1] and [person_2] both cannot work.
Question: What will happen if the girl sprains?
Answer: The girl will stop.
Someone, help Reason
Reason:
A. There are a lot people here, and can find someone to help at any time.
B. The girl can’t exercise because of a sprain and needs to rest.

Figure 1. Two samples in VideoQA dataset. They exhibit spurious
reasoning processes of B2A [26] that rely on statistical patterns,
including visually spurious object-relationship associations (top)
and textually unilateral semantic representations (bottom).

advances in basic applications fuel the confidence in finegrained multimodal analysis and reasoning, not only feature extraction, but also fine-grained general causality estimation, which is critical for a robust cognitive system.
Recent VideoQA methods usually explore multimodal
relational knowledge by sophisticated structured architecture, such as memory-augmented model [9], hierarchical
model [20], topological model [18], and transformer-based
model [37]. Although experiments validate their feature
fusion capabilities, we find that these methods concentrate
on statistical association based on multimodal data, ignoring the real stable association. They usually use a generally constrained approach with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), which tends to over-rely on the co-occurrence
bias of repeated objects and words in the collected observational data, and bypasses the impact of complete semantics
at the sentence level. This mechanism reduces the robustness of the model on new data, even in the test set which
has similar distributions to the training set.
For example, as shown in Fig. 1 (top), two people are
playing ”cricket” indoors, and there are other objects in the
room, including a TV that is on. If relying on the statistical relationship, the model may be confused by the two im-

19027

