This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Promoting Semantic Connectivity: Dual Nearest Neighbors Contrastive Learning
for Unsupervised Domain Generalization
Yuchen Liu1†, Yaoming Wang1†, Yabo Chen2, Wenrui Dai2∗, Chenglin Li1, Junni Zou2, and Hongkai Xiong1
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{liuyuchen6666, wang yaoming, chenyabo, daiwenrui, lcl1985, zoujunni, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) has achieved great success
in generalizing knowledge from source domains to unseen
target domains. However, current DG methods rely heavily on labeled source data, which are usually costly and
unavailable. Since unlabeled data are far more accessible,
we study a more practical unsupervised domain generalization (UDG) problem. Learning invariant visual representation from different views, i.e., contrastive learning, promises
well semantic features for in-domain unsupervised learning.
However, it fails in cross-domain scenarios. In this paper,
we first delve into the failure of vanilla contrastive learning and point out that semantic connectivity is the key to
UDG. Specifically, suppressing the intra-domain connectivity and encouraging the intra-class connectivity help to learn
the domain-invariant semantic information. Then, we propose a novel unsupervised domain generalization approach,
namely Dual Nearest Neighbors contrastive learning with
strong Augmentation (DN2 A). Our DN2 A leverages strong
augmentations to suppress the intra-domain connectivity
and proposes a novel dual nearest neighbors search strategy
to find trustworthy cross domain neighbors along with indomain neighbors to encourage the intra-class connectivity.
Experimental results demonstrate that our DN2 A outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large margin, e.g., 12.01%
and 13.11% accuracy gain with only 1% labels for linear
evaluation on PACS and DomainNet, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have yielded prolific results in
various tasks in recent years. However, they are tailored for
experimental cases, where training and testing data share the
same distribution. When transferred to practical applications,
these methods perform poorly on out-of-distribution data
due to domain shifts [27, 30]. To tackle this issue, domain
generalization (DG) methods [25, 35] are proposed to learn
*Corresponding author: Wenrui Dai. † Equal contribution.

Figure 1. (a) t-SNE visualization of unsupervised features learned
by SimCLR and our DN2 A on PACS. (b) Grad-cam visualization
of linear probing for SimCLR and ours with 10% labeled data.

transferable knowledge from multiple source domains to
generalize on unseen target domains. Despite the promising
results of DG, they are restricted to supervised training with
large amounts of labeled source data. However, large-scale
labeled source data are often unavailable due to the laborious
and expensive annotation capture, while unlabeled data are
far more accessible. Thus, we study the more practical
unsupervised domain generalization (UDG) [34] problem to
learn domain-invariant features in an unsupervised fashion.
Recent advances in unsupervised learning prefer contrastive learning (CL) [2, 14, 28, 32], which learns semantic
representation by enforcing similarity over different augmentations of the same image. However, most CL methods are
designed for i.i.d. datasets and can hardly accommodate the
cross-domain scenario in UDG. As depicted in Fig. 1, vanilla
SimCLR fails to learn domain-invariant semantic features
but learns domain-biased features. For further understanding, we dive into this phenomenon and propose the semantic
connectivity for UDG to measure the intra-domain and intraclass similarity. From augmentation graph view [12, 31],
semantic connectivity is the support overlap of augmented
samples within the same semantic class. We further find
that the degraded semantic connectivity is responsible for

3510

