This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rebalancing Batch Normalization for
Exemplar-based Class-Incremental Learning
Sungmin Cha1 , Sungjun Cho2 , Dasol Hwang2 , Sunwon Hong1 , Moontae Lee2,3 , and Taesup Moon1,4,5 *
1
Department of ECE, Seoul National University 2 LG AI Research 3 University of Illinois Chicago
4
ASRI / INMC / IPAI / AIIS, Seoul National University 5 SNU-LG AI Research Center
sungmin.cha@snu.ac.kr, {sungjun.cho, dasol.hwang}@lgresearch.ai,
zghdtnsz96@snu.ac.kr, moontae.lee@lgresearch.ai, tsmoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) and its variants has been extensively studied for neural nets in various computer vision
tasks, but relatively little work has been dedicated to studying
the effect of BN in continual learning. To that end, we develop a new update patch for BN, particularly tailored for the
exemplar-based class-incremental learning (CIL). The main
issue of BN in CIL is the imbalance of training data between
current and past tasks in a mini-batch, which makes the empirical mean and variance as well as the learnable affine
transformation parameters of BN heavily biased toward the
current task — contributing to the forgetting of past tasks.
While one of the recent BN variants has been developed
for “online” CIL, in which the training is done with a single
epoch, we show that their method does not necessarily bring
gains for “offline” CIL, in which a model is trained with
multiple epochs on the imbalanced training data. The main
reason for the ineffectiveness of their method lies in not fully
addressing the data imbalance issue, especially in computing the gradients for learning the affine transformation parameters of BN. Accordingly, our new hyperparameter-free
variant, dubbed as Task-Balanced BN (TBBN), is proposed
to more correctly resolve the imbalance issue by making a
horizontally-concatenated task-balanced batch using both
reshape and repeat operations during training. Based on
our experiments on class incremental learning of CIFAR100, ImageNet-100, and five dissimilar task datasets, we
demonstrate that our TBBN, which works exactly the same
as the vanilla BN in the inference time, is easily applicable
to most existing exemplar-based offline CIL algorithms and
consistently outperforms other BN variants.

1. Introduction
In recent years, continual learning (CL) has been actively
studied to efficiently learn a neural network on sequentially
* Corresponding author (E-mail: tsmoon@snu.ac.kr)

arriving datasets while eliminating the process of re-training
from scratch at each arrival of a new dataset [9]. However,
since the model is typically trained on a dataset that is heavily skewed toward the current task at each step, the resulting
neural network often suffers from suboptimal trade-off between stability and plasticity [25] during CL. To overcome
this issue, various studies have been focused on addressing
the so-called catastrophic forgetting phenomenon [9, 28].
Among different CL settings, the class-incremental learning (CIL) setting where the classifier needs to learn previously unseen classes at each incremental step has recently
drawn attention due to its practicality [1, 3, 6, 12, 15, 26,
39, 42, 44]. Most state-of-the-art CIL algorithms maintain a
small exemplar memory to store a subset of previously used
training data and combine it with the current task dataset to
mitigate the forgetting of past knowledge. A key issue of
exemplar-based CIL is that the model prediction becomes
heavily biased towards more recently learned classes, due
to the imbalance between the training data from the current
task (that are abundantly available) and past tasks (with limited access through exemplar memory). In response, recently
proposed solutions to biased predictions include bias correction [39], unified classifier [15], and separated softmax [1],
which greatly improved the overall accuracy of CIL methods
across all classes learned so far.
Despite such progress, relatively less focus has been made
on backbone architectures under CIL on computer vision
tasks. Specifically, the popular CNN-based models (e.g.,
ResNet [13]) are mainly used as feature extractors, and those
models are equipped with Batch Normalization (BN) [17]
by default. However, since BN is designed for single-task
training on CNNs, applying BN directly to exemplar-based
CIL results in statistics biased toward the current task due
to the imbalance between current and past tasks’ data in
a mini-batch. Recently, [29] pointed out this issue in CIL,
dubbed as cross-task normalization effect, and proposed a
new normalization scheme called Continual Normalization

20127

