This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Pose Sequence Modeling
Lin Geng Foo1 * Tianjiao Li1 * Hossein Rahmani2 Qiuhong Ke3 Jun Liu1†
1
Singapore University of Technology & Design 2 Lancaster University 3 Monash University
{lingeng foo,tianjiao li}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk,
qiuhong.ke@monash.edu, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose a Unified Pose Sequence Modeling approach to unify heterogeneous human behavior understanding tasks based on pose data, e.g., action recognition, 3D
pose estimation and 3D early action prediction. A major
obstacle is that different pose-based tasks require different
output data formats. Specifically, the action recognition and
prediction tasks require class predictions as outputs, while
3D pose estimation requires a human pose output, which
limits existing methods to leverage task-specific network architectures for each task. Hence, in this paper, we propose
a novel Unified Pose Sequence (UPS) model to unify heterogeneous output formats for the aforementioned tasks by
considering text-based action labels and coordinate-based
human poses as language sequences. Then, by optimizing a single auto-regressive transformer, we can obtain a
unified output sequence that can handle all the aforementioned tasks. Moreover, to avoid the interference brought by
the heterogeneity between different tasks, a dynamic routing mechanism is also proposed to empower our UPS with
the ability to learn which subsets of parameters should be
shared among different tasks. To evaluate the efficacy of
the proposed UPS, extensive experiments are conducted on
four different tasks with four popular behavior understanding benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Pose sequences, which capture the movements of the human body via human joint coordinates, are well-known to
be an efficient and effective representation of human motion and behaviour [58,80]. This is mainly because pose sequences often provide enough information to characterize
complex motion patterns [31], while being robust against
superficial visual variations such as the background, clothing texture and illumination conditions [43,44]. At the same
* equal contribution
† corresponding author

time, by using depth sensors such as the Kinect, pose data
can also be conveniently obtained in real-time to facilitate
downstream applications. Therefore, the potential of pose
sequences to tackle behaviour understanding has attracted a
lot of attention in recent years.
Notably, the usage of pose sequences has been widely
explored across many practical applications, including
human-robot interaction [1, 59], augmented reality [4, 51]
and security surveillance [18, 71]. Specifically, pose sequences, as informative inputs, can facilitate certain aspects
in these applications, such as action recognition [12, 44, 48,
66, 67, 86–88], 3D pose estimation [41, 45, 84, 92, 95, 96]
and early action prediction [23, 35, 39, 77, 78], making these
tasks popular and important areas of research.
However, existing methods for each task still often require task-specific architectures, e.g., hourglass networks
for pose estimation [84] and specialized GCN architectures
for action recognition [11,69], while the performing of multiple pose-based tasks with a single model is not well explored. Therefore, in order to perform multiple tasks, users
will often need to design and train multiple separate models,
which can be inconvenient and inefficient.
Hence, in this work, we seek to simplify and unify
the modeling for several popular and important pose-based
tasks: 3D action recognition, 2D action recognition, 3D
pose estimation and 3D early action prediction. This is a
challenging goal that has not been achieved before, requiring a single model to cover a large scope involving 2D tasks,
3D tasks, as well as 2D to 3D lifting. By unifying these
pose-based tasks and removing the need to design and train
separate task-specific models to tackle different pose-based
tasks, we can greatly reduce the difficulty and complexity
involved in tackling these tasks. Moreover, a unified model
is also an elegant way of handling multiple tasks that brings
us one step closer in our pursuit of general purpose vision
systems [25], i.e., an efficient multi-purpose AI model akin
to the human brain.
To this end, we propose a Unified Pose Sequence (UPS)
model to unify the architecture and output format for multiple popular pose-based tasks. Our UPS is a single uni-

13019

