This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DBARF: Deep Bundle-Adjusting Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields
Yu Chen
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{chenyu, gimhee.lee}@nus.edu.sg
Initial Poses
(BEV, iter=0)

1. Introduction
The recent introduction of NeRF (Neural Radiance
Fields) [28] bridges the gap between computer vision and
computer graphics with the focus on the Novel view synthesis (NVS) task. NeRF demonstrates impressive capability
of encoding the implicit scene representation and rendering
high-quality images at novel views with only a small set of
coordinate-based MLPs. Although NeRF and its variants
simplify the dense 3D reconstruction part of the traditional
photogrammetry pipeline that includes: the reconstruction
of dense point clouds from posed images followed by the
recovery and texture mapping of the surfaces into just a
simple neural network inference, they still require known
accurate camera poses as inputs.
Nonetheless, the acquisition of camera poses is expensive in the real world. Most NeRF-related methods obtain the camera poses by Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [4,
23, 34]. In SfM, camera poses are optimized under the

Optimized Poses
(SV, iter=20000)

DBARF

Recent works such as BARF and GARF can bundle adjust camera poses with neural radiance fields (NeRF) which
is based on coordinate-MLPs. Despite the impressive results, these methods cannot be applied to Generalizable
NeRFs (GeNeRFs) which require image feature extractions
that are often based on more complicated 3D CNN or transformer architectures. In this work, we first analyze the difficulties of jointly optimizing camera poses with GeNeRFs,
and then further propose our DBARF to tackle these issues.
Our DBARF which bundle adjusts camera poses by taking a cost feature map as an implicit cost function can be
jointly trained with GeNeRFs in a self-supervised manner.
Unlike BARF and its follow-up works, which can only be
applied to per-scene optimized NeRFs and need accurate
initial camera poses with the exception of forward-facing
scenes, our method can generalize across scenes and does
not require any good initialization. Experiments show the
effectiveness and generalization ability of our DBARF when
evaluated on real-world datasets. Our code is available at
https:// aibluefisher.github.io/ dbarf .

Optimized Poses
(BEV, iter=10000)

BARF =>GeNeRF

Abstract

Figure 1. Results of optimizing camera poses with BARF and
DBARF. From left to right are the initial camera poses, bird’s eye
view (BEV) of optimized camera poses after 1e4 iterations, and
side view (SV) of optimized camera pose after 2e4 iterations. Red
and blue denote ground truths and estimated camera poses (The
inconsistent ground truth poses in different iterations are due to
the randomness of selecting the training batches). Top: The camera poses diverge quickly when BARF [20] is applied to GeNeRF,
even with the camera poses initialized by perturbing the ground
truth with very small noise. Bottom: Results obtained by our
DBARF, the camera poses are randomly initialized.

keypoint-metric reprojection error in a process referred to as
bundle adjustment [43]. A notorious problem of SfM is that
it sometimes fails, e.g. in textureless or self-similar scenes,
and can also take days or even weeks to complete for largescale scenes. Consequently, one main forthcoming issue
with NeRF is that its rendering quality highly relies on accurate camera poses. Recently, several works try to solve the
pose inaccuracy jointly with NeRF. One of the representative works is BARF [20]. NeRF maps the pixel coordinates
into high-dimensional space as Fourier features [39] before
inputting into the MLPs to enable networks to learn the
high-frequency part of images. However, Fourier features
can be a double-edged sword when the camera poses are
jointly optimized with NeRF, where gradients from highfrequency components dominate the low-frequency parts
during training. To mitigate this problem, BARF draws
inspiration from the non-smoothness optimization in highdimensional functions: optimizer can get stuck at a local
optimum, but the training can be easier when the objective

24

