This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Visual Grounding and Tracking with Natural Language Specification
Li Zhou1 , Zikun Zhou2,1* , Kaige Mao1 , and Zhenyu He1,*
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
lizhou.hit@gmail.com

zhouzikunhit@gmail.com

Abstract
Tracking by natural language specification aims to locate the referred target in a sequence based on the natural language description. Existing algorithms solve this
issue in two steps, visual grounding and tracking, and accordingly deploy the separated grounding model and tracking model to implement these two steps, respectively. Such
a separated framework overlooks the link between visual
grounding and tracking, which is that the natural language
descriptions provide global semantic cues for localizing the
target for both two steps. Besides, the separated framework can hardly be trained end-to-end. To handle these
issues, we propose a joint visual grounding and tracking
framework, which reformulates grounding and tracking as
a unified task: localizing the referred target based on the
given visual-language references. Specifically, we propose
a multi-source relation modeling module to effectively build
the relation between the visual-language references and the
test image. In addition, we design a temporal modeling
module to provide a temporal clue with the guidance of
the global semantic information for our model, which effectively improves the adaptability to the appearance variations of the target. Extensive experimental results on
TNL2K, LaSOT, OTB99, and RefCOCOg demonstrate that
our method performs favorably against state-of-the-art algorithms for both tracking and grounding. Code is available at https://github.com/lizhou-cs/JointNLT.

1. Introduction
Tracking by natural language specification [18] is a task
aiming to locate the target in every frame of a sequence according to the state specified by the natural language. Compared with the classical tracking task [25, 33, 34, 41] using
a bounding box to specify the target of interest, tracking
by natural language specification provides a novel humanmachine interaction manner for visual tracking. In addition,
the natural language specification also has two advantages
∗ Corresponding authors: Zikun Zhou and Zhenyu He.

maokaige.hit@gmail.com

zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn

“zebra running on the
grass with a black horse”

Visual Grounding
Grounding
Model

Grounding Frame

Crop

Template

Object Tracking
Tracking
Model

Search Frame
(a) Separated visual grounding and tracking framework
Visual Grounding

“zebra running on the
grass with a black horse”

Grounding Frame
“zebra running on the
grass with a black horse”

Joint Grounding
&
Tracking Model
Object Tracking

Template Search Frame
(b) Joint visual grounding and tracking framework

Figure 1. Illustration of two different frameworks for tracking by
natural language specification. (a) The separated visual grounding and tracking framework, which consists of two independent
models for visual grounding and tracking, respectively. (b) The
proposed joint visual grounding and tracking framework, which
employs a single model for both visual grounding and tracking.

for the tracking task compared to the bounding box specification. First, the bounding box only provides a static representation of the target state, while the natural language can
describe the variation of the target for the long term. Second, the bounding box contains no direct semantics about
the target and even results in ambiguity [32], but the natural
language can provide clear semantics of the target used for
assisting the tracker to recognize the target. In spite of the
above merits, tracking by natural language specification has
not been fully explored.
Most existing solutions [17,18,32,39] for this task could

23151

