This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEVHeight: A Robust Framework for Vision-based Roadside
3D Object Detection
Lei Yang1 *, Kaicheng Yu2 , Tao Tang3 , Jun Li1 , Kun Yuan4 , Li Wang1 , Xinyu Zhang1†, Peng Chen2
1
State Key Laboratory of Automotive Safety and Energy, Tsinghua University
2
Autonomous Driving Lab, Alibaba Group; 3 Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University
4
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
{yanglei20@mails, lijun1958@, xyzhang@, wangli thu@mail}.tsinghua.edu.cn
{kaicheng.yu.yt, trent.tangtao}@gmail.com; kunyuan@pku.edu.cn; yuanshang.cp@alibaba-inc.com

Figure 1. (a) To produce 3D bounding boxes out of a monocular image, state-of-the-art methods firstly predict the per-pixel depth either
explicitly or implicitly to determine the 3D location of foreground objects with the background. However, when we plot the per-pixel
depth on the image, we notice that the differences between points on the car roof and surrounding ground quickly shrink when the car
moves away from the camera, making it sub-optimal to optimize especially for far objects. (b) On the contrary, we plot the per-pixel
height to the ground and observe that such difference remains agnostic regardless of the distance, and visually is superior for the network
to detect objects. However, one cannot directly regress the 3D location by solely predicting the height. (c) To this end, we propose a novel
framework, BEVHeight to address this issue. Empirical results reveal that our method surpasses the best method by a margin of 4.85% on
clean settings and over 26.88% on noisy settings.

Abstract
While most recent autonomous driving system focuses
on developing perception methods on ego-vehicle sensors,
people tend to overlook an alternative approach to leverage intelligent roadside cameras to extend the perception
ability beyond the visual range. We discover that the stateof-the-art vision-centric bird’s eye view detection methods
have inferior performances on roadside cameras. This is
because these methods mainly focus on recovering the depth
regarding the camera center, where the depth difference be-

tween the car and the ground quickly shrinks while the distance increases. In this paper, we propose a simple yet
effective approach, dubbed BEVHeight, to address this issue. In essence, instead of predicting the pixel-wise depth,
we regress the height to the ground to achieve a distanceagnostic formulation to ease the optimization process of
camera-only perception methods. On popular 3D detection
benchmarks of roadside cameras, our method surpasses
all previous vision-centric methods by a significant margin. The code is available at https://github.com/
ADLab-AutoDrive/BEVHeight.

* Work done during an internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding Author.

21611

