This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoWs on PASTURE: Baselines and Benchmarks
for Language-Driven Zero-Shot Object Navigation
Samir Yitzhak Gadre⇧

Mitchell Wortsman†

Gabriel Ilharco†

Abstract
For robots to be generally useful, they must be able
to find arbitrary objects described by people (i.e., be
language-driven) even without expensive navigation training on in-domain data (i.e., perform zero-shot inference).
We explore these capabilities in a unified setting: languagedriven zero-shot object navigation (L-ZSON). Inspired by
the recent success of open-vocabulary models for image
classification, we investigate a straightforward framework,
CLIP on Wheels (CoW), to adapt open-vocabulary models
to this task without fine-tuning. To better evaluate L-ZSON,
we introduce the PASTURE benchmark, which considers
finding uncommon objects, objects described by spatial and
appearance attributes, and hidden objects described relative to visible objects. We conduct an in-depth empirical study by directly deploying 22 CoW baselines across
H ABITAT, ROBOTHOR, and PASTURE. In total, we evaluate over 90k navigation episodes and find that (1) CoW
baselines often struggle to leverage language descriptions
but are proficient at finding uncommon objects. (2) A simple CoW, with CLIP-based object localization and classical
exploration—and no additional training—matches the navigation efficiency of a state-of-the-art ZSON method trained
for 500M steps on H ABITAT MP3D data. This same CoW
provides a 15.6 percentage point improvement in success
over a state-of-the-art ROBOTHOR ZSON model.1

1. Introduction
To be more widely applicable, robots should be
language-driven: able to deduce goals based on arbitrary
text input instead of being constrained to a fixed set of object categories. While existing image classification, semantic segmentation, and object navigation benchmarks like
ImageNet-1k [65], ImageNet-21k [22], MS-COCO [45],
LVIS [28], H ABITAT [67], and ROBOTHOR [18] include a
vast array of everyday items, they do not capture all objects
that matter to people. For instance, a lost “toy airplane” may
⇧ Columbia University, † University of Washington. Correspondence to
sy@cs.columbia.edu.
1 For code, data, and videos, see cow.cs.columbia.edu/

Sample tasks

Ludwig Schmidt†
Top-down visualization

Shuran Song⇧
Egocentric Observations

(a) Finding uncommon objects
“…llama wicker
basket…”

goal ✅

goal ✅

“…tie-dye
surfboard…”

(b) Finding objects based on attributes in the presence of distractors
“…small, green
apple…”

correct apple ✅

distractor apple⛔

correct mug ✅

distractor mug⛔

“…apple on a
coffee table near a
laptop…”

(c) Finding hidden objects in the presence of distractors
“…mug under the
bed…”

Figure 1. The PASTURE benchmark for L-ZSON. Text specifies navigation goal objects. Agents do not train on these tasks,
making the evaluation protocol zero-shot. (a) Uncommon object
goals like “llama wicker basket”, not found in existing navigation
benchmarks. (b) Appearance, spatial descriptions, which are necessary to find the correct object. (c) Hidden object descriptions,
which localize objects that are not visible.

become relevant in a kindergarten classroom, but this object
is not annotated in any of the aforementioned datasets.
In this paper, we study Language-driven zero-shot object
navigation (L-ZSON), a more challenging but also more applicable version of object navigation [5, 18, 67, 79, 89] and
ZSON [38,46] tasks. In L-ZSON, an agent must find an object based on a description, which may contain different levels of granularity (e.g., “toy airplane”, “toy airplane under
the bed”, or “wooden toy airplane”). L-ZSON encompasses
ZSON, which specifies only the target category [38, 46].
Since L-ZSON is “zero-shot”, we consider agents without
access to navigation training on the target objects or domains. This reflects realistic application scenarios, where
the environment and object set may not be known a priori.
Performing L-ZSON in any environment with unstructured language input is challenging; however, recent advances in open-vocabulary models for image classification [35, 58, 61], object detection [4, 21, 27, 36, 43, 47, 49,
62, 88], and semantic segmentation [3, 6, 15, 33, 36, 37, 86]
present a promising foundation. These models provide an
interface where one specifies—in text—the arbitrary ob-

23171

