This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking Robustness of 3D Object Detection to Common Corruptions
in Autonomous Driving
Yinpeng Dong1,5 , Caixin Kang2 , Jinlai Zhang3 , Zijian Zhu4 , Yikai Wang1 , Xiao Yang1 ,
Hang Su1,6∗ , Xingxing Wei2 , Jun Zhu1,5,6 *
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
Tsinghua-China Mobile Communications Group Co., Ltd. Joint Institute, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 3 Guangxi University
4
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
RealAI 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
{dongyinpeng,suhangss,dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn, caixinkang@buaa.edu.cn, 1711302013@st.gxu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection is an important task in autonomous
driving to perceive the surroundings. Despite the excellent
performance, the existing 3D detectors lack the robustness
to real-world corruptions caused by adverse weathers, sensor noises, etc., provoking concerns about the safety and
reliability of autonomous driving systems. To comprehensively and rigorously benchmark the corruption robustness
of 3D detectors, in this paper we design 27 types of common
corruptions for both LiDAR and camera inputs considering
real-world driving scenarios. By synthesizing these corruptions on public datasets, we establish three corruption robustness benchmarks—KITTI-C, nuScenes-C, and WaymoC. Then, we conduct large-scale experiments on 24 diverse
3D object detection models to evaluate their corruption robustness. Based on the evaluation results, we draw several
important findings, including: 1) motion-level corruptions
are the most threatening ones that lead to significant performance drop of all models; 2) LiDAR-camera fusion models
demonstrate better robustness; 3) camera-only models are
extremely vulnerable to image corruptions, showing the indispensability of LiDAR point clouds. We release the benchmarks and codes at https://github.com/thu-ml/
3D_Corruptions_AD to be helpful for future studies.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in autonomous driving, 3D object
detection aims to identify objects of interest (e.g., vehicles,
pedestrians, or cyclists) in the surrounding environment by
predicting their categories and the corresponding 3D bounding boxes. LiDAR and camera are two important types of
sensors for 3D object detection, where the former provides
* Corresponding authors.

the depth information of road objects as sparse point clouds,
while the latter captures abundant semantic information of
the scene as color images. Based on the complementary nature of the two modalities, 3D object detection models can
be categorized into LiDAR-only [29,47,48,60,69], cameraonly [39, 56–58], and LiDAR-camera fusion [11, 28, 34, 53]
models. Since autonomous driving is safety-critical, it is of
paramount importance to assess the robustness of 3D object
detectors under diverse circumstances before deployed.
Although the recent progress of 3D object detection has
led to significant improvements in typical benchmarks (e.g.,
KITTI [17], nuScenes [6], and Waymo [51]), the existing
models based on data-driven deep learning approaches often generalize poorly to the corrupted data caused by, e.g.,
adverse weathers [21, 22, 27], sensor noises [7, 25, 44], and
uncommon objects [9, 31], posing a formidable obstacle to
safe and reliable autonomous driving [1]. To perform robustness evaluation, recent works construct new datasets of
road anomalies [9,23,31,40] or under extreme weather conditions [4, 15, 41]. Nevertheless, they are usually of small
sizes due to the high data collection costs and the rareness
of corner cases or adverse weathers. Other works synthesize
common corruptions on clean datasets to benchmark robustness on image classification [25] and point cloud recognition [44, 50], but they only consider several simple corruptions, which could be insufficient and unrealistic for 3D object detection. Therefore, it remains challenging to comprehensively characterize different corruptions considering
diverse driving scenarios and fairly evaluate corruption robustness of existing models within a unified framework.
In this paper, we systematically design 27 types of common corruptions in 3D object detection for both LiDAR and
camera sensors to comprehensively and rigorously evaluate the corruption robustness of current 3D object detectors.

1022

