This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HexPlane: A Fast Representation for Dynamic Scenes
Ang Cao

Justin Johnson

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{ancao, justincj}@umich.edu

Abstract
Modeling and re-rendering dynamic 3D scenes is a challenging task in 3D vision. Prior approaches build on NeRF
and rely on implicit representations. This is slow since it requires many MLP evaluations, constraining real-world applications. We show that dynamic 3D scenes can be explicitly represented by six planes of learned features, leading to an elegant solution we call HexPlane. A HexPlane
computes features for points in spacetime by fusing vectors extracted from each plane, which is highly efficient.
Pairing a HexPlane with a tiny MLP to regress output colors and training via volume rendering gives impressive results for novel view synthesis on dynamic scenes, matching the image quality of prior work but reducing training
time by more than 100×. Extensive ablations confirm our
HexPlane design and show that it is robust to different feature fusion mechanisms, coordinate systems, and decoding
mechanisms. HexPlane is a simple and effective solution
for representing 4D volumes, and we hope they can broadly
contribute to modeling spacetime for dynamic 3D scenes.1

1. Introduction
Reconstructing and re-rendering 3D scenes from a set
of 2D images is a core vision problem which can enable
many AR/VR applications. The last few years have seen
tremendous progress in reconstructing static scenes, but this
assumption is restrictive: the real world is dynamic, and in
complex scenes motion is the norm, not the exception.
Many current approaches for representing dynamic
3D scenes rely on implicit representations, building on
NeRF [42]. They train a large multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
that inputs the position of a point in space and time, and outputs either the color of the point [28, 29] or a deformation
to a canonical static scene [16, 49, 50, 54]. In either case,
rendering images from novel views is expensive since each
generated pixel requires many MLP evaluations. Training is
1 Project page: https://caoang327.github.io/HexPlane.

Figure 1. HexPlane for Dynamic 3D Scenes. Instead of regressing colors and opacities from a deep MLP, we explicitly compute
features for points in spacetime via HexPlane. Pairing with a tiny
MLP, it allows above 100× speedups with matching quality.

similarly slow, requiring up to days of GPU time to model
a single dynamic scene; this computational bottleneck prevents these methods from being widely applied.
Several recent methods for modeling static scenes have
demonstrated tremendous speedups over NeRF through the
use of explicit and hybrid methods [7, 43, 66, 81]. These
methods use an explicit spatial data structure that stores explicit scene data [14, 81] or features that are decoded by a
tiny MLP [7, 43, 66]. This decouples a model’s capacity
from its speed, and allows high-quality images to be rendered in realtime [43]. While effective, these methods have
thus far been applied only to static scenes.
In this paper, we aim to design an explicit representation of dynamic 3D scenes, building on similar advances
for static scenes. To this end, we design a spatial-temporal
data structure that stores scene data. It must overcome two
key technical challenges. First is memory usage. We must
model all points in both space and time; naı̈vely storing data
in a dense 4D grid would scale with the fourth power of
grid resolution which is infeasible for large scenes or long
durations. Second is sparse observations. Moving a single
camera through a static scene can give views that densely
cover the scene; in contrast, moving a camera through a
dynamic scene gives just one view per timestep. Treating
timesteps independently may give insufficient scene coverage for high-quality reconstruction, so we must instead
share information across timesteps.

130

