This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-Text as Game Players:
Hierarchical Banzhaf Interaction for Cross-Modal Representation Learning
Peng Jin1,3
1

Jinfa Huang1,3 Pengfei Xiong4 Shangxuan Tian4
Xiangyang Ji5 Li Yuan1,2,3 * Jie Chen1,2,3 *

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China

2

Chang Liu5

Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

3

AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China

4

Shopee, Shenzhen, China

5

Department of Automation and BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

{jp21, jinfahuang}@stu.pku.edu.cn

xiongpengfei@gmail.com

{liuchang2022, xyji}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Contrastive learning-based video-language representation learning approaches, e.g., CLIP, have achieved outstanding performance, which pursue semantic interaction
upon pre-defined video-text pairs. To clarify this coarsegrained global interaction and move a step further, we have
to encounter challenging shell-breaking interactions for finegrained cross-modal learning. In this paper, we creatively
model video-text as game players with multivariate cooperative game theory to wisely handle the uncertainty during finegrained semantic interaction with diverse granularity, flexible combination, and vague intensity. Concretely, we propose Hierarchical Banzhaf Interaction (HBI) to value possible correspondence between video frames and text words
for sensitive and explainable cross-modal contrast. To efficiently realize the cooperative game of multiple video frames
and multiple text words, the proposed method clusters the
original video frames (text words) and computes the Banzhaf
Interaction between the merged tokens. By stacking token
merge modules, we achieve cooperative games at different
semantic levels. Extensive experiments on commonly used
text-video retrieval and video-question answering benchmarks with superior performances justify the efficacy of our
HBI. More encouragingly, it can also serve as a visualization
tool to promote the understanding of cross-modal interaction, which have a far-reaching impact on the community.
Project page is available at https://jpthu17.github.io/HBI/.

1. Introduction
Representation learning based on both vision and language has many potential benefits and direct applicability to
* Corresponding author: Li Yuan, Jie Chen.

tianshangxuan@u.nus.edu

yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn

chenj@pcl.ac.cn

1/0
(a) Cross-modal contrastive modeling

Banzhaf
Interaction:
0.7
0.0

A

woman
in
dress
and
a
man

0.6

in
suit
sit
together.

(b) Multivariate cooperative game modeling (Ours)
Figure 1. (a) Cross-modal contrastive methods only learn a global
semantic interaction from the coarse-grained labels of video-text
pairs. (b) We model cross-modal alignment as a multivariate cooperative game process. Specifically, we use Banzhaf Interaction
to value possible correspondence between video frames and text
words and consider it as an additional learning signal.

cross-modal tasks, such as text-video retrieval [20, 32] and
video-question answering [28, 49]. Visual-language learning
has recently boomed due to the success of contrastive learning [9–11,19,48,61–64], e.g., CLIP [40], to project the video
and text features into a common latent space according to
the semantic similarities of video-text pairs. In this manner,
cross-modal contrastive learning enables networks to learn
discriminative video-language representations.
The cross-modal contrastive approach [14, 20, 32] typically models the cross-modal interaction via solely the global
similarity of each modality. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1a,

2472

