This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Supervised Masked Knowledge Distillation for Few-Shot Transformers
Han Lin∗, Guangxing Han∗† , Jiawei Ma, Shiyuan Huang, Xudong Lin, Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University
{hl3199, gh2561, jiawei.m, sh3813, xl2798, sc250}@columbia.edu

(a) Few-Shot Transformers with Soft Label Regularization

Abstract

class labels

Complex expert-designed targets

class
prototypes
image

…

Vision Transformers (ViTs) emerge orto achieve imprespatch-levelcomputer vision
sive performance on many data-abundant
soft labels
tasks by capturing long-range dependencies among local
features. However, under few-shot learning (FSL) settings
on small datasets with only a few labeled data, ViT tends
to overfit and suffers from severe performance degradation
due to its absence of CNN-alike
inductive bias. Previous
Challenge
works in FSL avoid such problem either through the help
of self-supervised auxiliary
losses, or through the dextile
● How to establish
for patch
uses of label informationcorrespondence
under
supervised settings. But
tokens across images
●
Both CLS & patch
tokens
the gap between
self-supervised
and
supervised few-shot
● No negative samples
Transformers is still ●
unfilled.
Inspired by recent advances
Small batch size
●
in self-supervised knowledge
distillation and masked image
modeling (MIM), we propose a novel Supervised Masked
Knowledge Distillation model (SMKD) for few-shot Transformers which incorporates label information into selfdistillation frameworks. Compared with previous selfsupervised methods, we allow intra-class knowledge distillation on both class and patch tokens, and introduce
the challenging task of masked patch tokens reconstruction across intra-class images. Experimental results on
four few-shot classification benchmark datasets show that
our method with simple design outperforms previous methods by a large margin and achieves a new start-of-the-art.
Detailed ablation studies confirm the effectiveness of each
component of our model. Code for this paper is available
here: https://github.com/HL-hanlin/SMKD.

supervised loss

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [16] have emerge as a
competitive alternative to Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [31] in recent years, and have achieved impressive
performance in many vision tasks including image classification [16, 38, 59, 66], object detection [3, 10, 26–28, 79],
and object segmentation [50, 55]. Compared with CNNs,
which introduce inductive bias through convolutional kernels with fixed receptive fields [35], the attention layers in
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

encoder

Latent attribute surrogates [70]
…
Patch-level supervision from
pre-trained teacher model [14]

(b) Few-Shot Transformers with Self-Supervision Auxiliary Regularization
view1

student

supervised loss

Problems
image

EMA

view2

same-image cross-view
knowledge distillation

●

Hard to balance
supervised & self-supervised
learning objectives

teacher

(c) Few-Shot Transformers with Our Supervised Masked Knowledge Distillation
image A

mask

same class label

[cls] token (global info)
[patch] token (local info)

student

EMA

same-class cross-image
knowledge distillation ●

●
image B

teacher

Our Idea
Unified learning objective
Maximizing similarity of both
[cls] and corresponding [patch]
tokens for intra-class images

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed idea and other existing methods for few-shot Transformers. Our model mitigates
the overfitting issue of few-shot Transformers, by extending the
masked knowledge distillation framework into the supervised setting, and enforcing the alignment of [cls] and corresponding
[patch] tokens for intra-class images.

ViT allow it to model global token relations to capture longrange token dependencies. However, such flexibility also
comes at a cost: ViT is data-hungry and it needs to learn
token dependencies purely from data. This property often
makes it easy to overfit to datasets with small training set
and suffer from severe generalization performance degradation [36, 37]. Therefore, we are motivated to study how
to make ViTs generalize well on these small datasets, especially under the few-shot learning (FSL) setting [19, 39, 62]
which aims to recognize unseen new instances at test time
just from only a few (e.g. one or five) labeled samples from
each new categories.
Most of the existing methods mitigate the overfitting issue of few-shot Transformers [14] using various regularizations. For instance, some works utilize label information
in a weaker [70], softer [42] way, or use label information
efficiently through patch-level supervision [14]. However,
these models usually design sophisticated learning targets.

19649

