This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-POP - An automated annotation approach to facilitate markerless 2D-3D
tracking of freely moving birds with marker-based motion capture
Hemal Naik1234∗ ,Alex Hoi Hang Chan12∗ ,Junran Yang2 , Mathilde Delacoux12 ,
Iain D. Couzin123 , Fumihiro Kano12† , Máté Nagy12356†
1

2

Dept. of Collective Behavior and Dept. of Ecology of Animal Societies, Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior,
Dept. of Biology, University of Konstanz, 3 Centre for the Advanced Study of Collective Behaviour, University of Konstanz,
4
Computer Aided Medial Procedures, Informatik Department, Technische Universität München,
5
Dept. of Biological Physics, Eötvös Loránd University, 6 MTA-ELTE ‘Lendület’ Collective Behaviour Research Group,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences. ∗,† contributed equally. Full affiliation available in supplementary
{hnaik, icouzin}@ab.mpg.de, nagymate@hal.elte.hu,
{hoi-hang.chan, junran.yang, mathilde.delacoux, fumihiro.kano}@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract

Nose
Eyes (L/R)

Beak

Recent advances in machine learning and computer vision are revolutionizing the field of animal behavior by enabling researchers to track the poses and locations of freely
moving animals without any marker attachment. However,
large datasets of annotated images of animals for markerless pose tracking, especially high-resolution images taken
from multiple angles with accurate 3D annotations, are still
scant. Here, we propose a method that uses a motion capture (mo-cap) system to obtain a large amount of annotated
data on animal movement and posture (2D and 3D) in a
semi-automatic manner. Our method is novel in that it extracts the 3D positions of morphological keypoints (e.g eyes,
beak, tail) in reference to the positions of markers attached
to the animals. Using this method, we obtained, and offer
here, a new dataset - 3D-POP with approximately 300k annotated frames (4 million instances) in the form of videos
having groups of one to ten freely moving birds from 4 different camera views in a 3.6m x 4.2m area. 3D-POP is the
first dataset of flocking birds with accurate keypoint annotations in 2D and 3D along with bounding box and individual
identities and will facilitate the development of solutions for
problems of 2D to 3D markerless pose, trajectory tracking,
and identification in birds.

1. Introduction
Computer vision and machine learning are revolutionizing many facets of conventional research methods. For
example, dataset-driven machine learning methods have

Tail

Shoulders (L/R)
Top Keel

Bottom Keel

Figure 1. Definition of morphological keypoints offered in the 3DPOP dataset

demonstrated remarkable success in the field of animal behavior, in tasks related to object detection [40, 41], tracking
and individual identification [11, 25, 43], species recognition [40], 2D pose estimation [14, 29] and 3D pose estimation [2, 4]. These automatic methods not only reduce
the required labor and errors associated with manual coding of behaviours [6, 39] but also facilitate long-term continuous monitoring of animal behavior in both indoor (lab)
[32, 36] and outdoor (wild) settings [12, 37]. Engineering and robotics experts use the data on animal locomotion to reverse-engineer the key mechanisms underlying behaviors and movements of animals [18, 20]. The development of new techniques critically depends on the quality of
publicly-available datasets with accurate annotations.
Creating large datasets with animals is particularly difficult because every species has distinct morphology, and also
because it is generally challenging to film freely moving animals in a controlled environment. It is thus important for
1
21274

