This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrOC

: Cross-View Online Clustering for Dense Visual Representation
Learning
Thomas Stegmüller1⇤
Tim Lebailly2⇤
Behzad Bozorgtabar1,3
2
Tinne Tuytelaars
Jean-Philippe Thiran1,3
1
2
3
EPFL
KU Leuven
CHUV

1

{firstname}.{lastname}@epfl.ch

2

{firstname}.{lastname}@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Learning dense visual representations without labels is
an arduous task and more so from scene-centric data. We
propose to tackle this challenging problem by proposing a
Cross-view consistency objective with an Online Clustering
mechanism (CrOC) to discover and segment the semantics
of the views. In the absence of hand-crafted priors, the resulting method is more generalizable and does not require
a cumbersome pre-processing step. More importantly, the
clustering algorithm conjointly operates on the features of
both views, thereby elegantly bypassing the issue of content
not represented in both views and the ambiguous matching
of objects from one crop to the other. We demonstrate excellent performance on linear and unsupervised segmentation
transfer tasks on various datasets and similarly for video
object segmentation. Our code and pre-trained models are
publicly available at https://github.com/stegmuel/CrOC.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has gone a long and successful way since its beginning using carefully hand-crafted
proxy tasks such as colorization [26], jigsaw puzzle solving [32], or image rotations prediction [14]. In recent years,
a consensus seems to have been reached, and cross-view
consistency is used in almost all state-of-the-art (SOTA) visual SSL methods [5–7, 15, 19]. In that context, the whole
training objective revolves around the consistency of representation in the presence of information-preserving transformations [7], e.g., blurring, cropping, solarization, etc.
Although this approach is well grounded in learning imagelevel representations in the unrealistic scenario of objectcentric datasets, e.g., ImageNet [11], it cannot be trivially
extended to accommodate scene-centric datasets and even
* denotes equal contribution.

Figure 1. Schematic for different categories of self-supervised
learning methods for dense downstream tasks. a) Prior to the
training, a pre-trained model or color-based heuristic is used to
produce the clustering/matching of the whole dataset. c) The
matching/clustering is identified online but restrains the domain
of application of the loss to the intersection of the two views. b)
Our method takes the best of both worlds, leverages online clustering, and enforces constraints on the whole spatiality of the views.

less to learn dense representations. Indeed, in the presence
of complex scene images, the random cropping operation
used as image transformation loses its semantic-preserving
property, as a single image can yield two crops bearing antipodean semantic content [31,35–37]. Along the same line,
it’s not clear how to relate sub-regions of the image from
one crop to the other, which is necessary to derive a localized supervisory signal.
To address the above issue, some methods [31, 36] constrain the location of the crops based on some heuristics and
using a pre-processing step. This step is either not learnable
or requires the use of a pre-trained model. Alternatively, the
location of the crops (geometric pooling [45, 51]) and/or an

7000

