This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instant Volumetric Head Avatars
Wojciech Zielonka
Timo Bolkart
Justus Thies
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{wojciech.zielonka, timo.bolkart, justus.thies}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1. Given a short monocular RGB video, our method instantaneously optimizes a deformable neural radiance field to synthesize a
photo-realistic animatable 3D neural head avatar. The neural radiance field is embedded in a multi-resolution grid around a 3D face model
which guides the deformations. The resulting head avatar can be viewed under novel views and animated at interactive frame rates.

Abstract

We present Instant Volumetric Head Avatars (INSTA),
a novel approach for reconstructing photo-realistic digital avatars instantaneously. INSTA models a dynamic neural radiance field based on neural graphics primitives embedded around a parametric face model. Our pipeline is
trained on a single monocular RGB portrait video that observes the subject under different expressions and views.
While state-of-the-art methods take up to several days to
train an avatar, our method can reconstruct a digital avatar
in less than 10 minutes on modern GPU hardware, which is
orders of magnitude faster than previous solutions. In addition, it allows for the interactive rendering of novel poses
and expressions. By leveraging the geometry prior of the
underlying parametric face model, we demonstrate that INSTA extrapolates to unseen poses. In quantitative and qualitative studies on various subjects, INSTA outperforms stateof-the-art methods regarding rendering quality and training
time. Project website: https://zielon.github.io/insta/

1. Introduction
For immersive telepresence in AR or VR, we aim for
digital humans (avatars) that mimic the motions and facial
expressions of the actual subjects participating in a meeting. Besides the motion, these avatars should reflect the
human’s shape and appearance. Instead of prerecorded, old
avatars, we aim to instantaneously reconstruct the subject’s
look to capture the actual appearance during a meeting. To
this end, we propose Instant Volumetric Head Avatars (INSTA), which enables the reconstruction of an avatar within
a few minutes (∼10 min) and can be driven at interactive
frame rates. For easy accessibility, we rely on commodity
hardware to train and capture the avatar. Specifically, we
use a single RGB camera to record the input video. Stateof-the-art methods that use similar input data to reconstruct
a human avatar require a relatively long time to train, ranging from around one day [20] to almost a week [16,58]. Our
approach uses dynamic neural radiance fields [16] based on
neural graphics primitives [38], which are embedded around
a parametric face model [25], allowing low training times
and fast evaluation. In contrast to existing methods, we use
a metrical face reconstruction [59] to ensure that the avatar

4574

