This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All-in-one Image Restoration for Unknown Degradations Using
Adaptive Discriminative Filters for Specific Degradations

1

Dongwon Park1,4 , Byung Hyun Lee2 , Se Young Chun1,2,3,†
INMC, Dept. of ECE, 3 IPAI, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
4
Dept. of EE, UNIST, Republic of Korea
2

{dong1park,ldlqudgus756,sychun}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Image restorations for single degradations have been
widely studied, demonstrating excellent performance for
each degradation, but can not reflect unpredictable realistic
environments with unknown multiple degradations, which
may change over time. To mitigate this issue, image restorations for known and unknown multiple degradations have
recently been investigated, showing promising results, but
require large networks or have sub-optimal architectures
for potential interference among different degradations.
Here, inspired by the filter attribution integrated gradients
(FAIG), we propose an adaptive discriminative filter-based
model for specific degradations (ADMS) to restore images
with unknown degradations. Our method allows the network to contain degradation-dedicated filters only for about
3% of all network parameters per each degradation and to
apply them adaptively via degradation classification (DC)
to explicitly disentangle the network for multiple degradations. Our proposed method has demonstrated its effectiveness in comparison studies and achieved state-of-theart performance in all-in-one image restoration benchmark
datasets of both Rain-Noise-Blur and Rain-Snow-Haze.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is a fundamental computer vision task
that has been widely investigated especially for single
degradation such as noise, blur, snow or rain in images.
Recently, deep learning-based approaches have demonstrated remarkable performance with fast computations, but
a majority of them have been focusing on known single
degradation such as denoising [2, 4, 20, 25, 65, 67, 68], deraining [5, 16, 30, 51, 52, 59, 60], deblurring [19, 23, 24,
36, 38, 43, 46, 55], desnowing [11, 31, 33, 53] and dehazing [9, 18, 27, 32, 40, 45, 56, 63, 66]. These prior works can
†Corresponding author.

enhance the visual quality of deteriorated images as well
as may improve the performance of down-stream tasks including classification [17, 22], object detection [41, 42] and
autonomous driving [3, 34]. However, they are limited only
to known single degradation cases, thus can not reflect unpredictable realistic environments with unknown multiple
degradations, which may change over time.
Image restoration for real-world environments is a challenging problem since it must deal with unknown multiple
degradations. Since most prior works for single degradation may not be optimal for multiple degradations, image
restorations for known and unknown multiple degradations
have recently been investigated, showing promising results,
but require large networks and/or heavy computations. One
approach to handle known multiple degradations is to develop a single network architecture and train it with different degradation datasets to generate independent models
(IMs) for various degradations as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
This approach has achieved state-of-the-art performance for
known multiple degradations [7, 8, 13, 35, 39, 50, 54, 61, 62].
However, it requires a trained independent network for each
degradation task and a proper IM should be selected to handle incoming images with known multiple degradations.
Thus, this approach can be applied only to the case of
known multiple degradations and it still can not reflect realistic environments with unknown degradations.
Recently, all-in-one image restoration for unknown multiple degradations has been proposed [12,26,29] with different approaches. The first way to handle unknown multiple
degradations is to use a shared decoder with multiple independent encoders for multiple degradations (will denote it
as Model with independent Encoders or ME) [29] to take
the advantage of using small network parameters as compared to IM as illustrated in Figure 1(b). However, this
architecture requires more independent encoders to handle
more degradations inefficiently while there may be interference among diverse degradations in the shared decoder. The
second way is to use a unified model (UM) with a pair of
shared encoder and decoder for multiple degradations [12]

5815

