This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Outlier Rejection for 3D Registration with Variational Bayes
Haobo Jiang1 , Zheng Dang2 , Zhen Wei2 , Jin Xie∗1 , Jian Yang∗1 , and Mathieu Salzmann∗2
1

PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{jiang.hao.bo, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
{zheng.dang, zhen.wei, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Learning-based outlier (mismatched correspondence)
rejection for robust 3D registration generally formulates
the outlier removal as an inlier/outlier classification problem. The core for this to be successful is to learn the discriminative inlier/outlier feature representations. In this
paper, we develop a novel variational non-local networkbased outlier rejection framework for robust alignment. By
reformulating the non-local feature learning with variational Bayesian inference, the Bayesian-driven long-range
dependencies can be modeled to aggregate discriminative
geometric context information for inlier/outlier distinction.
Specifically, to achieve such Bayesian-driven contextual dependencies, each query/key/value component in our nonlocal network predicts a prior feature distribution and a
posterior one. Embedded with the inlier/outlier label, the
posterior feature distribution is label-dependent and discriminative. Thus, pushing the prior to be close to the discriminative posterior in the training step enables the features sampled from this prior at test time to model highquality long-range dependencies. Notably, to achieve effective posterior feature guidance, a specific probabilistic graphical model is designed over our non-local model,
which lets us derive a variational low bound as our optimization objective for model training. Finally, we propose a voting-based inlier searching strategy to cluster the
high-quality hypothetical inliers for transformation estimation. Extensive experiments on 3DMatch, 3DLoMatch, and
KITTI datasets verify the effectiveness of our method. Code
is available at https://github.com/Jiang-HB/VBReg.
∗ Corresponding authors

Haobo Jiang, Jin Xie, and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key Lab of
Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of
Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration is a fundamental but challenging
3D computer vision task, with many potential applications
such as 3D scene reconstruction [1, 39], object pose estimation [13, 44], and Lidar SLAM [15, 51]. It aims to align
two partially overlapping point clouds by estimating their
relative rigid transformation, i.e., 3D rotation and 3D translation. A popular approach to address the large-scale scene
registration problem consists of extracting point descriptors [11,14,17,37,38,50] and establishing correspondences
between the two point clouds, from which the transformation can be obtained geometrically. In this context, much
effort has been dedicated to designing traditional and deep
learning-based descriptors [3, 11, 21, 41, 50]. However, the
resulting correspondences inevitably still suffer from outliers (wrong matchings), particularly in challenging cases,
such as low-overlap, repetitive structures, or noisy point
sets, leading to registration failure.
To address this, many outlier filtering strategies have
been developed to robustify the registration process. These
include traditional rejection methods using random sample
consensus [16], point-wise descriptor similarity [7, 32] or
group-wise spatial consistency [46]. Deep learning methods have also been proposed, focusing on learning correspondence features used to estimate inlier confidence values [2, 10, 33]. In particular, the current state-of-the-art
method, PointDSC [2], relies on a spatial consistencydriven non-local network to capture long-range context
in its learned correspondence features. While effective,
PointDSC still yields limited registration robustness, particularly for scenes with a high outlier ratio, where the spatial consistency constraints may become ambiguous [36],
thereby degrading the correspondence features’ quality.
In this paper, we propose to explicitly account for the
ambiguities arising from high outlier ratios by developing
a probabilistic feature learning framework. To this end, we
introduce a variational non-local network based on an at-

1148

