This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DAA: A Delta Age AdaIN operation for age estimation via binary code
transformer

1

Ping Chen†1 , Xingpeng Zhang†2 *, Ye Li1 , Ju Tao1 , Bin Xiao2 , Bing Wang2 , Zongjie Jiang1
Jiayu Intelligent Technology Co.,Ltd. (Affiliated With Great Wall Motor Company Limited)
2
School of Computer Science, Southwest Petroleum University, Chengdu, China
redcping@gmail.com

xpzhang@swpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Naked eye recognition of age is usually based on comparison with the age of others. However, this idea is ignored
by computer tasks because it is difficult to obtain representative contrast images of each age. Inspired by the transfer
learning, we designed the Delta Age AdaIN (DAA) operation to obtain the feature difference with each age, which
obtains the style map of each age through the learned values representing the mean and standard deviation. We let
the input of transfer learning as the binary code of age
natural number to obtain continuous age feature information. The learned two groups of values in Binary code
mapping are corresponding to the mean and standard deviation of the comparison ages. In summary, our method
consists of four parts: FaceEncoder, DAA operation, Binary code mapping, and AgeDecoder modules. After getting the delta age via AgeDecoder, we take the average
value of all comparison ages and delta ages as the predicted
age. Compared with state-of-the-art methods, our method
achieves better performance with fewer parameters on multiple facial age datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/redcping/Delta_Age_AdaIN

1. Introduction
Facial age estimation has been an active research topic
in the computer version, for its important role in humancomputer interaction [9,40], facial attribute analysis [2,29],
market analysis [2], and so on. After the rise of deep learning, many deep structures, such as VGG [41], ResNet [18],
MobileNet [38], have been used as feature learning methods
to solve the problem of facial age estimation [7, 45, 46].
In general, the methods for facial age estimation can be
grouped into three categories: regression methods, classification methods, and ranking methods [27, 33]. The age
* Corresponding author. †These authors contributed equally to this
work.

yale.li.cn@gmail.com

regression methods consider labels as continuous numerical values [15, 30]. Except for the universal regression, researchers also proposed hierarchical models [17] and the
soft-margin mixture of regression [21] to handle the heterogeneous data. Facial age classification approaches usually
regard different ages or age groups as independent category
labels [16], which can be divided into single-label learning
and label distribution learning methods [7]. The single label learning [16,37] treats each age independently, ignoring
the fact that facial images of similar ages are very similar.
Label distribution learning methods [12, 13, 20, 39] learn
a label distribution that represents the relative importance
of each label when describing an instance. This method is
to compare the distance or similarity between the distribution predicted by the model and the actual distribution [7].
Nevertheless, acquiring distributional labels for thousands
of face images is a non-trivial task. The ranking approaches
treat the age value as rank-ordered data and use multiple
binary classifiers to determine the rank of the age [3–5].
Although the above methods study the problem of facial age estimation from different emphases, they all belong to the perspective of computer vision, which can be
summarized as feature extraction and modeling to predict
age. This is different from the mechanism of the naked human eye recognizing age, which is obtained by comparing
the current experience information with most humans. Because it is difficult to get representative age images of different races, computer tasks often ignore the idea of comparative learning. The style image can also be a contrast
in style transfer learning. [23, 24]. Inspired by this, we
propose a Delta Age Adaptive Instance Normalization operation (DAA) to obtain representative results of each age
through transfer learning. We want to transfer the current
image into a style map of each comparative age. And then
learn the feature difference between the current age and all
the comparative ages. Finally, the predicted age is obtained
based on the comparative age difference. Style images’
mean and standard deviation are the keys to style transfer,
and the random value cannot reflect the process of aging.

15836

