This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pointersect: Neural Rendering with Cloud-Ray Intersection
Jen-Hao Rick Chang1 , Wei-Yu Chen1,2 ,* Anurag Ranjan1 , Kwang Moo Yi1,3∗ , Oncel Tuzel1
1
Apple, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 University of British Columbia
https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/pointersect

Abstract
We propose a novel method that renders point clouds as if
they are surfaces. The proposed method is differentiable and
requires no scene-specific optimization. This unique capability enables, out-of-the-box, surface normal estimation, rendering room-scale point clouds, inverse rendering, and ray
tracing with global illumination. Unlike existing work that
focuses on converting point clouds to other representations—
e.g., surfaces or implicit functions—our key idea is to directly
infer the intersection of a light ray with the underlying surface represented by the given point cloud. Specifically, we
train a set transformer that, given a small number of local
neighbor points along a light ray, provides the intersection
point, the surface normal, and the material blending weights,
which are used to render the outcome of this light ray. Localizing the problem into small neighborhoods enables us
to train a model with only 48 meshes and apply it to unseen point clouds. Our model achieves higher estimation
accuracy than state-of-the-art surface reconstruction and
point-cloud rendering methods on three test sets. When applied to room-scale point clouds, without any scene-specific
optimization, the model achieves competitive quality with the
state-of-the-art novel-view rendering methods. Moreover, we
demonstrate ability to render and manipulate Lidar-scanned
point clouds such as lighting control and object insertion.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are abundant. They are samples of surfaces,
and can be captured by sensors such as Lidar, continuouswave time-of-flight, and stereo camera setups. Point-cloud
representation provides a straightforward connection to the
location of the surfaces in space, and thus is an intuitive
primitive to represent geometry [15].
Despite being ubiquitous, a core limitation of point clouds
is that they are non-trivial to render. Each point in the
point cloud occupies no volume—one cannot render them
into images as is. Therefore, existing methods either as* Work done at Apple. Corresponding author: jenhao chang@apple.com

(a) Illustration of the proposed method

(b) Rendered results of a sphere represented by points

Figure 1. We propose pointersect, a novel method to perform cloudray intersection. (a) Instead of projecting points onto the sensor,
suffering from holes, we trace rays from the sensor and estimate
the intersection point p between a ray and the underlying surface
represented by the points. We additionally estimate the surface
normal ⃗n, and the convex combination weights of points near the
ray to blend material or color, wj . (b) The capability to perform
cloud-ray intersection enables us to render point clouds with the
standard ray tracing method, i.e., path tracing. The result shows the
effect of global illumination, e.g., the cast shadow and reflection.

sign each point a volume-occupying shape, e.g., an oriented disk [36, 53], a sphere [28], or turn it into other
shape representations like meshes [27] or implicit functions [14, 18, 22, 30, 35]. However, it is difficult to determine the ideal shape, e.g., the radius of spheres or disks,
for rendering. Small shapes would cause holes, while large
shapes would cause blobby renderings, producing artifacts
in the rasterized images. While the artifacts can be alleviated

8359

