This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision Transformers are Parameter-Efficient Audio-Visual Learners
Yan-Bo Lin Yi-Lin Sung Jie Lei Mohit Bansal Gedas Bertasius
Department of Computer Science, UNC Chapel Hill
{yblin,ylsung,jielei,mbansal,gedas}@cs.unc.edu
Dog Barking

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) have achieved impressive results on various computer vision tasks in the last several
years. In this work, we study the capability of frozen ViTs,
pretrained only on visual data, to generalize to audio-visual
data without finetuning any of its original parameters. To
do so, we propose a latent audio-visual hybrid (LAV IS H)
adapter that adapts pretrained ViTs to audio-visual tasks by
injecting a small number of trainable parameters into every
layer of a frozen ViT. To efficiently fuse visual and audio
cues, our LAV IS H adapter uses a small set of latent tokens, which form an attention bottleneck, thus, eliminating
the quadratic cost of standard cross-attention. Compared
to the existing modality-specific audio-visual methods, our
approach achieves competitive or even better performance
on various audio-visual tasks while using fewer tunable parameters and without relying on costly audio pretraining or
external audio encoders. Our code is available at https:
//genjib.github.io/project_page/LAVISH/

1. Introduction
Humans can seamlessly process audio-visual cues and
use them in unison to learn associations between auditory
and visual signals (e.g., the sound of barking and the visual
concept of dog). In contrast, most modern computational
audio-visual models [34, 38, 79, 80, 82, 84, 92] study each of
these modalities in isolation, which leads to individuallytailored modality-specific models. While such modalityspecific approaches often achieve state-of-the-art results on
various audio-visual benchmarks, they also have several
major shortcomings. First, optimizing and training models for a specific modality (e.g., audio or video) requires
significant research effort and computing power. For example, training large-scale models for audio and video requires
more than 2,000 and 5,000 V100 hours respectively [10,86],
which is not feasible for many smaller research labs. Additionally, since modern visual and audio models are becoming larger, it can be quite costly to use separate backbone networks for processing each modality. For instance,
the audio-visual MBT-Large model [60], built using sepa-

ViT Block

ViT Block

LAVISH

LAVISH
Shared

ViT Block
LAVISH

ViT Block
Image Pretrained
Weights

ViT Block

LAVISH
ViT Block

Frozen
Update

Figure 1. We investigate whether frozen vision transformers
(ViTs) pretrained only on visual data can generalize to audio
data for complex audio-visual understanding tasks. For this purpose, we introduce a latent audio-visual hybrid adapter (LAV IS H),
which is inserted into every layer of a frozen ViT model. By tuning only a small number of additional parameters we can enable
a pretrained ViT to efficiently (i) adapt to the audio data, and (ii)
fuse relevant cues across audio and visual modalities.

rate audio and visual encoders, requires more than 48 GB
of GPU memory, which is only available on the costly,
high-end GPU servers such as A100. Lastly, the modalityspecific approaches are only trained on individual modalities and then typically combined via late fusion. As a result,
such models cannot benefit from cross-modal cues in the
early layers, which often leads to suboptimal performance
on audio-visual tasks requiring joint audio-visual reasoning.
The recent emergence of transformer models [2, 21, 24,
40, 60] has propelled research in modality-agnostic architectures for multi-modal understanding. In particular, the
generality of the transformer architecture [16] makes it easy
to apply these models to different modalities without any
modality-specific adaptations. This property is well illustrated by the fact that transformers [16] currently define
state-of-the-art across many domains, including natural language processing (NLP) [8, 15, 41, 42, 51, 59, 64, 91], com-

2299

