This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Randomized Adversarial Training via Taylor Expansion
Gaojie Jin1,2 , Xinping Yi2B , Dengyu Wu2 , Ronghui Mu3 , Xiaowei Huang2B
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
3
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
{g.jin3, xinping.yi, xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk
B
Corresponding Author

Abstract
In recent years, there has been an explosion of research
into developing more robust deep neural networks against
adversarial examples. Adversarial training appears as one
of the most successful methods. To deal with both the robustness against adversarial examples and the accuracy
over clean examples, many works develop enhanced adversarial training methods to achieve various trade-offs between them [19, 38, 80]. Leveraging over the studies [8, 32]
that smoothed update on weights during training may help
find flat minima and improve generalization, we suggest
reconciling the robustness-accuracy trade-off from another
perspective, i.e., by adding random noise into deterministic weights. The randomized weights enable our design of a
novel adversarial training method via Taylor expansion of a
small Gaussian noise, and we show that the new adversarial training method can flatten loss landscape and find flat
minima. With PGD, CW, and Auto Attacks, an extensive set
of experiments demonstrate that our method enhances the
state-of-the-art adversarial training methods, boosting both
robustness and clean accuracy. The code is available at
https://github.com/Alexkael/RandomizedAdversarial-Training.

1. Introduction
Trade-off between adversarial robustness and clean accuracy has recently been intensively studied [63, 68, 80]
and demonstrated to exist [34, 58, 70, 77]. Many different techniques have been developed to alleviate the loss of
clean accuracy when improving robustness, including data
augmentation [1, 5, 29], early-stopping [60, 81], instance
reweighting [3, 82], and various adversarial training methods [11, 36, 42, 74, 80]. Adversarial training is believed to
be the most effective defense method against adversarial at-

tacks, and is usually formulated as a minimax optimization
problem where the network weights are assumed deterministic in each alternating iteration. Given the fact that both
clean and adversarial examples are drawn from unknown
distributions which interact with one another through the
network weights, it is reasonable to relax the assumption
that neural networks are simply deterministic models where
weights are scalar values. This paper is based on a view, illustrated in Fig. 1, that randomized models enable the training optimization to consider multiple directions within a
small area and may achieve smoothed weights update – in
a way different from checkpoint averaging [8, 32] – and obtain robust models against new clean/adversarial examples.
Building upon the above view, we find a way, drastically
different from most existing studies in adversarial training,
to balance robustness and clean accuracy, that is, embedding neural network weights with random noise. Whilst
the randomized weights framework is not new in statistical
learning theory, where it has been used in many previous
works for e.g., generalization analysis [18, 52, 75], we hope
to advance the empirical understanding of the robustnessaccuracy trade-off problem in adversarial training by leveraging the rich tool sets in statistical learning. Remarkably,
it turns out adversarial training with the optimization over
randomized weights can improve the state-of-the-art adversarial training methods over both the adversarial robustness
and clean accuracy.
By modeling weights as randomized variables with an
artificially injected weight perturbation, we start with an
empirical analysis of flatness of loss landscape in Sec. 3.
We show that our method can flatten loss landscape and find
flatter minima in adversarial training, which is generally regarded as an indicator of good generalization ability. After
the flatness analysis, we show how to optimize with randomized weights during adversarial training in Sec. 4. A

16447

