This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quantitative Manipulation of Custom Attributes on 3D-Aware Image Synthesis
Hoseok Do1,2

EunKyung Yoo1

Taehyeong Kim3†

Chul Lee1

Jin young Choi2

1

2

AI Lab, CTO Division, LG Electronics, South Korea
ASRI, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea
3
Dept. of Biosystems Engineering, Seoul National University, South Korea
{hoseok.do, eunkyung.ryu, clee.lee}@lge.com,

{hoseok03, taehyeong.kim, jychoi}@snu.ac.kr

While 3D-based GAN techniques have been successfully
applied to render photo-realistic 3D images with a variety of attributes while preserving view consistency, there
has been little research on how to fine-control 3D images without limiting to a specific category of objects of
their properties. To fill such research gap, we propose a
novel image manipulation model of 3D-based GAN representations for a fine-grained control of specific custom attributes. By extending the latest 3D-based GAN models
(e.g., EG3D), our user-friendly quantitative manipulation
model enables a fine yet normalized control of 3D manipulation of multi-attribute quantities while achieving view
consistency. We validate the effectiveness of our proposed
technique both qualitatively and quantitatively through various experiments.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural rendering [23,34,38] are making it easy to reproduce virtual 3D objects from real-world
objects. Neural rendering approach is not fully scalable in
practice since it heavily relies on input images and thereby
can not fully represent every possible form, style, and state
variation of all real and unreal objects. 3D generative adversarial networks (GANs) models, on the other hand, are
more generalizable and extensible since these can not only
reproduce 3D objects at scale but also allow easier configurations based on the user’s intention [5,32,37], making them
more suitable for various 3D image synthesis tasks.
Image manipulation on the latent space of 2D GAN has
been extensively studied in recent years [2, 28, 29, 33, 39].
StyleGAN2 [15] has been the dominant technique used due
to its flexibility to represent different styles and disentangled latent spaces. More recently, 3D-based GAN [24,
† Work done during at LG Electronics

Tiredness 0.6

Tiredness 0.0

Abstract

Work

Sleep

0

Break

Tiredness 0.9

Tiredness 0.4

Over-work

Figure 1. An example of quantitative image manipulation for the
face tiredness attribute. Attributes expressed as complex facial
features, such as tiredness, are not easy to define explicitly. Our
method assigns user-defined attributes based on a small number of
image samples, allowing quantitative manipulation of 3D objects
according to the user’s desired state changes.

26, 32] for multi-view image synthesis using neural rendering [23, 25] has gained popularity. For instance, those
models [5, 10, 27] equipped with StyleGAN2 modules can
generate photo-realistic 3D images with a variety of attributes while preserving view consistency. Nevertheless,
the existing works do not well explore a fine-grained manipulation of custom attributes (e.g., capturing tiredness in
a face, consisting of multiple and complex facial expressions, as shown in Figure 1) of 3D objects that are synthesized using 3D-based GAN models, and therefore it deserves more thorough research. While there have been
some attempts [29,33,39] to use the latent spaces generated
by GAN models to manipulate generated and real images,
these approaches mainly focus on 2D objects and they are
not user-friendly because users need to individually determine the appropriate manipulation scale for every use according to every specific intention.
Achieving view consistency during 3D image manipulation in the latent spaces is crucial to achieve the quanti-

8529

