This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Graph Representation for Order-aware Visual Transformation
Yue Qiu, Yanjun Sun, Fumiya Matsuzawa, Kenji Iwata, Hirokatsu Kataoka
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
{qiu.yue, yanjun.Son, fumi8.matsuzawa, kenji.iwata, hirokatsu.kataoka}@aist.go.jp

Abstract
This paper proposes a new visual reasoning formulation that aims at discovering changes between image pairs
and their temporal orders. Recognizing scene dynamics and
their chronological orders is a fundamental aspect of human
cognition. The aforementioned abilities make it possible to
follow step-by-step instructions, reason about and analyze
events, recognize abnormal dynamics, and restore scenes
to their previous states. However, it remains unclear how
well current AI systems perform in these capabilities. Although a series of studies have focused on identifying and
describing changes from image pairs, they mainly consider
those changes that occur synchronously, thus neglecting potential orders within those changes. To address the above
issue, we first propose a visual transformation graph structure for conveying order-aware changes. Then, we benchmarked previous methods on our newly generated dataset
and identified the issues of existing methods for change order
recognition. Finally, we show a significant improvement in
order-aware change recognition by introducing a new model
that explicitly associates different changes and then identifies changes and their orders in a graph representation.

1. Introduction

Before-change

After-change

VTGen

Encoder

Type: move
Obj.: cyan, rubber, cube
Pos0.: purple, rubber, sphere
Pos1.: ground
Type: add
Obj.: gray, rubber, cylinder
Pos0.: Pos1.: cyan, rubber, cube

Visual transformation graph

Type: move
Obj.: gray, metal, sphere
Pos0.: ground
Pos1.: blue, rubber, sphere

Type: add
Obj.: gray, rubber, cube
Pos0.: Pos1.: purple, rubber, sphere

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed order-aware change recognition model VTGen (top). From an image pair observed before
and after multiple synchronous and asynchronous changes, VTGen
generates a visual transformation graph (bottom) where nodes indicate change contents (including type, object attributes, original
position described by what is underneath it, and new position, and
directed edges indicate temporal orders of changes.

The Only Constant in Life Is Change.
- Heraclitus
Humans conduct numerous reasoning processes beyond
object and motion recognition. Through these processes, we
can capture a wide range of information with just a glimpse
of a scenario. To achieve human-level visual understanding,
various studies have recently focused on different aspects of
visual reasoning, such as compositional [1–4], causal [5, 6],
abstract [7–9], abductive [10, 11], and commonsense visual
reasoning [12, 13]. Due to the ever-changing visual surrounding, perceiving and reasoning over scene dynamics are
essential. However, most existing visual reasoning studies
focus on scenes in fixed periods of time. Therefore, this
study focuses on a new formulation of visual reasoning for
identifying scene dynamics.

Due to variations in the spatial positions of objects and
the temporal order of human activities, changes within a
pair of observations could occur simultaneously or asynchronously. Several recent studies have already discussed
recognizing and describing synchronous changes from a pair
of images via natural language texts [14–16] while neglecting the potential orders between changes. However, identifying temporal orders is an integral aspect of revealing
how scene dynamics occur in time, making it possible to
restore scenes to their previous states. Temporal orders are
also critical in a variety of applications, such as room rearrangement [17], assembly operation [18,19], and instruction
following [20, 21]. Change order recognition presents new
challenges as it requires reasoning over underlying tempo-

22793

