This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiview Compressive Coding for 3D Reconstruction
Chao-Yuan Wu Justin Johnson Jitendra Malik Christoph Feichtenhofer Georgia Gkioxari
FAIR, Meta AI

1. Introduction
Images depict objects and scenes in diverse settings.
Popular 2D visual tasks, such as object classification [7] and
segmentation [32, 83], aim to recognize them on the image
plane. But image planes do not capture scenes in their entirety. Consider Fig. 1a. The toy’s left arm is not visible in
the image. This is framed by the task of 3D reconstruction:
given an image, fully reconstruct the scene in 3D.
3D reconstruction is a longstanding problem in AI with
applications in robotics and AR/VR. Structure from Motion [18, 60] lifts images to 3D by triangulation. Recently,
NeRF [37] optimizes radiance fields to synthesize novel
views. These approaches require many views of the same
scene during inference and do not generalize to novel scenes
from a single image. Others [16, 68] predict 3D from a single image but rely on expensive CAD supervision [5, 59].
Project page: https://mcc3d.github.io

3D Reconstruction

Encodings

…

A central goal of visual recognition is to understand objects and scenes from a single image. 2D recognition has
witnessed tremendous progress thanks to large-scale learning and general-purpose representations. Comparatively,
3D poses new challenges stemming from occlusions not depicted in the image. Prior works try to overcome these by
inferring from multiple views or rely on scarce CAD models
and category-specific priors which hinder scaling to novel
settings. In this work, we explore single-view 3D reconstruction by learning generalizable representations inspired
by advances in self-supervised learning. We introduce a
simple framework that operates on 3D points of single objects or whole scenes coupled with category-agnostic largescale training from diverse RGB-D videos. Our model, Multiview Compressive Coding (MCC), learns to compress the
input appearance and geometry to predict the 3D structure
by querying a 3D-aware decoder. MCC’s generality and efficiency allow it to learn from large-scale and diverse data
sources with strong generalization to novel objects imagined by DALL·E 2 or captured in-the-wild with an iPhone.

RGB-D Image

Attention

Abstract

unproject
Queries

(a) MCC Overview
(a)

Input

Output

Input

Output

Input

Output

(b) 3D Reconstructions by MCC
Figure 1. Multiview Compressive Coding (MCC). (a): MCC
encodes an input RGB-D image and uses an attention-based model
to predict the occupancy and color of query points to form the final
(b)
3D reconstruction. (b): MCC generalizes to novel objects captured
with iPhones (left) or imagined by DALL·E 2 [47] (middle). It is
also general – it works not only on objects but also scenes (right).

Reminiscent of generalized cylinders [40], some introduce object-specific priors via category-specific 3D templates [25, 29, 31], pose [42] or symmetries [73]. While impressive, these methods cannot scale as they rely on onerous
3D annotations and category-specific priors which are not
generally true. Alas large-scale learning, which has shown
promising generalization results for images [45] and language [2], is largely underexplored for 3D reconstruction.
Image-based recognition is entering a new era thanks to
domain-agnostic architectures, like transformers [10, 65],
and large-scale category-agnostic learning [19] . Motivated
by these advances, we present a scalable, general-purpose
model for 3D reconstruction from a single image. We introduce a simple, yet effective, framework that operates directly on 3D points. 3D points are general as they can capture any objects or scenes and are more versatile and efficient than meshes and voxels. Their generality and efficiency enables large-scale category-agnostic training. In
turn, large-scale training makes our 3D model effective.

9065

