This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Devil’s on the Edges: Selective Quad Attention for Scene Graph Generation
Deunsol Jung

Sanghyun Kim

Won Hwa Kim

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/SQUAT

Abstract

horse
man

Scene graph generation aims to construct a semantic
graph structure from an image such that its nodes and edges
respectively represent objects and their relationships. One
of the major challenges for the task lies in the presence
of distracting objects and relationships in images; contextual reasoning is strongly distracted by irrelevant objects or
backgrounds and, more importantly, a vast number of irrelevant candidate relations. To tackle the issue, we propose
the Selective Quad Attention Network (SQUAT) that learns
to select relevant object pairs and disambiguate them via diverse contextual interactions. SQUAT consists of two main
components: edge selection and quad attention. The edge
selection module selects relevant object pairs, i.e., edges in
the scene graph, which helps contextual reasoning, and the
quad attention module then updates the edge features using both edge-to-node and edge-to-edge cross-attentions to
capture contextual information between objects and object
pairs. Experiments demonstrate the strong performance
and robustness of SQUAT, achieving the state of the art on
the Visual Genome and Open Images v6 benchmarks.

horse
Background

glasses

man

Background

glasses

Background

Background

bucket

bucket

(b) Fully-connected scene graph

(a) Ground-truth scene graph

Query

Key-Value
Node

Edge

Node

N2N

N2E

Node

Edge

E2N

E2E

Edge

(c) Overview of the quad attention module

Figure 1. (a) The ground-truth scene graph contains only 4
ground-truth objects and 4 relations between the objects. (b) Only
13% of edges in a fully-connected graph have the actual relationships according to the ground-truths. (c) The overview of the quad
attention. The node features are updated by node-to-node (N2N)
and node-to-edge (N2E) attentions, and the edge features are updated by edge-to-node (E2N) and edge-to-edge (E2E) attentions.

1. Introduction
The task of scene graph generation (SGG) is to construct
a visually-grounded graph from an image such that its nodes
and edges respectively represent objects and their relationships in the image [27, 43, 46]. The scene graph provides a
semantic structure of images beyond individual objects and
thus is useful for a wide range of vision problems such as
visual question answering [36, 37], image captioning [53],
image retrieval [11], and conditional image generation [10],
where a holistic understanding of the relationships among
objects is required for high-level reasoning. With recent advances in deep neural networks for visual recognition, SGG
has been actively investigated in the computer vision community. A vast majority of existing methods tackle SGG by
ﬁrst detecting candidate objects and then performing contextual reasoning between the objects via message pass-

ing [19, 21, 43] or sequential modeling [28, 36, 50]. Despite
these efforts, the task of SGG remains extremely challenging, and even the state-of-the-art methods do not produce
reliable results for practical usage.
While there exist a multitude of challenges for SGG, the
intrinsic difﬁculty may lie in the presence of distracting objects and relationships in images; there is a vast number of
potential but irrelevant relations, i.e., edges, which quadratically increase with the number of candidate objects, i.e.,
nodes, in the scene graph. The contextual reasoning for
SGG in the wild is thus largely distracted by irrelevant objects and their relationship pairs. Let us take a simple example as in Fig. 1, where 4 objects and 4 relations in its
ground-truth scene graph exist in the given image. If our
18664

