This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangling Orthogonal Planes for Indoor Panoramic Room Layout
Estimation with Cross-Scale Distortion Awareness
Zhijie Shen, Zishuo Zheng, Chunyu Lin† , Lang Nie, Kang Liao, Shuai Zheng, and Yao Zhao
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
{zhjshen, zszheng, cylin, nielang, kang liao, zs1997, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

Multi-scale features

Abstract

Compressing

Compressing

1. Introduction
Indoor panoramic layout estimation refers to reconstructing 3D room layouts from omnidirectional images.
Since the panoramic vision system captures the whole-room
contextual information, we can estimate the complete room
layout with a single panoramic image. However, inferring
the 3D information from a 2D image is an ill-posed problem. Besides, the 360° field-of-view (FoV) of panoramas
brings severe distortions that increase along the latitude.
Both issues are challenging for indoor layout estimation.
† Corresponding author

Compressing

C

Compressing

Multi-scale features

Sampling

Resize

Resize
Resize

Features assembling

Based on the Manhattan World assumption, most existing indoor layout estimation schemes focus on recovering
layouts from vertically compressed 1D sequences. However,
the compression procedure confuses the semantics of different planes, yielding inferior performance with ambiguous
interpretability.
To address this issue, we propose to disentangle this 1D
representation by pre-segmenting orthogonal (vertical and
horizontal) planes from a complex scene, explicitly capturing the geometric cues for indoor layout estimation. Considering the symmetry between the floor boundary and ceiling boundary, we also design a soft-flipping fusion strategy
to assist the pre-segmentation. Besides, we present a feature assembling mechanism to effectively integrate shallow
and deep features with distortion distribution awareness.
To compensate for the potential errors in pre-segmentation,
we further leverage triple attention to reconstruct the disentangled sequences for better performance. Experiments
on four popular benchmarks demonstrate our superiority
over existing SoTA solutions, especially on the 3DIoU metric. The code is available at https://github.com/
zhijieshen-bjtu/DOPNet.

Horizontal plane

(a)

Compressing

Disentangling
Compressing
Vertical planes

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The commonly used architecture. (b) The proposed
one. Compared with the traditional pipeline, ours has two advantages: (1) Disentangling the 1D representation into two separate
sequences with different plane semantics. (2) Adaptively integrating shallow and deep features with distortion awareness via a feature assembling mechanism rather than simple concatenation.

Different from outdoor scenarios, the indoor room has
the following properties: (1) The indoor scenes conform to
the Manhattan World assumption (The floors and ceilings
are all flat planes, and the walls are perpendicular to them).
(2) The room layout is always described as the corners or
the floor boundary and ceiling boundary. These characteristics could be used as potential priors to guide the design of
a reasonable layout estimation method.
Based on the Manhattan World assumption, previous
approaches [19, 20, 8, 14, 21] prefer to estimate the layout from a 1D sequence. They advocate compressing the
extracted 2D feature maps in height dimension to obtain
a 1D sequence, of which every element in this sequence
share the same distortion magnitude (Fig. 1a). We argue
that this compressed representation does not eliminate the
panoramic distortions because there is no explicit distortion
processing when extracting 2D feature maps before compression. Moreover, this strategy roughly mixes the vertical
and horizontal planes together, confusing the semantics of
different planes that are crucial for layout estimation.
On the other hand, some researchers devoted themselves
17337

