This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FeatureBooster: Boosting Feature Descriptors with a Lightweight Neural
Network
Xinjiang Wang1,2
Zeyu Liu1,2
Yu Hu1,2
Wei Xi3
Wenxian Yu1,2
Danping Zou1,2 .*
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation and Location Based Services, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
SJTU SEIEE · G60 Yun Zhi AI Innovation and Application Research Center
3
Intelligent Perception Institute, Midea Corporate Research Center
{wangxj83,ribosomal,henryhuyu,wxyu,dpzou}@sjtu.edu.cn

xiwei1@midea.com

Abstract
We introduce a lightweight network to improve descriptors of keypoints within the same image. The network takes
the original descriptors and the geometric properties of keypoints as the input, and uses an MLP-based self-boosting
stage and a Transformer-based cross-boosting stage to enhance the descriptors. The boosted descriptors can be either real-valued or binary ones. We use the proposed network to boost both hand-crafted (ORB [34], SIFT [24]) and
the state-of-the-art learning-based descriptors (SuperPoint
[10], ALIKE [53]) and evaluate them on image matching,
visual localization, and structure-from-motion tasks. The
results show that our method signiﬁcantly improves the performance of each task, particularly in challenging cases
such as large illumination changes or repetitive patterns.
Our method requires only 3.2ms on desktop GPU and 27ms
on embedded GPU to process 2000 features, which is fast
enough to be applied to a practical system. The code and
trained weights are publicly available at github.com/SJTUViSYS/FeatureBooster.

Figure 1. ORB descriptors perform remarkably better in challenging cases after being boosted by the proposed lightweight network.
Left column: Matching results of using raw ORB descriptors.
Right column: Results of using boosted ORB descriptors. Nearest neighbor search and RANSAC [14] were used for matching.

shown to be more powerful than hand-crafted ones, especially in challenging cases such as signiﬁcant viewpoint
and illumination changes. Both hand-crafted and learningbased descriptors have shown to work well in practice.
Some of them have become default descriptors for some applications. For example, the simple binary descriptor ORB
[34] is widely used for SLAM systems [20, 29]. SIFT [24]
is typically used in structure-from-motion systems.
Considering that the descriptors have already been integrated into practical systems, replacing them with totally
new ones can be problematic, as it may require more computing power that may not be supported by the existing
hardware, or sometimes require extensive modiﬁcations to
the software because of changed descriptor type (e.g. from
binary to real).
In this work, we attempt to reuse existing descriptors
and enhance their discrimination ability with as little computational overhead as possible. To this end, we propose
a lightweight network to improve the original descriptors.
The input of this network is the descriptors and the geomet-

1. Introduction
Extracting sparse keypoints or local features from an image is a fundamental building block in various computer vision tasks, such as structure from motion (SfM), simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), and visual localization. The feature descriptor, represented by a real-valued or
binary descriptor, plays a key role in matching those keypoints across different images.
The descriptors are commonly hand-crafted in the early
days. Recently, learning-based descriptors [10, 53] have
* Corresponding Author: Danping Zou (dpzou@sjtu.edu.cn).
This works was supported by National Key R&D Program
(2022YFB3903802) and National of Science Foundation of China
(62073214)

7630

