This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V2V4Real: A Real-world Large-scale Dataset for Vehicle-to-Vehicle Cooperative
Perception
Runsheng Xu1 , Xin Xia1 *, Jinlong Li2 , Hanzhao Li1 , Shuo Zhang1 , Zhengzhong Tu3 , Zonglin Meng1 ,
Hao Xiang1 , Xiaoyu Dong4 , Rui Song5,6 , Hongkai Yu2 , Bolei Zhou1 , Jiaqi Ma1
University of California, Los Angeles1 Cleveland State University2 University of Texas at Austin3
Northwestern University4 Technical University of Munich5 Fraunhofer Institute6

Abstract
Modern perception systems of autonomous vehicles are
known to be sensitive to occlusions and lack the capability of long perceiving range. It has been one of the key
bottlenecks that prevents Level 5 autonomy. Recent research has demonstrated that the Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V)
cooperative perception system has great potential to revolutionize the autonomous driving industry. However, the
lack of a real-world dataset hinders the progress of this
field. To facilitate the development of cooperative perception, we present V2V4Real, the first large-scale realworld multi-modal dataset for V2V perception. The data
is collected by two vehicles equipped with multi-modal
sensors driving together through diverse scenarios. Our
V2V4Real dataset covers a driving area of 410 km, comprising 20K LiDAR frames, 40K RGB frames, 240K annotated 3D bounding boxes for 5 classes, and HDMaps that
cover all the driving routes. V2V4Real introduces three
perception tasks, including cooperative 3D object detection, cooperative 3D object tracking, and Sim2Real domain
adaptation for cooperative perception. We provide comprehensive benchmarks of recent cooperative perception algorithms on three tasks. The V2V4Real dataset can be found
at research.seas.ucla.edu/mobility-lab/v2v4real/.

1. Introduction
Perception is critical in autonomous driving (AV) for accurate navigation and safe planning. The recent development of deep learning brings significant breakthroughs in
various perception tasks such as 3D object detection [22,
35, 42], object tracking [43, 56], and semantic segmentation [47, 57]. However, single-vehicle vision systems still
suffer from many real-world challenges, such as occlusions
and short-range perceiving capability [15, 40, 49], which
* Corresponding Author, email address: x35xia@ucla.edu

(a) Aggregated LiDAR data

(b) HD map

(c) Satallite Map

Figure 1. A data frame sampled from V2V4Real: (a) aggregated
LiDAR data, (b) HD map, and (c) satellite map to indicate the
collective position. More qualitative examples of V2V4Real can
be found in the supplementary materials.

can cause catastrophic accidents. The shortcomings stem
mainly from the limited field-of-view of the individual vehicle, leading to an incomplete understanding of the surrounding traffic.
A growing interest and recent advancement in cooperative perception systems have enabled a new paradigm
that can potentially overcome the limitation of singlevehicle perception. By leveraging vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)
technologies, multiple connected and automated vehicles
(CAVs) can communicate and share captured sensor information simultaneously. As shown in a complex intersection
in Fig. 1, for example, the ego vehicle (red liDAR) struggles to perceive the upcoming objects located across the
way due to occlusions. Incorporating the LiDAR features
from the nearby CAV (green scans) can largely broaden the
sensing range of the vehicle and make it even see across the
occluded corner.
Despite the great promise, however, it remains chal13712

