This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Think Twice before Driving:
Towards Scalable Decoders for End-to-End Autonomous Driving
†

†

Xiaosong Jia1,2 , Penghao Wu2,3 , Li Chen2 , Jiangwei Xie2 , Conghui He2 , Junchi Yan1,2 , Hongyang Li2,1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
University of California at San Diego
†

Correspondence authors
https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/ThinkTwice

Throttle 0.05
Steer 0.05

Adjust Driving Plan
Look
OK to Follow

Better to be Faster

Oncoming
car yields

Predict

Throttle++
Steer++

× 𝑵𝑵

Figure 1. We propose ThinkTwice, a scalable decoder paradigm that generates the future trajectory and action of the ego vehicle sfor
end-to-end autonomous driving. Conditioned on the coarse action/trajectory, we propose the Look Module to retrieve information from
critical regions and the Prediction Module to anticipate the outcome of the ego behavior. Taking features from the two modules as input,
the coarse prediction is refined by predicting its offset from ground-truth. We could stack multiple such layers and scale up the capacity of
the decoder with dense supervision and spatial-temporal prior.

Abstract
End-to-end autonomous driving has made impressive
progress in recent years. Existing methods usually adopt
the decoupled encoder-decoder paradigm, where the encoder extracts hidden features from raw sensor data, and
the decoder outputs the ego-vehicle’s future trajectories or
actions. Under such a paradigm, the encoder does not have
access to the intended behavior of the ego agent, leaving the
burden of finding out safety-critical regions from the massive receptive field and inferring about future situations to
the decoder. Even worse, the decoder is usually composed
of several simple multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) or GRUs
while the encoder is delicately designed (e.g., a combination of heavy ResNets or Transformer). Such an imbalanced
resource-task division hampers the learning process.
In this work, we aim to alleviate the aforementioned
problem by two principles: (1) fully utilizing the capacity of the encoder; (2) increasing the capacity of the decoder. Concretely, we first predict a coarse-grained fu-

ture position and action based on the encoder features.
Then, conditioned on the position and action, the future
scene is imagined to check the ramification if we drive accordingly. We also retrieve the encoder features around
the predicted coordinate to obtain fine-grained information
about the safety-critical region. Finally, based on the predicted future and the retrieved salient feature, we refine the
coarse-grained position and action by predicting its offset
from ground-truth. The above refinement module could be
stacked in a cascaded fashion, which extends the capacity of the decoder with spatial-temporal prior knowledge
about the conditioned future. We conduct experiments on
the CARLA simulator and achieve state-of-the-art performance in closed-loop benchmarks. Extensive ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of each proposed module.

1. Introduction
With the advance in deep learning, autonomous driving has attracted attention from both academia and in-

21983

