This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R EAL I MPACT: A Dataset of Impact Sound Fields for Real Objects
Samuel Clarke1
Julia Xu1

Ruohan Gao1
Jui-Hsien Wang2
1
Stanford University

Abstract
Objects make unique sounds under different perturbations, environment conditions, and poses relative to the
listener. While prior works have modeled impact sounds
and sound propagation in simulation, we lack a standard
dataset of impact sound fields of real objects for audiovisual learning and calibration of the sim-to-real gap. We
present R EAL I MPACT, a large-scale dataset of real object
impact sounds recorded under controlled conditions. R E AL I MPACT contains 150,000 recordings of impact sounds
of 50 everyday objects with detailed annotations, including their impact locations, microphone locations, contact
force profiles, material labels, and RGBD images.* We
make preliminary attempts to use our dataset as a reference
to current simulation methods for estimating object impact
sounds that match the real world. Moreover, we demonstrate the usefulness of our dataset as a testbed for acoustic
and audio-visual learning via the evaluation of two benchmark tasks, including listener location classification and visual acoustic matching.

1. Introduction
Object sounds permeate our everyday natural environments as we both actively interact with them and passively
perceive events in our environment. The sound of a drinking
glass bouncing on the floor assuages our fear that the glass
would shatter. The click made by a knife making contact
with a cutting board assures us that we have diced cleanly
through a vegetable. And listening to the sound a painted
mug makes when we tap it informs us of whether it is made
of ceramic or metal. What we perceive from sound complements what we perceive from vision by reinforcing, disambiguating, or augmenting it.
Understanding the cause-and-effect relationships in
these sounds at a fine-grained level can inform us about
an object’s material properties and geometry, as well as
its contact and other environmental conditions. Capturing
* The project page and dataset are available at https : / /
samuelpclarke.com/realimpact/

Mason Wang1
Doug L. James1
2
Adobe Research

Mark Rau1
Jiajun Wu1

these relationships from real-world data can help us improve our models toward more realistic physical simulations, with applications in virtual reality, animation, and
training learning-based frameworks in simulation.
The sounds we perceive from objects are the result of
many intricate physical processes: they encode important
properties about the object itself (e.g., geometry, material,
mechanical properties), as well as the surrounding environment (e.g., room size, other passive objects present, materials of furniture in the room). More specifically, when a
hard object is struck, it vibrates according to its mass and
stiffness, and the shape of the object determines the mode
shapes of the dominant vibration patterns (§3.1). Acoustic waves are then emitted into the medium, typically air,
bouncing around in the room and interacting with surrounding objects and the room itself before reaching our ear or a
microphone to be perceived as pressure fluctuations (§3.2).
Prior work has explored using physical simulation [26,
54] or learning-based methods [28, 29] to reconstruct the
sound generation process virtually, as well as building 3D
environments with simulated spatial audio for embodied
audio-visual learning [7, 15, 18, 35, 42]. However, there has
been little work on building physical apparatuses and feasible measurement process to quantify sounds made by the
everyday objects, despite their importance and intimate relationship with our daily lives. As a result, the evaluations
of the methods above are largely established on subjective
metrics such as user studies.
To address this gap, we introduce R EAL I MPACT, a
dataset containing 150k recordings of 50 everyday objects,
each being struck from 5 distinct impact positions. For
each impact point, we capture sounds at 600 field points
to provide comprehensive coverage of the frequency components of the sounds and how they are distributed spatially. R EAL I MPACT thus provides all the inputs most current simulation frameworks needed to simulate each sound,
while also providing the ground truth recording for comparison. We show that R EAL I MPACT can be used for various
downstream auditory and audio-visual learning tasks, such
as listener location classification (§5.2) and visual acoustic matching (§5.3). These results demonstrate that sound

1516

