This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unite and Conquer: Plug & Play Multi-Modal Synthesis using Diffusion Models
Nithin Gopalakrishnan Nair, Wele Gedara Chaminda Bandara and Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD,USA
{ngopala2, wbandar1 and vpatel36}@jhu.edu

A starry

night sky

Forest covered

in snow

A road leading
into mountains

(a) {ImageNet class, Text} −→ Generic Scene

Tibetan terrier

Teddy Bear

Triceratops

Tree frog

Otterhound

Tibetan terrier

Teddy Bear

GLIDE [21]

Triceratops

Tree frog

Otterhound

OURS
(c) {Sketch, Text}−→ Facial image

OURS

TediGAN [45]

(b) {(Face, hair) semantic labels, Text}−→ Facial image

Semantic Label

This person is An old person This person has This person has
chubby and has with brown hair black hair and brown hair and
wears eyeglasses
wavy black hair
wears beard

Sketch

This person has This person has
blonde hair and brown hair and
black eyebrows dark skin tone

Figure 1. Applications of our method: (a) Cross-dataset multimodal generation (ImageNet and GLIDE [21]) using two off-the-shelf
diffusion models. We bring in new novel classes to a predefined background. We consider five rare classes from the ImageNet classes, and
three different text prompts as shown in the figure. For GLIDE [21], we create a new text prompt by adding an extra sentence utilizing
“and a {} in the photo”. For GLIDE [21], we sample five images and show the results having the maximum value of CLIP [24] correlation
value to the text prompt. (b) Multimodal Face generation with three modalities (hair segmentation map, skin segmentation map, and text).
(c) Multimodal Generation with two modalities. The text prompt for (b) and (c) is a user-defined text prompt with multiple attributes.

Abstract
Generating photos satisfying multiple constraints finds
broad utility in the content creation industry. A key hurdle to accomplishing this task is the need for paired data
consisting of all modalities (i.e., constraints) and their corresponding output. Moreover, existing methods need retraining using paired data across all modalities to introduce a new condition. This paper proposes a solution to this

problem based on denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDPMs). Our motivation for choosing diffusion models
over other generative models comes from the flexible internal structure of diffusion models. Since each sampling
step in the DDPM follows a Gaussian distribution, we show
that there exists a closed-form solution for generating an
image given various constraints. Our method can unite
multiple diffusion models trained on multiple sub-tasks and
conquer the combined task through our proposed sampling

6070

