This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Wisdom of Crowds: Temporal Progressive Attention
for Early Action Prediction

1

Alexandros Stergiou1,2,∗
Dima Damen3
2
Vrije University of Brussels, Belgium
imec, Belgium 3 University of Bristol, UK
Abstract

Early action prediction deals with inferring the ongoing
action from partially-observed videos, typically at the outset of the video. We propose a bottleneck-based attention
model that captures the evolution of the action, through progressive sampling over fine-to-coarse scales. Our proposed
Temporal Progressive (TemPr) model is composed of multiple attention towers, one for each scale. The predicted
action label is based on the collective agreement considering confidences of these towers. Extensive experiments over
four video datasets showcase state-of-the-art performance
on the task of Early Action Prediction across a range of encoder architectures. We demonstrate the effectiveness and
consistency of TemPr through detailed ablations.†

1. Introduction
Early action prediction (EAP) is the task of inferring
the action label corresponding to a given video, from only
partially observing the start of that video. Interest in EAP
has increased in recent years due to both the ever-growing
number of videos recorded and the requirement of processing them with minimal latency. Motivated by the advances in action recognition [6, 57], where the entire video
is used to recognize the action label, recent EAP methods [3,15,34,45,60] distill the knowledge from these recognition models to learn from the observed segments. Despite
promising results, the information that can be extracted
from partial and full videos is inevitably different. We instead focus on modeling the observed partial video better.
Several neurophysiological studies [11, 29] have suggested that humans understand actions in a predictive and
not reactive manner. This has resulted in the direct matching hypothesis [18, 46] where, actions are believed to be
perceived through common patterns. Encountering any of
these patterns prompts the expectation of specific action(s),
even before the action is completed. Although the early pre* Work carried out while A. Stergiou was at University of Bristol
† Code is available at: https://tinyurl.com/temprog

Figure 1. Early action prediction with TemPr involves the use
of multiple scales for extracting features over partially observed
videos. Encoded spatio-temporal features are attended by distinct
transformer towers (T ) at each scale. We visualize two scales,
where the fine scale Ti predicts ‘hold plate’, and the coarse scale
Ti+1 predicts ‘hold sponge’. Informative cues from both scales
are combined for early prediction of the action ‘wash plate’.

diction of actions is an inherent part of human cognition, the
task remains challenging for computational modeling.
Motivated by the direct matching hypothesis, we propose
a Temporally Progressive (TemPr) approach to modeling
partially observed videos. Inspired by multi-scale representations in images [7, 69] and video [27, 62], we represent the observed video by a set of sub-sequences of temporally increasing lengths as in Figure 1, which we refer
to as scales. TemPr uses distinct transformer towers over
each video scale. These utilize a shared latent-bottleneck
for cross-attention [28, 37], followed by a stack of selfattention blocks to concurrently encode and aggregate the
input. From tower outputs, a shared classifier produces label predictions for each scale. Labels are aggregated based
on their collective similarity and individual confidences.
In summary, our contributions are as follows: (i) We

14709

