This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Four-view Geometry with Unknown Radial Distortion*
Petr Hruby
ETH Zürich
Dept. of Computer Science

Viktor Korotynskiy
CIIRC, CTU in Prague

Timothy Duff
University of Washington

viktor.korotynskiy@cvut.cz

timduff@uw.edu

petr.hruby@inf.ethz.ch

Luke Oeding
Auburn University
oeding@auburn.edu

Marc Pollefeys
ETH Zürich
Dept. of Computer Science

Tomas Pajdla
CIIRC, CTU in Prague
pajdla@cvut.cz

marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch

Viktor Larsson
Lund University
viktor.larsson@math.lth.se

Abstract
We present novel solutions to previously unsolved problems of relative pose estimation from images whose calibration parameters, namely focal lengths and radial distortion,
are unknown. Our approach enables metric reconstruction
without modeling these parameters. The minimal case for
reconstruction requires 13 points in 4 views for both the
calibrated and uncalibrated cameras. We describe and implement the first solution to these minimal problems. In the
calibrated case, this may be modeled as a polynomial system of equations with 3584 solutions. Despite the apparent
intractability, the problem decomposes spectacularly. Each
solution falls into a Euclidean symmetry class of size 16,
and we can estimate 224 class representatives by solving a
sequence of three subproblems with 28, 2, and 4 solutions.
We highlight the relationship between internal constraints
on the radial quadrifocal tensor and the relations among
the principal minors of a 4 × 4 matrix. We also address the
case of 4 upright cameras, where 7 points are minimal. Finally, we evaluate our approach on simulated and real data
and benchmark against previous calibration-free solutions,
and show that our method provides an efficient startup for
an SfM pipeline with radial cameras.
* Supported by EU RDF IMPACT No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15
003/0000468 and EU H2020 No. 871245 SPRING projects. Viktor
Larsson was funded by the strategic research project ELLIIT. Timothy Duff acknowledges support from an NSF Mathematical Sciences
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (DMS-2103310). Viktor Korotynskiy
was partially supported by the Grant Agency of CTU in Prague project
SGS23/056/OHK3/1T/13.

Figure 1. Four-view Structure-from-Motion with 1D radial
cameras. A radial camera projects a 3D point onto a radial line
passing through its pinhole projection.

1. Introduction
Determining the relative position and orientation of two
or more cameras is a classical problem in computer vision [33]. It appears in the back-end of many vision systems, usually to initialize SLAM [54] or further reconstruction in Structure-from-Motion [70]. Much effort has been
concentrated on the development of methods for 3D reconstruction using perspective cameras with various additional
lens distortion models [1, 52, 70].
18990

