This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HelixSurf: A Robust and Efﬁcient Neural Implicit Surface Learning of Indoor
Scenes with Iterative Intertwined Regularization
Zhihao Liang1,* , Zhangjin Huang1,* , Changxing Ding1 and Kui Jia1,2,†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{eezhihaoliang, eehuangzhangjin}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {chxding, kuijia}@scut.edu.cn,

Abstract
Recovery of an underlying scene geometry from multiview images stands as a long-time challenge in computer
vision research. The recent promise leverages neural implicit surface learning and differentiable volume rendering,
and achieves both the recovery of scene geometry and synthesis of novel views, where deep priors of neural models
are used as an inductive smoothness bias. While promising
for object-level surfaces, these methods suffer when coping
with complex scene surfaces. In the meanwhile, traditional
multi-view stereo can recover the geometry of scenes with
rich textures, by globally optimizing the local, pixel-wise
correspondences across multiple views. We are thus motivated to make use of the complementary beneﬁts from the
two strategies, and propose a method termed Helix-shaped
neural implicit Surface learning or HelixSurf; HelixSurf
uses the intermediate prediction from one strategy as the
guidance to regularize the learning of the other one, and
conducts such intertwined regularization iteratively during
the learning process. We also propose an efﬁcient scheme
for differentiable volume rendering in HelixSurf. Experiments on surface reconstruction of indoor scenes show that
our method compares favorably with existing methods and
is orders of magnitude faster, even when some of existing methods are assisted with auxiliary training data. The
source code is available at https://github.com/Gorilla-LabSCUT/HelixSurf.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction of a scene from a set of observed multi-view images stands as a long-term challenge
in computer vision research. A rich literature [4, 11, 15] exists to address the challenge, including different paradigms
of methods from stereo matching to volumetric fusion.
* indicates equal contribution.
† correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>.

13165

5 mins

10 mins

15 mins

(a) Results of HelixSurf on an example scene from ScanNet at three training checkpoints, where we use color codes to visualize surface normals.
≈20x

≈50x

(b) Training curves of different methods on ScanNet. The empirical training time of
each method is measured on a machine with a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.

Figure 1. Efﬁcacy and efﬁciency of our proposed HelixSurf.

Among them, the representative methods of multi-view
stereo (MVS) [12,37,44,52] ﬁrst recover the properties (e.g,
depth and/or normal) of discrete surface points, by globally
optimizing the local, pixel-wise correspondences across the
multi-view images, where photometric and geometric consistencies across views are used as the optimization cues,
and a continuous ﬁtting method (e.g., Poisson reconstruction [17, 18]) is then applied to recover a complete surface.
MVS methods usually make a reliable recovery only on surface areas with rich textures.
More recently, differentiable volume rendering is proposed that connects the observed multi-view images with
neural modeling of the implicit surface and radiance ﬁeld
[28, 41, 48]. They show a surprisingly good promise for recovery of object-level surfaces, especially when the object

