This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Correlation in Few-Shot Segmentation: A Buoys View
Yuan Wang∗
Rui Sun*
Tianzhu Zhang†
University of Science and Technology of China
{wy2016, issunrui}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Support

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has achieved conspicuous
achievements attributed to the recent advances in deep neural
network [20]. However, its data-driven nature makes it heavily dependent on massive pixel-level training data, which is
labor-intensive and time-consuming to collect. To imitate
the human learning habits which can recognize new classes
with only a glance, few-shot segmentation [25] (FSS) has
attracted increasing interest in recent years, which aims at
segmenting novel objects in the given query image with a
few annotated support images.
In previous literature, superior prototypical learning methods [15, 28, 37] and affinity learning methods [11, 26, 30, 40]
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

𝑝1

③

②

𝑝1

𝑝3

𝑝3
Distribution similarity between

①

Pixel similarity
of and : 0.8

×

False match

𝑝2

②

: 0.2

Distribution similarity between

𝑝2

①

Buoys
and

Support foreground pixel
Query foreground pixel
Support background pixel

(a) Pair-wise Correlation

and

③

②

Pixel similarity
of and : 0.9

Query

Few-shot segmentation (FSS) aims to segment novel objects in a given query image with only a few annotated
support images. However, most previous best-performing
methods, whether prototypical learning methods or affinity
learning methods, neglect to alleviate false matches caused
by their own pixel-level correlation. In this work, we rethink
how to mitigate the false matches from the perspective of
representative reference features (referred to as buoys), and
propose a novel adaptive buoys correlation (ABC) network
to rectify direct pairwise pixel-level correlation, including a
buoys mining module and an adaptive correlation module.
The proposed ABC enjoys several merits. First, to learn
the buoys well without any correspondence supervision, we
customize the buoys mining module according to the three
characteristics of representativeness, task awareness and resilience. Second, the proposed adaptive correlation module
is responsible for further endowing buoy-correlation-based
pixel matching with an adaptive ability. Extensive experimental results with two different backbones on two challenging
benchmarks demonstrate that our ABC, as a general plugin, achieves consistent improvements over several leading
methods on both 1-shot and 5-shot settings.

: 0.9

Pixel-level similarity

Buoys correlation

(b) Distribution based Correlation

Figure 1. The motivation of our proposed method. False matches
tend to occur in the pixel-level correlation due to large intra-class
variations. We introduce a series of representative features (buoys)
as references and calculate the buoys-level correlation to suppress
false matches.

are almost all equipped with pixel-level correlation. In specific, for prototypical learning methods, pixel-level correlation is implicitly endowed with the expectation to generate
the foreground prior mask [28] for guiding the query pixel
classification. For affinity learning methods, pixel-level correlation directly serves to aggregate support information and
convey it to the query image [40].
Despite their promising results, these methods neglect
the fact that there may exist cluttered background and inherent large intra-class variations between support and query
images. In this case, directly employing pairwise pixel correlation may lead to considerable false matches. To make
matters worse, the negative impact is inevitably amplified
by inbuilt low-data regimes of FSS, leading to sub-optimal
results. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), due to the significant pose
difference of the object plane in the support-query image
pair, p2 in the query image located in the plane hatch is erroneously closer to p3 situated on the ground than counterpart
p1 in the support image. Therefore, it is highly desirable
to rectify these false matches caused by the direct pairwise
pixel-level correlation.
In this paper, we aim to mitigate the false matches in
previous FSS methods from the perspective of representative
reference features (referred to as buoys). Specifically, we
design a novel Adaptive Buoys Correlation (ABC) network
that can be applied as a generic plugin, including a buoy
mining module and an adaptive correlation module to rec-

7183

