This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Point-Cloud Object Detection without 3D Annotation
Yuheng Lu1∗ , Chenfeng Xu2∗ , Xiaobao Wei1 , Xiaodong Xie1 ,
Masayoshi Tomizuka2 , Kurt Keutzer2 , Shanghang Zhang1†
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 University of California Berkeley
{yuhenglu, xiaobaowei, donxie, shanghang}@pku.edu.cn
{xuchenfeng, tomizuka, keutzer}@berkeley.edu,

Abstract
The goal of open-vocabulary detection is to identify
novel objects based on arbitrary textual descriptions. In this
paper, we address open-vocabulary 3D point-cloud detection by a dividing-and-conquering strategy, which involves:
1) developing a point-cloud detector that can learn a general representation for localizing various objects, and 2)
connecting textual and point-cloud representations to enable the detector to classify novel object categories based
on text prompting. Specifically, we resort to rich image pre-trained models, by which the point-cloud detector learns localizing objects under the supervision of predicted 2D bounding boxes from 2D pre-trained detectors.
Moreover, we propose a novel de-biased triplet cross-modal
contrastive learning to connect the modalities of image,
point-cloud and text, thereby enabling the point-cloud detector to benefit from vision-language pre-trained models,
i.e., CLIP. The novel use of image and vision-language pretrained models for point-cloud detectors allows for openvocabulary 3D object detection without the need for 3D
annotations. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed
method improves at least 3.03 points and 7.47 points over
a wide range of baselines on the ScanNet and SUN RGB-D
datasets, respectively. Furthermore, we provide a comprehensive analysis to explain why our approach works. Code
is available at https://github.com/lyhdet/OV-3DET

1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art point-cloud detectors are typically trained on a limited number of classes, which fails
to account for the cornucopia of object classes that exist
in the real world. As a result, these detectors often fail to
generalize to unseen object classes that were not present
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. OV-3DET takes point-cloud and text as input, and detects objects according to the text description. Results on two
point-cloud datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of OV-3DET.
Note that RGB color is not used during inference. (we use it here
only for better visualization.)

in the training data. To address this issue, we focus on
the under-explored problem of open-vocabulary point-cloud
detection, which involves detecting 3D objects that are outside the training vocabulary and accompanied by arbitrary
text descriptions.
Achieving open-vocabulary detection requires the model
to learn general representations and relate those representations to text cues. However, the typical approach of collecting data with a larger number of classes is challenging in
the point-cloud field due to the difficulty of both data collection and annotation. Moreover, acquiring large-scale pointcloud-caption data is currently infeasible, which further hinders point-cloud detectors from learning to connect the representation with text prompts. Given these challenges, we
work around the problem of open-vocabulary 3D object detection by leveraging existing well-established pre-trained
models for images.
Indeed, the field of image/vision-language has made
remarkable progress in learning general representations
[8, 12, 19, 34], enabling various applications such as detection [34], vision-language question answering [26], and
even image generation [22]. In particular, the CLIP pre-

1190

