This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding the Robustness of 3D Object Detection with Bird’s-Eye-View
Representations in Autonomous Driving
Zijian Zhu1* Yichi Zhang2,5* Hai Chen3 Yinpeng Dong2B
Shu Zhao3 Wenbo Ding4 Jiachen Zhong4 Shibao Zheng1B
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing, Ministry of Education,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University,
Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province
4
SAIC Motor AI Lab 5 Zhongguancun Laboratory
{zzj403,sbzh}@sjtu.edu.cn, zyc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dongyinpeng@tsinghua.edu.cn
{chber ahu,zhaoshuzs2002}@hotmail.com, {dingwenbo,zhongjiachen}@saicmotor.com

Abstract

1. Introduction

3D object detection is an essential perception task in
autonomous driving to understand the environments. The
Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) representations have significantly
improved the performance of 3D detectors with camera inputs on popular benchmarks. However, there still lacks a
systematic understanding of the robustness of these visiondependent BEV models, which is closely related to the safety
of autonomous driving systems. In this paper, we evaluate
the natural and adversarial robustness of various representative models under extensive settings, to fully understand
their behaviors influenced by explicit BEV features compared with those without BEV. In addition to the classic
settings, we propose a 3D consistent patch attack by applying adversarial patches in the 3D space to guarantee the
spatiotemporal consistency, which is more realistic for the
scenario of autonomous driving. With substantial experiments, we draw several findings: 1) BEV models tend to be
more stable than previous methods under different natural
conditions and common corruptions due to the expressive
spatial representations; 2) BEV models are more vulnerable to adversarial noises, mainly caused by the redundant
BEV features; 3) Camera-LiDAR fusion models have superior performance under different settings with multi-modal
inputs, but BEV fusion model is still vulnerable to adversarial noises of both point cloud and image. These findings
alert the safety issue in the applications of BEV detectors
and could facilitate the development of more robust models.

Autonomous driving systems have great demand for reliable 3D object detection models [21], which aim to predict
3D bounding boxes and categories of road objects, in order
to understand the surroundings. To extract holistic representations in the 3D space, the Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) is
commonly adopted as a unified representation [30], since
it contains both locations and semantic features of objects
without being affected by occlusion, and shows promise for
various 3D perception tasks in autonomous driving, such
as map restoration [41, 44]. Although being broadly used
for LiDAR point clouds [28, 65], the BEV representation
has recently achieved great success for 3D object detection with multiple cameras, arousing tremendous attention
from both industry and academia due to low cost of camera sensors and better exploitation of semantic information
in images. These vision-dependent BEV models1 typically
project 2D image features to explicit BEV feature maps in
the 3D space and make predictions based on BEV features
[25,26,31,32,35]. As representative models, BEVDet [26],
BEVDepth [31] and BEVFusion [35] distribute the 2D features into 3D space according to the estimated depth map,
while BEVFormer [32] adopts cross attention to query BEV
features from 2D images. With expressive spatial semantics
of BEV, these models achieve the state-of-the-art results on
popular benchmarks (e.g., nuScenes [8]).
Despite the excellent performance, these models are still
far from practical deployment due to the robustness issues.
Previous works have shown that deep learning models are

* Equal Contribution. B Corresponding authors. This work was done
when Zijian Zhu and Hai Chen were visiting Tsinghua University.

1 In this paper, we use the term vision-dependent BEV models to indicate both camera-only and LiDAR-camera fusion BEV models.

21600

