This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cap4Video: What Can Auxiliary Captions Do for Text-Video Retrieval?
Haipeng Luo3∗
Bo Fang3
Jingdong Wang2
Wanli Ouyang4,1
1
2
The University of Sydney
Baidu Inc.
3
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shanghai AI Laboratory

Wenhao Wu1,2 *

whwu.ucas@gmail.com

hot Caption Generation

Abstract

Most existing text-video retrieval methods focus on
Captions
CLIP
GPT-2 between the
cross-modal matching
visual content of videos
and textual query sentences. However, in real-world scenarios, online videos are often accompanied by relevant text
ns for Videoinformation
Understanding
such as titles, tags, and even subtitles, which
can be utilized
to match textual queries. This insight has
Augmented
motivated
us
to
propose a novelVideo
approach to text-video
Training Pairs
retrieval, where we directly generate associated captions
from videos using zero-shot video captioning with knowledge fromEnhanced
web-scale pre-trained Video
models (e.g., CLIP and
s
Representation
GPT-2). Given the generated captions, a natural question arises: what benefits do they bring to text-video reAuxiliary
trieval? To
answer this, we introduce
Text Cap4Video, a new
Matching
framework
that Scores
leverages captions in three ways: i) Input
data: video-caption pairs can augment the training data. ii)
Intermediate feature interaction: we perform cross-modal
feature interaction between the video and caption to produce enhanced video representations. iii) Output score:
the Query-Caption matching branch can complement the
original Query-Video matching branch for text-video retrieval. We conduct comprehensive ablation studies to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Without any
post-processing, Cap4Video achieves state-of-the-art performance on four standard text-video retrieval benchmarks:
MSR-VTT (51.4%), VATEX (66.6%), MSVD (51.8%), and
DiDeMo (52.0%). The code is available at https://
github.com/whwu95/Cap4Video.

1. Introduction
Text-video retrieval is a fundamental task in videolanguage learning. With the rapid advancements in imagelanguage pre-training [15, 30, 46, 47], researchers have focused on expanding pre-trained image-language models, especially CLIP [30], to tackle the text-video retrieval task.
The research path has evolved from the most direct global
* Equal contribution.

(a)

Query-Video Matching
Query

Video
(b)

Captioner
CLIP GPT-2

Video
(c)

Caption

Cross-modal Interaction

Video

New training pairs

Query-Video
Matching

Query

Caption

Query-Caption
Matching

Figure 1. (a) An existing end-to-end learning paradigm for textvideo retrieval. (b) Zero-shot video captioning achieved by guiding a large language model (LLM) such as GPT-2 [31] with
CLIP [30]. (c) Our Cap4Video framework leverages the generated
captions in three aspects: input data augmentation, intermediate
feature interaction, and output score fusion.

matching (i.e., video-sentence alignment [11, 24]) to finegrained matching (e.g., frame-word alignment [36], videoword alignment [13], multi-hierarchical alignment [9, 28],
etc.). These studies have demonstrated remarkable performance and significantly outperformed previous models.
Two key factors contribute to this improvement. Firstly,
CLIP offers powerful visual and textual representations that
are pre-aligned in the semantic embedding space, thereby
reducing the challenge of cross-modal learning in videotext matching. Secondly, these methods can fine-tune the
pre-trained vision and text encoders using sparsely sampled
frames in an end-to-end manner. All of these methods aim
to learn cross-modal alignment between the visual represen-

10704

