This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Class-Conditional Sharpness-Aware Minimization for Deep Long-Tailed
Recognition
Zhipeng Zhou1,† ,
1

Lanqing Li2,4,† ,

Peilin Zhao3, ,

Pheng-Ann Heng2 ,

Wei Gong1,

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
3
4
Tencent AI Lab,
Zhejiang Lab
zzp1994@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lanqingli1993@gmail.com, masonzhao@tencent.com,
pheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, weigong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

41, 48]. A key enabler of deep learning is the collection
of large-scale datasets [29, 42, 64], which are normally split
into training and testing sets with presumably i.i.d. samples. However, such scenario provides relatively trivial tests
for the generalization of machine learning models. In practice, label [17, 25, 56] and domain [14, 18, 23] distribution
shifts are prevalent, due to the disparity between the data
preparation and evaluation protocols. A classical example
is imbalanced [15] or long-tailed recognition [60], where
a model is trained on highly imbalanced source label distribution ps (y) while evaluated on a uniform target label
distribution pt (y).

It’s widely acknowledged that deep learning models with
ﬂatter minima in its loss landscape tend to generalize better. However, such property is under-explored in deep
long-tailed recognition (DLTR), a practical problem where
the model is required to generalize equally well across all
classes when trained on highly imbalanced label distribution. In this paper, through empirical observations, we argue that sharp minima are in fact prevalent in deep longtailed models, whereas naı̈ve integration of existing ﬂattening operations into long-tailed learning algorithms brings
little improvement. Instead, we propose an effective twostage sharpness-aware optimization approach based on the
decoupling paradigm in DLTR. In the ﬁrst stage, both the
feature extractor and classiﬁer are trained under parameter perturbations at a class-conditioned scale, which is
theoretically motivated by the characteristic radius of ﬂat
minima under the PAC-Bayesian framework. In the second stage, we generate adversarial features with classbalanced sampling to further robustify the classiﬁer with the
backbone frozen. Extensive experiments on multiple longtailed visual recognition benchmarks show that, our proposed Class-Conditional Sharpness-Aware Minimization
(CC-SAM), achieves competitive performance compared to
the state-of-the-arts. Code is available at https://
github.com/zzpustc/CC-SAM .

In this paper, we focus on the practical yet challenging deep long-tailed recognition (DLTR) problem, which
is inherent in the visual world [32, 60] with fundamental connections to many disciplines such as the powerlaw scaling in network science [2] and the Pareto principle in economics [39]. In computer vision, numerous
deep long-tailed learning studies have emerged in recent
years, which mainly belong to 5 categories: class rebalancing [7, 10, 28, 40, 45, 52, 54], information augmentation [22, 27, 31, 50, 55], decoupled training [20, 58, 62], representation learning [9, 32, 51, 59, 65] and ensemble learning [6, 53, 63].
In this work, we propose a novel approach to DLTR
from a distinct angle, by seeking out ﬂat minima in the loss
landscape of modern neural networks to ensure model robustness under parameter perturbation. Such optimization
strategy, termed ﬂattening in our context, have been shown
in a myriad of literature to effectively improve generalization of deep learning models in terms of supervised learning [13, 21, 35, 43], self-supervised learning [30] and continual learning [11, 44]. However, application and adaption of ﬂattening in the context of DLTR remain underexplored. To ﬁll this gap, we ﬁrst show later in this paper

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning models, composed of multiple
neural network layers with millions of parameters, have
achieved remarkable successes in computer vision [24, 33,
† Equal contribution.  Corresponding authors. Work was primarily
done when Z. Zhou worked as L. Li’s intern at Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen.

3499

