This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RONO: Robust Discriminative Learning with Noisy Labels
for 2D-3D Cross-Modal Retrieval
Yanglin Feng1
1

Hongyuan Zhu2

College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
3
Sichuan Zhiqian Technology Co., Ltd

Dezhong Peng1,3,4
2

4

Abstract
Recently, with the advent of Metaverse and AI Generated Content, cross-modal retrieval becomes popular with
a burst of 2D and 3D data. However, this problem is
challenging given the heterogeneous structure and semantic
discrepancies. Moreover, imperfect annotations are ubiquitous given the ambiguous 2D and 3D content, thus inevitably producing noisy labels to degrade the learning performance. To tackle the problem, this paper proposes a robust 2D-3D retrieval framework (RONO) to robustly learn
from noisy multimodal data. Specifically, one novel Robust
Discriminative Center Learning mechanism (RDCL) is proposed in RONO to adaptively distinguish clean and noisy
samples for respectively providing them with positive and
negative optimization directions, thus mitigating the negative impact of noisy labels. Besides, we present a Shared
Space Consistency Learning mechanism (SSCL) to capture
the intrinsic information inside the noisy data by minimizing
the cross-modal and semantic discrepancy between common space and label space simultaneously. Comprehensive mathematical analyses are given to theoretically prove
the noise tolerance of the proposed method. Furthermore,
we conduct extensive experiments on four 3D-model multimodal datasets to verify the effectiveness of our method
by comparing it with 15 state-of-the-art methods. Code is
available at https://github.com/penghu-cs/RONO.

1. Introduction
Point-cloud retrieval (PCR) is fundamental and crucial
for processing and analyzing 3D data [14], which could
provide the direct technical support of the 3D data search
engine, thus embracing compelling application prospects
and practical value in the fields of robotics [7, 32], autonomous driving [23, 31], virtual/augmented reality [9],
and medicine [29], etc. Different from 2D images, 3D
point clouds could depict the internal architecture and ex* Corresponding author: Peng Hu (penghu.ml@gmail.com).

Xi Peng1

Peng Hu1 *

2

Institute for Infocomm Research (I R), A*STAR, Singapore
Chengdu Ruibei Yingte Information Technology Co., Ltd

ternal appearance of objects from distinct views/modalities.
Hence, PCR is often accompanied by retrieving across diverse modalities, termed 2D-3D cross-modal retrieval [19].
On the other hand, it is extremely expensive and laborintensive to label such a huge amount of data points [17,
41], not to mention the additional challenges of the missing color and texture of the point clouds. In order to reduce
the labeling cost, we could utilize open source or low-cost
annotation tools (e.g., point-cloud-annotation-tool [18], LabelHub, etc.), hence it will inevitably introduce label noise
due to the non-expert annotation. However, almost all existing works excessively rely on well-labeled data [19, 20, 44],
thus making them vulnerable to noisy labels and leading to
unavoidable performance degradation.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose a
robust 2D-3D retrieval framework (RONO) to robustly
learn from noisy multimodal data as shown in Figure 1.
Our RONO framework consists of two mechanisms: 1) a
novel Robust Discriminative Center Learning mechanism
(RDCL) to robustly and discriminatively tackle clean and
noisy samples, and 2) a Shared Space Consistency Learning
mechanism (SSCL) to alleviate and even eliminate the heterogeneity and semantic gaps across different modalities.
More specifically, RDCL is presented to adaptively divide the noisy data into clean and noisy samples based on
the memorization effect of deep neural networks (DNNs)
[3], and then endowing them with positive and negative optimization directions, respectively. In brief, RDCL could
compact the clean points to the corresponding category centers while scattering the noisy ones apart away from the
noisy centers in the common space, thus alleviating the
interference of noisy labels. In addition, our SSCL aims
at mitigating the inherent gaps in the common space, i.e.,
the heterogeneity and semantic gaps. On the one hand, to
bridge the heterogeneity gap across different modalities, our
SSCL enforces modality-specific samples from the same instance collapse into a single point in the common space,
thus producing modality-invariant representations. On the
other hand, our SSCL narrows the gap between the representation space and shared label space to explicitly elimi-

11610

