This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Connecting the Dots: Floorplan Reconstruction Using Two-Level Queries
Yuanwen Yue1

Theodora Kontogianni2

Konrad Schindler1,2

1 Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zurich

Abstract
We address 2D floorplan reconstruction from 3D scans.
Existing approaches typically employ heuristically designed multi-stage pipelines. Instead, we formulate floorplan reconstruction as a single-stage structured prediction task: find a variable-size set of polygons, which in
turn are variable-length sequences of ordered vertices.
To solve it we develop a novel Transformer architecture that generates polygons of multiple rooms in parallel, in a holistic manner without hand-crafted intermediate stages. The model features two-level queries for polygons and corners, and includes polygon matching to make
the network end-to-end trainable. Our method achieves
a new state-of-the-art for two challenging datasets, Structured3D and SceneCAD, along with significantly faster inference than previous methods. Moreover, it can readily be extended to predict additional information, i.e., semantic room types and architectural elements like doors
and windows. Our code and models are available at:
https://github.com/ywyue/RoomFormer.

1. Introduction
The goal of floorplan reconstruction is to turn observations of an (indoor) scene into a 2D vector map in birdseye view. More specifically, we aim to abstract a 3D point
cloud into a set of closed polygons corresponding to rooms,
optionally enriched with further structural and semantic elements like doors, windows and room type labels.
Floorplans are an essential representation that enables
a wide range of applications in robotics, AR/VR, interior design, etc. Like prior work [2, 3, 8, 9, 29], we start
from a 3D point cloud, which can easily be captured with
RGB-D cameras, laser scanners or SfM systems. Several
works [8, 9, 21, 29] have shown the effectiveness of projecting the raw 3D point data along the gravity axis, to obtain a
2D density map that highlights the building’s structural elements (e.g., walls). We also employ this early transition to
2D image space. The resulting density maps are compact
and computationally efficient, but inherit the noise and data
gaps of the underlying point clouds, hence floorplan recon-

Francis Engelmann2

2 ETH AI Center, ETH Zurich

Input 3D Point Cloud

Reconstructed Floorplan

Figure 1. Semantic floorplan reconstruction. Given a point
cloud of an indoor environment, RoomFormer jointly recovers
multiple room polygons along with their associated room types,
as well as architectural elements such as doors and windows.

struction remains a challenging task.
Existing methods can be split broadly into two categories
that both operate in two stages: Top-down methods [8, 29]
first extract room masks from the density map using neural networks (e.g., Mask R-CNN [15]), then employ optimization/search techniques (e.g., integer programming [28],
Monte-Carlo Tree-Search [4]) to extract a polygonal floorplan. Such techniques are not end-to-end trainable, and
their success depends on how well the hand-crafted optimization captures domain knowledge about room shape and
layout. Alternatively, bottom-up methods [9, 21] first detect corners, then look for edges between corners (i.e., wall
segments) and finally assemble them into a planar floorplan
graph. Both approaches are strictly sequential and therefore
dependent on the quality of the initial corner, respectively
room, detector. The second stage starts from the detected
entities, therefore missing or spurious detections may significantly impact the reconstruction.
We address those limitations and design a model that
directly maps a density image to a set of room polygons.
Our model, named RoomFormer, leverages the sequence
prediction capabilities of Transformers and directly outputs a variable-length, ordered sequence of vertices per
room. RoomFormer requires neither hand-crafted, domainspecific intermediate products nor explicit corner, wall or
room detections. Moreover, it predicts all rooms that make
up the floorplan at once, exploiting the parallel nature of the
Transformer architecture.

845

