This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Divide and Conquer: Answering Questions with Object Factorization and
Compositional Reasoning
Shi Chen
Qi Zhao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Minnesota
{chen4595, qzhao}@umn.edu

Abstract
Humans have the innate capability to answer diverse
questions, which is rooted in the natural ability to correlate different concepts based on their semantic relationships
and decompose difficult problems into sub-tasks. On the
contrary, existing visual reasoning methods assume training samples that capture every possible object and reasoning problem, and rely on black-boxed models that commonly exploit statistical priors. They have yet to develop
the capability to address novel objects or spurious biases
in real-world scenarios, and also fall short of interpreting the rationales behind their decisions. Inspired by humans’ reasoning of the visual world, we tackle the aforementioned challenges from a compositional perspective,
and propose an integral framework consisting of a principled object factorization method and a novel neural module network. Our factorization method decomposes objects
based on their key characteristics, and automatically derives prototypes that represent a wide range of objects. With
these prototypes encoding important semantics, the proposed network then correlates objects by measuring their
similarity on a common semantic space and makes decisions with a compositional reasoning process. It is capable of answering questions with diverse objects regardless of their availability during training, and overcoming
the issues of biased question-answer distributions. In addition to the enhanced generalizability, our framework also
provides an interpretable interface for understanding the
decision-making process of models. Our code is available
at https://github.com/szzexpoi/POEM .

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental goals in artificial intelligence is
to develop systems that are able to reason with the complexity of real-world data to make decisions. Most existing
visual question answering (VQA) methods [2,13,28,29,33,

34, 38, 49, 57] assume a complete overlap between objects
involved in training and testing, and commonly rely on the
spurious distributions of questions and answers [39]. As
a result, they have limited generalizability toward real-life
visual reasoning, and also lack the ability to justify the reasoning process that leads to the answers.
“All mammals are animals. All elephants are mammals.
Therefore, all elephants are animals [5].” The wide application of syllogistic logic reflects key characteristics of
the ways humans reason about the world. Unlike models
[2, 38, 49] that utilize implicit features and heavily exploit
statistical priors, humans correlate diverse objects from the
compositional perspective based on their shared characteristics [26] and tackle problems with a structured reasoning
process, which is both generalizable and interpretable.
To address the complexity of real-world problems, this
study aims to develop object factorization and compositional reasoning capabilities in models. As shown in Figure
1, our approach bridges diverse objects by projecting them
onto a common space formed by discriminative prototypes
(e.g., round shape, stuffed toy), and formulates the reasoning process with atomic steps [48] representing essential
reasoning skills (e.g., Find, Relate). The prototypes are derived with object factorization, and they represent important
semantics of objects (e.g., honey jar → <round shape, container ...>, teddy bear → <bear, stuffed toy ...>). With
an improved understanding of semantic relationships, our
framework correlates objects (e.g., honey jar and container,
stuffed toy and teddy bear) based on their commonalities in
characteristics, leading to enhanced robustness against the
diversity of objects and data biases. It also allows interpretations of the model’s reasoning process consistent with the
ways humans describe their own thinking [8].
Compared to previous studies [2, 21, 33, 34, 48, 49], our
major distinction lies in (1) the composition in two important dimensions of visual reasoning, i.e., objects and the
reasoning process, and (2) a tight coupling between them.
Instead of using black-boxed features or a direct mapping
between question and answer that is vulnerable to object di-

6736

