This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Objaverse: A Universe of Annotated 3D Objects
Matt Deitke†ψ , Dustin Schwenk† , Jordi Salvador† , Luca Weihs† , Oscar Michel†
Eli VanderBilt† , Ludwig Schmidtψ , Kiana Ehsani† , Aniruddha Kembhavi†ψ , Ali Farhadiψ
†
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI, ψ University of Washington, Seattle
objaverse.allenai.org

Figure 1. Example instances from our large-scale 3D asset dataset O BJAVERSE. O BJAVERSE 3D assets are semantically diverse, highquality, and paired with natural-language descriptions.

Abstract
Massive data corpora like WebText, Wikipedia, Conceptual Captions, WebImageText, and LAION have propelled
recent dramatic progress in AI. Large neural models trained
on such datasets produce impressive results and top many of
today’s benchmarks. A notable omiss1ion within this family of large-scale datasets is 3D data. Despite considerable
interest and potential applications in 3D vision, datasets
of high-fidelity 3D models continue to be mid-sized with
limited diversity of object categories. Addressing this gap,
we present Objaverse 1.0, a large dataset of objects with
800K+ (and growing) 3D models with descriptive captions,
tags, and animations. Objaverse improves upon present day
3D repositories in terms of scale, number of categories,
and in the visual diversity of instances within a category.
We demonstrate the large potential of Objaverse via four
diverse applications: training generative 3D models, imCorrespondence to <mattd@allenai.org>.

proving tail category segmentation on the LVIS benchmark,
training open-vocabulary object-navigation models for Embodied AI, and creating a new benchmark for robustness
analysis of vision models. Objaverse can open new directions for research and enable new applications across the
field of AI.

1. Introduction
Massive datasets have enabled and driven rapid progress
in AI. Language corpora on the web led to large language
models like GPT-3 [4]; paired image and text datasets like
Conceptual Captions [63] led to vision-and-language pretrained models like VilBERT [42]; YouTube video datasets
led to video capable models like Merlot-Reserve [82]; and
massive multimodal datasets like WebImageText [65] and
LAION [61, 62] led to models like CLIP [55] and StableDiffusion [59]. These leaps in dataset scale and diversity were
triggered by moving from manually curated datasets to harnessing the power of the web and its creative content.
In contrast to the datasets described above, the size of

13142

