This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LSTFE-Net:Long Short-Term Feature Enhancement Network for Video Small
Object Detection
Jinsheng Xiao1 , Yuanxu Wu1 , Yunhua Chen2 *, Shurui Wang1 , Zhongyuan Wang1 , Jiayi Ma1
1. Wuhan University, China
2. Guangdong University of Technology,China
{xiaojs,whuwuyuanxu,shuruiwang}@whu.edu.cn, yhchen@gdut.edu.cn
wzy hope@163.com, jyma2010@gmail.com

Abstract

Input

Video small object detection is a difficult task due to the
lack of object information. Recent methods focus on adding
more temporal information to obtain more potent high-level
features, which often fail to specify the most vital information for small objects, resulting in insufficient or inappropriate features. Since information from frames at different positions contributes differently to small objects, it is
not ideal to assume that using one universal method will
extract proper features. We find that context information
from the long-term frame and temporal information from
the short-term frame are two useful cues for video small object detection. To fully utilize these two cues, we propose a
long short-term feature enhancement network (LSTFE-Net)
for video small object detection. First, we develop a plugand-play spatio-temporal feature alignment module to create temporal correspondences between the short-term and
current frames. Then, we propose a frame selection module to select the long-term frame that can provide the most
additional context information. Finally, we propose a long
short-term feature aggregation module to fuse long shortterm features. Compared to other state-of-the-art methods, our LSTFE-Net achieves 4.4% absolute boosts in AP
on the FL-Drones dataset. More details can be found at
https://github.com/xiaojs18/LSTFE-Net.

1. Introduction
Video small object detection plays an important role
in many fields such as automatic driving, remote sensing,
medical image, and industrial defect detection [26]. However, it is still a difficult task due to the lack of pixel information and the difficulty of feature extraction. Therefore,
the topic of how to enhance the features of small objects
has attracted great attention [1, 7, 16].
* The corresponding author

............

......
Cur-frame

ST-frames

LT-frames

Feature extraction network

Feature
Extraction
Cur-frame feature

ST-frame features

LT-frame features

Spatio-temporal feature alignment module

Frame selection module

RPN
RoI feature extraction

PL Feature
Extraction
Cur-frame PL feature

Detection
results

Short-term feature
aggregation

ST-frame PL features

LT-frame PL features

Long-term feature
aggregation

Long Short-term Feature Aggregation

Figure 1. The architecture of the proposed LSTFE-Net. The
current frame (Cur-frame), short-term frames (ST-frames) near
the Cur-frame, and long-term frames (LT-frames) sampled from
the whole video first go through the feature extraction network.
Then the Cur-frame feature and ST-frame features are connected
through the spatio-temporal feature alignment module, and the
frame selection module searches the background context of LTframe features. After getting the Proposal-Level (PL) features, the
long short-term feature aggregation module finally integrates the
long short-term features into the Cur-frame to make feature enhancement. Best viewed in color and zoomed in.

Some recent works have proved that the improvement of
video small object detection performance requires full utilization of information in the temporal dimension. While
detecting small objects in the current frame may suffer from
many problems such as motion blur, low resolution, and
too small size, effective modeling of information from other
frames can help address these problems [2, 4, 9, 17]. There
is a high similarity in nearby frames because of the strong
time continuity between them, so it is natural to emphasize the importance of short-term frames, which are near
the current frame. According to FGFA [28] and STSN [2],

14613

