This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Propagate And Calibrate: Real-time Passive Non-line-of-sight Tracking
Yihao Wang1 * Zhigang Wang1 * Bin Zhao1,2† Dong Wang1 Mulin Chen1,2 Xuelong Li1,2†
1
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Northwestern Polytechnical University
{wangyihao,wangzhigang,zhaobin,wangdong,chenmulin}@pjlab.org.cn

li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) tracking has drawn increasing
attention in recent years, due to its ability to detect object motion out of sight. Most previous works on NLOS
tracking rely on active illumination, e.g., laser, and suffer from high cost and elaborate experimental conditions.
Besides, these techniques are still far from practical application due to oversimplified settings. In contrast, we propose a purely passive method to track a person walking in
an invisible room by only observing a relay wall, which is
more in line with real application scenarios, e.g., security.
To excavate imperceptible changes in videos of the relay
wall, we introduce difference frames as an essential carrier of temporal-local motion messages. In addition, we
propose PAC-Net, which consists of alternating propagation and calibration, making it capable of leveraging both
dynamic and static messages on a frame-level granularity. To evaluate the proposed method, we build and publish
the first dynamic passive NLOS tracking dataset, NLOSTrack, which fills the vacuum of realistic NLOS datasets.
NLOS-Track contains thousands of NLOS video clips and
corresponding trajectories. Both real-shot and synthetic
data are included. Our codes and dataset are available at
https://againstentropy.github.io/NLOS-Track/.

1. Introduction
In contrast to conventional imaging within the direct line-of-sight (LOS), non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging aims to tackle an inverse problem, i.e., using indirect
signal (e.g., reflection from a visible relay wall) to recover
information of invisible areas. To specify, NLOS tracking
manages to reconstruct a continuous trajectory in real time
when an object or a person is moving in an invisible region,
which is sketched in Fig. 1. The ability to track moving
objects outside the LOS would enable promising applications, such as autonomous driving, robotic vision, security,
medical imaging, post-disaster searching, and rescue operations, etc. [2, 14, 17, 27], thus receiving increasing attention
in recent years.
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Y

CAMERA
X

Figure 1. A schematic of the passive NLOS tracking. The character is walking in the hidden scene and we can perform real-time
tracking by observing and analyzing the relay wall from outside
the room with a RGB camera, without any additional equipment.

Existing NLOS tracking techniques mostly rely on
active illumination from the detection side [4, 5, 7, 8, 16,
23, 25, 28, 35, 36]. Although introducing denser and finer
information, active illumination typically requires expensive equipment (e.g., ultra-fast pulsed laser) and elaborate
experimental conditions [29]. These defects cause a gap between active techniques and practical applications. Besides,
the oversimplified setting in previous works even expands
the gap. Unlike active methods, passive NLOS techniques
[1, 3, 5, 18, 19, 29–31, 33, 39, 41] only depend on the feeble
diffuse reflection of the hidden region, getting rid of requirements of expensive equipment. So this paper focuses on the
low-cost passive NLOS tracking task in realistic scenarios.
We find that most existing NLOS tracking works merely
locate the object in each frame independently [4, 5, 7, 8, 19,
23,28,36], without considering the position relationship between adjoining moments. This practice directly causes jitters of trajectory, thus resulting in inaccurate tracking (see
Sec. 5.3 for more details). In this paper, we consider the significance of making use of motion information and taking
advantage of motion continuity prior, which helps achieve
more coherent and accurate tracking results.
Furthermore, passive NLOS techniques face the
dilemma that the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is extremely
low [6, 8]. To address this problem, some previous works

972

