This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Two-Stream Networks for Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization
with Semantic-Aware Mechanisms
Yu Wang
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Yadong Li
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Hongbin Wang
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

yuwangtj@yeah.net

liyadong.lyd@antgroup.com

hongbin.whb@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization aims to
detect action boundaries in untrimmed videos with only
video-level annotations. Most existing schemes detect temporal regions that are most responsive to video-level classification, but they overlook the semantic consistency between
frames. In this paper, we hypothesize that snippets with
similar representations should be considered as the same
action class despite the absence of supervision signals on
each snippet. To this end, we devise a learnable dictionary
where entries are the class centroids of the corresponding
action categories. The representations of snippets identified
as the same action category are induced to be close to the
same class centroid, which guides the network to perceive
the semantics of frames and avoid unreasonable localization. Besides, we propose a two-stream framework that integrates the attention mechanism and the multiple-instance
learning strategy to extract fine-grained clues and salient
features respectively. Their complementarity enables the
model to refine temporal boundaries. Finally, the developed
model is validated on the publicly available THUMOS-14
and ActivityNet-1.3 datasets, where substantial experiments
and analyses demonstrate that our model achieves remarkable advances over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) is committed to detecting action intervals in untrimmed videos. It has received increasing popularity recently due to its wide application in surveillance analysis, video summarization and
retrieval [39, 44, 47], etc. Typically, fully-supervised TAL
[51, 58, 59] is prohibitively expensive and unrealistic due
to frame-level annotations, thus the weakly-supervised TAL
(WS-TAL) [32, 34, 40, 45, 55] that only video-level annotations are required has been advocated recently.
Most WS-TAL methods [8, 9, 31, 43, 45, 46] transform

Figure 1. An example contains the action of “Bicycle Motocross”
and the background. Representations depicted in monochromatic
color are similar, which should be regarded to describe the same
action (or background) and grouped together. The color brightness
indicates the degree of similarity.

localization into classification tasks that detect temporal
regions contributing the most to video-level classification.
They divide raw videos into fixed-length non-overlapping
snippets, on which snippet-wise attention activations or
class activation sequence (CAS) is generated. Temporal regions are detected by thresholding and merging these activations along the time dimension. Specifically, multiple
instance learning (MIL) [36, 42] and the attention mechanism [11, 14, 53] are typically employed. The former aggregates snippets that are considered action instances with
top-k confidence. However, such a regime over-emphasizes
these snippets with top-k confidence, resulting in discarding potential clues in remaining snippets with lower confidence. Besides, MIL chooses the most discriminative snippets ignoring the completeness of action instances, which
is incompatible with the localization task. Different from
MIL, the attention-based mechanism independently yields
class-agnostic confidence for each snippet, which is utilized
as a weight to perform temporal pooling over all snippets
and generate video-level representations for classification.

18878

