This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

(ML)2 P-Encoder: On Exploration of Channel-class Correlation for Multi-label
Zero-shot Learning
Ziming Liu1 , Song Guo1,2 , Xiaocheng Lu1 , Jingcai Guo1,2 *, Jiewei Zhang1 , Yue Zeng1 , Fushuo Huo1
1
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China
{ziming.liu, jiewei.zhang, fushuo.huo}@connect.polyu.hk
{song.guo, xiaoclu, jc-jingcai.guo, zengyue.zeng}@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent studies usually approach multi-label zeroshot learning (MLZSL) with visual-semantic mapping on
spatial-class correlation, which can be computationally
costly, and worse still, fails to capture fine-grained classspecific semantics. We observe that different channels may
usually have different sensitivities on classes, which can
correspond to specific semantics. Such an intrinsic channelclass correlation suggests a potential alternative for the
more accurate and class-harmonious feature representations. In this paper, our interest is to fully explore the power
of channel-class correlation as the unique base for MLZSL.
Specifically, we propose a light yet efficient Multi-Label
Multi-Layer Perceptron-based Encoder, dubbed (ML)2 PEncoder, to extract and preserve channel-wise semantics.
We reorganize the generated feature maps into several
groups, of which each of them can be trained independently
with (ML)2 P-Encoder. On top of that, a global groupwise attention module is further designed to build the multilabel specific class relationships among different classes,
which eventually fulfills a novel Channel-Class Correlation
MLZSL framework (C3 -MLZSL)1 . Extensive experiments on
large-scale MLZSL benchmarks including NUS-WIDE and
Open-Images-V4 demonstrate the superiority of our model
against other representative state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
The proliferation of smart devices has greatly enriched
human life when it comes to the era of big data. These smart
devices are usually equipped with cameras such that users
can easily produce and share their images. With the increasing abundance of public images, how to analyze them accurately has become a challenging problem. Recent years

INPUT

Feature Maps

Channel-Class Correlation
Predict
WATER

TREE

Seen Labels

GARDEN
Unseen Labels

Figure 1. Example of Channel-Class Correlation. Our method
achieves the prediction of unseen classes by exploiting the unique
distribution of channel responses as semantic information for the
class and building correlations with responses from the same channel (zoom in for a better view).

have witnessed great success in classifying an image into
a specific class [20, 37, 39], namely, single-label classification. However, in reality, the images [17,46] usually contain
abundant information and thereby consist of multiple labels.
In recent years, the multi-label classification has been
widely investigated by exploring the relationship among
different labels from multiple aspects [9, 13, 14, 16, 42].
However, in some scenarios where extensive collections of
images exist, e.g., Flickr2 , users can freely set one or more
individual tags/labels for each image, while the presented
objects and labels in these images may not be fully shown
in any previous collection, and thus result in a domain gap
for the recognition. Therefore, in real-world applications,
the model is required to gain the ability to predict unseen
classes as well. As one of the thriving research topics, zero-

* Jingcai Guo is the corresponding author.
1 Released code: github.com/simonzmliu/cvpr23_mlzsl

2 https://www.flickr.com

23859

