This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ambiguity-Resistant Semi-Supervised Learning for Dense Object Detection
Chang Liu1,∗, Weiming Zhang2,∗, Xiangru Lin2 , Wei Zhang2,†, Xiao Tan2 , Junyu Han2 ,
Xiaomao Li1,3 , Errui Ding2 , Jingdong Wang2
1
Shanghai University, 2 Baidu Inc, 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{liuchang123,lixiaomao}@shu.edu.cn
{zhangweiming,linxiangru,zhangwei99,tanxiao01,hanjunyu,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
With basic Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD)
techniques, one-stage detectors generally obtain limited
promotions compared with two-stage clusters. We experimentally find that the root lies in two kinds of ambiguities:
(1) Selection ambiguity that selected pseudo labels are less
accurate, since classification scores cannot properly represent the localization quality. (2) Assignment ambiguity
that samples are matched with improper labels in pseudolabel assignment, as the strategy is misguided by missed
objects and inaccurate pseudo boxes. To tackle these problems, we propose a Ambiguity-Resistant Semi-supervised
Learning (ARSL) for one-stage detectors. Specifically, to
alleviate the selection ambiguity, Joint-Confidence Estimation (JCE) is proposed to jointly quantifies the classification
and localization quality of pseudo labels. As for the assignment ambiguity, Task-Separation Assignment (TSA) is
introduced to assign labels based on pixel-level predictions
rather than unreliable pseudo boxes. It employs a ’divideand-conquer’ strategy and separately exploits positives for
the classification and localization task, which is more robust to the assignment ambiguity. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that ARSL effectively mitigates the ambiguities and achieves state-of-the-art SSOD performance
on MS COCO and PASCAL VOC. Codes can be found at
https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleDetection.

1. Introduction
Abundant data plays an essential role in deep learning
based object detection [18, 22, 23], yet labeling a large
amount of annotations is labour-consuming and expensive.
To save labeling expenditure, Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD) attempts to leverage limited labeled data
∗ Co-first author (Equal Contribution).
† Corresponding author.
This work was done when Chang Liu was an intern at Baidu Inc.

Figure 1. Comparing FCOS, Faster RCNN, and our approach on
COCO train2017. Under the basic SSOD pipeline, FCOS obtains
limited improvements compared with Faster RCNN. Our approach
consistently promotes FCOS and achieves a state-of-the-art performance on SSOD.

and easily accessible unlabeled data for detection tasks. Advanced SSOD methods [19, 33] follow the Mean-Teacher
[29] paradigm and mainly apply the self-training [11, 32]
technique to perform semi-supervised learning. Though this
pipeline has successfully promoted two-stage detectors, it
is less harmonious with one-stage methods which are also
important due to their competitive accuracy and computational efficiency. As verified in Fig. 1, compared with Faster
RCNN [23], FCOS [30] has a comparable supervised performance, but achieves a relatively limited improvement under the basic semi-supervised pipeline. To figure out this
problem, we analyze the core components of SSOD, e.g.,
pseudo-label selection and assignment.
With comprehensive investigations in Sec. 3.2, we find
that there exist selection and assignment ambiguities, hindering the semi-supervised learning of one-stage detectors.
The selection ambiguity denotes that the selected pseudo
labels for unlabeled images are less accurate. It is caused
by the mismatch between classification scores and localization quality. Specifically, compared with Faster RCNN,
FCOS has a much smaller Pearson correlation coefficient
between classification and localization (0.279 vs. 0.439),

15579

