This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Supervision and Shufﬂe Data Augmentation for
3D Semi-Supervised Object Detection
Chuandong Liu1,2 , Chenqiang Gao1,2 ,* Fangcen Liu1,2 , Pengcheng Li1,2 , Deyu Meng3,4 , Xinbo Gao1
1
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
2
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Signal and Information Processing, Chongqing, China
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
4
Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau
Abstract
State-of-the-art 3D object detectors are usually trained
on large-scale datasets with high-quality 3D annotations.
However, such 3D annotations are often expensive and
time-consuming, which may not be practical for real applications. A natural remedy is to adopt semi-supervised
learning (SSL) by leveraging a limited amount of labeled
samples and abundant unlabeled samples. Current pseudolabeling-based SSL object detection methods mainly adopt
a teacher-student framework, with a single ﬁxed threshold
strategy to generate supervision signals, which inevitably
brings confused supervision when guiding the student network training. Besides, the data augmentation of the point
cloud in the typical teacher-student framework is too weak,
and only contains basic down sampling and ﬂip-and-shift
(i.e., rotate and scaling), which hinders the effective learning of feature information. Hence, we address these issues by introducing a novel approach of Hierarchical Supervision and Shufﬂe Data Augmentation (HSSDA), which
is a simple yet effective teacher-student framework. The
teacher network generates more reasonable supervision for
the student network by designing a dynamic dual-threshold
strategy. Besides, the shufﬂe data augmentation strategy
is designed to strengthen the feature representation ability
of the student network. Extensive experiments show that
HSSDA consistently outperforms the recent state-of-the-art
methods on different datasets. The code will be released at
https://github.com/azhuantou/HSSDA.

1. Introduction
Kinds of important applications, especially autonomous
driving, have been motivating the rapid development of 3D
* Corresponding author.

23819

Full labeled scene

RGB Image

Unlabeled scene

Unlabeled scene

Teacher Network

Teacher Network

Unlabeled scene
Flip&Shift

Unlabeled scene
Split&Shuffle

Augmented scene

Augmented scene

Student
Network

Student
Network

High threshold OR Low threshold Dual-threshold strategy

Pseudo-labeling scene

Pseudo-labeling scene

Vanilla Teacher

Ours Teacher

(a)

Ours Student

Vanilla Student

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) the previous teacher compared to our
teacher framework and (b) the previous student compared to our
student framework. The black dashed box includes the RGB image and the corresponding fully annotated 3D point cloud (green
box). The left side of the yellow dotted line in (a) represents
the pseudo-labeling scene generated by the single threshold of
the vanilla teacher network, causing the student network may be
severely misled due to missing mined objects (high threshold) or
false positive objects (low threshold), while our proposed teacher
network generates three groups of pseudo labels(shown as green,
red, blue) to provide hierarchical supervision for the student network. (b) shows our student network adopts stronger shufﬂed data
augmentation than the vanilla student network to learn the stronger
ability of feature representation.

object detection by the range sensor data (e.g., LiDAR point
cloud). Up to now, many point-based and point-voxel-based
methods [10,30,31,49] have been proposed. Despite the impressive progress, a large amount of accurate instance-level
3D annotations have to be provided for training, which is
more time-consuming and expensive than 2D object annotation. This hinders the application and deployment of exist-

