This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPPO: Image-and-Language Understanding from Pixels Only
Michael Tschannen, Basil Mustafa, Neil Houlsby
Google Research, Brain Team, Zürich
Abstract
Multimodal models are becoming increasingly effective,
in part due to unified components, such as the Transformer
architecture. However, multimodal models still often consist
of many task- and modality-specific pieces and training procedures. For example, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) trains independent text and image towers via a contrastive loss. We
explore an additional unification: the use of a pure pixelbased model to perform image, text, and multimodal tasks.
Our model is trained with contrastive loss alone, so we call
it CLIP-Pixels Only (CLIPPO). CLIPPO uses a single encoder that processes both regular images and text rendered
as images. CLIPPO performs image-based tasks such as retrieval and zero-shot image classification almost as well as
CLIP-style models, with half the number of parameters and
no text-specific tower or embedding. When trained jointly
via image-text contrastive learning and next-sentence contrastive learning, CLIPPO can perform well on natural
language understanding tasks, without any word-level loss
(language modelling or masked language modelling), outperforming pixel-based prior work. Surprisingly, CLIPPO
can obtain good accuracy in visual question answering,
simply by rendering the question and image together. Finally, we exploit the fact that CLIPPO does not require a
tokenizer to show that it can achieve strong performance on
multilingual multimodal retrieval without modifications.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large-scale multimodal training of
Transformer-based models has led to improvements in the
state-of-the-art in different domains including vision [2, 10,
74–76], language [6, 11], and audio [5]. In particular, in
computer vision and image-language understanding, a single large pretrained model can outperform task-specific expert models [10, 74, 75]. However, large multimodal models often use modality or dataset-specific encoders and decoders, and accordingly lead to involved protocols. For
example, such models frequently involve training different
Code and pretrained models are available as part of big vision [4]
https://github.com/google-research/big_vision.

• CLIP •

• CLIPPO •

Contrastive

Contrastive

Vision
Transformer

Text
Transformer

Transformer

WORD EMB
CONV

CONV
TOK

A birthday
pug wearing a
party hat.

A birthday pu
g wearing a p
arty hat

Figure 1. CLIP [56] trains separate image and text encoders,
each with a modality-specific preprocessing and embedding, on
image/alt-text pairs with a contrastive objective. CLIPPO trains a
pure pixel-based model with equivalent capabilities by rendering
the alt-text as an image, encoding the resulting image pair using
a shared vision encoder (in two separate forward passes), and applying same training objective as CLIP.

parts of the model in separate phases on their respective
datasets, with dataset-specific preprocessing, or transferring
different parts in a task-specific manner [75]. Such modality
and task-specific components can lead to additional engineering complexity, and poses challenges when introducing
new pretraining losses or downstream tasks. Developing
a single end-to-end model that can process any modality,
or combination of modalities, would be a valuable step for
multimodal learning. Here, we focus on images and text.
A number of key unifications have accelerated the
progress of multimodal learning. First, the Transformer
architecture has been shown to work as a universal backbone, performing well on text [6, 15], vision [16], audio [5, 24, 54], and other domains [7, 34]. Second, many
papers have explored mapping different modalities into a
single shared embedding space to simplify the input/output
interface [21, 22, 46, 69], or develop a single interface to
many tasks [31, 37]. Third, alternative representations of
modalities allow harnessing in one domain neural architectures or training procedures designed for another domain [28, 49, 54, 60]. For example, [60] and [28, 54] represent text and audio, respectively, by rendering these modalities as images (via a spectogram in the case of audio).
In this paper, we explore the use of a pure pixel-based

11006

