This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-Weakly Supervised Object Kinematic Motion Prediction
Gengxin Liu1

Qian Sun1 Haibin Huang2 Chongyang Ma2 Yulan Guo3
Li Yi4 Hui Huang1 Ruizhen Hu1 *
1
2
Shenzhen University Kuaishou Technology 3 Sun Yat-sen University 4 Tsinghua University
{gengxin.v.liu,qiansun1006,jackiehuanghaibin,chongyangm,yulan.vision,
ericyi0124,hhzhiyan,ruizhen.hu}@gmail.com

Abstract
Given a 3D object, kinematic motion prediction aims to
identify the mobile parts as well as the corresponding motion parameters. Due to the large variations in both topological structure and geometric details of 3D objects, this
remains a challenging task and the lack of large scale labeled data also constrain the performance of deep learning
based approaches. In this paper, we tackle the task of object
kinematic motion prediction problem in a semi-weakly supervised manner. Our key observations are two-fold. First,
although 3D dataset with fully annotated motion labels is
limited, there are existing datasets and methods for object
part semantic segmentation at large scale. Second, semantic part segmentation and mobile part segmentation is not
always consistent but it is possible to detect the mobile parts
from the underlying 3D structure. Towards this end, we propose a graph neural network to learn the map between hierarchical part-level segmentation and mobile parts parameters, which are further refined based on geometric alignment. This network can be first trained on PartNet-Mobility
dataset with fully labeled mobility information and then applied on PartNet dataset with fine-grained and hierarchical
part-level segmentation. The network predictions yield a
large scale of 3D objects with pseudo labeled mobility information and can further be used for weakly-supervised
learning with pre-existing segmentation. Our experiments
show there are significant performance boosts with the augmented data for previous method designed for kinematic
motion prediction on 3D partial scans.

1. Introduction
In this work, we study the problem of 3D object kinematic motion prediction. As a key aspect of functional
analysis of 3D shape, the understanding of part mobilities plays an important role in applications, such as robot* Ruizhen Hu is the corresponding author.




 
   

 
 


 

 
 

 
  

Figure 1. Our semi-weakly supervised method for object kinematic motion prediction, which utilize the weakly labeled dataset
with part semantic segmentation to augment the training data for
object kinematic motion prediction on partial scans.

environment interaction, object functionality prediction, as
well as 3D object reconstruction and animation.
There have been a few methods on discovering part mobility from various inputs, including 3D objects and sequence of RGBD scans, via both supervised or unsupervised learning [8, 11, 22, 26, 28]. Despite the rapid development in this filed, it remains challenging to boost the generalization performance of these methods: there is significant
performance degeneration when the queried objects present
different topology, structure, or geometric details that are
out of the space of training examples.
However, it is with great difficulty to collect fully annotated dataset for kinematic motion prediction, which requires not only segmentation of object w.r.t motion but also
the associated parameters. Furthermore, it is infeasible to
collect such dataset at large scale, since there are only a
few dataset with limited size available for motion prediction
task such as PartNet-Mobility [24] and Shape2Motion [22].
Meanwhile, as a long lasting task in both graphics and vision, there have been massive methods proposed with large
scale dataset of segmented 3D objects. Among them, PartNet dataset [17] consists of more than 25k 3D models of
24 object categories with the corresponding fine-grained

21726

