This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boundary-aware Backward-Compatible Representation via Adversarial
Learning in Image Retrieval
Tan Pan∗ , Furong Xu∗† , Xudong Yang† , Sifeng He, Chen Jiang, Qingpei Guo, Feng Qian,
Xiaobo Zhang, Yuan Cheng, Lei Yang, Wei Chu

Ant Group
{pantan.pt∗ , booyoungxu.xfr∗† , jiegang.yxd† }@antgroup.com

Abstract
Image retrieval plays an important role in the Internet world. Usually, the core parts of mainstream visual
retrieval systems include an online service of the embedding model and a large-scale vector database. For traditional model upgrades, the old model will not be replaced by the new one until the embeddings of all the images in the database are re-computed by the new model,
which takes days or weeks for a large amount of data.
Recently, backward-compatible training (BCT) enables the
new model to be immediately deployed online by making the
new embeddings directly comparable to the old ones. For
BCT, improving the compatibility of two models with less
negative impact on retrieval performance is the key challenge. In this paper, we introduce AdvBCT, an Adversarial Backward-Compatible Training method with an elastic
boundary constraint that takes both compatibility and discrimination into consideration. We first employ adversarial
learning to minimize the distribution disparity between embeddings of the new model and the old model. Meanwhile,
we add an elastic boundary constraint during training to
improve compatibility and discrimination efficiently. Extensive experiments on GLDv2, Revisited Oxford (ROxford),
and Revisited Paris (RParis) demonstrate that our method
outperforms other BCT methods on both compatibility and
discrimination. The implementation of AdvBCT will be publicly available at https://github.com/Ashespt/AdvBCT.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval brings great convenience to our daily life
in various areas such as e-commerce search [8, 16], face
recognition [17, 32], and landmark localization [13, 24].
With the rapid development of deep learning, visual re*These authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding authors.

trieval systems develop towards larger models and richer
databases to provide people with better services. Most modern visual retrieval systems include two core parts: (i) an
online service of the embedding model which maps an input image to a high-dimensional vector, i.e., the embedding,
and (ii) a large-scale vector database which stores the embeddings of the gallery set and is responsible for similarity
search when a query image arrives. During the lifetime of
the system, new models with better performance are trained
and then deployed online to replace the old ones. Unfortunately, the embeddings of the query images extracted by
the new model are not compatible with the old ones in the
database in most cases. As a result, the vector database must
be rebuilt by extracting embeddings for the whole gallery
set with the new model. This process is called backfilling [18]. In general, practical industrial applications containing a database with millions to billions of images take
days or even weeks for backfilling. During that time, the old
model and database must be kept online to handle queries.
This so-called cold-refresh [30] model upgrade process is
shown in Fig. 1a.
Recently, to save resources and simplify the complex
backfilling process, backward-compatible learning was proposed [18]. Backward-compatible learning aims to ensure
the compatibility of embedding representations between
models. As shown in Fig. 1b, the new model can directly
replace the old one and the embeddings of images in stock
are updated on-the-fly. With the hot-refresh model-update
strategy, the system only needs to maintain one service and
one database at a time, effectively reducing the required resource during backfilling.
Meanwhile, these hot-refresh model upgrades also pose
new challenges for visual search systems. The retrieval performance during backfilling reflects the compatibility between models, which should not degrade compared to the
old system. However, making the new model perfectly
back-compatible with the old one leaves no room for improvement on the retrieval task. The ultimate goal of the
compatible learning is to enable the compatibility between

15201

