This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Deep Probabilistic Approach for Partial Point Cloud Registration
Guofeng Mei1 Hao Tang2 Xiaoshui Huang3 Weijie Wang4
Juan Liu5 Jian Zhang1 Luc Van Gool2 Qiang Wu1
1
GBDTC,UTS 2 CVL, ETH Zurich 3 Shanghai AI Lab 4 UNITN 5 BIT
Guofeng.Mei@student.uts.edu.au

Abstract
Deep point cloud registration methods face challenges
to partial overlaps and rely on labeled data. To address
these issues, we propose UDPReg, an unsupervised deep
probabilistic registration framework for point clouds with
partial overlaps. Specifically, we first adopt a network to
learn posterior probability distributions of Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) from point clouds. To handle partial
point cloud registration, we apply the Sinkhorn algorithm
to predict the distribution-level correspondences under the
constraint of the mixing weights of GMMs. To enable unsupervised learning, we design three distribution consistencybased losses: self-consistency, cross-consistency, and local
contrastive. The self-consistency loss is formulated by encouraging GMMs in Euclidean and feature spaces to share
identical posterior distributions. The cross-consistency loss
derives from the fact that the points of two partially overlapping point clouds belonging to the same clusters share
the cluster centroids. The cross-consistency loss allows the
network to flexibly learn a transformation-invariant posterior distribution of two aligned point clouds. The local contrastive loss facilitates the network to extract discriminative local features. Our UDPReg achieves competitive performance on the 3DMatch/3DLoMatch and ModelNet/ModelLoNet benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration aims at determining the
optimal transformation to align two partially overlapping
point clouds into one coherent coordinate system [21, 30–
32]. This task dominates the performance of systems in
many areas, such as robotics [57], augmented reality [6],
autonomous driving [35, 42], radiotherapy [27], etc. Recent advances have been monopolized by learning-based
approaches due to the development of 3D point cloud representation learning and differentiable optimization [37].
Existing deep learning-based point cloud registration
methods can be broadly categorized as correspondence-

liu juan@bit.edu.cn

free [2, 21, 30, 32, 47] and correspondence-based [4, 9, 19,
50]. The former minimizes the difference between global
features extracted from two input point clouds. These
global features are typically computed based on all the
points of a point cloud, making correspondence-free approaches inadequate to handle real scenes with partial overlap [9, 55]. Correspondence-based methods first extract local features used for the establishment of point-level [9, 17,
19,21] or distribution-level [15,29,39,52] correspondences,
and finally, estimate the pose from those correspondences.
However, point-level registration does not work well under conditions involving varying point densities or repetitive patterns [31]. This issue is especially prominent in indoor environments, where low-texture regions or repetitive
patterns sometimes dominate the field of view. Distributionlevel registration, which compensates for the shortcomings
of point-level methods, aligns two point clouds without establishing explicit point correspondences. Unfortunately, to
the best of our knowledge, the existing methods are inflexible and cannot handle point clouds with partial overlaps
in real scenes [28, 31]. Moreover, the success of learningbased methods mainly depends on large amounts of ground
truth transformations or correspondences as the supervision
signal for model training. Needless to say, the required
ground truth is typically difficult or costly to acquire, thus
hampering their application in the real world [38].
We thus propose an unsupervised deep probabilistic registration framework to alleviate these limitations. Specifically, we extend the distribution-to-distribution (D2D)
method to solve partial point cloud registration by adopting the Sinkhorn algorithm [11] to predict correspondences
of distribution. In order to make the network learn geometrically and semantically consistent features, we design distribution-consistency losses, i.e., self-consistency
and cross-consistency losses, to train the networks without
using any ground-truth pose or correspondences. Besides,
we also introduce a local contrastive loss to learn more discriminative features by pushing features of points belonging to the same clusters together while pulling dissimilar
features of points coming from different clusters apart.

13611

