This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPE: Disentanglement of Pose and Expression for General Video Portrait Editing
Yong Zhang3 *
Weize Quan1,2
Yanbo Fan3
Xiaodong Cun3
Ying Shan3
Dong-Ming Yan1,2 *
1
MAIS & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tencent AI Lab, ShenZhen, China
exp edit

exp edit

pose edit

S

S

D

D

Video expression editing

Decoupling of pose and
expression

Youxin Pang1,2,3

pose edit

S

D

S

D

Figure 1. Visual examples produced by our method. Top: disentanglement of pose and expression. Bottom: general video editing. Our method
can edit the pose or expression of the source image independently according to the driving image through decoupling pose and expression in
motion transfer. Benefiting from the disentanglement, our one-shot talking face method can be applied to video portrait editing. Since our
method can edit expression only, the edited cropped face can be pasted back to the full image simply. As our method is subject-agnostic, it
can be used to edit any unseen video as well, which is different from subject-dependent video editing methods such as DVP [19].

Abstract
One-shot video-driven talking face generation aims at
producing a synthetic talking video by transferring the facial
motion from a video to an arbitrary portrait image. Head
pose and facial expression are always entangled in facial
motion and transferred simultaneously. However, the entanglement sets up a barrier for these methods to be used in
video portrait editing directly, where it may require to modify
the expression only while maintaining the pose unchanged.
One challenge of decoupling pose and expression is the lack
of paired data, such as the same pose but different expres-

sions. Only a few methods attempt to tackle this challenge
with the feat of 3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) for explicit
disentanglement. But 3DMMs are not accurate enough to
capture facial details due to the limited number of Blendshapes, which has side effects on motion transfer. In this
paper, we introduce a novel self-supervised disentanglement
framework to decouple pose and expression without 3DMMs
and paired data, which consists of a motion editing module,
a pose generator, and an expression generator. The editing
module projects faces into a latent space where pose motion
and expression motion can be disentangled, and the pose
or expression transfer can be performed in the latent space
conveniently via addition. The two generators render the

* Corresponding Authors.

427

