This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RIATIG: Reliable and Imperceptible Adversarial Text-to-Image Generation with
Natural Prompts
Han Liu1 , Yuhao Wu1 , Shixuan Zhai1 , Bo Yuan2 , Ning Zhang1
1
Washington University in St. Louis, 2 Rutgers University
{h.liu1,yuhao.wu,zhais,zhang.ning}@wustl.edu,bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction
The text-to-image generation has captured widespread
attention from the research community with its creative and
realistic image generation capability [52, 55, 56]. The ability to generate text-consistent images from natural language
descriptions could potentially bring tremendous benefits to
many areas of life, such as multimedia editing, computeraided design, and art creation [23, 27, 37, 43].
Driven by recent advances in models trained with large
datasets [42, 57] and multimodal learning [45] (e.g., diffusion models [17]), text-to-image generation has made significant progress in synthesizing high-fidelity and photorealistic images, such as DALL·E [43], DALL·E 2 [42] and
Imagen [45]. At the same time, there are a growing num1 Code is available at: https://github.com/WUSTL-CSPL/RIATIG

a holsel is on the
side of evergeren

a tr ee standing
next to Baruntse

DALL . E mini

DALL . E 2

Imagen

Adversarial Images

The field of text-to-image generation has made remarkable strides in creating high-fidelity and photorealistic images. As this technology gains popularity, there is a growing concern about its potential security risks. However,
there has been limited exploration into the robustness of
these models from an adversarial perspective. Existing research has primarily focused on untargeted settings, and
lacks holistic consideration for reliability (attack success
rate) and stealthiness (imperceptibility).
In this paper, we propose RIATIG, a reliable and imperceptible adversarial attack against text-to-image models via inconspicuous examples. By formulating the example crafting as an optimization process and solving it using
a genetic-based method, our proposed attack can generate
imperceptible prompts for text-to-image generation models
in a reliable way. Evaluation of six popular text-to-image
generation models demonstrates the efficiency and stealthiness of our attack in both white-box and black-box settings.
To allow the community to build on top of our findings,
we’ve made the artifacts available1 .

a cassavas that is on
the side of a towe r

Target Images

Abstract

Figure 1. Examples of RIATIG attacks. The top texts are the
adversarial prompts, and the bottom texts are the target models.
The first row represents the target images, while the second row
represents the adversarial image generated by the prompt.

ber of ethical concerns about the potential misuse of this
technology [36,45,53]. Generative models could be used to
generate synthetic video/audio/images of individuals (e.g.,
Deepfakes [14]), or synthetic contents with harmful stereotypes, violence, or obscenities [10, 45, 53]. To prevent the
generation of such harmful content, content moderation filters are deployed in public APIs (e.g., DALL·E 2) to filter
unsafe text prompts that may lead to harmful content. However, despite their best intentions, existing model-based text
filters remain susceptible to adaptive adversarial attacks.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to be
vulnerable to adversarial examples [9, 31, 32]. By applying
these techniques, it is possible to craft an adversarial text
that looks natural to bypass the content filters, yet generates a completely different category of potentially malicious
images. However, the adversarial attacks on text-to-image
generators are less explored. To the best of our knowledge,
there are two closely related studies [15, 36]. Nevertheless,
two challenges remain:

20585

