This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Are Data-driven Explanations Robust against Out-of-distribution Data?
Tang Li

Fengchun Qiao
Mengmeng Ma
University of Delaware

Xi Peng

{tangli, fengchun, mengma, xipeng}@udel.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
There has been an increasing trend to apply black-box
machine learning (ML) models for high-stakes applications.
The lack of explainability of models can have severe consequences in healthcare [48], criminal justice [61], and
other domains. Meanwhile, ML models are inevitably exposed to unseen distributions that lie outside their training space [28, 56]; a highly accurate model on average can
fail catastrophically on out-of-distribution (OOD) data due
to naturally-occurring variations, sub-populations, spurious
correlations, and adversarial attacks. For example, a cancer detector would erroneously predict samples from hospitals having different data acquisition protocols or equipment
1 The source code and pre-trained models are available at: https:
//github.com/tangli-udel/DRE.

GroupDRO

IRM

DRE (ours)

OOD (test)

In-distribution (train)
Location 43 Location 38 Location 100

ERM

Location 46

As black-box models increasingly power high-stakes applications, a variety of data-driven explanation methods
have been introduced. Meanwhile, machine learning models are constantly challenged by distributional shifts. A
question naturally arises: Are data-driven explanations robust against out-of-distribution data? Our empirical results show that even though predict correctly, the model
might still yield unreliable explanations under distributional shifts. How to develop robust explanations against
out-of-distribution data? To address this problem, we
propose an end-to-end model-agnostic learning framework
Distributionally Robust Explanations (DRE). The key idea
is, inspired by self-supervised learning, to fully utilizes the
inter-distribution information to provide supervisory signals for the learning of explanations without human annotation. Can robust explanations benefit the model’s generalization capability? We conduct extensive experiments on a
wide range of tasks and data types, including classification
and regression on image and scientific tabular data. Our
results demonstrate that the proposed method significantly
improves the model’s performance in terms of explanation
and prediction robustness against distributional shifts.

Original

Figure 1. The explanations for in- and out-of-distribution data
of Terra Incognita [4] dataset. Note that GroupDRO [50] and
IRM [2] are explicitly designed methods that can predict accurately across distributions. Although with correct predictions, the
explanations of models trained by such methods would also highlight distribution-specific associations (e.g., tree branches) except
the object. This leads to unreliable explanations on OOD data. On
the contrary, our model consistently focuses on the most discriminative features shared across distributions.

manufacturers. Therefore, reliable explanations across distributions are crucial for the safe deployment of ML models.
However, existing works focus on the reliability of datadriven explanation methods [1, 64] while ignoring the robustness of explanations against distributional shifts.
A question naturally arises: Are data-driven explanations robust against out-of-distribution data? We empirically investigate this problem across different methods.
Results of the Grad-CAM [51] explanations are shown in
Fig. 1. We find that the distributional shifts would further obscure the decision-making process due to the blackbox nature of ML models. As shown, the explanations focus not only on the object but also spurious factors (e.g.,
background pixels). Such distribution-specific associations
would yield inconsistent explanations across distributions.

3821

