This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Fast Adaptation of Pretrained Contrastive Models for Multi-channel
Video-Language Retrieval
Xudong Lin1 Simran Tiwari1 , Shiyuan Huang1 , Manling Li2
Mike Zheng Shou3 , Heng Ji2 , Shih-Fu Chang1
1
Columbia University 2 UIUC 3 National University of Singapore
xudong.lin@columbia.edu

Abstract
Multi-channel video-language retrieval require models
to understand information from different channels (e.g.
video+question, video+speech) to correctly link a video
with a textual response or query. Fortunately, contrastive
multimodal models are shown to be highly effective at aligning entities in images/videos and text, e.g., CLIP [20]; text
contrastive models are extensively studied recently for their
strong ability of producing discriminative sentence embeddings, e.g., SimCSE [5]. However, there is not a clear
way to quickly adapt these two lines to multi-channel videolanguage retrieval with limited data and resources. In this
paper, we identify a principled model design space with two
axes: how to represent videos and how to fuse video and text
information. Based on categorization of recent methods, we
investigate the options of representing videos using continuous feature vectors or discrete text tokens; for the fusion
method, we explore the use of a multimodal transformer or
a pretrained contrastive text model. We extensively evaluate the four combinations on five video-language datasets.
We surprisingly find that discrete text tokens coupled with
a pretrained contrastive text model yields the best performance, which can even outperform state-of-the-art on the
iVQA and How2QA datasets without additional training on
millions of video-text data. Further analysis shows that this
is because representing videos as text tokens captures the
key visual information and text tokens are naturally aligned
with text models that are strong retrievers after the contrastive pretraining process. All the empirical analysis establishes a solid foundation for future research on affordable and upgradable multimodal intelligence.

1. Introduction
From retrieving a trending video on TikTok with natural
language descriptions to asking a bot to solve your technical problem with the question and a descriptive video,

AI agents handling multi-channel video-language retrievalstyle tasks have been increasingly demanded in this postsocial-media era. These tasks require the agent to fuse information from multiple channels, i.e., video and text to
retrieve a text response or return a multi-channel sample
for a text query. To power such agents, a popular approach [9, 10, 15, 34, 40] consists of two rounds of pretraining: (1) The 1st round is to obtain unimodal pretrained models, such as visual-only encoders [3, 6, 17, 20]
(e.g., S3D,CLIP) and text-only encoders [4,13,22,24] (e.g.,
BERT) (2) The 2nd round aims at pretraining on visualtext dataset - specifically, researchers leverage techniques
like masked token modeling [9, 40] or contrastive learning [10, 15, 33, 34] to align and fuse unimodal features from
model pretrained in the 1st round.
Such methods achieve good performance on multichannel retrieval-style tasks but they suffer from two major limitations: 1) huge amounts of data and computational
resources are required for the second-round “pretraining”,
which significantly limits the research exploration without
such resources; 2) the domain of video data used in the
second round “pretraining” has to be strongly correlated
with downstream tasks [9], which may restrict such methods from being generally applicable.
To alleviate such limitations, we study a novel problem:
fast adaptation of pretrained contrastive models on multichannel video-language retrieval under limited resources.
Specifically, we propose to adapt both contrastive multimodal models [16,20] and contrastive text models [5,22] to
enjoy their strong encoding ability and discriminative embedding space. There has been tremendous progress recently on large-scale contrastive multimodal models [16,
17, 20]. Through pretraining on millions of images/videos,
these models are highly effective at encoding visual inputs
and linking entities across modalities. Meanwhile, contrastive text models [5, 22] have been also densely studied to obtain discriminative sentence embeddings. These
models are shown to perform well on challenging text retrieval tasks such as semantic search [19], which requires

14846

