This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Logical Consistency and Greater Descriptive Power for Facial Hair Attribute
Learning
Haiyu Wu1 , Grace Bezold1 , Aman Bhatta1 , Kevin W. Bowyer1
1
University of Notre Dame

Abstract
Face attribute research has so far used only simple binary attributes for facial hair; e.g., beard / no beard. We
have created a new, more descriptive facial hair annotation
scheme and applied it to create a new facial hair attribute
dataset, FH37K. Face attribute research also so far has not
dealt with logical consistency and completeness. For example, in prior research, an image might be classified as
both having no beard and also having a goatee (a type of
beard). We show that the test accuracy of previous classification methods on facial hair attribute classification drops
significantly if logical consistency of classifications is enforced. We propose a logically consistent prediction loss,
LCPLoss, to aid learning of logical consistency across attributes, and also a label compensation training strategy
to eliminate the problem of no positive prediction across
a set of related attributes. Using an attribute classifier
trained on FH37K, we investigate how facial hair affects
face recognition accuracy, including variation across demographics. Results show that similarity and difference in
facial hairstyle have important effects on the impostor and
genuine score distributions in face recognition. The code is
at https:// github.com/ HaiyuWu/ LogicalConsistency.

Figure 1. (1) What is the best way to define the facial hair styles?
(2) How does the facial hair classifier perform in the real-world
cases? (3) How does the face matcher treat the same (different)
person with different (same) beard styles? This paper presents our
approaches and answers for these questions.

sistency of the predictions. We illustrate the use of this new,
richer set of facial hair annotations by investigating the effect of beard area on face recognition accuracy across demographic groups. Contributions of this work include:
• A richer scheme of facial hair attributes is defined and
annotations are created for the FH37K dataset. The attributes describe facial hair features along dimensions
of area of the face covered, length of hair and connectedness of elements of the hair (See Sec. 2 and 4.1).
• The logical consistency of classifications of the facial
hair attribute classifier is analyzed. We show that the
proposed LCPLoss and label compensation strategy
can significantly reduce the number of logically inconsistent predictions (See Section 5 and Section 6.1).

1. Introduction
Facial attributes have been widely used in face matching/recognition [8, 14, 30, 31, 37, 43], face image retrieval
[34, 39], re-identification [42, 44, 45], training GANs [15,
16, 25, 33] for generation of synthetic images, and other areas. As an important feature of the face, facial hairstyle
does not attract enough attention as a research area. One
reason is that current datasets have only simple binary attributes to describe facial hair, and this does not support
deeper investigation. This paper introduces a more descriptive set of facial hair attributes, representing dimensions of
the area of face covered, the length of the hair, and connectedness of beard/mustache/sideburns. We also propose
a logically consistent predictions loss function, LCPLoss,
and label compensation strategy to enhance the logical con-

• We analyze the effect of the beard area on face recognition accuracy. Larger difference in beard area between
a pair of images matched for recognition decreases the
similarity value of both impostor and genuine image
pairs. Interestingly, the face matchers perform differently across demographic groups when image pairs
have the same beard area. (See Section 6.2)

2. Facial Hair In Face Attribute Datasets
For a broad discussion of face attribute classification research, see the recent survey by Zheng et al [55]. Here, we

8588

