This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiple Instance Learning via Iterative Self-Paced Supervised Contrastive
Learning
Kangning Liu*⇤1 , Weicheng Zhu*⇤1 , Yiqiu Shen1 , Sheng Liu1 , Narges Razavian2
Krzysztof J. Geras†2,1 , Carlos Fernandez-Granda††1,3
1
NYU Center for Data Science 2 NYU Grossman School of Medicine
3
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
Abstract
Learning representations for individual instances when
only bag-level labels are available is a fundamental
challenge in multiple instance learning (MIL). Recent
works have shown promising results using contrastive selfsupervised learning (CSSL), which learns to push apart
representations corresponding to two different randomlyselected instances. Unfortunately, in real-world applications such as medical image classification, there is often
class imbalance, so randomly-selected instances mostly belong to the same majority class, which precludes CSSL from
learning inter-class differences. To address this issue, we
propose a novel framework, Iterative Self-paced Supervised
Contrastive Learning for MIL Representations (ItS2CLR),
which improves the learned representation by exploiting
instance-level pseudo labels derived from the bag-level labels. The framework employs a novel self-paced sampling
strategy to ensure the accuracy of pseudo labels. We evaluate ItS2CLR on three medical datasets, showing that it improves the quality of instance-level pseudo labels and representations, and outperforms existing MIL methods in terms
of both bag and instance level accuracy. 1

1. Introduction
The goal of multiple instance learning (MIL) is to perform classification on data that is arranged in bags of instances. Each instance is either positive or negative, but
these instance-level labels are not available during training;
only bag-level labels are available. A bag is labeled as positive if any of the instances in it are positive, and negative
otherwise. An important application of MIL is cancer diagnosis from histopathology slides. Each slide is divided into
* Equal Contribution
† Joint Last Author

1 Code is available at https://github.com/Kangningthu/
ItS2CLR

hundreds or thousands of tiles but typically only slide-level
labels are available [6, 9, 17, 35, 39, 53].
Histopathology slides are typically very large, in the order of gigapixels (the resolution of a typical slide can be
as high as 105 ⇥ 105 ), so end-to-end training of deep neural networks is typically infeasible due to memory limitations of GPU hardware. Consequently, state-of-the-art
approaches [6, 35, 39, 44, 53] utilize a two-stage learning
pipeline: (1) a feature-extraction stage where each instance
is mapped to a representation which summarizes its content,
and (2) an aggregation stage where the representations extracted from all instances in a bag are combined to produce
a bag-level prediction (Figure 1). Notably, our results indicate that even in the rare settings where end-to-end training
is possible, this pipeline still tends to be superior (see Section 4.3).
In this work, we focus on a fundamental challenge in
MIL: how to train the feature extractor. Currently, there are
three main strategies to perform feature-extraction, which
have significant shortcomings. (1) Pretraining on a large
natural image dataset such as ImageNet [39,44] is problematic for medical applications because features learned from
natural images may generalize poorly to other domains [38].
(2) Supervised training using bag-level labels as instancelevel labels is effective if positive bags contain mostly positive instances [11, 34, 50], but in many medical datasets this
is not the case [5, 35]. (3) Contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL) outperforms prior methods [14,35], but is not as
effective in settings with heavy class imbalance, which are
of crucial importance in medicine. CSSL operates by pushing apart the representations of different randomly selected
instances. When positive bags contain mostly negative instances, CSSL training ends up pushing apart negative instances from each other, which precludes it from learning
features that distinguish positive samples from the negative
ones (Figure 2). We discuss this finding in Section 2.
Our goal is to address the shortcomings of current
feature-extraction methods. We build upon several key insights. First, it is possible to extract instance-level pseudo

3355

