This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DSFNet: Dual Space Fusion Network for Occlusion-Robust
3D Dense Face Alignment
Heyuan Li1 , Bo Wang2 , Yu Cheng1 , Mohan Kankanhalli1 , Robby T. Tan1
1
National University of Singapore 2 CtrsVision
liheyuan@u.nus.edu, hawk.rsrch@gmail.com, e0321276@u.nus.edu,
mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Input

3DDFA-V2

SynergyNet

SADRNet

Ours

Input

3DDFA-V2

SynergyNet

SADRNet

Ours

Figure 1. The qualitative results compared to state-of-the-art methods on severely occluded or large view angle cases from datasets [38,47].
For each case, from left to right are input, results of 3DDFA-V2 [12], SynergyNet [41], SADRNet [26], and our method.

Abstract
Sensitivity to severe occlusion and large view angles limits the usage scenarios of the existing monocular 3D dense
face alignment methods. The state-of-the-art 3DMM-based
method, directly regresses the model’s coefficients, underutilizing the low-level 2D spatial and semantic information,
which can actually offer cues for face shape and orientation. In this work, we demonstrate how modeling 3D facial
geometry in image and model space jointly can solve the occlusion and view angle problems. Instead of predicting the
whole face directly, we regress image space features in the
visible facial region by dense prediction first. Subsequently,
we predict our model’s coefficients based on the regressed
feature of the visible regions, leveraging the prior knowledge of whole face geometry from the morphable models to
complete the invisible regions. We further propose a fusion
network that combines the advantages of both the image
and model space predictions to achieve high robustness and
accuracy in unconstrained scenarios. Thanks to the proposed fusion module, our method is robust not only to occlusion and large pitch and roll view angles, which is the bene-

fit of our image space approach, but also to noise and large
yaw angles, which is the benefit of our model space method.
Comprehensive evaluations demonstrate the superior performance of our method compared with the state-of-the-art
methods. On the 3D dense face alignment task, we achieve
3.80% NME on the AFLW2000-3D dataset, which outperforms the state-of-the-art method by 5.5%. Code is available at https://github.com/lhyfst/DSFNet.

1. Introduction
3D dense face alignment is an important problem with many applications, e.g. video conferencing,
AR/VR/metaverse, games, facial analysis, etc. Many methods have been proposed [8–12, 16, 21, 26, 27, 29, 33, 39, 41,
47, 49]. However, these methods are sensitive to severe occlusion and large view angles [19, 26, 31, 32], limiting their
applicability of 3D dense face alignment on wild images
where occlusion and view angles often occur.
3D dense face alignment from a single image is an illposed problem, mainly because of the depth ambiguity. The

4531

