This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sample-level Multi-view Graph Clustering
Yuze Tan, Yixi Liu, Shudong Huang,* Wentao Feng, Jiancheng Lv
Sichuan University
{tanyuze,liuyixi}@stu.scu.edu.cn,{huangsd,Wtfeng2021,lvjiancheng}@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view clustering has hitherto been studied due to
their effectiveness in dealing with heterogeneous data. Despite the empirical success made by recent works, there
still exists several severe challenges. Particularly, previous
multi-view clustering algorithms seldom consider the topological structure in data, which is essential for clustering
data on manifold. Moreover, existing methods cannot fully
explore the consistency of local structures between different
views as they uncover the clustering structure in a intraview way instead of a inter-view manner. In this paper, we
propose to exploit the implied data manifold by learning
the topological structure of data. Besides, considering that
the consistency of multiple views is manifested in the generally similar local structure while the inconsistent structures are the minority, we further explore the intersections
of multiple views in the sample level such that the cross-view
consistency can be better maintained. We model the above
concerns in a unified framework and design an efficient algorithm to solve the corresponding optimization problem.
Experimental results on various multi-view datasets certificate the effectiveness of the proposed method and verify its
superiority over other SOTA approaches.

1. Introduction
In many real scenarios, data are usually collected from
diverse sources in various domains or described by multiple feature sets [1, 2]. A case in point is the image dataset,
which can be represented by different visual descriptors,
such as LBP, GIST, CENTRIST, HOG, SIFT and Color Moment [3]. Moreover, a document can be written in different languages, and a website can be described by its linkage, page content, etc. These data are generally known as
multi-view data [1, 4]. Each view contains partial and complementary information, any of which suffices for learning,
and they all together agree to a consensus latent representation [5–7]. Multi-view clustering aims to accurately par-

tition data into distinct clusters according to their compatible and complementary information embedded in heterogeneous features [1, 8].
In general, multi-view clustering methods can be divided into four categories according to the mechanisms
and principles on which these methods are based. [1] initiated the trend of co-training algorithm by first carrying
out a co-training strategy and making the clustering results on all view tend to each other as well as satisfying
the broadest agreement across all views. Owing to the efficiency of exploiting similarities among multiple views,
multi-kernel learning is widely utilized to boost the performance of multi-view clustering methods [9–11]. Multi-task
multi-view clustering [12,13] inherits the property of multitask clustering. Each view of the data is treated with at least
one related task. Moreover, inter-task knowledge is transferred from one to another so that the relationship between
multi-view and multi-task is fully exploited to improve the
clustering outcomes. Another kind of graph-based multiview clustering methods usually attempt to explore an optimal consensus graph across all views, and utilize graph-cut
algorithm on the optimal graph to obtain final clustering result [3, 5, 14].
A great number of multi-view clustering methods have
been proposed and illustrated remarkable empirical successes up to now [15–17]. However, there are still severe
drawbacks urgently need to be overcome. For one thing,
existing multi-view clustering algorithms seldom consider
the topological structure in data, which is essential for clustering data on manifold. Considering that the data sampled
from real world typically lie in the nonlinear manifold, data
points geometrically far from one to another may keep high
consistency when they are linked by a series of consecutive
neighbors. For another, they suffer from a coarse-grained
problem that ignores the view correlation between samples.
Note that redundancy or partial structure mistakes in certain
views may lead to a sub-optimal cluster structure. Besides,
traditional view-wise fusion strategy would result in a superimposition of redundancies, and hence acquire a more
imprecise common cluster structure.
Regarding the above issues, we propose to exploit the

* Corresponding author.

23966

