This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Prompting with Missing Modalities for Visual Recognition
Yi-Lun Lee† Yi-Hsuan Tsai‡ Wei-Chen Chiu†
†
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Chen-Yu Lee‡
‡
Google

{yllee10727, walon}@cs.nctu.edu.tw, {yhtsai, chenyulee}@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle two challenges in multimodal
learning for visual recognition: 1) when missing-modality
occurs either during training or testing in real-world situations; and 2) when the computation resources are not
available to finetune on heavy transformer models. To
this end, we propose to utilize prompt learning and mitigate the above two challenges together. Specifically, our
modality-missing-aware prompts can be plugged into multimodal transformers to handle general missing-modality
cases, while only requiring less than 1% learnable parameters compared to training the entire model. We further explore the effect of different prompt configurations and analyze the robustness to missing modality. Extensive experiments are conducted to show the effectiveness of our prompt
learning framework that improves the performance under
various missing-modality cases, while alleviating the requirement of heavy model re-training. Code is available.1

1. Introduction
Our observation perceived in daily life is typically mulitmodal, such as visual, linguistic, and acoustic signals, thus
modeling and coordinating multimodal information is of
great interest and has broad application potentials. Recently, multimodal transformers [13, 17, 22, 25, 35] emerge
as the pre-trained backbone models in several multimodal
downstream tasks, including genre classification [22], multimodal sentiment analysis [25, 35], and cross-modal retrieval [13,15,17,30], etc. Though providing promising performance and generalization ability on various tasks, there
are still challenges for multimodal transformers being applied in practical scenarios: 1) how to efficiently adapt the
multimodal transformers without using heavy computation
resource to finetune the entire model? 2) how to ensure the
robustness when there are missing modalities, e.g., incomplete training data or observations in testing?
1 https://github.com/YiLunLee/missing aware prompts

Figure 1. Illustration of missing-modality scenarios in training
multimodal transformers. Prior work [22] investigates the robustness of multimodal transformers to modality-incomplete test data,
with the requirement to finetune the entire model using modalitycomplete training data. In contrast, our work studies a more general scenario where various modality-missing cases would occur
differently not only for each data sample but also learning phases
(training, testing, or both), and we adopt prompt learning to adapt
the pre-trained transformer for downstream tasks without requiring heavy computations on finetuning the entire model.

Most multimodal transformer-based methods have a
common assumption on the data completeness, which may
not hold in practice due to the privacy, device, or security
constraints. Thus, the performance may degrade when the
data is modality-incomplete (regardless of training or testing). On the other hand, transformers pretrained on largescale datasets are frequently adopted as backbone and finetuned for addressing various downstream tasks, thanks to
the strong generalizability of transformers. However, as the
model size of transformers increases (e.g., up to billions of
parameters [5,26,27]), finetuning becomes significantly expensive (e.g., up to millions of A100-GPU-hours [31]) and
is even not feasible for practitioners due to the limited computation resources in most real-world applications. In addition, finetuning a transformer on relatively small-scale target datasets can result in restricted generalizability [9, 10]
and stability [24], thus hindering it from being reused for

14943

