This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask-guided Matting in the Wild
Kwanyong Park1

Sanghyun Woo1
1

Seoung Wug Oh2

KAIST

2

In So Kweon1

Joon-Young Lee2

Adobe Research

Abstract
Mask-guided matting has shown great practicality compared to traditional trimap-based methods. The maskguided approach takes an easily-obtainable coarse mask as
guidance and produces an accurate alpha matte. To extend the success toward practical usage, we tackle maskguided matting in the wild, which covers a wide range of
categories in their complex context robustly. To this end,
we propose a simple yet effective learning framework based
on two core insights: 1) learning a generalized matting
model that can better understand the given mask guidance
and 2) leveraging weak supervision datasets (e.g., instance
segmentation dataset) to alleviate the limited diversity and
scale of existing matting datasets. Extensive experimental results on multiple benchmarks, consisting of a newly
proposed synthetic benchmark (Composition-Wild) and existing natural datasets, demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed method. Moreover, we provide appealing results
on new practical applications (e.g., panoptic matting and
mask-guided video matting), showing the great generality
and potential of our model.

1. Introduction
Image matting aims to predict the opacity of objects, which enables precise separation from surrounding backgrounds. Due to the ill-posed nature of the
task, many works [7, 13, 21, 27, 30, 48] have improved
matting performance by relying on the manual guidance
of a trimap. However, pixel-level annotation of foreground/background/unknown is extremely burdensome, restricting its usage in many practical applications such as image/video editing and film production. Recently, many efficient alternatives for user guidance have been proposed,
including trimap-free [15, 32], additional background images [22, 34], scribble [43], and the user clicks [45].
Among them, the mask-guided approach [50] shows a
great trade-off between performance and intensity of user
interaction. It utilizes a coarse mask as guidance, which is
much easier to obtain either manually or from off-the-shelf

Image and Guidance

MGMatting

Ours

Figure 1. Qualitative Comparisons of MGMatting [50] and
Ours in the wild. The mask guidance is overlaid on images with
blue color. Best viewed zoomed in.

segmentation models [2, 10]. With only the coarse spatial
prior, the mask-guided matting model [50] shows comparable or even better performance than the trimap-based competitors [13,17,21,27,48] on synthetic Composition-1k [48]
and a real-world human matting dataset [50]. However, despite the encouraging results, we see the previous state-ofthe-art model [50] struggles to obtain desirable alpha matte
in complex real-world scenes (see Fig. 1).
With this observation, we tackle mask-guided matting
in the wild. Specifically, we formulate unique setups and
emerging challenges of the new task as follows: (1) We aim
to handle objects in their complex context, reflecting the
characteristics of natural images. The previous method [50]
evaluates their model on iconic-object images [1, 29] where
only a single object is in the center. As the model can
easily find the target object in such images, the model’s
real instance discrimination ability is, in fact, veiled. On
the contrary, in an ‘in-the-wild’ setting, it is crucial to precisely localize the target object from the given coarse/noisy
mask guidance (i.e. mask awareness). (2) Our model targets to deal with diverse categories of objects in natural

1992

