This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning and Aggregating Lane Graphs for Urban Automated Driving
Martin Büchner1 * Jannik Zürn1∗ Ion-George Todoran2 Abhinav Valada1 Wolfram Burgard3
1
2
3
University of Freiburg
Woven by Toyota
University of Technology Nuremberg

Abstract
Lane graph estimation is an essential and highly challenging task in automated driving and HD map learning. Existing methods using either onboard or aerial imagery struggle
with complex lane topologies, out-of-distribution scenarios, or significant occlusions in the image space. Moreover,
merging overlapping lane graphs to obtain consistent largescale graphs remains difficult. To overcome these challenges,
we propose a novel bottom-up approach to lane graph estimation from aerial imagery that aggregates multiple overlapping graphs into a single consistent graph. Due to its
modular design, our method allows us to address two complementary tasks: predicting ego-respective successor lane
graphs from arbitrary vehicle positions using a graph neural
network and aggregating these predictions into a consistent
global lane graph. Extensive experiments on a large-scale
lane graph dataset demonstrate that our approach yields
highly accurate lane graphs, even in regions with severe
occlusions. The presented approach to graph aggregation
proves to eliminate inconsistent predictions while increasing the overall graph quality. We make our large-scale
urban lane graph dataset and code publicly available at
http://urbanlanegraph.cs.uni-freiburg.de.

1. Introduction
Most automated driving vehicles rely on the knowledge
of their immediate surroundings to safely navigate urban
environments. Onboard sensors including LiDARs and cameras provide perception inputs that are utilized in multiple
tasks such as localization [7, 21, 27], tracking [4], or scene
understanding [20, 24, 26, 37] to aggregate representations
of the environment. However, robust planning and control
typically require vastly more detailed and less noisy world
models in the form of HD map data [12]. In particular, information on lane parametrization and connectivity is essential
for both planning future driving maneuvers as well as highlevel navigation tasks. Creating and maintaining HD maps
in the form of lane graphs is a time-consuming and arduous
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Our approach predicts accurate lane graphs from aerial images
of complex urban environments. We visualize the estimated lane graph in
magenta and indicate model initialization points with yellow circles.

task due to the large amount of detail required in the annotation and the data curation process including map updates
based on local environment changes such as construction
sites.
Previous approaches to lane graph estimation have shown
shortcomings in predicting lane graphs due to multiple deficiencies: On the one hand, methods using onboard imagery
typically degrade at complex real-world intersections and
under significant occlusions, e.g., when following another
vehicle [5, 6]. On the other hand, methods based on aerial
imagery show reduced performance when confronted with
occlusions in the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) due to, e.g., vegetation or shadows, and suffer from catastrophic drift when
unconstrained in out-of-distribution scenarios [30]. Previous
works treat intersections and non-intersections inherently
differently [15] and thus require elaborated heuristics and
post-processing to merge single predictions into a consistent
lane graph. Moreover, prior works do not focus on use cases
where multiple predicted graphs must be merged into a single consistent solution, which is essential for enabling the
automatic generation of highly detailed lane graphs of large
contiguous regions.

13415

