This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Geometric Visual Similarity Learning in 3D Medical Image Self-supervised
Pre-training
Yuting He1 , Guanyu Yang1∗, Rongjun Ge2 , Yang Chen1 , Jean-Louis Coatrieux3 , Boyu Wang4 , Shuo Li5
1
Southeast University 2 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
3
University of Rennes 1 4 Western University 5 Case Western Reserve University
Abstract
Learning inter-image similarity is crucial for 3D medical images self-supervised pre-training, due to their sharing
of numerous same semantic regions. However, the lack of
the semantic prior in metrics and the semantic-independent
variation in 3D medical images make it challenging to get
a reliable measurement for the inter-image similarity, hindering the learning of consistent representation for same
semantics. We investigate the challenging problem of this
task, i.e., learning a consistent representation between images for a clustering effect of same semantic features. We
propose a novel visual similarity learning paradigm, Geometric Visual Similarity Learning, which embeds the prior
of topological invariance into the measurement of the interimage similarity for consistent representation of semantic
regions. To drive this paradigm, we further construct a
novel geometric matching head, the Z-matching head, to
collaboratively learn the global and local similarity of semantic regions, guiding the efﬁcient representation learning for different scale-level inter-image semantic features.
Our experiments demonstrate that the pre-training with
our learning of inter-image similarity yields more powerful inner-scene, inter-scene, and global-local transferring
ability on four challenging 3D medical image tasks. Our
codes and pre-trained models will be publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Learning inter-image similarity [26, 33, 44, 47] is crucial
for 3D medical image (e.g., CT, MR) self-supervised pretraining (SSP) [20]. As shown in Fig.1, different from natural images which are widely researched in SSP, 3D medical images share numerous same semantic regions due to
the consistency of human anatomies [28] and the complete
spatial information in 3D vision [35], bringing a strong
prior for effective SSP. Therefore, it targets on constrain∗ Corresponding author: yang.list@seu.edu.cn
1 https://github.com/YutingHe-list/GVSL

3D medical image

3D medical image

x Consistent human
anatomies
x Complete spatial
information in 3D vision

Lung

Lung

RV

RV
RA

Myo
Ao
LA

Lung
Spine

a) Large semantic difference
between natural images

Do

LV
Myo

Myo

RA
Ao
Lung

LV

LA

Myo

Lung
Spine

Do

Lung

b) Numerous same semantic regions
between 3D medical images

Figure 1. Learning inter-image similarity is crucial for 3D medical
image SSP. a) Natural images have large semantic difference between images whose inter-image similarity is weak. b) 3D medical
images share numerous same semantic regions between images
due to the consistent human anatomies and the complete spatial
information in 3D vision, having large inter-image similarity.

ing the pre-training network for a consistent representation
of these same semantic regions between images without annotations. Once successful, it will bring great clustering
effect for same semantic features, powerful representability
of pre-trained network, and effective transferring for potential downstream tasks.
Although the existing SSP works have achieved promising results in their tasks, they are limited in the learning of
inter-image similarity in 3D medical images. 1) Clusteringbased SSP methods [2, 24] measure the features’ similarity
between images for their clustering pattern in an embedding
space, and learn to aggregate same cluster’s features. However, they simply employ the Mahalanobis or Euclidean distance as the measurement function which is extremely interfered by images’ semantics-independent variations (Fig.2).
2) Contrastive learning works [3, 4] directly learn to separate their features for inter-image dissimilarity. This violates the learning inter-image similarity which is crucial
in 3D images and will make the network represent distinct
features for same semantic regions. Although some other
contrastive learning works [4, 7, 41] have removed the sep-

9538

