This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long Range Pooling for 3D Large-Scale Scene Understanding
Xiang-Li Li1

Meng-Hao Guo1 Tai-Jiang Mu1 Ralph R. Martin2
1
BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 Cardiff University

Shi-Min Hu1

lixl19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gmh20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
taijiang@tsinghua.edu.cn, martinrr@cardiff.ac.uk, shimin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Inspired by the success of recent vision transformers
and large kernel design in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), in this paper, we analyze and explore essential
reasons for their success. We claim two factors that are
critical for 3D large-scale scene understanding: a larger
receptive field and operations with greater non-linearity.
The former is responsible for providing long range contexts and the latter can enhance the capacity of the network. To achieve the above properties, we propose a simple
yet effective long range pooling (LRP) module using dilation max pooling, which provides a network with a large
adaptive receptive field. LRP has few parameters, and can
be readily added to current CNNs. Also, based on LRP,
we present an entire network architecture, LRPNet, for 3D
understanding. Ablation studies are presented to support
our claims, and show that the LRP module achieves better results than large kernel convolution yet with reduced
computation, due to its non-linearity. We also demonstrate
the superiority of LRPNet on various benchmarks: LRPNet
performs the best on ScanNet and surpasses other CNNbased methods on S3DIS and Matterport3D. Code will be
avalible at https://github.com/li-xl/LRPNet.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D sensors, more and
more 3D data is becoming available from a variety of applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented/virtual reality. Analyzing and understanding this
3D data has become essential, which requires efficient and
effective processing. Various data structures, including
point clouds, meshes, multi-view images, voxels, etc, have
been proposed for representing 3D data [73]. Unlike 2D
image data, a point cloud or mesh, is irregular and unordered. These characteristics mean that typical CNNs cannot directly be applied to such 3D data. Thus, specially
designed networks such as MLPs [49], CNNs [27, 40, 69],
GNNs [53, 68] and transformers [16, 46, 79] are proposed

Baseline

Input / Ground Truth
unclassified
window
bathtub

wall
floor
picture
bookshelf
other furniture

cabinet
counter

bed
desk

chair
sofa
table
curtain
refrigerator

Ours
toilet
door
shower curtain

sink

Figure 1.
Qualitative results of Effective Receptive Field
(ERF) [45]. Left: the input and ground truth. Middle: the ERF
and results of baseline described in section 3.3. Right: the ERF
and results of LRPNet (ours). The stained areas around the positions of interest (red dots) represent the range of receptive fields,
with green to red representing the increasing strength of response.
Our method correctly segments the cabinet from the wall with the
proposed effective receptive field.

to perform effective deep learning on them. However, processing large-scale point cloud or mesh is computationally
expensive. Multi-view images contain multiple different
views of a scene. Typically, CNNs are used to process each
view independently and a fusion module is used to combine
the results. Nevertheless, there is unavoidable 3D information loss due to the finite or insufficient number of views.
Voxel data has the benefit of regularity like images, even if
the on-surface voxels only contain sparse data. The simplicity of the structure helps to maintain high performance, so
this paper focuses on processing voxel data.
Learning on 3D voxels can be easily implemented by
directly extending the well studied 2D CNN networks to
3D [52, 66, 72]. Considering that 3D voxel data is inherently sparse, some works usually adopt specially designed
3D sparse CNNs [7,15,56] for large-scale scene understanding. Since only the surface of the real scene data has values, the neighbors around each voxel do not necessarily belong to the same object, so a large receptive field is more

10300

