This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task Difficulty Aware Parameter Allocation & Regularization for Lifelong
Learning
Wenjin Wang, Yunqing Hu, Qianglong Chen, Yin Zhang*
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{wangwenjin,yunqinghu,chenqianglong,zhangyin98}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

5-classes
Classification Tasks

Strategies

Model

Learn the first task

Parameter regularization or allocation methods are effective in overcoming catastrophic forgetting in lifelong
learning. However, they solve all tasks in a sequence uniformly and ignore the differences in the learning difficulty of
different tasks. So parameter regularization methods face
significant forgetting when learning a new task very different from learned tasks, and parameter allocation methods face unnecessary parameter overhead when learning
simple tasks. In this paper, we propose the Parameter
Allocation & Regularization (PAR), which adaptively select
an appropriate strategy for each task from parameter allocation and regularization based on its learning difficulty.
A task is easy for a model that has learned tasks related
to it and vice versa. We propose a divergence estimation
method based on the Nearest-Prototype distance to measure the task relatedness using only features of the new task.
Moreover, we propose a time-efficient relatedness-aware
sampling-based architecture search strategy to reduce the
parameter overhead for allocation. Experimental results
on multiple benchmarks demonstrate that, compared with
SOTAs, our method is scalable and significantly reduces
the model’s redundancy while improving the model’s performance. Further qualitative analysis indicates that PAR
obtains reasonable task-relatedness.

1. Introduction
Recently, the lifelong learning [9] ability of neural networks, i.e., learning continuously from a continuous sequence of tasks, has been extensively studied. It is natural
for human beings to constantly learn and accumulate knowledge from tasks and then use it to facilitate future learning.
However, classical models [13, 18, 41] suffer catastrophic
forgetting [12], i.e., the model’s performance on learned
tasks deteriorates rapidly after learning a new one.
To overcome the catastrophic forgetting, many param* Corresponding author: Yin Zhang.

Large carnivores
Parameter Regularization
for the easy new task

Reptiles
（Related to task

)

Parameter Allocation
for the difficult new task

Fruit and vegetables
（No related tasks before)

Current
task

Adaptive strategy ？

Large omnivores and herbivores

?

（Related to ?)

Adaptive Parameter Allocation & Regularization Based on Task Learning Difficulty

Label

Model

Expert

Learning
Strategy

Task Data

Figure 1. PAR adaptively selects a strategy from regularization
and allocation to handle each task according to its learning difficulty. The difficulty depends not only on the task itself, but also
on whether the model has previously learned tasks related to it.

eter regularization or allocation methods have been proposed. Parameter regularization methods [10, 16, 19, 21,
23, 25, 27] alleviate forgetting by adding a regularization
term to the loss function and perform well when the new
task does not differ much from learned tasks. Parameter allocation methods based on static models [7, 15, 31, 36] and
dynamic models [2,20,24,26,29,30,34,38,39,42,45,47] allocate different parameters to different tasks and can adapt
to new tasks quite different from learned tasks. However,
the above methods solve all tasks in a sequence uniformly,
and ignore the differences of learning difficulty of different
tasks. This leads to the significant forgetting in parameter
regularization methods when learning a new task which is
quite different from learned tasks, and also leads to unnecessary parameter cost in parameter allocation methods when
learning some simple tasks.
In this paper, we propose a difficulty-aware method
Parameter Allocation & Regularization (PAR). As shown

7776

