This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised 3D Point Cloud Representation Learning by Triangle Constrained
Contrast for Autonomous Driving
Bo Pang∗ Hongchi Xia∗ Cewu Lu†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{pangbo, xiahongchi, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the difﬁculty of annotating the 3D LiDAR data of
autonomous driving, an efﬁcient unsupervised 3D representation learning method is important. In this paper, we design the Triangle Constrained Contrast (TriCC) framework
tailored for autonomous driving scenes which learns 3D unsupervised representations through both the multimodal information and dynamic of temporal sequences. We treat one
camera image and two LiDAR point clouds with different
timestamps as a triplet. And our key design is the consistent
constraint that automatically ﬁnds matching relationships
among the triplet through “self-cycle” and learns representations from it. With the matching relations across the temporal dimension and modalities, we can further conduct a
triplet contrast to improve learning efﬁciency. To the best
of our knowledge, TriCC is the ﬁrst framework that uniﬁes
both the temporal and multimodal semantics, which means
it utilizes almost all the information in autonomous driving
scenes. And compared with previous contrastive methods,
it can automatically dig out contrasting pairs with higher
difﬁculty, instead of relying on handcrafted ones. Extensive
experiments are conducted with Minkowski-UNet and VoxelNet on several semantic segmentation and 3D detection
datasets. Results show that TriCC learns effective representations with much fewer training iterations and improves
the SOTA results greatly on all the downstream tasks. Code
and models can be found at https://bopang1996.github.io/.

1. Introduction
For the perception of autonomous driving, semantic segmentation and 3D object detection on point cloud are two
fundamental tasks [18, 89]. At present, deep learning algorithms based on supervised learning have pushed their
performances to the applicable level [37, 42, 83] with large
∗ Equal contribution. † Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, the mem-

ber of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, and Shanghai
Qi Zhi Institute.

Point features at
key frame ‫ ݐ‬൅ ʹ

Point features at
key frame ‫ ݐ‬൅ ͳ

Pixel features at
key frame ‫ ݐ‬൅ ͳ

Point features at
key frame ‫ݐ‬

Pixel features at
key frame ‫ݐ‬

Triangle Consistent
Constraint
2D RGB features
3D Point Cloud
features

Figure 1. Brief illustration of the Triangle Constrained Contrast
(TriCC). In order to learn dense 3D point cloud representations
from temporal information and multimodal semantics in one uniﬁed algorithm, TriCC is designed to adopt the triangle consistent
constraint to automatically ﬁnd the pixel (point)-level matching
relationships among each triangle (the red cycle) and learn effective representations spanning temporal and modality dimensions,
instead of relying on hand-crafted pre-deﬁned dense positive pairs
that traditional contrastive learning methods adopt. Thus, it can
unify all the semantics in one concise and compact algorithm.

scale datasets [7, 47, 66, 86]. Nevertheless, in the supervised process, obtaining annotations for these dense localization tasks is expensive and time-consuming. Thus, a
mass of easy-collected perception data lacks efﬁcient utilization [7,86] and it needs much repetitive work to transfer
supervised trained models to different scenes which makes
the extension of applications difﬁcult. Based on this, in
this paper, we build an unsupervised dense 3D point cloud
representation learning framework tailored for autonomous
driving scenes, aiming at achieving better performance on
dense tasks with less annotated data.
Inspired by contrastive learning, a mainstream unsuper-

5229

