This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robust Tampered Text Detection in Document Image: New dataset and
New Solution
Chenfan Qu1 , Chongyu Liu1 , Yuliang Liu2 , Xinhong Chen1 , Dezhi Peng1 , Fengjun Guo3 ,
Lianwen Jin1,*
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
3
IntSig Information Co., Ltd
202221012612@mail.scut.edu.cn, eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, tampered text detection in document image has
attracted increasingly attention due to its essential role on
information security. However, detecting visually consistent tampered text in photographed document images is still
a main challenge. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to capture more fine-grained clues in complex scenarios for tampered text detection, termed as Document Tampering Detector (DTD), which consists of a Frequency Perception Head (FPH) to compensate the deficiencies caused
by the inconspicuous visual features, and a Multi-view Iterative Decoder (MID) for fully utilizing the information
of features in different scales. In addition, we design a
new training paradigm, termed as Curriculum Learning for
Tampering Detection (CLTD), which can address the confusion during the training procedure and thus to improve
the robustness for image compression and the ability to
generalize. To further facilitate the tampered text detection in document images, we construct a large-scale document image dataset, termed as DocTamper, which contains
170,000 document images of various types. Experiments
demonstrate that our proposed DTD outperforms previous
state-of-the-art by 9.2%, 26.3% and 12.3% in terms of
F-measure on the DocTamper testing set, and the crossdomain testing sets of DocTamper-FCD and DocTamperSCD, respectively. Codes and dataset will be available at
https://github.com/qcf-568/DocTamper.

1. Introduction
Document images are one of the most essential media
for information transmission in modern society, which contains amounts of sensitive and privacy information such
as telephone numbers. As the rapid development of the
image editing technologies, such sensitive text information can be more easily to be tampered for malicious pur-

Figure 1. Tampered text in document images usually have relatively small areas and few visual tampering clue.

poses such as defraud, causing serious information security
risks [33,42,48,50]. Therefore, detecting tampering in document images has become an important research topic in recent years [18,47]. It is crucial to develop effective methods
to examine whether a document image is modified, meanwhile identifying the exact location of the tampered text.
Most text tamper methods in documents images can be
generally categorized into three types: (1) Splicing, which
copies regions from one image and paste to other images;
(2) Copy-move, which shifts the spatial locations of objects
within images; (3) Generation, which replaces regions of
images with visually plausible but different contents, As
shown in Fig. 1. Though tampering detection in natural
images has been studied for years [14, 49], it differs a lot
from that in document images. For natural images, tampering detection mainly relies on the relatively obvious visual tampered clues on edge or surface of the object, which
hardly exist in documents, especially for copy-move and
splicing [1, 47]. This is because document images mostly
have the same background color, and text within clusters
usually has the same font and size. Therefore, the tampered

5937

