This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Box-Level Active Detection
Mengyao Lyu1,2,3 Jundong Zhou1,2,3 Hui Chen1,2 Yijie Huang4 Dongdong Yu4
Yaqian Li4 Yandong Guo4 Yuchen Guo1,2 Liuyu Xiang5∗ Guiguang Ding1,2 *
1
Tsinghua University 2 BNRist 3 Hangzhou Zhuoxi Institute of Brain and Intelligence
4
OPPO Research Institute 5 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{mengyao.lyu,jundong.zhou}@outlook.com {huangyijie,yudongdong,liyaqian,guoyandong}@oppo.com
{jichenhui2012,yuchen.w.guo}@gmail.com xiangly@bupt.edu.cn dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Reducing the dependency on large-scale and wellannotated datasets for deep neural networks has received
* Corresponding Authors.

CoreSet
LearningLoss*
ALMDN*

MeanEntropy-MCDropout*
MeanEntropy-Ensemble*
sCOMPAS (ours)

BoxCnt
FullSup

82
80
77
mAP50 (%)

Active learning selects informative samples for annotation within budget, which has proven efficient recently on
object detection. However, the widely used active detection
benchmarks conduct image-level evaluation, which is unrealistic in human workload estimation and biased towards
crowded images. Furthermore, existing methods still perform image-level annotation, but equally scoring all targets
within the same image incurs waste of budget and redundant labels. Having revealed above problems and limitations, we introduce a box-level active detection framework
that controls a box-based budget per cycle, prioritizes informative targets and avoids redundancy for fair comparison
and efficient application.
Under the proposed box-level setting, we devise a novel
pipeline, namely Complementary Pseudo Active Strategy
(ComPAS). It exploits both human annotations and the
model intelligence in a complementary fashion: an efficient
input-end committee queries labels for informative objects
only; meantime well-learned targets are identified by the
model and compensated with pseudo-labels. ComPAS consistently outperforms 10 competitors under 4 settings in a
unified codebase. With supervision from labeled data only,
it achieves 100% supervised performance of VOC0712 with
merely 19% box annotations. On the COCO dataset, it
yields up to 4.3% mAP improvement over the second-best
method. ComPAS also supports training with the unlabeled
pool, where it surpasses 90% COCO supervised performance with 85% label reduction. Our source code is publicly available at https://github.com/lyumengyao/blad.

Random
MeanEntropy
WhiteBoxQBC

75
72

25% boxes

70

19% boxes

67
65

10% boxes

2K

4K
#images

6K

8K

4K

6K

8K
#boxes

10K

12K

Figure 1. Active detection methods evaluated on VOC0712 under image-level (Left) and box-level (Right) settings. BoxCnt is
our hack that simply queries potentially the most crowded images,
which demonstrates that image-level evaluation is highly biased.
Methods marked with * have specialized detector architectures.

a growing interest in recent years, especially for the detection task, where the box-level annotation is highly demanding. Among data-efficient training schemes, active detection methods [1, 4, 6, 7, 13, 20, 24, 35] iterate over detector training, performance evaluation, informative image acquisition and human annotation. Despite recent progress,
previous pool-based active detection methods still consider
the subject of interest at the image-level: they conduct
image-level evaluation, where the budget is controlled by
the number of labeled images per cycle; afterwards, they
perform exhaustive image-level annotation, where all instances of the same image are labeled. Such an image-level
framework suffers from unfairness in model performance
comparison and leads to a waste of annotation resources.
On the one hand, existing methods under the image-level
evaluation assume equal budget for every image. However, in real-world use cases, the workload of annotators

23766

