This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Integral Neural Networks
Kirill Solodskikh*† Azim Kurbanov*† Ruslan Aydarkhanov†
Irina Zhelavskaya Yury Parfenov
Dehua Song
Stamatios Lefkimmiatis
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{kirillceo, azimcto, ruslancto}@garch.me
{zhelavskaya.irina1, parfenov.yury, dehua.song, stamatios.lefkimmiatis}@huawei.com

Abstract
We introduce a new family of deep neural networks,
where instead of the conventional representation of network layers as N -dimensional weight tensors, we use a
continuous layer representation along the filter and channel dimensions. We call such networks Integral Neural Networks (INNs). In particular, the weights of INNs are represented as continuous functions defined on N -dimensional
hypercubes, and the discrete transformations of inputs to
the layers are replaced by continuous integration operations, accordingly. During the inference stage, our continuous layers can be converted into the traditional tensor
representation via numerical integral quadratures. Such
kind of representation allows the discretization of a network to an arbitrary size with various discretization intervals for the integral kernels. This approach can be applied to prune the model directly on an edge device while
suffering only a small performance loss at high rates of
structural pruning without any fine-tuning. To evaluate the
practical benefits of our proposed approach, we have conducted experiments using various neural network architectures on multiple tasks. Our reported results show that the
proposed INNs achieve the same performance with their
conventional discrete counterparts, while being able to preserve approximately the same performance (2% accuracy
loss for ResNet18 on Imagenet) at a high rate (up to 30%)
of structural pruning without fine-tuning, compared to 65%
accuracy loss of the conventional pruning methods under
the same conditions. Code is available at gitee.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
impressive breakthroughs in a wide range of practical applications in both computer vision [13, 20, 32] and natural
* The authors contributed equally to this work.
† Currently affiliated with Garch Lab.

language processing [7] tasks. This state-of-the-art performance is mainly attributed to the huge representation capacity [2] of DNNs. According to the Kolmogorov superposition theorem [14] and the universal approximation
theorem [29], a DNN is capable of approximating uniformly any continuous multivariate function with appropriate weights. To achieve better performance, a large number of parameters and computations are assigned to the
DNN [10, 40], which seriously limits its application on
memory- and computation-constrained devices. Hence, numerous approaches have been proposed to compress and accelerate neural networks, including pruning [26, 38], quantization [35, 41] and neural architecture search [34, 37].
DNNs are particularly successful in dealing with challenging transformations of natural signals such as images
or audio signals [27]. Since such analogue signals are inevitably discretized, neural networks conventionally perform discrete representations and transformations, such as
matrix multiplications and discrete convolutions. However,
for such kind of representations the size of neural networks
cannot be adjusted without suffering severe performance
degradation during the inference stage, once the training
procedure is completed. Although several network pruning methods [26, 38] have been proposed to extract crucial
channels from the trained model and generate efficient models, they either suffer from a significant accuracy degradation or require to fine-tune the model on the whole training database. Along with the development of hardware,
there have been diverse edge devices with various capacities
for memory and computation, from ordinary processors to
dedicated neural network accelerators. The model size for
different devices varies significantly [4]. Moreover, many
tasks (e.g. autonomous driving) require different response
speeds on the same hardware according to various scenarios or conditions (e.g. driving speed and weather condition).
The conventional way to deal with such problems is to design multiple model architectures for all possible scenarios
and store them together. However, the downside of such

16113

