This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PanoHead: Geometry-Aware 3D Full-Head Synthesis in 360◦
Sizhe An1,2

Hongyi Xu1 Yichun Shi1 Guoxian Song1 Umit Y. Ogras2
1
2
ByteDance Inc.
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Linjie Luo1

Generation

latent code

Reconstruction

Figure 1. Our PanoHead enables 360◦ view-consistent photo-realistic full-head image synthesis with high-fidelity geometry, enabling
authentic 3D portraits creation from a single-view image.

Abstract
Synthesis and reconstruction of 3D human head has
gained increasing interests in computer vision and computer
graphics recently. Existing state-of-the-art 3D generative adversarial networks (GANs) for 3D human head synthesis are
either limited to near-frontal views or hard to preserve 3D
consistency in large view angles. We propose PanoHead, the
first 3D-aware generative model that enables high-quality
view-consistent image synthesis of full heads in 360◦ with
diverse appearance and detailed geometry using only in-thewild unstructured images for training. At its core, we lift up
the representation power of recent 3D GANs and bridge the
data alignment gap when training from in-the-wild images
with widely distributed views. Specifically, we propose a
novel two-stage self-adaptive image alignment for robust 3D
GAN training. We further introduce a tri-grid neural volume
representation that effectively addresses front-face and backhead feature entanglement rooted in the widely-adopted triplane formulation. Our method instills prior knowledge
of 2D image segmentation in adversarial learning of 3D
neural scene structures, enabling compositable head synthe-

sis in diverse backgrounds. Benefiting from these designs,
our method significantly outperforms previous 3D GANs,
generating high-quality 3D heads with accurate geometry
and diverse appearances, even with long wavy and afro
hairstyles, renderable from arbitrary poses. Furthermore,
we show that our system can reconstruct full 3D heads from
single input images for personalized realistic 3D avatars.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic portrait image synthesis has been a continuous focus in computer vision and graphics, with a wide
range of downstream applications in digital avatars, telepresence, immersive gaming, and many others. Recent advances in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12] has
demonstrated strikingly high image synthesis quality, indistinguishable from real photographs [19, 21, 22]. However,
contemporary generative approaches operate on 2D convolutional networks without modeling the underlying 3D scenes.
Therefore 3D consistency cannot be strictly enforced when

20950

Project page: https://sizhean.github.io/panohead

