This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Doubly Right Object Recognition: A Why Prompt for Visual Rationales
Chengzhi Mao1
Revant Teotia1
Amrutha Sundar1
Sachit Menon1
Junfeng Yang1
Xin Wang2
Carl Vondrick1
1
2
Columbia University
Microsoft Research
{mcz,rt2891,as6431,sm4934,junfeng,vondrick}@cs.columbia.edu, wanxin@microsoft.com

Many visual recognition models are evaluated only on
their classification accuracy, a metric for which they obtain
strong performance. In this paper, we investigate whether
computer vision models can also provide correct rationales
for their predictions. We propose a “doubly right” object recognition benchmark, where the metric requires the
model to simultaneously produce both the right labels as
well as the right rationales. We find that state-of-the-art
visual models, such as CLIP, often provide incorrect rationales for their categorical predictions. However, by transferring the rationales from language models into visual representations through a tailored dataset, we show that we
can learn a “why prompt,” which adapts large visual representations to produce correct rationales. Visualizations and
empirical experiments show that our prompts significantly
improve performance on doubly right object recognition, in
addition to zero-shot transfer to unseen tasks and datasets.

1. Introduction
Computer vision models today are able to achieve high
accuracy – sometimes super-human – at correctly recognizing objects in images. However, most models today are not
evaluated on whether they get the prediction right for the
right reasons [14, 19, 48, 53]. Learning models that can explain their own decision is important for building trustworthy systems, especially in applications that require humanmachine interactions [2, 15, 37, 50]. Rationales that justify
the prediction can largely improve user trust [54], which is
a crucial metric that the visual recognition field should push
forward in the future.
Existing methods in interpretability have investigated
how to understand which features contribute to the models’ prediction [33, 34, 44, 46, 47, 52, 60]. However, saliency
explanations are often imprecise, require domain expertise
to understand, and also cannot be evaluated. [20, 22] have
instead explored verbal rationales to justify the decisionmaking. However, they require manual collections of the

Why Prompt

Abstract

Vision
Model

Greek Salad

Vision
Model

This is a photo of a
greek salad because
there are various
toppings such as diced
tomatoes, onions,
peppers, and jalapenos

Figure 1. Visual reasoning for doubly right object recognition task.
Motivated by prompting in NLP, we learn a why prompt from multimodal data, which allows us to instruct visual models to predict
both the right category and the correct rationales that justify the
prediction.

plausible rationales in the first place, which subsequently
are limited to small-scale datasets and tasks [24, 56].
Scalable methods for explainability have been developed
in natural language processing (NLP) through prompting.
By adding additional instructions to the input, such as the
sentence “think step-by-step,” language models then output
descriptions of their reasoning through the chain of thought
process [57]. Since the explanations are verbal, they are
easily understandable by people, and since the mechanism
emerges without explicit supervision, it is highly scalable.
In this paper, we investigate whether visual representations
can also explain their reasoning through visual chain-ofthought prompts.
Our paper first introduces a benchmark for doubly right
object recognition, where computer vision models must predict both correct categorical labels as well as correct rationales. Our benchmark is large, and covers many categories and datasets. We found that the visual representations do not have double right capability out-of-the-box on
our benchmark. The recent large-scale image-language pretrained models [41, 49] can retrieve open-world language
descriptions that are closest to the image embedding in the
feature space, serving as verbal explanations. However, the
models often select the wrong rationales.
Instead, we propose a framework to explicitly transfer the chain-of-thought reasoning from NLP models into

2722

