This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Loss Function by Minimizing the Detrimental Effect of Floating-point
Errors on Gradient-based Attacks
Yunrui Yu
Department of Computer Science
State Key Lab of IOTSC
University of Macau, Macau SAR, China.

Cheng-Zhong Xu*
Department of Computer Science
State Key Lab of IOTSC
University of Macau, Macau SAR, China.

yb97445@um.edu.mo

czxu@um.edu.mo

Attackers can deceive neural networks by adding human imperceptive perturbations to their input data; this
reveals the vulnerability and weak robustness of current
deep-learning networks. Many attack techniques have been
proposed to evaluate the model’s robustness. Gradientbased attacks suffer from severely overestimating the robustness. This paper identifies that the relative error in calculated gradients caused by floating-point errors, including
floating-point underflow and rounding errors, is a fundamental reason why gradient-based attacks fail to accurately
assess the model’s robustness. Although it is hard to eliminate the relative error in the gradients, we can control its
effect on the gradient-based attacks. Correspondingly, we
propose an efficient loss function by minimizing the detrimental impact of the floating-point errors on the attacks.
Experimental results show that it is more efficient and reliable than other loss functions when examined across a wide
range of defence mechanisms.

1. Introduction
AI with deep neural networks (DNNs) as the core [24]
has achieved great success in different research directions
and has been widely used in many safety-critical systems,
such as aviation [1, 8, 35], medical diagnosis [27, 49], selfdriving [4,26,47] , etc. However, a severe problem with current DNNs is that they are vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
Adding human imperceptive perturbations to input data can
mislead the model to output incorrect results [16, 45]. Such
vulnerability poses a significant security risk to all DNNbased systems. Therefore, increasing the models’ robustness and providing efficient and reliable evaluation methods
are becoming increasingly urgent and vital.
* Corresponding author.
1 https://robustbench.github.io/

Robust Accuracy (%)

Abstract
CE
CE target
C&W
C&W target
DLR

55.0
54.5

DLR target
MIFPE
MIFPE target
Best

54.0
MIFPE

53.5

MIFPE

53.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

5.0

Iterations (k)
Figure 1. Comparison of the effectiveness of non-targeted and
multi-targeted PGD 100 iterations attacks using various loss functions on the CIFAR-10 dataset. The best results were obtained
from RobustBench1 using an ensemble attack with a minimum of
4900 iterations. The defence model is from [59].

Numerous defence strategies [6, 10, 13, 16, 29, 31, 55] to
improve the model’s robustness and many attacks [2, 29,
33, 41, 50, 52, 54, 59] to evaluate these strategies have been
proposed. Currently, the most efficient attack method is
known as white-box attack, where the attacker has complete knowledge of the target defending strategy, including its model architecture, parameters, detail of the training algorithm, dataset, etc. A typical example is Projective gradient descent (PGD) [29] for evaluating the model’s
robustness. However, studies have shown that PGD with
cross-entropy (CE) loss fails to provide accurate evaluation
results [6, 41] and significantly overestimates the model’s
robustness(Figure 1). To enhance the evaluation accuracy,
recent powerful evaluation methods were proposed to ensemble diverse attack algorithms [10, 30]. However, their
performance is at the cost of high computational overhead.
The research community attributes the failure of
gradient-based attacks to gradient masking [15]. The core
of gradient masking is that the calculated gradients are not

4056

