This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Temporal Modeling for CLIP-based Image-to-Video
Knowledge Transferring
Ruyang Liu*1,3♢
1

Jingjia Huang*2

Ge Li1

Jiashi Feng2

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University

{ruyang@stu,geli@ece,thomas@}.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-text pretrained models, e.g., CLIP, have shown
impressive general multi-modal knowledge learned from
large-scale image-text data pairs, thus attracting increasing attention for their potential to improve visual representation learning in the video domain. In this paper, based
on the CLIP model, we revisit temporal modeling in the
context of image-to-video knowledge transferring, which is
the key point for extending image-text pretrained models to
the video domain. We find that current temporal modeling mechanisms are tailored to either high-level semanticdominant tasks (e.g., retrieval) or low-level visual patterndominant tasks (e.g., recognition), and fail to work on the
two cases simultaneously. The key difficulty lies in modeling
temporal dependency while taking advantage of both highlevel and low-level knowledge in CLIP model. To tackle
this problem, we present Spatial-Temporal Auxiliary Network (STAN) – a simple and effective temporal modeling
mechanism extending CLIP model to diverse video tasks.
Specifically, to realize both low-level and high-level knowledge transferring, STAN adopts a branch structure with
decomposed spatial-temporal modules that enable multilevel CLIP features to be spatial-temporally contextualized. We evaluate our method on two representative video
tasks: Video-Text Retrieval and Video Recognition. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our model
over the state-of-the-art methods on various datasets, including MSR-VTT, DiDeMo, LSMDC, MSVD, Kinetics-400,
and Something-Something-V2. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/farewellthree/STAN

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great success of imagetext pretrained models such as CLIP [31]. Pretrained on
over 400M image-text data pairs, these models learned
transferable rich knowledge for various image understanding tasks. Similarly, video domains also call for a CLIP-like

2

Xinglong Wu2
ByteDance Inc

3

Thomas H. Li B1

Peng Cheng Laboratory

{huangjingjia,jshfeng,wuxinglong}@bytedance.com

model to solve downstream video tasks. However, it is hard
to get a pretrained model as powerful as CLIP in the video
domain due to the unaffordable demands on computation resources and the difficulty of collecting video-text data pairs
as large and diverse as image-text data. Instead of directly
pursuing video-text pretrained models [16, 26], a potential
alternative solution that benefits video downstream tasks is
to transfer the knowledge in image-text pretrained models
to the video domain, which has attracted increasing attention in recent years [11, 12, 25, 28, 29, 40].
Extending pretrained 2D image models to the video domain is a widely-studied topic in deep learning [4, 7], and
the key point lies in empowering 2D models with the capability of modeling temporal dependency between video
frames while taking advantages of knowledge in the pretrained models. In this paper, based on CLIP [31], we revisit
temporal modeling in the context of image-to-video knowledge transferring, and present Spatial-Temporal Auxiliary
Network (STAN) – a new temporal modeling method that
is easy and effective for extending image-text pretrained
model to diverse downstream video tasks.
We find that current efforts on empowering CLIP with
temporal modeling capability can be roughly divided into
posterior structure based methods and intermediate structure based methods as shown in Fig. 1(a). Posterior structure based methods [11,12,25] employ a late modeling strategy, which take CLIP as a feature extractor and conduct
temporal modeling upon the embeddings of video frames
extracted independently from CLIP. Upon the highly semantic embeddings, though the structure is beneficial for
transferring the well-aligned visual-language representation
(i.e., high-level knowledge) to downstream tasks, it hardly
captures the spatial-temporal visual patterns (i.e., low-level
knowledge) among different frames, which is important for
video understanding. As shown in Fig. 1(b), compared to
the CLIP baseline that employs a naive mean pooling to
aggregate the features of all frames to obtain a video representation, the performance improvement brought by the
typical posterior structure, i.e. CLIP4clip-seqTrans [25] is
trivial, especially on the video action recognition task where

6555

