This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF in the Palm of Your Hand:
Corrective Augmentation for Robotics via Novel-View Synthesis
Allan Zhou*
Stanford

Moo Jin Kim∗
Stanford

Lirui Wang
MIT CSAIL

Pete Florence
Google

Chelsea Finn
Stanford

Abstract
Expert demonstrations are a rich source of supervision
for training visual robotic manipulation policies, but imitation learning methods often require either a large number
of demonstrations or expensive online expert supervision to
learn reactive closed-loop behaviors. In this work, we introduce SPARTN (Synthetic Perturbations for Augmenting
Robot Trajectories via NeRF): a fully-offline data augmentation scheme for improving robot policies that use eye-inhand cameras. Our approach leverages neural radiance
fields (NeRFs) to synthetically inject corrective noise into
visual demonstrations, using NeRFs to generate perturbed
viewpoints while simultaneously calculating the corrective
actions. This requires no additional expert supervision or
environment interaction, and distills the geometric information in NeRFs into a real-time reactive RGB-only policy.
In a simulated 6-DoF visual grasping benchmark, SPARTN
improves success rates by 2.8× over imitation learning
without the corrective augmentations and even outperforms
some methods that use online supervision. It additionally
closes the gap between RGB-only and RGB-D success rates,
eliminating the previous need for depth sensors. In realworld 6-DoF robotic grasping experiments from limited human demonstrations, our method improves absolute success
rates by 22.5% on average, including objects that are traditionally challenging for depth-based methods. See video
results at https://bland.website/spartn.

1. Introduction
Object grasping is a central problem in vision-based control and is fundamental to many robotic manipulation problems. While there has been significant progress in topdown bin picking settings [21, 34], 6-DoF grasping of arbitrary objects amidst clutter remains an open problem, and
is especially challenging for shiny or reflective objects that
are not visible to depth cameras. For example, the task of
grasping a wine glass from the stem shown in Figure 1 re* Equal contribution. Correspondence to ayz@cs.stanford.edu.

Figure 1. SPARTN is an offline data augmentation method for behavior cloning eye-in-hand visual policies. It simulates recovery
in a demonstration by using NeRFs to render high-fidelity observations (right) from noisy states, then generates corrective action
labels.

quires precise 6-DoF control (using full 3D translation and
3D rotation of the gripper) and closed-loop perception of
a transparent object. Traditional 6-DoF grasping pipelines
[8, 57] synthesize only one grasp pose and use a motion
planner to generate a collision-free trajectory to reach the
grasp [38, 40, 54, 60]. However, the use of open-loop trajectory execution prevents the system from using perceptual
feedback for reactive, precise grasping behavior. In this paper, we study how to learn closed-loop policies for 6-DoF
object grasping from RGB images, which can be trained
with imitation or reinforcement learning methods [58].
Imitation learning from expert demonstrations is a simple and promising approach to this problem, but is known
to suffer from compounding errors [46]. As a result, complex vision-based tasks can require online expert supervision [19, 46] or environment interaction [13, 44], both of
which are expensive and time-consuming to collect. On the
other hand, offline “feedback augmentation” methods [14,
22] can be effective at combating compounding errors, but
are severely limited in scope and thus far have not been ap-

17907

