This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PEFAT: Boosting Semi-supervised Medical Image Classification via Pseudo-loss
Estimation and Feature Adversarial Training
∗

∗

†

Qingjie Zeng1 Yutong Xie2 Zilin Lu1 Yong Xia1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
maxwell@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yutong.xie678@gmail.com, luzl@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yxia@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pseudo-labeling approaches have been proven beneficial
for semi-supervised learning (SSL) schemes in computer vision and medical imaging. Most works are dedicated to
finding samples with high-confidence pseudo-labels from
the perspective of model predicted probability. Whereas
this way may lead to the inclusion of incorrectly pseudolabeled data if the threshold is not carefully adjusted. In
addition, low-confidence probability samples are frequently
disregarded and not employed to their full potential. In
this paper, we propose a novel Pseudo-loss Estimation
and Feature Adversarial Training semi-supervised framework, termed as PEFAT, to boost the performance of multiclass and multi-label medical image classification from the
point of loss distribution modeling and adversarial training. Specifically, we develop a trustworthy data selection scheme to split a high-quality pseudo-labeled set, inspired by the dividable pseudo-loss assumption that clean
data tend to show lower loss while noise data is the opposite. Instead of directly discarding these samples with lowquality pseudo-labels, we present a novel regularization
approach to learn discriminate information from them via
injecting adversarial noises at the feature-level to smooth
the decision boundary. Experimental results on three medical and two natural image benchmarks validate that our
PEFAT can achieve a promising performance and surpass
other state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/maxwell0027/PEFAT.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various computer vision tasks [4–6,13,15,19]. This success has
∗ Equal contribution. † Y. Xia is the corresponding author. This work

was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62171377, and in part by the Key Research and Development
Program of Shaanxi Province, China, under Grant 2022GY-084.

(a) Illustration of traditional SSL methods (top) and our method (bottom).

(b) Probability distribution of labeled data (left) and validation data (right),
when using the warm-upped model on ISIC2018 dataset.

Figure 1. (a) shows the main difference between our method
and other SSL methods, our method selects high-quality pseudolabeled data by pseudo-loss estimation, and also injects featurelevel adversarial noises for better unlabeled data mining; (b) indicates the phenomenon that clean pseudo-labeled set is hard to
collect when using probability-based threshold, which is mainly
attributed to the over-confident prediction.

also made practical applications more accessible, including
medical image analysis (MIA) [10, 21, 30, 31, 35, 39]. However, unlike computer vision, annotating a large-scale medical image dataset requires expert knowledge and is timeconsuming and costly. Alternatively, unlabeled data can be
collected from clinical sites in a more available way, thereby
mitigating the cost of data annotation by leveraging these
unlabeled data.
Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) has drawn a lot of attention due to its superior performance, by only leveraging
limited labeled data and a vast number of unlabeled data.
Under the SSL setting, it is critical to mine adequate infor-

15671

