This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PartDistillation: Learning Parts from Instance Segmentation
Jang Hyun Cho*
UT Austin

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

Vignesh Ramanathan
Meta AI

janghyuncho7@utexas.edu

philkr@cs.utexas.edu

vigneshr@meta.com

[t]

Figure 1. PartDistillation distills a grouping of embedding distances of the penultimate later of a instance segmentation model into a part
segmentation model in a completely unsupervised manner. Above are some representative results obtained without any part supervision.

Abstract
We present a scalable framework to learn part segmentation from object instance labels. State-of-the-art instance
segmentation models contain a surprising amount of part
information. However, much of this information is hidden
from plain view. For each object instance, the part information is noisy, inconsistent, and incomplete. PartDistillation transfers the part information of an instance segmentation model into a part segmentation model through
self-supervised self-training on a large dataset. The resulting segmentation model is robust, accurate, and generalizes
well. We evaluate the model on various part segmentation
datasets. Our model outperforms supervised part segmentation in zero-shot generalization performance by a large
margin. Our model outperforms when finetuned on target datasets compared to supervised counterpart and other
baselines especially in few-shot regime. Finally, our model
provides a wider coverage of rare parts when evaluated
over 10K object classes. Code is at https://github.
com/facebookresearch/PartDistillation.
* This work was done during Jang Hyun Cho’s internship at Meta AI.

1. Introduction
The world of object parts is rich, diverse, and plentiful. Yet, even the most successful part segmentation benchmarks [10, 22] focus on only the few most prominent image classes, and are orders of magnitude smaller than corresponding object instance segmentation benchmarks [21,31].
Parts are harder to detect, annotate, and properly define.
In this paper, we show that instance segmentation
models, and indirectly much larger instance segmentation
datasets, provide plentiful supervision for part segmentation. Specifically, we show that the penultimate layer of
a pre-trained instance segmentation model readily groups
parts across a wide class of instances. We distill this part information from an instance segmentation model into a dedicated part segmentation framework, in a two stage process
we call PartDistillation. In the first stage, our model learns
to segment all possible parts in a class-agnostic fashion.
We bootstrap an iterative self-training process from clustered embeddings of an instance segmentation model. The
self-supervised nature of this process allows us to scale part
discovery to 10K object classes in 10M images without
any part-level supervision. In the second stage, our method

7152

