This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Re-thinking Model Inversion Attacks Against Deep Neural Networks
Ngoc-Bao Nguyen∗

Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran∗ Milad Abdollahzadeh Ngai-Man Cheung†
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)

thibaongoc nguyen@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,{keshigeyan,milad abdollahzadeh,ngaiman cheung}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Model inversion (MI) attacks aim to infer and reconstruct private training data by abusing access to a model.
MI attacks have raised concerns about the leaking of sensitive information (e.g. private face images used in training a face recognition system). Recently, several algorithms
for MI have been proposed to improve the attack performance. In this work, we revisit MI, study two fundamental
issues pertaining to all state-of-the-art (SOTA) MI algorithms, and propose solutions to these issues which lead to
a significant boost in attack performance for all SOTA MI.
In particular, our contributions are two-fold: 1) We analyze the optimization objective of SOTA MI algorithms, argue that the objective is sub-optimal for achieving MI, and
propose an improved optimization objective that boosts attack performance significantly. 2) We analyze “MI overfitting”, show that it would prevent reconstructed images from
learning semantics of training data, and propose a novel
“model augmentation” idea to overcome this issue. Our
proposed solutions are simple and improve all SOTA MI attack accuracy significantly. E.g., in the standard CelebA
benchmark, our solutions improve accuracy by 11.8% and
achieve for the first time over 90% attack accuracy. Our
findings demonstrate that there is a clear risk of leaking sensitive information from deep learning models. We
urge serious consideration to be given to the privacy implications. Our code, demo, and models are available
at https://ngoc- nguyen- 0.github.io/rethinking_model_inversion_attacks/.

1. Introduction
Privacy of deep neural networks (DNNs) has attracted
considerable attention recently [2, 3, 23, 31, 32]. Today,
DNNs are being applied in many domains involving private and sensitive datasets, e.g., healthcare, and security.
There is a growing concern of privacy attacks to gain knowledge of confidential datasets used in training DNNs. One
* Equal Contribution

† Corresponding Author

important category of privacy attacks is Model Inversion
(MI) [5, 8, 11, 12, 16, 36, 37, 39, 40] (Fig. 1). Given access to a model, MI attacks aim to infer and reconstruct features of the private dataset used in the training of the model.
For example, a malicious user may attack a face recognition
system to reconstruct sensitive face images used in training.
Similar to previous work [5, 36, 39], we will use face recognition models as the running example.
Related Work. MI attacks were first introduced in [12],
where simple linear regression is the target of attack. Recently, there is a fair amount of interest to extend MI to complex DNNs. Most of these attacks [5, 36, 39] focus on the
whitebox setting and the attacker is assumed to have complete knowledge of the model subject to attack. As many
platforms provide downloading of entire trained DNNs for
users [5, 39], whitebox attacks are important. [39] proposes
Generative Model Inversion (GMI) attack, where generic
public information is leveraged to learn a distributional
prior via generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13, 35],
and this prior is used to guide reconstruction of private
training samples. [5] proposes Knowledge-Enriched Distributional Model Inversion (KEDMI), where an inversionspecific GAN is trained by leveraging knowledge provided
by the target model. [36] proposes Variational Model Inversion (VMI), where a probabilistic interpretation of MI leads
to a variational objective for the attack. KEDMI and VMI
achieve SOTA attack performance (See Supplementary for
further discussion of related work).
In this paper, we revisit SOTA MI, study two issues
pertaining to all SOTA MI and propose solutions to these issues that are complementary and applicable to all SOTA MI
(Fig. 1). In particular, despite the range of approaches proposed in recent works, common and central to all these approaches is an inversion step which formulates reconstruction of training samples as an optimization. The optimization objective in the inversion step involves the identity loss,
which is the same for all SOTA MI and is formulated as the
negative log-likelihood for the reconstructed samples under
the model being attacked. While ideas have been proposed
to advance other aspects of MI, effective design of the identity loss has not been studied.

16384

