This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Recognition-Driven Image Restoration for Multiple Degradation with
Intrinsic Semantics Recovery
Zizheng Yang* Jie Huang* Jiahao Chang Man Zhou
Hu Yu Jinghao Zhang Feng Zhao†
University of Science and Technology of China
{yzz6000, hj0117, changjh, manman, yuhu520, jhaozhang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

Deep image recognition models suffer a signiﬁcant performance drop when applied to low-quality images since
they are trained on high-quality images. Although many
studies have investigated to solve the issue through image
restoration or domain adaptation, the former focuses on visual quality rather than recognition quality, while the latter requires semantic annotations for task-speciﬁc training.
In this paper, to address more practical scenarios, we propose a Visual Recognition-Driven Image Restoration network for multiple degradation, dubbed VRD-IR, to recover
high-quality images from various unknown corruption types
from the perspective of visual recognition within one model.
Concretely, we harmonize the semantic representations of
diverse degraded images into a uniﬁed space in a dynamic
manner, and then optimize them towards intrinsic semantics
recovery. Moreover, a prior-ascribing optimization strategy is introduced to encourage VRD-IR to couple with various downstream recognition tasks better. Our VRD-IR is
corruption- and recognition-agnostic, and can be inserted
into various recognition tasks directly as an image enhancement module. Extensive experiments on multiple image distortions demonstrate that our VRD-IR surpasses existing
image restoration methods and show superior performance
on diverse high-level tasks, including classiﬁcation, detection, and person re-identiﬁcation.

1. Introduction
We have witnessed the remarkable success made by deep
learning in image recognition tasks in recent years, such as
classiﬁcation [25,33,66], detection [23,46,62,68], and segmentation [9,51]. However, most of these approaches leverage the public datasets with high-quality images (e.g., Ima* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

CUB Top-1 Accuracy on VGG16 (%)

Abstract

VRD-IR

75

URIE

65

AirNet

Clean Image

MPRNet

FDGAN
55
45

DDP

35

Hazy Image
25

AODNet

15

EPRN
DehazeNet

5
12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

PSNR (dB)

Figure 1. Illustration of visual quality and recognition quality using different dehazing methods on hazy CUB [73]. The top-1 accuracy is evaluated by VGG16 [66] pre-trained on clean CUB. Our
method, VRD-IR, is shown in bold. As we can see, higher visual
quality doesn’t mean higher recognition quality.

geNet [64], CoCo [47]) for training, and they suffer a significant drop when applied to low-quality images (e.g., hazy,
rainy, and noisy), since the statistical properties of pixels
are ruined by image degradation [75].
An intuitive approach to tackle this issue is to restore the
distorted images ﬁrst, and then feed them into the succeeding recognition models. With this line, various image enhancement methods have been developed to improve the human visual quality of corrupted images [15, 90]. However,
the visual quality and the recognition quality of an image
differ fundamentally from one another. As shown in Fig. 1,
the restored image with higher visual effect cannot guarantee satisfactory performance on downstream high-level vision tasks [57, 67, 81].
Another feasible solution is to encourage the recognition
models to learn corruption-invariant feature representations,
which can be applied to low-quality images directly without
image recovery. For that purpose, numerous datasets have

14059

