This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local Connectivity-Based Density Estimation for Face Clustering
Junho Shin, Hyo-Jun Lee, Hyunseop Kim, Jong-Hyeon Baek, Daehyun Kim, Yeong Jun Koh∗
Chungnam National University
{wnsgh8190, gywns6287, hyunseop95, whdgusdl97, seven776484}@gmail.com, yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent graph-based face clustering methods predict the
connectivity of enormous edges, including false positive
edges that link nodes with different classes. However, those
false positive edges, which connect negative node pairs,
have the risk of integration of different clusters when their
connectivity is incorrectly estimated. This paper proposes a
novel face clustering method to address this problem. The
proposed clustering method employs density-based clustering, which maintains edges that have higher density. For
this purpose, we propose a reliable density estimation algorithm based on local connectivity between K nearest neighbors (KNN). We effectively exclude negative pairs from the
KNN graph based on the reliable density while maintaining
sufficient positive pairs. Furthermore, we develop a pairwise connectivity estimation network to predict the connectivity of the selected edges. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed clustering method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art clustering methods on largescale face clustering datasets and fashion image clustering
datasets. Our code is available at https://github.
com/illian01/LCE-PCENet

1. Introduction
Recently, with the release of large labeled face image
datasets [7, 9, 10], there are great progresses of face recognition [4, 13, 14, 22]. These data-driven approaches still demand massive annotated face data for improving face recognition models. Face clustering, which aims to divide enormous face images into different clusters, is essential to reduce annotation costs. Also, face clustering can be used in
real-world applications, including photo management and
organization of large-scale face images in social media, as
well as data collection.
Traditional clustering methods such as K-Means [16]
and DBSCAN [5] do not require training steps, but they
∗ Corresponding author

depend on specific conditions on data distributions and
are sensitive to hyper-parameters. Also, they work well
on small scale-data but are vulnerable to large-scale data.
Thus, they are not effective to face image data, which contains large-scale images and diverse distributions in general.
Recent researches [2,6,12,17,19,24,26] construct the KNN
graph and estimate the connectivity between nodes using
deep neural networks with supervised-learning, where the
connectivity represents the probability whether two nodes
belong to the same cluster. For instance, in [19, 24], graph
convolution networks (GCNs) are employed to estimate the
connectivity between nodes linked with edges in the KNN
graph. Also, the transformer [21] is adopted to exploit
the relationship among K nearest neighbors and estimate
the connectivity between neighbor nodes [17]. Thus, these
methods [17,19,24] estimate the connectivity between most
edges in the KNN graph, including many false positive
edges, which link nodes with different classes (negative
pairs). However, clustering performance is significantly degraded when the connectivity between negative pairs is incorrectly estimated.
Some methods [2, 12, 26] select a small number of edges
from the KNN graph to exclude negative pairs and perform
classification on the selected pairs only. A GCN-based confidence estimator is designed to select edges that link nodes
with higher confidence [26]. Density-based methods [2, 12]
estimate density for each node to choose edges that are directed to cluster centers. They pick only one pair for each
node based on the estimated density and determine whether
each pair belongs to the same cluster through pairwise classification. They achieve high precision performance by reducing negative pairs for classification candidates, but a
small number of classification candidates yield relatively
low recall performance.
Due to the imperfection of the pairwise classification, the
more negative pairs are selected as classification candidates,
the more nodes with different classes are likely to be merged
in the clustering process. On the other hand, insufficient
positive pairs may degrade recall scores since some nodes
that belong to the same class cannot be merged. Thus, it is
essential to reduce negative pairs while maintaining suffi-

13621

