This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

You Need Multiple Exiting: Dynamic Early Exiting for
Accelerating Unified Vision Language Model
Shengkun Tang1 , Yaqing Wang2 , Zhenglun Kong6 , Tianchi Zhang4 , Yao Li5 , Caiwen Ding3
Yanzhi Wang6 , Yi Liang2 , Dongkuan Xu1
1
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA 2 Google Research, New York, USA
3
University of Connecticut, Mansfield, USA 4 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
5
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA 6 Northeastern University, Boston, USA
shengkuntangwork@gmail.com, {yaqingwang, yiliang}@google.com, yaoli@email.unc.edu
{kong.zhe, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu, tonyztc@umich.edu, caiwen.ding@uconn.edu, dxu27@ncsu.edu

Abstract

Large-scale Transformer models bring significant improvements for various downstream vision language tasks
with a unified architecture. The performance improvements
come with increasing model size, resulting in slow inference
speed and increased cost for severing. While some certain
predictions benefit from the full computation of the largescale model, not all of inputs need the same amount of computation to conduct, potentially leading to computation resource waste. To handle this challenge, early exiting is proposed to adaptively allocate computational power in term of
input complexity to improve inference efficiency. The existing early exiting strategies usually adopt output confidence
based on intermediate layers as a proxy of input complexity
to incur the decision of skipping following layers. However, such strategies cannot be applied to encoder in the
widely-used unified architecture with both encoder and decoder due to difficulty of output confidence estimation in the
encoder layers. It is suboptimal in term of saving computation power to ignore the early exiting in encoder component. To address this issue, we propose a novel early exiting
strategy for unified vision language models, which allows
to dynamically skip the layers in encoder and decoder simultaneously in term of input layer-wise similarities with
multiple times of early exiting, namely MuE. By decomposing the image and text modalities in the encoder, MuE is
flexible and can skip different layers in term of modalities,
advancing the inference efficiency while minimizing performance drop. Experiments on the SNLI-VE and MS COCO
datasets show that the proposed approach MuE can reduce
expected inference time by up to 50% and 40% while maintaining 99% and 96% performance respectively.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in multi-modal Transformer-based
large-scale models [25, 28, 48, 57] bring improvements across various vision language tasks. Among
the Transformer-based models, the unified sequence-tosequence architecture [38, 46] has attracted much attention
due to its potential to become a universal computation
engine to diverse tasks. Although large-scale models
have achieved unattainable performance, their expensive
computational cost usually hinders their applications in
real-time scenarios.
While the scaling effect suggests that the performance
of the model benefits from its increased size, not every input requires the same amount of computation to achieve
similar performance. Such an observation is particularly
valid in visual language tasks, where inputs from different
modalities may require different amounts of computation.
Early exiting is a popular method to reduce computational
costs by adaptively skipping layers on top of the input while
preserving the general knowledge of the large-scale model.
Existing studies aim to deal with early exiting decisions
for encoder-only models [51, 52] or decoder components in
encoder-decoder architectures [8], but cannot induce early
exiting decisions for both components at the same time.
Considering that single-component strategies may be suboptimal in terms of saving computation cost, in this paper,
we investigate how to perform early exiting for both encoder and decoder components in a sequence-to-sequence
architecture to elucidate a new way to further improve inference efficiency.
Given the varied complexity of the inputs, it is natural
to consider skipping some layers of the encoder as well
as the decoder. Current decision mechanisms use classifiers to predict the output confidence of intermediate representations and stop computation if the confidence reaches

10781

