This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleRes: Transforming the Residuals for Real Image Editing with StyleGAN
Hamza Pehlivan

Yusuf Dalva
Bilkent University

Aysegul Dundar

{hamza.pehlivan,yusuf.dalva}@bilkent.edu.tr
adundar@cs.bilkent.edu.tr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) achieve high
quality synthesis of various objects that are hard to distinguish from real images [14, 21, 22, 41, 43]. These networks
also have an important property that they organize their latent space in a semantically meaningful way; as such, via
latent editing, one can manipulate an attribute of a generated image. This property makes GANs a promising technology for image attribute editing and not only for generated images but also for real images. However, for real images, one also needs to find the corresponding latent code
that will generate the particular real image. For this purpose, different GAN inversion methods are proposed, aiming to project real images to pretrained GAN latent space
[15, 30, 31, 33, 37]. Even though this is an extensively stud-

Smile

Color

HyperStyle [5]

HFGI [34]

e4e [32]

Input

Bobcut

StyleRes (Ours)

We present a novel image inversion framework and a
training pipeline to achieve high-fidelity image inversion
with high-quality attribute editing. Inverting real images
into StyleGAN’s latent space is an extensively studied problem, yet the trade-off between the image reconstruction fidelity and image editing quality remains an open challenge.
The low-rate latent spaces are limited in their expressiveness power for high-fidelity reconstruction. On the other
hand, high-rate latent spaces result in degradation in editing quality. In this work, to achieve high-fidelity inversion,
we learn residual features in higher latent codes that lower
latent codes were not able to encode. This enables preserving image details in reconstruction. To achieve high-quality
editing, we learn how to transform the residual features
for adapting to manipulations in latent codes. We train
the framework to extract residual features and transform
them via a novel architecture pipeline and cycle consistency
losses. We run extensive experiments and compare our
method with state-of-the-art inversion methods. Qualitative
metrics and visual comparisons show significant improvements. Code: https://github.com/hamzapehlivan/StyleRes

Pose

Figure 1. Comparison of our method with e4e, HFGI, and HyperStyle for the pose, bob cut hairstyle, smile removal, and color
change edits. Our method achieves high fidelity to the input and
high quality edits.

ied problem with significant progress, the trade-off between
image reconstruction fidelity and image editing quality remains an open challenge.
The trade-off between image reconstruction fidelity and
image editing quality is referred to as the distortioneditability trade-off [32]. Both are essential for real image editing. However, it is shown that the low-rate latent
spaces are limited in their expressiveness power, and not
every image can be inverted with high fidelity reconstruction [1, 27, 32, 34]. For that reason, higher bit encodings

1828

