This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simulated Annealing in Early Layers Leads to Better Generalization
Amir M. Sarfi1,2
Zahra Karimpour1
Muawiz Chaudhary1,2
Nasir M. Khalid 1,2
Mirco Ravanelli1,2
Sudhir Mudur1
Eugene Belilovsky1,2
1
Concordia University 2 Mila – Quebec AI Institute
Abstract
Recently, a number of iterative learning methods have
been introduced to improve generalization. These typically
rely on training for longer periods of time in exchange for
improved generalization. LLF (later-layer-forgetting) is a
state-of-the-art method in this category. It strengthens learning in early layers by periodically re-initializing the last
few layers of the network. Our principal innovation in this
work is to use Simulated annealing in EArly Layers (SEAL)
of the network in place of re-initialization of later layers.
Essentially, later layers go through the normal gradient descent process, while the early layers go through short stints
of gradient ascent followed by gradient descent. Extensive
experiments on the popular Tiny-ImageNet dataset benchmark and a series of transfer learning and few-shot learning
tasks show that we outperform LLF by a significant margin.
We further show that, compared to normal training, LLF
features, although improving on the target task, degrade
the transfer learning performance across all datasets we explored. In comparison, our method outperforms LLF across
the same target datasets by a large margin. We also show
that the prediction depth of our method is significantly lower
than that of LLF and normal training, indicating on average
better prediction performance.1

1. Introduction
Overfitting is a crucial challenge in supervised deep
learning, which prevents a neural network from performing
well on unseen data. This problem is particularly pervasive in smaller dataset regimes. Classical machine learning approaches to address this problem typically rely on
explicit regularization added as part of the optimization obThis research was partially funded by NSERC Discovery
Grant RGPIN2021-04104 and RGPIN-2019-05729.
We acknowledge the resources provided by Compute Canada and Calcul Quebec.
Correspondence to:
a.m.sarfi@gmail.com,
eugene.belilovsky@concordia.ca,
sudhir.mudur@concordia.ca
1 The code to reproduce our results is publicly available at:
https://github.com/amiiir-sarfi/SEAL

jective [37]. A number of implicit approaches are often
applied in training deep networks. These implicit methods
are usually easier to design than explicit terms added to the
objective function. For example, early stopping [42] and
dropout [32] are classical examples of implicit regularization methods. It can be shown that these techniques can be
shown to be linked directly to explicit regularization terms.
Consider the case of linear regression, early stopping can be
directly seen as Tikhonov regularization [42]. Indeed the use
of modified optimization strategies to improve generalization
is becoming pervasive in deep learning [7].
Recently, iterative training methods have been introduced
to improve generalization in deep networks. These allow
neural networks to be trained for many epochs while progressively improving generalization [9, 10, 35, 41, 46]. These
works typically rely on a notion of a generation, in which
a model is optimized towards a local minimum in a single
generation. Subsequently, in a new generation, the objective
function is modified, or the network is perturbed towards
a high loss, requiring a new generation of optimization towards a minimum. The earliest work on this topic focused
on self-distillation [10, 41], where, in each successive generation, a student network with the same architecture was
initialized and trained to mimic the softmax output distribution of the previous model. This procedure was theoretically
studied by [22] and provided the formal link to its explicit
regularization effects.
A number of other techniques were subsequently proposed. These have been characterized by Zhou et al. [46] as
instances of a forget-and-relearn scheme, where they define
forgetting as any process that worsens the training accuracy
of a model. In forget-and-relearn, the forgetting stage happens at the beginning of each generation where some part
of the weights are perturbed (e.g., by removing [8, 9] or by
re-initialization [35,46]), and the network is normally trained
for the rest of the generation. They further introduce a simple
forgetting method called later-layer-forgetting (LLF), where
they re-initialize the last few layers of the network. The intuition behind LLF comes from the concept of prediction depth
introduced by Baldock et al. [1]. The prediction depth of a
sample refers to the earliest layer, after which the layer-wise
k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) probe of all layers is the same as

20205

