This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Human Mesh Estimation from Virtual Markers
Xiaoxuan Ma1
1

Jiajun Su1

Chunyu Wang 3 *

Wentao Zhu1

Yizhou Wang1, 2, 4

School of Computer Science, Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
2
Inst. for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
4
Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology
{maxiaoxuan, sujiajun, wtzhu, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, chnuwa@microsoft.com

Abstract
Inspired by the success of volumetric 3D pose estimation, some recent human mesh estimators propose to estimate 3D skeletons as intermediate representations, from
which, the dense 3D meshes are regressed by exploiting the
mesh topology. However, body shape information is lost
in extracting skeletons, leading to mediocre performance.
The advanced motion capture systems solve the problem by
placing dense physical markers on the body surface, which
allows to extract realistic meshes from their non-rigid motions. However, they cannot be applied to wild images
without markers. In this work, we present an intermediate representation, named virtual markers, which learns
64 landmark keypoints on the body surface based on the
large-scale mocap data in a generative style, mimicking the
effects of physical markers. The virtual markers can be accurately detected from wild images and can reconstruct the
intact meshes with realistic shapes by simple interpolation.
Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on
three datasets. In particular, it surpasses the existing methods by a notable margin on the SURREAL dataset, which
has diverse body shapes. Code is available at https:
//github.com/ShirleyMaxx/VirtualMarker.

1. Introduction
3D human mesh estimation aims to estimate the 3D
positions of the mesh vertices that are on the body surface. The task has attracted a lot of attention from
the computer vision and computer graphics communities
[3, 10, 18, 24, 26, 29, 34, 36, 41, 49] because it can benefit
many applications such as virtual reality [14]. Recently, the
deep learning-based methods [7, 18, 28] have significantly
* Corresponding author

Image

Pose2Mesh

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Mesh estimation results on four examples with different
body shapes. Pose2Mesh [7] which uses 3D skeletons as the intermediate representation fails to predict accurate shapes. Our virtual
marker-based method obtains accurate estimates.

advanced the accuracy on the benchmark datasets.
The pioneer methods [18, 49] propose to regress the pose
and shape parameters of the mesh models such as SMPL [35]
directly from images. While straightforward, their accuracy is usually lower than the state-of-the-arts. The first
reason is that the mapping from the image features to the
model parameters is highly non-linear and suffers from
image-model misalignment [28]. Besides, existing mesh
datasets [15, 27, 37, 52] are small and limited to simple labo-

534

