This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semi-supervised Hand Appearance Recovery via Structure Disentanglement and
Dual Adversarial Discrimination
Zimeng Zhao

Binghui Zuo

Zhiyu Long

Yangang Wang*

Southeast University, China

Abstract
Enormous hand images with reliable annotations are
collected through marker-based MoCap . Unfortunately,
degradations caused by markers limit their application in
hand appearance reconstruction. A clear appearance recovery insight is an image-to-image translation trained with
unpaired data. However, most frameworks fail because
there exists structure inconsistency from a degraded hand
to a bare one. The core of our approach is to first disentangle the bare hand structure from those degraded images and
then wrap the appearance to this structure with a dual adversarial discrimination (DAD) scheme. Both modules take
full advantage of the semi-supervised learning paradigm:
The structure disentanglement benefits from the modeling
ability of ViT, and the translator is enhanced by the dual discrimination on both translation processes and translation
results. Comprehensive evaluations have been conducted
to prove that our framework can robustly recover photorealistic hand appearance from diverse marker-contained
and even object-occluded datasets. It provides a novel avenue to acquire bare hand appearance data for other downstream learning problems.

1. Introduction
Both bare hand appearance and vivid hand motion are of
great significance for virtual human creation. A dilemma
hinders the synchronous acquisition of these two: accurate motion capture [20, 27, 68] relies on markers that degrade hand appearance, whereas detailed appearance capture [50, 59, 75] in a markerless setting makes hand motion
hard to track. Is there a win-win solution that guarantees
high fidelity for both?
Existing ones include markerless MoCap [26,83,88] and
graphic rendering [16, 29, 80]. However, the former re* Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. This work
was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 62076061), in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu
Province (No. BK20220127).

Figure 1. Hand appearance recovery from diverse degradations. Compared with CycleGAN-based frameworks, we recover
more bare hand appearance while preserving more semantics.

quires a pose estimator [13, 47, 90] trained with laborious
annotations. And the latter often produces artifacts because it is hard to simulate photo-realistic lighting. Another insight is to “translate” the degraded appearances as
bare ones end-to-end. Nevertheless, it is tough to collect
paired data for its training. Moreover, most unsupervised
frameworks [56, 57, 91] are only feasible when the translating target and source are consistent in structure, while our
task needs to change those marker-related structures in the
source. To this end, our key idea is to first disentangle the
bare hand structure represented by a pixel-aligned map,
and then wrap the appearance on this bare one trained
with a dual adversarial discrimination (DAD) scheme.
There are two strategies to wrap the appearance from one
image to another. (i) Template-based strategies learn [6, 63,

12125

