This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Polarization Reconstruction with PDAVIS Events
Haiyang Mei1,2

Zuowen Wang2 Xin Yang1 Xiaopeng Wei1 Tobi Delbruck2
1
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
haiyang.mei@outlook.com, {xinyang, xpwei}@dlut.edu.cn, {zuowen, tobi}@ini.uzh.ch
Intensity

Polarization Event Camera
(PDAVIS)

Saturated

Blur

Angle of
Linear Polarization

π/2
0

Degree of
0
Linear Polarization

1

Subpixel Circuit

Frame

readout
Ln(I)

+

θon +
θoff +

Equation

ON
OFF

Events
Polarization
FireNet

E2P
(Ours)
Polarizer Array

Figure 1. The polarization dynamic and active pixel vision sensor (PDAVIS) [15] is integrated with a nanowire polarizer array. It concurrently outputs conventional polarization intensity frames and asynchronous polarization brightness change events with submillisecond
latency over a million-fold illumination range. Taking polarization events as input, the existing state of the art (SOA) method Polarization
FireNet [15, 41] can reconstruct the intensity video with high dynamic range (HDR) and less motion blur, but fails to correctly reconstruct
the angle and degree of linear polarization. Our Events to Polarization (E2P) achieves sharp output and HDR with a more accurate polarization reconstruction.

Abstract
The polarization event camera PDAVIS is a novel bioinspired neuromorphic vision sensor that reports both conventional polarization frames and asynchronous, continuously per-pixel polarization brightness changes (polarization events) with fast temporal resolution and large dynamic range. A deep neural network method (Polarization FireNet) was previously developed to reconstruct the
polarization angle and degree from polarization events for
bridging the gap between the polarization event camera
and mainstream computer vision. However, Polarization
FireNet applies a network pre-trained for normal eventbased frame reconstruction independently on each of four
channels of polarization events from four linear polarization angles, which ignores the correlations between channels and inevitably introduces content inconsistency between the four reconstructed frames, resulting in unsatisfactory polarization reconstruction performance. In this work,
we strive to train an effective, yet efficient, DNN model that

directly outputs polarization from the input raw polarization events. To this end, we constructed the first largescale event-to-polarization dataset, which we subsequently
employed to train our events-to-polarization network E2P.
E2P extracts rich polarization patterns from input polarization events and enhances features through cross-modality
context integration. We demonstrate that E2P outperforms
Polarization FireNet by a significant margin with no additional computing cost. Experimental results also show that
E2P produces more accurate measurement of polarization
than the PDAVIS frames in challenging fast and high dynamic range scenes. Code and data are publicly available
at: https://github.com/SensorsINI/e2p.

1. Introduction
Visual information is encoded in light by intensity, color,
and polarization [12]. Polarization is a property of transverse light waves that specifies the geometric orientation of

22149

