This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Align your Latents:
High-Resolution Video Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models
Andreas Blattmann1 *,†

Robin Rombach1 *,†

Seung Wook Kim2,3,4
1

LMU Munich

2

NVIDIA

3

Huan Ling2,3,4 *

Sanja Fidler2,3,4

Vector Institute

4

Tim Dockhorn2,3,5 *,†

Karsten Kreis2

University of Toronto

5

University of Waterloo

“A horse galloping through van Gogh’s ‘Starry Night’”

“A dog wearing virtual reality goggles in sunset, 4k, high resolution”

“The Orient Express driving through a fantasy landscape, animated oil on canvas”

Figure 1. Video LDM samples. Top: Text-to-Video generation. Bottom: 512 × 1024 resolution real driving scene video generation.

Abstract
Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) enable high-quality image synthesis while avoiding excessive compute demands
by training a diffusion model in a compressed lowerdimensional latent space. Here, we apply the LDM
paradigm to high-resolution video generation, a particularly resource-intensive task. We first pre-train an LDM
on images only; then, we turn the image generator into a
video generator by introducing a temporal dimension to the
latent space diffusion model and fine-tuning on encoded image sequences, i.e., videos. Similarly, we temporally align
diffusion model upsamplers, turning them into temporally
consistent video super resolution models. We focus on two
relevant real-world applications: Simulation of in-the-wild
driving data and creative content creation with text-to-video
modeling. In particular, we validate our Video LDM on

real driving videos of resolution 512 × 1024, achieving
state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, our approach
can easily leverage off-the-shelf pre-trained image LDMs,
as we only need to train a temporal alignment model in
that case. Doing so, we turn the publicly available, stateof-the-art text-to-image LDM Stable Diffusion into an efficient and expressive text-to-video model with resolution
up to 1280 × 2048. We show that the temporal layers
trained in this way generalize to different fine-tuned textto-image LDMs. Utilizing this property, we show the first
results for personalized text-to-video generation, opening
exciting directions for future content creation. Project page:
https://nv-tlabs.github.io/VideoLDM/

* Equal contribution.
† Andreas, Robin and Tim did the work during internships at NVIDIA.

22563

