This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dionysus: Recovering Scene Structures by
Dividing into Semantic Pieces
Likang Wang1 , Lei Chen1,2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Data Science and Analytics Thrust
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
1

lwangcg@connect.ust.hk,

Abstract
Most existing 3D reconstruction methods result in either
detail loss or unsatisfying efficiency. However, effectiveness and efficiency are equally crucial in real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving and augmented reality.
We argue that this dilemma comes from wasted resources
on valueless depth samples. This paper tackles the problem by proposing a novel learning-based 3D reconstruction framework named Dionysus. Our main contribution
is to find out the most promising depth candidates from estimated semantic maps. This strategy simultaneously enables high effectiveness and efficiency by attending to the
most reliable nominators. Specifically, we distinguish unreliable depth candidates by checking the cross-view semantic
consistency and allow adaptive sampling by redistributing
depth nominators among pixels. Experiments on the most
popular datasets confirm our proposed framework’s effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D structures from 2D images is one of
the most fundamental computer vision tasks [7, 25, 26,
68] and has wide applications in various scenarios (e.g.,
autonomous driving, metaverse, and augmented reality).
Thanks to the popularity of smartphones, high-quality RGB
videos are always obtainable. Since each image describes
only a tiny piece of the whole scenario [31, 33], reconstruction from multiple frames [44, 50] is more attractive than
from a single image [13, 14]. Although model quality and
real-time response are equally essential, the existing 3D
reconstruction methods have difficulty performing well in
both aspects. For example, multi-view stereo (MVS) models [63,73] consume seconds on each image, while real-time
approaches [9, 57, 64] lead to missing details or large-area

leichen@cse.ust.hk

mess.
The mainstream reconstruction methods [15,63,72] generally sample a set of candidate depths or voxels, then use
neural networks (e.g., CNNs [21] and transformers [58]) to
evaluate each candidate’s reliability. The candidate number is generally small because of the evaluation networks’
high computational demand. Consequently, the reconstruction quality becomes unsatisfying because the ground truth
is less likely to be sampled.
Pursuing a higher candidate sampling density, CasMVSNet [15] shrinks the depth range in a coarse-to-fine fashion;
IS-MVSNet [63] searches for new candidates according to
the estimated error distribution; NeuralRecon [57] prunes
the voxels thought to be unreliable in the previous predictions. All these methods select candidates according to the
initial depth estimations. Notably, small objects and delicate structures are hard to recover in the beginning lowresolution phase because they require a high resolution to
distinguish. As a result, the final reconstruction often suffers from missing objects and crude details because the actual depth can be outside the final search range when the
initial estimation is unreliable. However, decent reconstruction quality on delicate objects is crucial to many real-world
applications. Specifically, traffic accidents may occur if
any pedestrian or warning post fails to recover; frequent
collisions and even fire disasters might happen if cleaning
robots cannot well reconstruct table legs and electric cables. Besides the defects in meticulous structures, coarseto-fine models also have room to improve efficiency. As
mentioned, the mainstream coarse-to-fine methods sample
and then evaluate initial candidates multiple times to locate
the most valuable candidate depths. Notably, examining the
preliminary candidates may be more expensive (usually two
times more [15, 78]) than assessing the final nominators.
In addition to the costly evaluation networks widely
adopted in coarse-to-fine architectures, another natural so-

12576

