This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perception-Oriented Single Image Super-Resolution using Optimal Objective
Estimation

1

Seung Ho Park1,2 , Young Su Moon2 , Nam Ik Cho1,3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, INMC, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Visual Display Division, Samsung Electronics, Korea
3
IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea

Abstract
Single-image super-resolution (SISR) networks trained
with perceptual and adversarial losses provide highcontrast outputs compared to those of networks trained with
distortion-oriented losses, such as L1 or L2. However, it
has been shown that using a single perceptual loss is insufficient for accurately restoring locally varying diverse
shapes in images, often generating undesirable artifacts or
unnatural details. For this reason, combinations of various losses, such as perceptual, adversarial, and distortion
losses, have been attempted, yet it remains challenging to
find optimal combinations. Hence, in this paper, we propose a new SISR framework that applies optimal objectives
for each region to generate plausible results in overall areas
of high-resolution outputs. Specifically, the framework comprises two models: a predictive model that infers an optimal
objective map for a given low-resolution (LR) input and a
generative model that applies a target objective map to produce the corresponding SR output. The generative model is
trained over our proposed objective trajectory representing
a set of essential objectives, which enables the single network to learn various SR results corresponding to combined
losses on the trajectory. The predictive model is trained using pairs of LR images and corresponding optimal objective
maps searched from the objective trajectory. Experimental
results on five benchmarks show that the proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art perception-driven SR methods
in LPIPS, DISTS, PSNR, and SSIM metrics. The visual
results also demonstrate the superiority of our method in
perception-oriented reconstruction. The code is available
at https://github.com/seungho-snu/SROOE.

1. Introduction
The purpose of single image super-resolution (SISR) is
to estimate a high-resolution (HR) image corresponding to
a given low-resolution (LR) input. SISR has many applica-

img 012
(Urban100)

HR
(PSNR↑ / LPIPS↓)

SRGAN [23]
(21.06 / 0.1521)

ESRGAN [46]
(20.80 / 0.1182)

OOE Map

SROOE (Ours)
(21.71 / 0.1030)

RankSRGAN [53]
(21.05 / 0.1462)

SPSR [31]
(21.27 / 0.1241)

Figure 1. Visual and quantitative comparison. The proposed SROOE shows a higher PSNR, LR-PSNR [28] and lower
LPIPS [52] than other state-of-the-art methods, i.e., lower distortion and higher perceptual quality.

tions, mainly as a pre-processing step of computer vision or
image analysis tasks, such as medical [13, 34, 51], surveillance [11, 43], and satellite image analysis [30, 41]. However, SISR is an ill-posed problem in that infinitely many
HR images correspond to a single LR image. Recently, the
performance of SISR has been greatly improved by adopting deep neural networks [7, 8, 15, 18, 21, 22, 26, 42, 54, 55].
Pixel-wise distortion-oriented losses (L1 and L2) were
widely used in early research, which helped to obtain a high
signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR). However, these losses lead
the model to generate an average of possible HR solutions,
which are usually blurry and thus visually not pleasing.
Subsequently, perception-oriented losses, such as perceptual loss [19] and generative adversarial loss [12], were

1725

