This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Phone2Proc: Bringing Robust Robots Into Our Chaotic World
Matt Deitke∗†ψ , Rose Hendrix∗† , Ali Farhadiψ ,
Kiana Ehsani† , Aniruddha Kembhavi†ψ
†
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI, ψ University of Washington, Seattle
https://phone2proc.allenai.org/

Figure 1. Successfully deploying agents trained in simulation to the real world has generally proved fraught - we present P HONE 2P ROC, a
simple approach that uses a cellphone to scan an environment and procedurally generate targeted training scene variations of that location,
whose usage results in successful and robust agents in the real environment.

Abstract
Training embodied agents in simulation has become
mainstream for the embodied AI community. However,
these agents often struggle when deployed in the physical
world due to their inability to generalize to real-world environments. In this paper, we present Phone2Proc, a method
that uses a 10-minute phone scan and conditional procedural generation to create a distribution of training scenes
that are semantically similar to the target environment. The
generated scenes are conditioned on the wall layout and
arrangement of large objects from the scan, while also
sampling lighting, clutter, surface textures, and instances
of smaller objects with randomized placement and materials. Leveraging just a simple RGB camera, training with
Phone2Proc shows massive improvements from 34.7% to
70.7% success rate in sim-to-real ObjectNav performance
∗ Equal contribution.

across a test suite of over 200 trials in diverse real-world
environments, including homes, offices, and RoboTHOR.
Furthermore, Phone2Proc’s diverse distribution of generated scenes makes agents remarkably robust to changes in
the real world, such as human movement, object rearrangement, lighting changes, or clutter.

1. Introduction
The embodied AI research community has increasingly
relied on visual simulators [30, 49, 61] to train embodied
agents, with the expectation that the resulting policies can
be transferred onto robots in the physical world. While
agents trained within simulated environments have shown
increased capabilities, progress in successfully deploying
these policies onto physical robots has been limited.
Robots trained in simulation must overcome daunting
challenges if they are to work effectively in a real space such
as our home. First, they must overcome the generalization

9665

