This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning a 3D Morphable Face Reflectance Model from Low-cost Data
Yuxuan Han1
1

Zhibo Wang2

Feng Xu1

School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Training

2

SenseTime Research

Morphable Face Reflectance Model

Multi-PIE
+

×

+

×

+

×

FFHQ
Low-cost Data

Diffuse Albedo

Linear Combination Weights for Different Specular Exponents

Figure 1. We propose the first 3D morphable face reflectance model with spatially varying BRDF and a technique to train the model with
low-cost publicly-available data. We represent face reflectance as a Lambertian BRDF combined with the linear combination of BlinnPhong BRDFs with different predefined specular exponents. The reflectance parameters for each face vertex are the diffuse albedo and a
set of weights. We show the first 3 principal components of diffuse albedo and spatially varying weights here in nonlinear sRGB space.

Abstract
Modeling non-Lambertian effects such as facial specularity leads to a more realistic 3D Morphable Face Model.
Existing works build parametric models for diffuse and
specular albedo using Light Stage data. However, only diffuse and specular albedo cannot determine the full BRDF.
In addition, the requirement of Light Stage data is hard to
fulfill for the research communities. This paper proposes
the first 3D morphable face reflectance model with spatially varying BRDF using only low-cost publicly-available
data. We apply linear shiness weighting into parametric
modeling to represent spatially varying specular intensity
and shiness. Then an inverse rendering algorithm is developed to reconstruct the reflectance parameters from nonLight Stage data, which are used to train an initial morphable reflectance model. To enhance the model’s generalization capability and expressive power, we further propose an update-by-reconstruction strategy to finetune it on
an in-the-wild dataset. Experimental results show that our
method obtains decent rendering results with plausible facial specularities. Our code is released here.

1. Introduction
3D Morphable Face Models (3DMM) [4, 19] have attracted much attention in the past two decades, as it pro-

vides a powerful and compact statistical prior of 3D face
geometry and appearance with dense point-to-point correspondence to various downstream applications like face reconstruction [14,22,52,55,56], rendering [13,53,57,58,70],
and animation [3,7,9,20,21,68]. Existing works [52,54,55]
have demonstrated promising results for improving the generalization capability and expressive power of 3DMM under
the assumption that faces are Lambertian surfaces. However, it is still challenging to model non-Lambertian effects
such as facial specularity in 3DMM, which can lead to a
more realistic face model.
A few recent works [37, 50] involve non-Lambertian facial reflectance in the morphable face model. Using a Light
Stage [11, 24, 39], they capture diffuse and specular albedo
maps of tens of participants. Then, they model the diffuse and specular albedo by training a PCA model [50]
or a deep generative network [37] on the acquired data.
However, only the diffuse and specular albedo cannot determine the complete Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution
Function (BRDF). Thus, other works [15–17] set the remaining reflectance parameters (e.g. specular exponent for
the Blinn-Phong BRDF [5], roughness for the TorranceSparrow BRDF [59]) of all face vertices to a reasonable
value to characterize specular shiness and obtain the complete BRDF. As shown in Figure 7, these spatially uniform
parameters lead to unpleasing rendering results since face
reflectance is inherently spatially varying [65]. Besides, the

8598

