This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRACE: 5D Temporal Regression of Avatars
with Dynamic Cameras in 3D Environments
Yu Sun1 * Qian Bao2† Wu Liu2† Tao Mei4 Michael J. Black3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Explore Academy of JD.com
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 4 HiDream.ai Inc.
yusunhit@gmail.com, baoqian@jd.com, liuwu1@jd.com
tmei@hidream.ai, black@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1. 5D temporal reconstruction of multiple 3D people in global coordinates with a dynamic camera. We introduce TRACE,
a monocular one-stage method with a holistic 5D representation that enables the network to explicitly reason about human motion across
time. Unlike previous methods [44,45] (b) that regress all 3D people from each frame in camera coordinates, TRACE (c) tracks the subjects
(a) presented in the first frame through time and recovers their global trajectories in global coordinates in one shot.

Abstract
Although the estimation of 3D human pose and shape
(HPS) is rapidly progressing, current methods still cannot reliably estimate moving humans in global coordinates,
which is critical for many applications. This is particularly
challenging when the camera is also moving, entangling
human and camera motion. To address these issues, we
adopt a novel 5D representation (space, time, and identity)
that enables end-to-end reasoning about people in scenes.
Our method, called TRACE, introduces several novel ar-

chitectural components. Most importantly, it uses two new
“maps” to reason about the 3D trajectory of people over
time in camera, and world, coordinates. An additional
memory unit enables persistent tracking of people even during long occlusions. TRACE is the first one-stage method to
jointly recover and track 3D humans in global coordinates
from dynamic cameras. By training it end-to-end, and using full image information, TRACE achieves state-of-the-art
performance on tracking and HPS benchmarks. The code1
and dataset2 are released for research purposes.

1 https://www.yusun.work/TRACE/TRACE.html

* This work was done when Yu Sun was an intern at JD.com.
† Corresponding author.

2 https://github.com/Arthur151/DynaCam

8856

