This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flexible-Cm GAN: Towards Precise 3D Dose Prediction in Radiotherapy
Riqiang Gao
Bin Lou
Zhoubing Xu
Dorin Comaniciu
Ali Kamen
Digital Technology and Innovation, Siemens Healthineers, Princeton NJ 08540
riqiang.gao@siemens-healthineers.com

Abstract
Deep learning has been utilized in knowledge-based radiotherapy planning in which a system trained with a set
of clinically approved plans is employed to infer a threedimensional dose map for a given new patient. However,
previous deep methods are primarily limited to simple scenarios, e.g., a fixed planning type or a consistent beam angle configuration. This in fact limits the usability of such
approaches and makes them not generalizable over a larger
set of clinical scenarios. Herein, we propose a novel conditional generative model, Flexible-Cm GAN, utilizing additional information regarding planning types and various
beam geometries. A miss-consistency loss is proposed to
deal with the challenge of having a limited set of conditions on the input data, e.g., incomplete training samples.
To address the challenges of including clinical preferences,
we derive a differentiable shift-dose-volume loss to incorporate the well-known dose-volume histogram constraints.
During inference, users can flexibly choose a specific planning type and a set of beam angles to meet the clinical requirements. We conduct experiments on an illustrative face
dataset to show the motivation of Flexible-Cm GAN and further validate our model’s potential clinical values with two
radiotherapy datasets. The results demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method in a practical heterogeneous radiotherapy planning application compared to
existing deep learning-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Radiation therapy (RT) is an essential modality for cancer treatment and is applicable to about 50% of patients
[12, 25]. However, many studies demonstrate that millions
of patients currently do not have access to radiotherapy due
to limited infrastructures and trained experts to handle complex planning procedures [15, 20, 59].
RT treatment planning is a process that involves a multidisciplinary team (e.g., oncologists, therapists, physicists)
to figure out the treatment beam configurations and intensity
for cancer patients [25]. The modern RT treatments can be

(a) edge vs. shoe (2D)

(b) CT vs. dose (beam-dynamic)

(c) CT vs. dose (beam-static)

(d) CT vs. dose (beam-static)

Figure 1. Vanilla image-to-image translation (a) and dose prediction (b)-(d). (a) has a clear shape match between the source and
Restricted © Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc., 2022
target domains. (b)-(d)
illustrate our challenges, including heterogeneous patterns, no clear match between source and target, and
3D data (showing 2D for simplicity) is harder than 2Ds.

divided into two broad categories using static- or dynamicbeams. The intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) [56]
and volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) [48, 57] are
the most common static- and dynamic- beam types, respectively [10]. IMRT uses several personalized but fixed beam
angles, delivering radiation precisely to the tumor while
sparing the surrounding normal tissues according to the location of the tumor and anatomical organs at risk (OARs).
During VMAT, the treatment beam is on while its treatment
head is moving on an arc trajectory [10]. As shown in Figure 1, the dose maps of static- and dynamic- beam RT plans
can look significantly different, which results from different delivery nature energy fluences in those two modes.
Moreover, even using the same planning mode, different
configurations (e.g., beam angles, isocenter) are needed for
different patients due to different tumor locations/shapes,
anatomy structures, and other clinical parameters.
Knowledge-based planning (KBP) aims to use computer
technologies to reduce the time for individualized treatment
plans [6, 43]. Historically, KBP technologies relied on statistical models or handcrafted features [46, 54]. While providing promising results, these methods are hard to generalize beyond an inherently targeted limited set of scenarios [33]. Advanced artificial intelligence (e.g., deep learning [37]) has shown great potential to alter the way oncology therapies are administered [25, 53]. An integral part of

715

