This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Complexity-guided Slimmable Decoder for Efficient Deep Video Compression
Zhihao Hu
Beihang University, China

Dong Xu
University of Hong Kong, China

huzhihao@buaa.edu.cn

dongxu@hku.hk

Abstract
In this work, we propose the complexity-guided
slimmable decoder (cgSlimDecoder) in combination with
skip-adaptive entropy coding (SaEC) for efficient deep
video compression. Specifically, given the target complexity constraints, in our cgSlimDecoder, we introduce a set
of new channel width selection modules to automatically
decide the optimal channel width of each slimmable convolution layer. By optimizing the complexity-rate-distortion
related objective function to directly learn the parameters
of the newly introduced channel width selection modules
and other modules in the decoder, our cgSlimDecoder can
automatically allocate the optimal numbers of parameters
for different types of modules (e.g., motion/residual decoder
and the motion compensation network) and simultaneously
support multiple complexity levels by using a single learnt
decoder instead of multiple decoders. In addition, our proposed SaEC can further accelerate the entropy decoding
procedure in both motion and residual decoders by simply
skipping the entropy coding process for the elements in the
encoded feature maps that are already well-predicted by the
hyperprior network. As demonstrated in our comprehensive
experiments, our newly proposed methods cgSlimDecoder
and SaEC are general and can be readily incorporated into
three widely used deep video codecs (i.e., DVC, FVC and
DCVC) to significantly improve their coding efficiency with
negligible performance drop.

1. Introduction
Recently, learning-based video codecs [1, 15, 22, 28]
have achieved promising coding performance and outperformed widely used commercial codecs like H.264 [46]
and H.265 [40]. However, learning-based video codecs are
always inefficient due to computationally complex operations. In practical application scenarios, it is desirable that
the video codecs can decode the videos in real-time. Additionally, the decoders from different devices can afford different computational complexities under different scenarios. For example, a cloud server can afford higher compu-

tational resource while a smartphone can afford much less
computational resource. Therefore, it is also desirable to
develop a video decoder that can simultaneously support
multiple computational complexities.
In order to achieve practical video codecs, two aspects
should be taken into consideration during decoding. First,
there are different modules in most decoders (see Figure 1
(a)) and the network structure of different modules in each
decoder (e.g., motion decoder, residual decoder and motion
compensation networks) needs to be carefully designed to
meet different complexity constraints. However, different
modules need to handle different types of information (e.g.,
residual information versus motion information) and thus
require different channel widths under different complexity constraints, which makes it hard to manually design the
optimal channel widths for different convolution layers in
different modules. Second, the encoded bit-streams need to
be entropy decoded back into the entire feature map. However, most elements in the feature map are already precisely
predicted by the hyperprior networks [33]. As a result, it
is less efficient to entropy code the entire feature map as it
will also degrade the decoding efficiency.
Considering these two aspects, in this work, we propose
a complexity-guided slimmable decoder (cgSlimDecoder)
in combination with skip-adaptive entropy coding (SaEC)
for efficient deep video coding. Motivated by the slimmable
neural networks [21,53] for various visual recognition tasks,
for the decoder network, we propose a complexity-guided
slimmable decoder by additionally introducing a set of new
channel width selection modules to automatically decide
the optimal channel width of each slimmable convolution
layer under different complexity constraints. By learning
the parameters from our complexity-guided channel width
selection modules and other modules (e.g., the slimmable
convolution layers) through optimizing the complexity-ratedistortion based objective function, our slimmable decoder
can automatically select the optimal channel widths for different modules such that the target complexity constraints
can be optimally allocated to different modules (e.g., the
motion/residual decoder and the motion compensation network). When the computational resource is sufficient (resp.,

14358

