This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ERM-KTP: Knowledge-level Machine Unlearning via Knowledge Transfer
Shen Lin1 *, Xiaoyu Zhang1 *, Chenyang Chen1 , Xiaofeng Chen1†, Willy Susilo2
1

Xidian University, 2 University of Wollongong
linshen@stu.xidian.edu.cn, xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn, cychen 1@stu.xidian.edu.cn,
xfchen@xidian.edu.cn, wsusilo@uow.edu.au

Abstract
Machine unlearning can fortify the privacy and security
of machine learning applications. Unfortunately, the exact unlearning approaches are inefficient, and the approximate unlearning approaches are unsuitable for complicated
CNNs. Moreover, the approximate approaches have serious
security flaws because even unlearning completely different
data points can produce the same contribution estimation
as unlearning the target data points. To address the above
problems, we try to define machine unlearning from the
knowledge perspective, and we propose a knowledge-level
machine unlearning method, namely ERM-KTP. Specifically, we propose an entanglement-reduced mask (ERM)
structure to reduce the knowledge entanglement among
classes during the training phase. When receiving the unlearning requests, we transfer the knowledge of the nontarget data points from the original model to the unlearned
model and meanwhile prohibit the knowledge of the target data points via our proposed knowledge transfer and
prohibition (KTP) method. Finally, we will get the unlearned model as the result and delete the original model
to accomplish the unlearning process. Especially, our proposed ERM-KTP is an interpretable unlearning method because the ERM structure and the crafted masks in KTP
can explicitly explain the operation and the effect of unlearning data points. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness, efficiency, high fidelity, and scalability of
the ERM-KTP unlearning method. Code is available at
https://github.com/RUIYUN-ML/ERM-KTP

1. Introduction
In recent years, many countries have raised concerns
about protecting personal privacy. The privacy legislation,
e.g., the well-known European Union’s GDPR [19], have
been promulgated to oblige information service providers
* Both authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author

to remove personal data when receiving a request from
the data owner, i.e., the right-to-be-forgotten. Besides, the
GDPR stipulates that the service providers should remove
the corresponding impact of the data requested by the data
owner, in which the machine learning models are the most
representative. Many kinds of research demonstrate that the
machine learning models can memorize knowledge of the
data points, e.g., the membership inference attack [7,14,15]
can infer whether a data point is in the training set or not.
A naive approach is retraining the model after removing the target data points from the training set, but the human resources and materials consumed are costly. Thus,
aiming to efficiently remove data as well as their generated contribution to the model, a new ML privacy protection research direction emerged, called machine unlearning.
A good deal of related work attempted to solve the dataremoving challenge of inefficient retraining, and there are
two representative research fields, including exact unlearning [1] and approximate unlearning [3–5]. Unfortunately,
these approaches usually require huge computational, storage overhead, and memory requirements for class-specific
machine unlearning tasks on the complicated convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). Furthermore, they may compromise the model’s performance and even cause disastrous
forgetting. Most significantly, Thudi et al. [18] believed that
such approximate unlearning approaches have serious security flaws because they usually define machine unlearning
as the distribution difference between the unlearned model
and the retrained model. According to this definition, even
unlearning completely different data points can produce the
same contribution estimation as unlearning the target data
points.
Unlearning algorithms are difficult to implement on deep
learning models because these models are often seen as
a black box and lack interpretability, which makes data
points’ contributions challenging to estimate. Though many
related works [2, 10, 16, 21] attempted to improve the interpretability of deep learning models, they can not apply to
machine unlearning directly. For example, Zhou et al. [22]

20147

