This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hi-LASSIE: High-Fidelity Articulated Shape and Skeleton Discovery
from Sparse Image Ensemble
Chun-Han Yao1*
1

Wei-Chih Hung2 Yuanzhen Li3 Michael Rubinstein3
Ming-Hsuan Yang134 Varun Jampani3

UC Merced

Skeleton discovery

2

3

Google Research

4

Yonsei University

3D shape or skeleton template

…

…
Image ensemble

Waymo

Shared parts

Instance parts

Textured

Input

Instance parts

Textured

Figure 1. Hi-LASSIE overview and sample reconstructions. Given 20-30 images of an articulated animal class, we first discover a
generic 3D skeleton, then jointly optimize the camera viewpoints, skeleton articulations, as well as shared and instance-specific neural part
shapes. Hi-LASSIE is able to produce high-fidelity shapes and texture without any pre-defined shape model or 3D skeleton annotations.
The part-based representation also allows applications like animation and motion re-targeting.

Abstract
Automatically estimating 3D skeleton, shape, camera
viewpoints, and part articulation from sparse in-the-wild
image ensembles is a severely under-constrained and challenging problem. Most prior methods rely on large-scale
image datasets, dense temporal correspondence, or human
annotations like camera pose, 2D keypoints, and shape templates. We propose Hi-LASSIE, which performs 3D articulated reconstruction from only 20-30 online images in the
wild without any user-defined shape or skeleton templates.
We follow the recent work of LASSIE that tackles a similar
problem setting and make two significant advances. First,
instead of relying on a manually annotated 3D skeleton,
we automatically estimate a class-specific skeleton from the
selected reference image. Second, we improve the shape
reconstructions with novel instance-specific optimization
strategies that allow reconstructions to faithful fit on each
instance while preserving the class-specific priors learned
* Work done as a student researcher at Google.

across all images. Experiments on in-the-wild image ensembles show that Hi-LASSIE obtains higher fidelity stateof-the-art 3D reconstructions despite requiring minimum
user input. Project page: chhankyao.github.io/
hi-lassie/

1. Introduction
3D assets of articulated animals enable numerous applications in games, movies, AR/VR, etc. However, building
high-fidelity 3D models of articulated shapes like animal
bodies is labor intensive either via manual creation or 3D
scanning. Recent advances in deep learning and 3D representations have significantly improved the quality of 3D
reconstruction from images. Much of the success depends
on the availability of either rich 3D annotations or multiview captures, both of which are not always available in a
real-world scenario. A more practical and scalable alternative is automatic 3D reconstruction from online images
as it is straightforward to obtain image ensembles of any
animal category (e.g., image search results). In this work,

4853

