This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Topology-Guided Multi-Class Cell Context Generation for Digital Pathology
Shahira Abousamra1 , Rajarsi Gupta2 , Tahsin Kurc2 , Dimitris Samaras1 , Joel Saltz2 and Chao Chen2
1
2

Stony Brook University, Department of Computer Science, USA

Stony Brook University, Department of Biomedical Informatics, USA

Abstract
In digital pathology, the spatial context of cells is important for cell classification, cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
To model such complex cell context, however, is challenging. Cells form different mixtures, lineages, clusters and
holes. To model such structural patterns in a learnable
fashion, we introduce several mathematical tools from spatial statistics and topological data analysis. We incorporate
such structural descriptors into a deep generative model as
both conditional inputs and a differentiable loss. This way,
we are able to generate high quality multi-class cell layouts
for the first time. We show that the topology-rich cell layouts
can be used for data augmentation and improve the performance of downstream tasks such as cell classification.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has advanced our learning ability in digital
pathology. Deep-learning-based methods have achieved impressive performance in various tasks including but not limited to: cell detection and classification [2,23,24,52], nuclei
instance segmentation [8, 18, 19, 21, 26, 32–34, 42, 51], survival prediction and patient outcome [1,28,30,49], interpretation of multiplex immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence imagery [3, 14–16] and many others.
Despite the rapid progress in recent years, pathology
image analysis is still suffering from limited observations.
The available annotated images are still scarce relative to
the highly heterogeneous and complex tumor microenvironment driven by numerous biological factors. The limitation
in training data constraints a learning algorithm’s prediction power. To this end, one solution is to train generative
models that can generate realistic pathology images to augment existing data. Generative models have been proposed
to help learning methods in various tasks such as nuclei segmentation [7, 21], survival prediction [44] and cancer grade
prediction [47].
Generating pathology images usually involves two steps:
(1) generating spatial layout of cells and (2) filling in stains
and textures inside and outside cell nuclei masks. Most ex-

Figure 1. Overview of our multi-class cell context generator.

isting methods only focus on the second step. They either
generate random cell positions [21] or directly copy nuclei
masks from existing images [17]. These methods miss the
opportunity to learn the rich cell spatial context carrying
critical information about cancer biology.
Spatial context includes how different types of cells (tumor, lymphocyte, stromal, etc) are distributed around each
other, as well as how they form different structural patterns
such as clusters, holes and lineages. Plenty of evidence
have demonstrated the importance of spatial context in cancer diagnosis and prognosis [31, 53]. One good example is
the clinical significance of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs), i.e., lymphocytes residing within the border of invasive tumors [37–40]. The spatial distribution of stromal
cells in the vicinity of tumor has been shown to be directly
related to cancer outcomes [35,53]. Tumor budding, i.e., the
presence of isolated or small clusters of tumor cells at the
invasive tumor front, is a prognosis biomarker associated
with an increased risk of lymph node metastasis in colorectal carcinoma and other solid malignancies [29]. In prostate
cancer tissue samples, plenty of loopy cellular structures are
formed corresponding to glands. Their integrity, known as
the Gleason score, is a good indicator of cancer progression [48].

3323

