This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt, Generate, then Cache:
Cascade of Foundation Models makes Strong Few-shot Learners
Renrui Zhang∗2,3 , Xiangfei Hu∗3 , Bohao Li3 , Siyuan Huang3 , Hanqiu Deng3
Yu Qiao3 , Peng Gao†1,3 , Hongsheng Li2,4
1

2

Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
CUHK MMLab 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 CPII under InnoHK
{zhangrenrui, huxiangfei, gaopeng}@pjlab.org.cn
hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

CLIP

GPT-3
What a dog looks like?

Visual recognition in low-data regimes requires deep neural
networks to learn generalized representations from limited
training samples. Recently, CLIP-based methods have
shown promising few-shot performance benefited from the
contrastive language-image pre-training. We then question,
if the more diverse pre-training knowledge can be cascaded
to further assist few-shot representation learning. In this
paper, we propose CaFo, a Cascade of Foundation models
that incorporates diverse prior knowledge of various pretraining paradigms for better few-shot learning. Our CaFo
incorporates CLIP’s language-contrastive knowledge,
DINO’s vision-contrastive knowledge, DALL-E’s visiongenerative knowledge, and GPT-3’s language-generative
knowledge. Specifically, CaFo works by ‘Prompt, Generate,
then Cache’. Firstly, we leverage GPT-3 to produce textual
inputs for prompting CLIP with rich downstream linguistic
semantics. Then, we generate synthetic images via DALL-E
to expand the few-shot training data without any manpower.
At last, we introduce a learnable cache model to adaptively
blend the predictions from CLIP and DINO. By such collaboration, CaFo can fully unleash the potential of different
pre-training methods and unify them to perform state-ofthe-art for few-shot classification. Code is available at
https://github.com/ZrrSkywalker/CaFo.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks [44] and transformers [68] have attained great success on a wide range of vision tasks with abundant datasets [15]. Instead, for some
data-deficient and resource-finite scenarios, few-shot learning [63, 70] also becomes a research hotspot, where the net∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author

DINO
a

contrast

generate

a

dog

looks

like…

DALL-E
photo

of

a

dog.

contrast
a

photo

of

a

generate

dog.

Language-contrastive
Knowledge

Vision-contrastive
Knowledge

CaFo

Language-generative
Knowledge
a

dog

looks

Vision-generative
Knowledge
like…

Figure 1. The Cascade Paradigm of CaFo. We adaptively incorporate the knowledge from four types of pre-training methods and
achieve a strong few-shot learner.

works are constrained to learn from limited images with
annotations. Many previous works have been proposed
in this field to enhance model’s generalization capability
by meta learning [20, 71], metric learning [74], and data
augmentation [31, 73]. Recently, CLIP [57] pre-trained
by large-scale language-image pairs shows favorable zeroshot transfer ability for open-vocabulary visual recognition. The follow-up CoOp [83], CLIP-Adapter [24] and
Tip-Adapter [76] further extend it for few-shot classification and achieve superior performance on various downstream datasets. This indicates that, even if the few-shot
training data is insufficient, the large-scale pre-training has
endowed the network with strong representation ability,
which highly benefits the few-shot learning on downstream
domains. Now that there exist various self-supervisory
paradigms besides CLIP, could we adaptively integrate their
pre-learned knowledge and collaborate them to be a better

15211

