cept

This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Concept Learning and Reasoning from Multi-View Images
Yining Hong1 , Chunru Lin2 , Yilun Du3 ,
Zhenfang Chen5 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum3 , Chuang Gan4, 5
1
UCLA, 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University, 3 MIT CSAIL,
4
UMass Amherst, 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
https://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/3d-clr/

1

2

ation

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

3
4

5
8
7
6

Counting:
Comparison:
Concept:
Relation:
Q: Are there any televisions? Q: How many chairs are close Q: Facing the computer from Q: Are there fewer pictures in
to the table in the room with the curtain, is there a lamp on the larger room than the other
A: Yes
plant on the cabinet? A: 6
room? A: No
the right? A: Yes
Q: Is the computer closer to a
Q: Is there a sofa in the
Q: How many rooms have
room with a printer?
Q: What’s on the cabinet in printer or a lamp?
sofas? A: 1
A: Yes
the smaller room? A: Plant A: Printer
Figure 1. An exemplar scene with multi-view images and question-answer pairs of our 3DMV-VQA dataset. 3DMV-VQA contains four
question types: concept, counting, relation, comparison. Orange words denote semantic concepts; blue words denote the relations.

Abstract
Humans are able to accurately reason in 3D by gathering
multi-view observations of the surrounding world. Inspired
by this insight, we introduce a new large-scale benchmark
for 3D multi-view visual question answering (3DMV-VQA).
This dataset is collected by an embodied agent actively moving and capturing RGB images in an environment using the
Habitat simulator. In total, it consists of approximately 5k
scenes, 600k images, paired with 50k questions. We evaluate
various state-of-the-art models for visual reasoning on our
benchmark and find that they all perform poorly. We suggest

that a principled approach for 3D reasoning from multi-view
images should be to infer a compact 3D representation of the
world from the multi-view images, which is further grounded
on open-vocabulary semantic concepts, and then to execute
reasoning on these 3D representations. As the first step towards this approach, we propose a novel 3D concept learning
and reasoning (3D-CLR) framework that seamlessly combines these components via neural fields, 2D pre-trained
vision-language models, and neural reasoning operators. Experimental results suggest that our framework outperforms
baseline models by a large margin, but the challenge remains
largely unsolved. We further perform an in-depth analysis of
the challenges and highlight potential future directions. .

9202

