This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Open-vocabulary Semantic Segmentation Models
From Natural Language Supervision
Jilan Xu1,2 Junlin Hou1 Yuejie Zhang1 * Rui Feng1∗ Yi Wang2 Yu Qiao2 Weidi Xie2,3
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, Fudan University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVS), that aims to segment objects
of arbitrary classes beyond a pre-defined, closed-set categories. The main contributions are as follows: First,
we propose a transformer-based model for OVS, termed
as OVSegmentor, which only exploits web-crawled imagetext pairs for pre-training without using any mask annotations. OVSegmentor assembles the image pixels into a set
of learnable group tokens via a slot-attention based binding module, then aligns the group tokens to corresponding caption embeddings. Second, we propose two proxy
tasks for training, namely masked entity completion and
cross-image mask consistency. The former aims to infer
all masked entities in the caption given group tokens, that
enables the model to learn fine-grained alignment between
visual groups and text entities. The latter enforces consistent mask predictions between images that contain shared
entities, encouraging the model to learn visual invariance.
Third, we construct CC4M dataset for pre-training by filtering CC12M with frequently appeared entities, which significantly improves training efficiency. Fourth, we perform zero-shot transfer on four benchmark datasets, PASCAL VOC, PASCAL Context, COCO Object, and ADE20K.
OVSegmentor achieves superior results over state-of-theart approaches on PASCAL VOC using only 3% data (4M
vs 134M) for pre-training.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation considers the problem of assigning class labels to each pixel in the image. It plays critical roles in a wide range of real-world scenarios, including
autonomous driving, computer-aided diagnosis and satellite
image analysis, to name a few. Generally speaking, two
lines of research dominate semantic segmentation, one way
is to cluster the pixels into different groups and assign a
* Corresponding author

Closed-set semantic segmentation
{cat, dog}

{cat, dog, fire hydrant }

Seg
Model

Seg
Model

Training

Inference

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (ours)
Visual
encoder

Three cats are
sleeping on the bed.

Text
encoder

A train arrives at
its destination.

Visual
encoder
Text
encoder

A photo of {cat/dog/fire hydrant}

Figure 1. An illustration of open-vocabulary semantic segmentation. Models trained on closed-set classes (cat and dog) fail to
segment novel class (fire hydrant). We train a visual encoder and a
text encoder on web-collected image-text pairs without using any
mask labels, and our model can segment arbitrary object classes.

semantic label to each group; the other idea treats segmentation as pixel-wise classification, casting each pixel into
one category. Despite tremendous progress, the scalability
of existing approaches that rely on supervised training has
been fundamentally limited: (1) costly annotation procedure. Extensive manual pixel-wise annotations are required
for training segmentation models; (2) closed-set segmentation. The model is restricted to segmenting objects from a
closed-set of categories. Whenever a new dataset comes,
the model requires re-training.
In this paper, our goal is to train an open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation (OVS) model, by exploiting freely
available image-caption pairs on Internet, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. The recent work, for example, CLIP [41]
and ALIGN [23] have demonstrated that a combination
of large-scale image-caption pairs and simple noise contrastive estimation can learn powerful image-text embeddings from scratch, and show strong “zero-shot” generalization abilities for open-vocabulary classification. Additionally, GroupViT [53] extends the idea towards semantic
segmentation by training a segmentation model with text
supervision only. They perform hierarchical grouping of

2935

