The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Efficient Gaussian Process Classification Using Pólya-Gamma Data Augmentation
Florian Wenzel,1,* Théo Galy-Fajou,2,* Christan Donner,2 Marius Kloft,1,3 Manfred Opper2
*

Contributed equally, 1 TU Kaiserslautern, Germany, 2 TU Berlin, Germany, 3 University of Southern California, USA
wenzelfl@hu-berlin.de, galy-fajou@tu-berlin.de, christian.donner@bccn-berlin.de,
kloft@cs.uni-kl.de, manfred.opper@tu-berlin.de

Abstract

is the standard Euclidean gradient multiplied by the inverse Fisher information matrix. Natural gradients recently
have been successfully used in a variety of variational inference problems (Honkela et al. 2010; Wenzel et al. 2017;
Jähnichen et al. 2018).
Unfortunately, an efficient computation of the natural gradient for the GP classification problem is not straight forward. The use of the probit link function in Dezfouli and
Bonilla (2015); Hernández-Lobato and Hernández-Lobato
(2016); Mandt et al. (2017); Salimbeni, Eleftheriadis, and
Hensman (2018) leads to expectations in the variational objective functions that can only be computed by numerical
quadrature, thus, preventing efficient optimization.
We derive a natural-gradient approach to variational inference in GP classification based on the logit link. We exploit that the corresponding likelihood has an auxiliary variable representation as a continuous mixture of Gaussians involving Pólya-Gamma random variables (Polson, Scott, and
Windle 2013).
Unlike former approaches, our natural gradient updates
can be computed in closed-form. Moreover, they have the
advantage that they correspond to block-coordinate ascent
updates and, therefore, learning rates close to one can be
chosen. This leads to a fast and stable algorithm which is
simple to implement. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We present a Gaussian process classification model using
a logit link function that is based on Pólya-Gamma data
augmentation and inducing points for Gaussian process
inference.
• We derive an efficient inference algorithm based on
stochastic variational inference and natural gradients. All
natural gradient updates are given in closed-form and do
not rely on numerical quadrature methods or sampling approaches. Natural gradients have the advantage that they
provide effective second-order optimization updates.
• In our experiments, we demonstrate that our approach
drastically improves speed up to two orders of magnitude while being competitive in terms of prediction performance. We apply our method to massive real-world
datasets up to 11 million points and demonstrate superior
scalability.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we discuss
related work. In section 3 we introduce our novel scalable

We propose a scalable stochastic variational approach to GP
classification building on Pólya-Gamma data augmentation
and inducing points. Unlike former approaches, we obtain
closed-form updates based on natural gradients that lead to efficient optimization. We evaluate the algorithm on real-world
datasets containing up to 11 million data points and demonstrate that it is up to two orders of magnitude faster than the
state-of-the-art while being competitive in terms of prediction
performance.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen and Williams 2005)
provide a popular Bayesian non-linear non-parametric
method for regression and classification. Because of their
ability of accurately adapting to data and thus achieving high
prediction accuracy while providing well calibrated uncertainty estimates, GPs are a standard method in several application areas, including geospatial predictive modeling (Stein
2012) and robotics (Dragiev, Toussaint, and Gienger 2011).
However, recent trends in data availability in the sciences
and technology have made it necessary to develop algorithms capable of processing massive data (John Walker
2014). Currently, GP classification has limited applicability to big data. Naive inference typically scales cubic in the
number of data points, and exact computation of posterior
and marginal likelihood is intractable.
Nevertheless, the combination of so-called sparse Gaussian process techniques with approximate inference methods, such as expectation propagation (EP) or the variational approach, have enabled GP classification for datasets
containing millions of data points (Hernández-Lobato
and Hernández-Lobato 2016; Salimbeni, Eleftheriadis, and
Hensman 2018).
While these results are already impressive, we will show
in this paper that a speedup of up to two orders magnitudes can be achieved. Our approach is based on considering an augmented version of the original GP classification model and replacing the ordinary (stochastic) gradients
for optimization by more efficient natural gradients, which
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5417

