The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cross-View Local Structure Preserved Diversity and
Consensus Learning for Multi-View Unsupervised Feature Selection
Chang Tang,1 Xinzhong Zhu,2,3 Xinwang Liu,4 Lizhe Wang1
1

2

School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China
College of Mathematics, Physics and Information Engineering, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China
3
Research Institute of Ningbo Cixing Co., Ltd, Ningbo 315336, China
4
School of Computer Science, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
tangchang@cug.edu.cn, zxz@zjnu.edu.cn, xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn, lizhe.wang@gmail.com
Abstract

In order to process the multi-view data, many multi-view
learning methods have been put forward (Wang et al. 2018;
Tang et al. 2018d). Among these algorithms, multi-view unsupervised feature selection (MV-UFS), which aims to select
a feature subset from multi-view data without using the labels of samples, has obtained more and more attention since
different views of data are usually with high dimensionality and processing these data is confronted with the curse of
dimensionality problem (Friedman 1997). In addition, it is
a challenging and laborious task to obtain the labels from
large number of data instances.
In the past few years, a variety of MV-UFS methods have
been proposed and these methods can be mainly grouped
into two categories. The first category combines multiple
features from different views into a single one and then applies traditional single-view unsupervised feature selection
methods, including Laplacian score (He, Cai, and Niyogi
2005), trace ratio (Nie et al. 2008), spectral feature selection (Zhao and Liu 2007), minimum redundancy spectral
feature selection (Zhao, Wang, and Liu 2010) and data representation (Zhu et al. 2017), into the concentrated data.
This kind of methods does not well exploit the underlying
correlations between different views. Instead of concentrating different views, the other category of MV-UFS methods aim to tackle multi-view data directly, and they often
excavate the diversity and complementary information to
promote the feature selection performance. Typical methods in this class include Adaptive Multi-View Feature Selection (AMFS) method (Wang et al. 2016), Adaptive Unsupervised Multi-View Feature Selection (AUMFS) (Feng et al.
2012), Robust Multi-View Feature Selection (RMFS) (Liu,
Mao, and Fu 2017), Adaptive Similarity and View Weight
(ASVW) learning for Multi-View Feature Selection (Hou
et al. 2017) and Consensus Learning Guided Multi-view
Unsupervised Feature Selection (CGMV-UFS) (Tang et al.
2018a). Since the diversity and complementary information
are important for multi-view learning, MV-UFS methods in
the second class often perform better than those in the first
category. The work in this paper belongs to the second category.
Without labels of data instances, the local property of
samples usually acts as a priori to regularize the feature selection process. Therefore, traditional methods usually utilize various similarity graphs to characterize the local geo-

Multi-view unsupervised feature selection (MV-UFS) aims
to select a feature subset from multi-view data without using the labels of samples. However, we observe that existing MV-UFS algorithms do not well consider the local
structure of cross views and the diversity of different views,
which could adversely affect the performance of subsequent
learning tasks. In this paper, we propose a cross-view local
structure preserved diversity and consensus semantic learning model for MV-UFS, termed CRV-DCL briefly, to address these issues. Specifically, we project each view of data
into a common semantic label space which is composed of
a consensus part and a diversity part, with the aim to capture both the common information and distinguishing knowledge across different views. Further, an inter-view similarity
graph between each pairwise view and an intra-view similarity graph of each view are respectively constructed to preserve the local structure of data in different views and different samples in the same view. An l2,1 -norm constraint is
imposed on the feature projection matrix to select discriminative features. We carefully design an efficient algorithm
with convergence guarantee to solve the resultant optimization problem. Extensive experimental study is conducted on
six publicly real multi-view datasets and the experimental results well demonstrate the effectiveness of CRV-DCL.

Introduction
With the rapid development of data acquisition sensors
and data processing technologies, data are usually represented by various feature descriptors. For an instance, in
image/video processing, different visual descriptors such
as Local Binary Patterns (LBP) (Ojala, Pietikainen, and
Maenpaa 2002), Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT)
(Lowe and Lowe 2004) and Histogram of Oriented Gradient
(HOG) (Dalal and Triggs 2005) are often used to describe
each image/video frame from different views. In biomedical research, both the chemical structure and chemical response in different cells can be used to represent a certain
drug, while the sequence and gene expression values can
represent a certain protein in different aspects (Li 2014;
Li and Cai 2017). In general, data in these applications is
termed multi-view data in data mining and machine learning communities (Liu et al. 2016; 2018; Zhang et al. 2018).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5101

