The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Crash to Not Crash: Learn to Identify Dangerous Vehicles Using a Simulator
Hoon Kim,∗ Kangwook Lee,∗ Gyeongjo Hwang, Changho Suh
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
{gnsrla12, kw1jjang, hkj4276, chsuh}@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract

the flexibility of synthetic data generator. Our label adaptation algorithm first extracts the states of nearby vehicles by
accessing internal variables of the underlying driving simulator. Using the extracted states, we refine labels by predicting vehicle paths as per a vehicle motion model.
Using the aforementioned approach, we generate a large
synthetic accident dataset, and train efficient CNN-based
classifiers with it. We evaluate the performance of our
approach on a real-world accident dataset consisting of
YouTube dashcam videos1 . Our extensive experiments show
that classifiers trained with our synthetic data better predict
dangerous vehicles than those trained with real data. Specifically, when time-to-collision (TTC) is between 1.6 s and
1.8 s, our approach achieves 18.5% lower missed detection
rate than those trained with real data.

Developing a computer vision-based algorithm for identifying dangerous vehicles requires a large amount of labeled accident data, which is difficult to collect in the real world. To
tackle this challenge, we first develop a synthetic data generator built on top of a driving simulator. We then observe that
the synthetic labels that are generated based on simulation
results are very noisy, resulting in poor classification performance. In order to improve the quality of synthetic labels, we
propose a new label adaptation technique that first extracts
internal states of vehicles from the underlying driving simulator, and then refines labels by predicting future paths of
vehicles based on a well-studied motion model. Via real-data
experiments, we show that our dangerous vehicle classifier
can reduce the missed detection rate by at least 18.5% compared with those trained with real data when time-to-collision
is between 1.6 s and 1.8 s.

Related Works
Collision prediction algorithms: Due to the difficulty
of collecting a large amount of accident dataset, most of
the existing collision prediction algorithms are rule-based
ones (Raut and Malik 2014). These approaches predict collisions by developing precise motion models, fitting the motions of the nearby vehicles, and estimating their future trajectories. For instance, one can compute the collision probability as a function of the distance to the nearby vehicles and
the speed of ego-vehicle (Nakamori et al. 2002). However,
these approaches typically assume availability of expensive
devices (such as radar, LIDAR, or communication chips) to
measure or receive the states of nearby vehicles.
To avoid the dependency on expensive hardwares, one
may make use of low-cost cameras by developing a computer vision-based collision prediction systems. In a few recent works, the authors propose the use of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) for building efficient CPS (Wang
and Kato 2017; Suzuki, Aoki, and Kataoka 2017; Chan et
al. 2017). However, they could collect only a small amount
of accident data due to data scarcity and difficulty of manual
annotation. Different from the existing works, our synthetic
data generator can produce a large enough dataset without requiring manual labeling. Further, existing computer
vision-based algorithms classify dangerous scenes from safe
scenes, and hence cannot capture which vehicle is the source

Introduction
Nearly 1.3 million people die in road crashes each year, and
3 out of 4 deaths are caused by incautious driving. One can
save a significant number of lives by warning them ahead
of a collision. The goal of collision prediction system (CPS)
is to predict vehicle collisions as early as possible by using
a variety of input sensors. While developing efficient CPS
requires a large amount of labeled accident data, it is difficult
to collect accident data in the real world, and it is even more
difficult to accurately annotate accident data.
In this work, we tackle this challenge by developing a
synthetic data generator built on top of a driving simulator.
Specifically, we manipulate low-level internal functions of a
video game called Grand Theft Auto 5 (GTA V) to synthesize accident and non-accident scenes. Each scene is labeled
according to simulation results of nearby vehicles.
Potentially due to the difference between the driving
model of AI agents in the simulator and that of human
drivers, synthetic labels are very noisy, resulting in performance degradation when used for training.
In order to improve the accuracy of synthetic labels, we
propose a label adaptation technique, which fully leverages
∗

These two authors contributed equally
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

978

Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/crash-to-not-crash

