The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MIGAN: Malware Image Synthesis Using GANs
Abhishek Singh

Debojyoti Dutta, Amit Saha

abhishek.s14@iiits.in
Indian Institute of Information
Technology, Sri City, AP, India, 517588

Cisco Systems, San Jose, California

Abstract

different compared to natural images. Malware images of
same category have strong structural correlation between
them and it is this underlying structure among malware images which differentiates one category of malware from another. Hence, existing data augmentation schemes for images which are based on rotational and translation invariance
of natural images do not reconcile with the idiosyncrasies of
malware images. We discuss about the data set in more detail
in the supplementary file.
There are other added advantages from this GAN based
model of synthesizing training samples. For sensitive data,
individuals/companies can make the generator, G, publicly
available which might be preferable over sharing the actual
data set. Also, G can be used as an alternative when transferring the whole data set from one system to other. While a
data set would require a lot of bandwidth and time to get
transferred across systems, the generator, being comparatively smaller in size, can instead be transferred and used to
synthesize training samples. Additionally, the discriminator
can be used as a baseline model since it is trained to predict
the class labels for its training data.

Majority of the advancement in Deep learning (DL) has occurred in domains such as computer vision, and natural language processing, where abundant training data is available.
A major obstacle in leveraging DL techniques for malware
analysis is the lack of sufficiently big, labeled datasets. In
this paper, we take the first steps towards building a model
which can synthesize labeled dataset of malware images using GAN. Such a model can be utilized to perform data augmentation for training a classifier. Furthermore, the model can
be shared publicly for community to reap benefits of dataset
without sharing the original dataset. First, we show the underlying idiosyncrasies of malware images and why existing data
augmentation techniques as well as traditional GAN training
fail to produce quality artificial samples. Next, we propose
a new method for training GAN where we explicitly embed
prior domain knowledge about the dataset into the training
procedure. We show improvements in training stability and
sample quality assessed on different metrics. Our experiments
show substantial improvement on baselines and promise for
using such a generative model for malware visualization systems.

Introduction

Experiments and Analysis

With recent advances in machine learning (ML) and DL in
particular, there has been a surge in malware detection systems which make use of ML/DL models. Lack of publicly
available labeled data sets of malware samples make it difficult to compare existing models. In this work, we propose
a GAN based generative model which can ameliorate the issue. We refer our proposed GAN based setup as Malware
Images GAN(MIGAN). We show its efficacy by performing data augmentation for malware images which is widely
used in malware visualization systems. Traditional areas in
DL such as computer vision and natural language processing have used data augmentation to enhance performance
for variety of problems. Some common methods to perform
data augmentation are adding noise, re-arranging portions
of data, and removing small amount of information from
data. For example, in natural images the conventional data
augmentation method is to perform horizontal flipping and
random cropping. A data set of malware images is quite

For experiments, we use the data set introduced by (Nataraj
et al. 2011) and is publicly available. The data set consists of
total 9,458 images coming from 25 different malware families. In order to obtain malware image from a given malware binary, every byte of the binary is read sequentially as
a component of a vector with each component of the vector
being an unsigned 8-bit integer. This vector is then interpreted as a gray-scale image by fixing number of columns
and rows. To segregate generated samples to their respective
malware category without any manual intervention, we use
the mechanism of class-conditional image synthesis model
as described in AC-GAN (Odena, Olah, and Shlens 2016),
where the generator is conditioned with class label and the
discriminator is tasked to predict the class label. Not only do
we obtain a labeled data set with this approach but we also
observe improved quality of the synthetic samples as this
approach allows the model to obtain extra information over
the domain and discover more structure in the latent space
of GAN. To allow the model to learn the structural correlation among the malware images of same category we add an
additional task for the generator. To understand it, let us first

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10033

