The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Grading Uncompilable Programs
Rohit Takhar, Varun Aggarwal
{rohit.takhar, varun}@aspiringminds.com
Aspiring Minds

Abstract

2013; Head et al. 2017), the system automatically provides
feedback on student programs by finding fixes. There are
also tools (Le Goues et al. 2012; Long and Rinard 2016;
Mechtaev, Yi, and Roychoudhury 2016) that fix logical bugs
automatically in softwares.
None of these approaches handles codes that do not compile.1 They require a compilable code to be able to grade
them or provide feedback. Generally, codes that do not compile constitute 34% of the total submitted codes in MOOCs
(Bhatia and Singh 2016) and 46% in applicant pool for coding jobs (our study). Candidates miss out on good grades or
jobs, even when they write uncompilable codes with correct
or near correct logic (see examples in Table 5). They are unable to get any feedback on their codes either. Evaluators
miss on identifying or hiring potentially good recruits.
We present the first approach to grade uncompilable codes
and provide semantic feedback on them. By semantic feedback, we imply feedback on the logic/algorithm of the code
and not feedback on how to make the code compilable. Our
feedback comprises whether the code has the algorithmic
structures to solve a given programming problem, for instance, does it have the required control structures or data
operations (refer to Table 4 for rubric definition). We intend to discover the intent of the coder — capture what she
wished to imply had the code compiled. We do this by various ways — imposing less stringent grammar/rules than the
compiler, skipping non-understandable parts and by fixing
compilation errors. These methods allow us to derive rich
semantic features from uncompilable codes. We then build
machine learning (ML) based grading models using these
features. Also, we investigate the possibility of reusing of
available ML models developed using labelled compilable
codes. We suggest methods to re-use these models with limited sample of labelled uncompilable codes.
Using our method, we find that 15.5% of uncompilable
codes submitted by students seeking job with a China internet company had near correct logic, while 21.9% had the
right control structures. In particular, the paper makes the
following contributions:

Evaluators wish to test candidates on their ability to propose the correct algorithmic approach to solve programming
problems. Recently, several automated systems for grading
programs have been proposed, but none of them address uncompilable codes. We present the first approach to grade uncompilable codes and provide semantic feedback on them using machine learning. We propose two methods that allow us
to derive informative semantic features from programs. One
of this approach makes the program compilable by correcting errors, while the other relaxes syntax/grammar rules to
help parse uncompilable codes. We compare the relative efficacy of these approaches towards grading. We finally combine them to build an algorithm which rivals the accuracy of
experts in grading programs. Additionally, we show that the
models learned for compilable codes can be reused for uncompilable codes. We present case studies, where companies
are able to hire more efficiently by deploying our technology.

1

Introduction

Evaluators often wish to test students and jobseekers on
their ability to propose the correct logic, aka algorithmic approach, to solve a given programming problem. Evaluators
care most about this skill rather than the ability to follow
and reproduce the syntax of a language. Syntax can be learnt
quickly for a new language. Thus, candidates are often asked
to write the program in a language of their choice or even as
a pseudo-code. Evaluators then examine the code and discuss to see if the stated algorithm (not the exact program) is
correct and efficient.
Several automated systems for testing coding skills and providing feedback have been developed in the last decade.
The traditional method for evaluation of the code uses test
cases, which neither provides a good judgment to the evaluator nor proper actionable feedback to the candidate. Recently, several new methods of grading and feedback that
use techniques such as machine learning and program analysis have been developed. In (Srikant and Aggarwal 2014),
the authors present a system which provides a grade on the
logical correctness of a program according to a rubric. It
uses machine learning and control structure and data dependency features. In (Singh, Gulwani, and Solar-Lezama

• We present the first approach to grade and provide seman1

There are approaches (Gupta et al. 2017; Bhatia and Singh
2016) to correct uncompilable codes to make them compilable, but
they do not provide semantic feedback.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9389

