The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Model-Based Diagnosis of Hybrid Systems Using Satisfiability Modulo Theory
Alexander Diedrich, Alexander Maier

Oliver Niggemann

Fraunhofer IOSB-INA
Fraunhofer Center for Machine Learning
Lemgo, Germany
alexander.diedrich@iosb-ina.fraunhofer.de
alexander.maier@iosb-ina.fraunhofer.de

Institute Industrial IT
Lemgo, Germany
oliver.niggemann@hs-owl.de

Abstract

classifier is trained using supervised machine learning algorithms (Matias et al. 2013).
Model-based Approach: Model-based diagnosis (MBD)
approaches (Struss and Ertl 2009; Niggemann et al. 2012)
are better suited to identify root causes in large distributed
systems. With MBD, a model is used to simulate the normal
behavior of a plant or normal product features, i.e. unlike
heuristic diagnosis models, the model infers from causes to
symptoms. Such models come in different flavors: Statistical
(Ferracuti et al. 2011) and state-based models (Windmann
et al. 2013) or physical first principle models (de Kleer et al.
2013). So model-based approaches capture the normal situation while phenomenological approaches capture the differences between normal and anomalous situations. The main
challenge for MBD is high engineering efforts for the creation of such models.
While heuristic approaches are often more straightforward and do not require a system model, they have one
major inherent drawback: They must deduce against the direction of causality since they deduce from observations to
anomalies. For complex distributed systems with their high
number of interdependencies between components and their
complex causalities, this is a hard task because a high number of classification rules is needed to discriminate between
all possible combinations of symptoms. Model-based approaches do not have this problem since system models take
all inputs and compute the outputs, i.e. they work in the direction of the physical causality. So in general, phenomenological approaches are chosen for local compact devices
while model-based approaches are chosen for complex, distributed plants.
While MBD has proven to be well suited for complex systems, it has for several reasons proven difficult to apply it to
CPPS:
Timed and State-Based Behavior: CPPSs are distributed
physical systems with complex timing behavior. So any diagnosis must take dynamic behavior characteristics into consideration. Furthermore, often the behavior depends on state
variables, i.e. the system has memories influencing the behavior. But MBD so-far mainly deals with static systems.
Hybrid Behavior: CPPSs are hybrid systems which comprise discrete signals, time- and value-continuous signals,
and structured data. Often, discrete signals such as opening
a valve or turning off a robot trigger mode changes (Buede

Currently, detecting and isolating faults in hybrid systems is
often done manually with the help of human operators. In this
paper we present a novel model-based diagnosis approach
for automatically diagnosing hybrid systems. The approach
has two parts: First, modelling dynamic system behaviour
is done through well-known state space models using differential equations. Second, from the state space models we
calculate Boolean residuals through an observer-pattern. The
novelty lies in implementing the observer pattern through the
use of a symbolic system description specified in satisfiability
theory modulo linear arithmetic. With this, we create a static
situation for the diagnosis algorithm and decouple modelling
and diagnosis. Evaluating the system description generates
one Boolean residual for each component. These residuals
constitute the fault symptoms. To find the minimum cardinality diagnosis from these symptoms we employ Reiter’s diagnosis lattice.
For the experimental evaluation we use a simulation of the
Tennessee Eastman process and a simulation of a four-tank
model. We show that the presented approach is able to identify all injected faults.

Introduction
Diagnosing modern production systems is a key element of
research agendas such as Cyber-Physical Production Systems (CPPSs) (Lee 2008; Rajkumar et al. 2010) or its German pendant Industry 4.0. In these agendas, a major focus is on the self-diagnosis capabilities for complex and
distributed CPPSs. Typical goals of such self-diagnosis approaches are the detection of anomalies, suboptimal energy
consumptions, error causes in large plants, or wear (Isermann 2004; Niggemann and Lohweg 2015).
Very roughly, we can differentiate between two types of
diagnosis approaches—which come in several flavors:
Heuristic or Phenomenological Approach: Here, the system observations are directly classified as correct or anomalous (Ferracuti et al. 2011). I.e. the diagnosis software uses
models which deduce from anomalies, here called symptoms, to faults, here called root causes. Traditionally, the
classification know-how is often modeled manually, e.g. in
form of rules (expert systems). For fast-changing CPPSs, the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1452

