The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Which Factorization Machine Modeling Is
Better: A Theoretical Answer with Optimal Guarantee
Ming Lin,1 Shuang Qiu,2 Jieping Ye,2 Xiaomin Song,1 Qi Qian,1 Liang Sun,1
Shenghuo Zhu,1 Rong Jin1
1

Alibaba Group, Bellevue, USA
Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
{ming.l, xiaomin.song, qi.qian,liang.sun, shenghuo.zhu, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com, {qiush, jpye}@umich.edu
2

Abstract

learning research as it abridges the linear regression and high
order polynomial regression. It is therefore important to understand the theoretical foundation of FM.
Given an instance x ∈ Rd , the conventional FM assumes
that the label y ∈ R of x is generated by

Factorization machine (FM) is a popular machine learning
model to capture the second order feature interactions. The
optimal learning guarantee of FM and its generalized version is not yet developed. For a rank k generalized FM of d
dimensional input, the previous best known sampling complexity is O[k3 d · polylog(kd)] under Gaussian distribution. This bound is sub-optimal comparing to the information theoretical lower bound O(kd). In this work, we aim to
tighten this bound towards optimal and generalize the analysis to sub-gaussian distribution. We prove that when the
input data satisfies the so-called τ -Moment Invertible Property, the sampling complexity of generalized FM can be improved to O[k2 d · polylog(kd)/τ 2 ]. When the second order
self-interaction terms are excluded in the generalized FM, the
bound can be improved to the optimal O[kd · polylog(kd)]
up to the logarithmic factors. Our analysis also suggests that
the positive semi-definite constraint in the conventional FM
is redundant as it does not improve the sampling complexity
while making the model difficult to optimize. We evaluate our
improved FM model in real-time high precision GPS signal
calibration task to validate its superiority.

1

y = x> w ∗ + x> M ∗ x
∗

rank(M ∗ ) ≤ k

(1)

∗

where {w , M } are the first order and the second order
coefficients respectively. In the original FM paper (Rendle
2010), the authors additionally assumed that M ∗ is generated from a low-rank positive semi-definite (PSD) matrix
with all its diagonal elements subtracted. That is
M ∗ = U ∗ U ∗> − diag(U ∗ U ∗> ) .

(2)

Eq. (2) consists of two parts. We call the first part U ∗ U ∗>
as the PSD constraint and the second part −diag(·) as the
diagonal-zero constraint. Our key question in this work is
whether the FM model (1) can be learned by O[kd log(kd)]
observations and how the two additional constraints help the
generalization ability of FM.
Although the FM has been widely applied , there is little research exploring the theoretical properties of the FM to
answer the above key question. A naive analysis directly following the sampling complexity of the linear model would
suggest O(d2 ) samples to recover {w∗ , M ∗ } which is too
loose. When w∗ = 0 and M ∗ is symmetric, Eq. (1) is equal
to the symmetric matrix sensing problem. (Cai and Zhang
2015) proved the sampling complexity of this special case
on well-bounded sub-gaussian distribution using trace norm
convex programming under the `2 /`1 -RIP condition. (Yurtsever et al. 2017) developed a conditional gradient descent
solver to recover M ∗ . However, when w∗ 6= 0 the above
methods and the theoretical results are no longer applicable. (Blondel, Fujino, and Ueda 2015) considered a convexified formulation of FM. Their FM model requires solving
a trace-norm regularized loss function which is computationally expensive. They did not provide statistical learning
guarantees for the convexified FM.
To the best of our knowledge, the most recent research
dealing with the theoretical properties of the FM is (Lin and
Ye 2016). In their study, the authors argued that the two
constraints proposed in (Rendle 2010) can be removed if x
is sampled from the standard Gaussian distribution. However, their analysis heavily relies on the rotation invariance

Introduction

Factorization machine (FM) (Rendle 2010; Bayer et al.
2017; Juan, Lefortier, and Chapelle 2017; Juan et al. 2016;
Zhao et al. 2017; Yamada et al. 2017; Luo et al. 2018;
Lin et al. 2018) is a popular linear regression model to
capture the second order feature interactions. It has been
found effective in various applications, including recommendation systems (Rendle 2010) , CTR prediction (Juan
et al. 2016), computational medicine (Lin et al. 2016) , social network (Hong, Doumith, and Davison 2013) and so
on. Intuitively speaking, the second order feature interactions consider the factors jointly affecting the output. On
the theoretical side, FM is closely related to the symmetric matrix sensing (Kueng, Rauhut, and Terstiege 2017;
Cai and Zhang 2015; Yurtsever et al. 2017) and phase retrieval (Candes et al. 2013). While the conventional FM only
considers the second order feature interactions, it is possible
to extend the conventional FM to the high order functional
space which leads to the Polynomial Network model (Blondel et al. 2016). FM is the cornerstone in modern machine
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4312

