The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Automated Rule Base Completion as Bayesian Concept Induction
Zied Bouraoui

Steven Schockaert

CRIL - CNRS & Univ Artois, France
zied.bouraoui@cril.fr

Cardiff University, UK
SchockaertS1@Cardiff.ac.uk

some unknown property P , we can plausibly derive that
limes have this property as well, simply because there are
very few natural properties which hold for oranges, lemons
and grapefruit, but not for lime. Similarly, suppose we have
a knowledge base containing rules of the following form:

Abstract
Considerable attention has recently been devoted to the problem of automatically extending knowledge bases by applying
some form of inductive reasoning. While the vast majority of
existing work is centred around so-called knowledge graphs,
in this paper we consider a setting where the input consists
of a set of (existential) rules. To this end, we exploit a vector space representation of the considered concepts, which
is partly induced from the rule base itself and partly from a
pre-trained word embedding. Inspired by recent approaches
to concept induction, we then model rule templates in this
vector space embedding using Gaussian distributions. Unlike
many existing approaches, we learn rules by directly exploiting regularities in the given rule base, and do not require that
a database with concept and relation instances is given. As
a result, our method can be applied to a wide variety of ontologies. We present experimental results that demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method.

1

r1 (X) ∧ orange(X) → r2 (X)
r1 (X) ∧ lemon(X) → r2 (X)
r1 (X) ∧ grapefruit(X) → r2 (X)
Without knowing anything about the meaning of the relations r1 and r2 , we can intuitively still derive that the following rule is plausible:
r1 (X) ∧ lime(X) → r2 (X)
To implement this intuition, we rely on two types of vector
space representations of the considered relations. First, we
can use word embeddings (Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013;
Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), which are vector
space representations of word meaning that are learned from
large text collections. Such representations have been found
to exhibit various interesting regularities, which means that
they can be regarded as a source of commonsense knowledge (Levy, Goldberg, and Ramat-Gan 2014; Gupta et al.
2015). Most importantly for our purposes, words representing concepts with similar properties, such as different kinds
of citrus fruits, tend to be clustered together. Second, we
will also rely on a vector space representation that has been
learned from the ontology itself. The aim of this representation is to capture the intuition that relations which are asserted to have similar properties should also be considered
as similar for the purpose of inductive reasoning.
Similarly, by focusing on pairs of concepts, we can also
complete rule bases using a form of analogical reasoning.
Consider the following example:

Introduction

The problem of automated knowledge base completion has
received considerable attention in recent years (Pujara et al.
2017). Within the broad aim of knowledge base completion,
various strategies can be explored. One possible strategy is
to find missing facts by searching for relevant documents
on the Web, and analyzing their content (West et al. 2014).
Another strategy is to identify and exploit statistical regularities among the facts in a given knowledge base (Lao,
Mitchell, and Cohen 2011; Bordes et al. 2013). Most existing approaches, however, focus on finding plausible missing facts. Our focus in this paper is instead to find missing
knowledge in a given ontology.
In particular, we propose an approach to find plausible
rules which is inspired by cognitive models for category
based induction (Osherson et al. 1990; Tenenbaum and Griffiths 2001). The main aim of such induction models is to determine which objects are likely to have some property P ,
knowing that the objects o1 , ..., on have this property (but
knowing nothing else about property P ). In other words,
inductive generalization in these models is based on our
knowledge of the semantic features of the objects. For example, knowing that oranges, lemons and grapefruit have

r1 (X, Y ) ∧ bat(X) → cave(Y )
r1 (X, Y ) ∧ duck(X) → pond(Y )
r1 (X, Y ) ∧ dolphin(X) → sea(Y )
Then we can plausible also derive the following rule, based
on the analogical relationship that holds between the pairs
(bat, cave), (duck, pond), (dolphin, sea) and (trout, river):

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

r1 (X, Y ) ∧ trout(X) → river(Y )
6228

