The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

An Integrative Framework for Artificial Intelligence Education
Pat Langley
Institute for the Study of Learning and Expertise,
2164 Staunton Court, Palo Alto, CA 94306 USA
Department of Computer Science, University of Auckland,
Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142 NZ

Abstract

In this paper, we analyze this crisis in AI instruction and
propose an alternative approach to presenting content about
the field. In the next section, we review the state of introductory courses in this area and drawbacks of the current style.
After this, we propose some principles for introductory education in the area that address these issues. After this, we describe the structure and content for a new type of AI course,
discussing how each module responds to the principles. The
narrative emphasizes the cumulative, system-level character of intelligence, starting with low-level tasks like matching patterns and making decisions, and proceeding to integrated agents that combine inference, execution, and planning. We also discuss how traditional topics like natural language, vision, uncertainty, and learning relate to our framework, along with the importance of history and the target
audiences for our innovative course.

Modern introductory courses on AI do not train students to
create intelligent systems or provide broad coverage of this
complex field. In this paper, we identify problems with common approaches to teaching artificial intelligence and suggest
alternative principles that courses should adopt instead. We
illustrate these principles in a proposed course that teaches
students not only about component methods, such as pattern
matching and decision making, but also about their combination into higher-level abilities for reasoning, sequential control, plan generation, and integrated intelligent agents. We
also present a curriculum that instantiates this organization,
including sample programming exercises and a project that
requires system integration. Participants also gain experience
building knowledge-based agents that use their software to
produce intelligent behavior.

1

2

Background and Motivation

The State of the Art

As noted earlier, we believe that existing introductory AI
courses do not train students in the concepts or skills they
need to develop intelligent systems. However, before we
devote substantial effort to devising a new curriculum, we
should first examine the way that classes are currently taught
and determine their adequacy. To this end, we examined the
Web sites for undergraduate AI courses at the ten major universities shown in Table 1. Most described classes offered
in 2018, but one occurred the year before. In each case, we
inspected the course schedule and associated exercises, although for a few the latter were unavailable. With two exceptions, they used Russell and Norvig’s (2009) textbook and
covered its topics, although often in different orders. Most
schedules included multiple sessions on search and game
playing, constraint satisfaction and logical reasoning, probabilistic inference, and varieties of statistical learning.
Analysis of information on these ten courses revealed a
number of themes that, we believe, are reasons for concern:

Modern students of artificial intelligence are being poorly
served. Introductory courses focus on topics that are well
formalized and easy to teach, and they are usually communicated as a set of unrelated problems. These classes omit
many of the discipline’s most basic and important ideas, despite their continued relevance. The past 30 years have seen
substantial progress, but similar conceptual advances occurred in physics, chemistry, and biology without those disciplines dropping their established content. AI is in serious
danger of raising entire generations of researchers and practitioners with no training in the field’s history or its many
well-understood, successful methods.
Moreover, courses seldom champion the idea that some
mental abilities build on others in a cumulative manner or
the importance of integration in developing intelligent systems. Students typically gain experience with using existing
software, but few of them ever learn how to design and implement such systems on their own. Mainstream introductory classes train people to become consumers of AI technology rather than producers, which does not bode well for
the discipline’s future. Increased emphasis on statistics and
machine learning, which often replace traditional topics, has
made the situation even worse.

• Students learn about AI as a collection of isolated algorithms, with little attention to how they can contribute to
integrated intelligent systems. This gives many people the
impression that all important results in the field reside at
the level of these component methods, that their integration involves ‘mere’ application, and that the study of ‘AI
systems’ is effectively an oxymoron.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9670

