The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Knowledge Tracing Machines: Factorization Machines for Knowledge Tracing
Jill-Jênn Vie,1 Hisashi Kashima1 2
1

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, 2 Kyoto University
vie@jill-jenn.net, kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract

So far, various models have been designed for student
modeling, either based on prediction of sequences (Piech
et al. 2015), or factor analysis (Thai-Nghe et al. 2011;
Lavoué et al. 2018). Most of existing techniques model students or questions with unidimensional parameters. In this
paper, we generalize these models to higher dimensions and
manage to train efficiently student models of dimension up
to 20. Our family of models is particularly convenient when
observations from students are sparse, e.g. when some students attempted few questions, or some questions were answered by few students, which is most of the data usually
encountered in online platforms such as MOOCs.
When fitting student models, it is better to rely on all the
information available at hand. In order to get information
about questions, one can identify the knowledge components (KCs) involved in each question. This side information
is usually encoded under the form of a Q-matrix, that maps
items to knowledge components: qjk is 1 if item j involves
KC k, 0 otherwise. In this paper, we will also note KC(j)
the sets of skills involved by question j, i.e. KC(j) =
{k|qjk = 1}.
In order to model different attempts, one can keep track of
how many times a student has attempted a question, or how
many times a student has had the opportunity to acquire a
skill, while interacting with the learning material.
Our experiments show, in particular, that:
• It is better to estimate a bias for each item (not only skill),
which popular educational data mining (EDM) models do
not.
• Most existing models in EDM cannot handle side information such as multiple skills for one item, but the proposed approach does.
• Side information improves performance more than increasing the latent dimension.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the most generic
framework that incorporates side information into a student
model. For the sake of reproducibility, our implementation
is available on GitHub1 . The interested reader can check our
code and reuse it in order to try new combinations and devise
new models.

Knowledge tracing is a sequence prediction problem where
the goal is to predict the outcomes of students over questions
as they are interacting with a learning platform. By tracking
the evolution of the knowledge of some student, one can optimize instruction. Existing methods are either based on temporal latent variable models, or factor analysis with temporal
features. We here show that factorization machines (FMs), a
model for regression or classification, encompasses several
existing models in the educational literature as special cases,
notably additive factor model, performance factor model, and
multidimensional item response theory. We show, using several real datasets of tens of thousands of users and items, that
FMs can estimate student knowledge accurately and fast even
when student data is sparsely observed, and handle side information such as multiple knowledge components and number
of attempts at item or skill level. Our approach allows to fit
student models of higher dimension than existing models, and
provides a testbed to try new combinations of features in order to improve existing models.

Modeling student learning is key to be able to detect students that need further attention, or recommend automatically relevant learning resources. Initially, models were developed for students sitting for standardized tests, where students could read every problem statement, and missing answers could be treated as incorrect. However, in online platforms such as MOOCs, students attempt some exercises, but
do not even look at other ones. Also, they may learn between different attempts. How to measure knowledge when
students have attempted different questions?
We want to predict the performance of a set I of students,
say users, over a set J of questions, say items (we will interchangeably refer to questions as items, problems, or tasks).
Each student can attempt a question multiple times, and may
learn between successive attempts. We assume we observe
ordered triplets (i, j, o) ∈ I × J × {0, 1} which encode the
fact that student i attempted question j and got it either correct (o = 1) or incorrect (o = 0). Triplets are sorted chronologically. Then, given a new pair (i′ , j ′ ), we need to predict
whether student i′ will get question j ′ correct or incorrect.
We can also assume extra knowledge about users, or items.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

750

https://github.com/jilljenn/ktm

