The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Overcoming Blind Spots in the Real World:
Leveraging Complementary Abilities for Joint Execution
Ramya Ramakrishnan,1 Ece Kamar,2 Besmira Nushi,2
Debadeepta Dey,2 Julie Shah,1 Eric Horvitz2
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Simulators are being increasingly used to train agents before
deploying them in real-world environments. While training
in simulation provides a cost-effective way to learn, poorly
modeled aspects of the simulator can lead to costly mistakes,
or blind spots. While humans can help guide an agent towards
identifying these error regions, humans themselves have blind
spots and noise in execution. We study how learning about
blind spots of both can be used to manage hand-off decisions when humans and agents jointly act in the real-world
in which neither of them are trained or evaluated fully. The
formulation assumes that agent blind spots result from representational limitations in the simulation world, which leads
the agent to ignore important features that are relevant for
acting in the open world. Our approach for blind spot discovery combines experiences collected in simulation with limited
human demonstrations. The first step applies imitation learning to demonstration data to identify important features that
the human is using but that the agent is missing. The second
step uses noisy labels extracted from action mismatches between the agent and the human across simulation and demonstration data to train blind spot models. We show through experiments on two domains that our approach is able to learn
a succinct representation that accurately captures blind spot
regions and avoids dangerous errors in the real world through
transfer of control between the agent and the human.

Figure 1: The agent is trained in a simulator world, which
sees a subset Sa of the true state space S. Human demonstrations operate in subset Sh , and joint execution happens
in the real world space S.

world. We assume that agents can perceive numerous features but learn to ignore many of them due to the incompleteness of the simulator to reflect the complexity of the
real world. Consider an automated driving car that has been
trained in a simulation environment. The simulator models
general driving conditions, with different vehicles, such as
cars and trucks, and the agent learns to drive well in this
setting. To learn, the agent focuses on the most important
features for decision making, such as distance to nearby vehicles and which lane it is in. Because the agent trains extensively in this simulator and has some sensor capabilities
that are more accurate than human perception, it acts optimally in this world, much better than a human can act.
However, the agent never encounters some aspects of the
real-world (e.g., emergency vehicles) so the agent learns to
ignore these aspects that did not matter in simulation. For
example, the agent knows how to avoid cars and be cautious
around trucks, but does not recognize ambulances as special types of vehicles that require different behavior. Because
correct behavior around emergency vehicles is different than
behavior around other vehicles, executing the learned policy
in the real-world may cause costly mistakes – blind spots.
Directly executing the agent policy in the real world poses
safety concerns, so we propose complementing the agent
with a black-box helper agent. In contrast to prior work (Ramakrishnan et al. 2018), we do not assume that the helper

Introduction
For handling complex, real-world tasks, many agents are
first trained in simulation environments (Tobin et al. 2017;
Mahler et al. 2017; OpenAI et al. 2018). While simulators
are providing increasingly realistic training environments
(Shah et al. 2018; Dosovitskiy et al. 2017; Chang et al. 2017)
that can help accelerate initial learning, there is almost always a gap between simulation and reality (Ramakrishnan et
al. 2018). Directly transferring learned policies to the open
world in these cases can cause costly systematic errors, or
blind spots, that occur due to differences between the two
environments. Identifying blind spots before deployment in
the real world is crucial for safe execution, yet it is challenging since the simulator lacks signals of such failures.
We focus on blind spots that occur due to missing observational features when going from a simulator to the real
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6137

