The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Motion Guided Spatial Attention for Video Captioning
Shaoxiang Chen, Yu-Gang Jiang*
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems
{sxchen13, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Sequence-to-sequence models incorporated with attention
mechanism have shown promising improvements on video
captioning. While there is rich information both inside and
between frames, spatial attention is rarely explored and motion information is usually handled by 3D-CNNs as just another modality for fusion. On the other hand, researches about
human perception suggest that apparent motion can attract
attention. Motivated by this, we aim to learn spatial attention on video frames under the guidance of motion information for caption generation. We present a novel video captioning framework by utilizing Motion Guided Spatial Attention
(MGSA). The proposed MGSA exploits the motion between
video frames by learning spatial attention from stacked optical flow images with a custom CNN. To further relate the
spatial attention maps of video frames, we designed a Gated
Attention Recurrent Unit (GARU) to adaptively incorporate
previous attention maps. The whole framework can be trained
in an end-to-end manner. We evaluate our approach on two
benchmark datasets, MSVD and MSR-VTT. The experiments
show that our designed model can generate better video representation and state of the art results are obtained under popular evaluation metrics such as BLEU@4, CIDEr, and METEOR.

Figure 1: Best viewed in color. Example video frames shown
with optical flow in the bottom row. The frame in red box is
the sampled key frame. The flow images in green and yellow boxes are the horizontal and vertical component of the
optical flow computed around the key frame, respectively.

Automatically describing the content of a video using natural language, i.e., video captioning, is a challenging task
in computer vision. Lots of practical applications such as
auxiliary aid for visually impaired people, human computer
interaction, and video retrieval can benefit from video captioning, thus it has drawn great research attention. In general, video captioning systems can be roughly divided into
two components: video representation and sentence generation. Traditional approaches (Krishnamoorthy et al. 2013;
Thomason et al. 2014; Guadarrama et al. 2013) used various visual classifiers/trackers to detect visual concepts and
then generate sentences with predefined language templates.
For video representation, these approaches rely on handcrafted features which do not generalize well and can not
be trained in an end-to-end manner. With the rapid development of deep learning, two major changes have been

made to video captioning systems: convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for video representation and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for sequence modeling. Earlier researchers (Venugopalan et al. 2015a; 2015b; Donahue et al.
2015) directly extracted global feature (i.e., a single vector
to represent one frame) of video frames from a pre-trained
CNN and fed to RNNs (LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), GRU (Chung et al. 2014), etc.) for sentence generation. While these plain sequence-to-sequence approaches
can achieve significant improvements over traditional methods, they still suffer from loss of both spatial and temporal information in videos. Later works (Yao et al. 2015;
Baraldi, Grana, and Cucchiara 2017; Pan et al. 2016) tried
to exploit the temporal structure of videos by adaptively assigning weights to video frames at every word generation
step, which is known as temporal attention. But in these
works, video frames are still represented by global feature
vectors extracted from CNNs. Thus, the rich visual contents
in video frames are not fully exploited. Spatial attention is
widely adopted in image captioning. (Xu et al. 2015) proposed to learn a set of attention weights for image regions1
to represent their relevance to the generated words, so that
the regional features can be better combined. Motivated by

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For convenience, we refer the 2D attention weight matrix as
“attention map” hereinafter.

1

Introduction

8191

