The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DDFlow: Learning Optical Flow with Unlabeled Data Distillation
Pengpeng Liu,†∗ Irwin King,† Michael R. Lyu,† Jia Xu§
†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
§
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{ppliu, king, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jiajxu@tencent.com

Abstract

𝐼1

We present DDFlow, a data distillation approach to learning
optical flow estimation from unlabeled data. The approach
distills reliable predictions from a teacher network, and uses
these predictions as annotations to guide a student network
to learn optical flow. Unlike existing work relying on handcrafted energy terms to handle occlusion, our approach is
data-driven, and learns optical flow for occluded pixels. This
enables us to train our model with a much simpler loss function, and achieve a much higher accuracy. We conduct a rigorous evaluation on the challenging Flying Chairs, MPI Sintel, KITTI 2012 and 2015 benchmarks, and show that our
approach significantly outperforms all existing unsupervised
learning methods, while running at real time.

𝐼2

(𝑥2 , 𝑦2 )

(𝑥1 , 𝑦1 )

Teacher
Model

Flow

Guide

𝐼1

(𝑥1 , 𝑦1 )

𝐼2

Student
Model

Flow

Figure 1: Data distillation illustration. We use the optical
flow predictions from our teacher model to guide the learning of our student model.

Introduction
Optical flow estimation is a core computer vision building block, with a wide range of applications, including autonomous driving (Menze and Geiger 2015), object tracking
(Chauhan and Krishan 2013), action recognition (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014) and video processing (Bonneel et al.
2015). Traditional approaches (Horn and Schunck 1981;
Brox et al. 2004; Brox and Malik 2011) formulate optical flow estimation as an energy minimization problem,
but they are often computationally expensive (Xu, Ranftl,
and Koltun 2017). Recent learning-based methods (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015; Ranjan and Black 2017; Ilg et al. 2017;
Hui, Tang, and Loy 2018; Sun et al. 2018) overcome this
issue by directly estimating optical flow from raw images
using convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, in
order to train such CNNs with high performance, it requires
a large collection of densely labeled data, which is extremely
difficult to obtain for real-world sequences.
One alternative is to use synthetic datasets. Unfortunately, there usually exists a large domain gap between
the distribution of synthetic images and natural scenes (Liu
et al. 2008). Previous networks (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015;
Ranjan and Black 2017) trained only on synthetic data turn
to overfit, and often perform poorly when they are directly
evaluated on real sequences. Another promising direction is
to learn from unlabeled videos, which are readily available

at much larger scale. (Jason, Harley, and Derpanis 2016;
Ren et al. 2017) employ the classical warping idea, and train
CNNs with a photometric loss defined on the difference between reference and warped target images. Recent methods
propose additional loss terms to cope with occluded pixels
(Meister, Hur, and Roth 2018; Wang et al. 2018), or utilize
multi-frames to reason occlusion (Janai et al. 2018). However, all these methods rely on hand-crafted energy terms to
regularize optical flow estimation, lacking key capability to
learn optical flow of occluded pixels. As a result, there is
still a large performance gap comparing these methods with
state-of-the-art fully supervised methods.
Is it possible to learn optical flow in a data-driven way,
while not using any ground truth at all? In this paper, we address this issue by a data distilling approach. Our algorithm
optimizes two models, a teacher model and a student model
(as shown in Figure 1). We train the teacher model to estimate optical flow for non-occluded pixels (e.g., (x1 , y1 )
in I1 ). Then, we hallucinate flow occlusion by cropping
patches from original images (pixel (x1 , y1 ) now becomes
occluded in Ie1 ). Predictions from our teacher model are used
as annotations to directly guide the student network to learn
optical flow. Both networks share the identical architecture,
and are trained end-to-end with simple loss functions. The
student network is used to produce optical flow at test time,
and runs at real time.

∗

Work mainly done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8770

