The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Tracking Logical Difference in
Large-Scale Ontologies: A Forgetting-Based Approach
Yizheng Zhao

Ghadah Alghamdi

Renate A. Schmidt

The University of Manchester, UK

The University of Manchester, UK

The University of Manchester, UK

Hao Feng

Giorgos Stoilos

Damir Juric

Mohammad Khodadadi

North China University of
Science & Technology, China

Babylon Health, UK

Babylon Health, UK

Babylon Health, UK

Abstract

to compute logical difference between ontologies is also important when merging/aligning/integrating different ontologies (Jiménez-Ruiz et al. 2011; Solimando, Jiménez-Ruiz,
and Guerrini 2017; Stoilos et al. 2018).

This paper explores how the logical difference between two
ontologies can be tracked using a forgetting-based or uniform
interpolation (UI)-based approach. The idea is that rather than
computing all entailments of one ontology not entailed by
the other ontology, which would be computationally infeasible, only the strongest entailments not entailed in the other
ontology are computed. To overcome drawbacks of existing forgetting/uniform interpolation tools we introduce a new
forgetting method designed for the task of computing the
logical difference between different versions of large-scale
ontologies. The method is sound and terminating, and can
compute uniform interpolants for ALC-ontologies as large
as SNOMED CT and NCIt. Our evaluation shows that the
method can achieve considerably better success rates (>90%)
and provides a feasible approach to computing the logical difference in large-scale ontologies, as a case study on different
versions of SNOMED CT and NCIt ontologies shows.

At present most existing ontology difference tools and
ontology alignment/merging tools are only able to compute
the structural differences (Noy and Musen 2002; Gonçalves,
Parsia, and Sattler 2012) or to approximate the logical
difference (Konev et al. 2012; Jiménez-Ruiz et al. 2011;
Kremen, Smid, and Kouba 2011; Solimando, Jiménez-Ruiz,
and Guerrini 2017). A particular challenge is the size of
ontologies used in real-world applications. Our target are
SNOMED CT and NCIt ontologies. Being the most comprehensive, multi-lingual medical ontology in the world, the
core SNOMED CT ontology contains over 335K concepts
definitions (Spackman 2000). The NCIt ontologies define
terminologies in the biomedical domain and include more
than 60K concept definitions (Hartel et al. 2005).

Introduction

In the present paper we explore how the logical difference
between two ontologies can be tracked using a forgettingor uniform interpolation (UI)-based approach, as proposed
in (Ludwig and Konev 2014). Forgetting is an ontology reengineering technique which preserves the semantics of definitions of concepts and relationships among them (Lin and
Reiter 1994; Konev, Walther, and Wolter 2009a; 2009b; Lutz
and Wolter 2011; Wang et al. 2014; Zhao and Schmidt 2017;
2018b). However, currently, there are no good forgetting
tools that allow us to track logical differences efficiently.
To address this shortcoming we introduce a new forgetting
method designed for the task of computing the logical difference of large-scale ontologies. The method is sound and terminating, and can compute uniform interpolants for ALContologies as large as SNOMED CT and NCIt. Our evaluation shows the method achieves considerably better success
rates (>90%). Based on this new forgetting method we have
developed a new logical difference analysis tool to analyze
the differences between the Australia and Canada country
extensions of the base SNOMED CT International ontology and recent versions of the NCIt ontologies. While the
Canada extension was found to be a conservative extension
of SNOMED CT International, the diversion to the Australia
version is significant, which is reflected in large logical difference sets.

Ontologies are widely deployed and used to give structured
representations of domain knowledge suitable for AI reasoning and have become increasingly popular across numerous industry sectors, including medical, digital biology
and energy sectors. In this paper we are concerned with the
problem of tracking the changes between different versions
of an ontology, which can be done based on the notion of
logical difference. The logical difference between two ontologies are the axioms in one that are not entailed by the
other, reflecting the information gained and information lost
between the ontologies (Konev, Walther, and Wolter 2008;
Konev et al. 2012).
From the perspective of ontology engineers, tracking the
differences of large-scale ontologies is a critical task for the
purpose of maintaining them: to track what has changed in
a new version of an ontology, to ensure that the extension
is safe in the sense of being a conservative extension (Lutz,
Walther, and Wolter 2007), and to identify gained and lost
information (Klein et al. 2002). This provides a means of
discovering issues in the ontologies and enhance quality
control, which is important for ontology curators. Being able
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3116

