The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

GlobalTrait: Personality Alignment of Multilingual Word Embeddings
Farhad Bin Siddique,1,2 Dario Bertero,1,2 Pascale Fung1,2,3
1

Electronic and Computer Engineering Department
Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE)
3
EMOS Technologies Inc.
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
[fsiddique, dbertero]@connect.ust.hk, pascale@ece.ust.hk
2

• Openness to Experience vs Cautious (Openn) - intellectual, insightful vs shallow, unimaginative.

Abstract
We propose a multilingual model to recognize Big Five Personality traits from text data in four different languages: English, Spanish, Dutch and Italian. Our analysis shows that
words having a similar semantic meaning in different languages do not necessarily correspond to the same personality traits. Therefore, we propose a personality alignment
method, GlobalTrait, which has a mapping for each trait from
the source language to the target language (English), such
that words that correlate positively to each trait are close together in the multilingual vector space. Using these aligned
embeddings for training, we can transfer personality related
training features from high-resource languages such as English to other low-resource languages, and get better multilingual results, when compared to using simple monolingual
and unaligned multilingual embeddings. We achieve an average F-score increase (across all three languages except English) from 65 to 73.4 (+8.4), when comparing our monolingual model to multilingual using CNN with personality
aligned embeddings. We also show relatively good performance in the regression tasks, and better classification results
when evaluating our model on a separate Chinese dataset.

Personality traits affect the usage of language in people
(Mairesse et al. 2007), and it is an integral part of humanhuman interaction (Long and Martin 2000; Berry, Willingham, and Thayer 2000). As we develop smarter dialogue
systems, future virtual agents need to detect and adapt to different user personalities in order to express empathy (Fung
et al. 2016). Although traditionally the user personality can
be identified by having the user fill out a self-assessment
form such as the NEO Personality Inventory (Costa and McCrae 2008), this method is not feasible for many applications
where we may wish to identify user personality, such as dialogue systems. Therefore, work on automatic personality assessment has become increasingly important recently with
the rise in popularity of applications such as Human Resources (HR) screening, personalized marketing, and other
social media related user-profiling.
Currently, personality labeled data is scarce, especially
in the multilingual setting, which makes it essential to use
the relatively larger size of data in English to help recognize traits in other languages. Previous work on multilingual personality recognition have tried to use the wordlevel or character-level similarity across languages to develop a multilingual model (Liu, Perez, and Nowson 2016;
Siddique and Fung 2017). However, our experiments show
that words used by people with different personality traits
differ among languages or cultures, which is not captured
by distributional semantics alone, making it necessary to
learn a personality-based mapping of words to express each
personality trait. Therefore, we propose GlobalTrait, which
trains personality trait-based alignment of multilingual embeddings from the source language(s) to the target language,
such that words that correlate positively to each trait are
closer together in the multilingual (global) vector space. We
show that taking such mapping or alignment of embeddings
as input to our model gives us better multilingual results in
the task of personality recognition.

Introduction
According to (Allport 1937), personality refers to the characteristic pattern in a person’s thinking, feeling, and decision
making. It is a quality of a person across a relatively long period and is different from emotions, which can be perceived
in the moment. We can think of it as, personality is to emotion what climate is to weather. The Big Five model of personality (Goldberg 1993) is a common way of quantifying
a person’s personality, and is recognized by most psychologists around the world. It tries to represent the traits as scores
across five dimensions:
• Extraversion vs Introverted (Extr) - sociable, assertive,
playful vs aloof, reserved, shy;
• Conscientiousness vs Unconscientious (Cons) - selfdisciplined, organised vs inefficient, careless;
• Agreeableness vs Disagreeable (Agr) - friendly, cooperative vs antagonistic, faultfinding;
• Neuroticism vs Emotionally Stable (Emot) - insecure,
anxious vs calm, unemotional;

Related Work
Automatic personality recognition has been done since as
early as 2006 (Oberlander and Nowson 2006), where the
personality of blog authors were identified using Naive

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7015

