Multistream Classification with Relative Density Ratio Estimation
Bo Dong, Yang Gao, Swarup Chandra, Latifur Khan
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson TX
{bxd130630, yxg122530, swarup.chandra, lkhan}@utdallas.edu

Abstract

For instance, consider the scenario of predicting sentiment of Facebook posts (Ortigosa, Martı́n, and Carro 2014).
Usually, the sentiment label is not provided along with a
user’s post. To train a classifier, true labels of a few posts
from multiple users may be requested. However, if users responding with the labels are not a good representation of the
population, then the classifier trained directly on such biased
labeled data may not generalize well to all other user posts.
To address the challenge of limited labeled data over
concept-drifting data streams, (Chandra et al. 2016) introduced a framework where a subset of independent processes
continuously generate labeled data instances having a biased distribution compared to unlabeled instances generated
from the population. They represent the data as two disjoint
streams, one with biased labeled data and the other with unlabeled data, to leverage transfer learning techniques that aid
in bias correction. This setting is called Multistream Classification, to emphasize the two-stream representation. The
labeled stream is called source and the unlabeled stream
is called target. Moreover, this representation allows for
drifts in concepts to be observed independently over the two
streams. The combination of concept drift and sampling bias
provides a variety of unique challenges, such as data shift
and asynchronous concept drifts between the source and target streams, for predicting labels of unlabeled instances in
the target stream.
However, previous approaches that address the challenges
of multistream setting suffer from lack of systematic model
selection (Chandra et al. 2016) or have large computational
time overhead (Haque et al. 2017). In a framework that perform label prediction over data streams, the speed of data
consumption is typically limited by its slowest component.
In existing approaches that perform multistream classification, the data processing time is limited by the bias correction technique employed. (Haque et al. 2017) uses an optimization procedure that has quadratic time complexity. This
severely limits the speed of data consumption in the two
streams, particularly in the target stream.
In this paper, we instead utilize a faster bias correction approach which is more suitable for multistream classification.
Particularly, distribution bias is corrected by directly estimating the density ratio between source and target stream
during classifier training, where the training is performed
over a bias-corrected dataset. Recently, a technique that

In supervised learning, availability of sufficient labeled data is
of prime importance. Unfortunately, they are sparingly available in many real-world applications. Particularly when performing classification over a non-stationary data stream, unavailability of sufficient labeled data undermines the classifier’s long-term performance by limiting its adaptability to
changes in data distribution over time. Recently, studies in
such settings have appealed to transfer learning techniques
over a data stream while detecting drifts in data distribution over time. Here, the data stream is represented by two
independent non-stationary streams, one containing labeled
data instances (called source stream) having a biased distribution compared to the unlabeled data instances (called target stream). The task of label prediction under this representation is called Multistream Classification, where instances
in the two streams occur independently. While these studies
have addressed various challenges in the multistream setting,
it still suffers from large computational overhead mainly due
to frequent bias correction and drift adaptation methods employed. In this paper, we focus on utilizing an alternative bias
correction technique, called relative density-ratio estimation,
which is known to be computationally faster. Importantly, we
propose a novel mechanism to automatically learn an appropriate mixture of relative density that adapts to changes in the
multistream setting over time. We theoretically study its properties and empirically demonstrate its superior performance,
within a multistream framework called MSCRDR, on benchmark datasets by comparing with other competing methods.

Introduction
When employing a supervised machine learning model for
label prediction over a stream of data instances continuously
generated from non-stationary processes, its prediction performance degrades with changes in data distribution over
time. This problem, called concept drift (Gama et al. 2004),
has been addressed in previous studies using model adaptation and drift detection techniques (Masud et al. 2011;
Domingos and Hulten 2000; Gama et al. 2014). However,
they assume that sufficient labeled data instances are readily
available throughout the stream (Haque, Khan, and Baron
2016; Mu et al. 2017). Unfortunately, the existence of sufficient labeled instances is scarce in practice.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3478

