The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MNCN: A Multilingual Ngram-Based Convolutional
Network for Aspect Category Detection in Online Reviews
Erfan Ghadery, Sajad Movahedi, Heshaam Faili, Azadeh Shakery
University of Tehran
Tehran, Iran
{erfan.ghadery, s.movahedi, hfaili, shakery}@ut.ac.ir

Abstract

the international market, consumers write reviews in different languages. Only addressing English reviews lead to
missing a lot of information existing in other languages. A
multilingual method can have two main advantages: First,
by using a multilingual method, we can extract information
from reviews in different languages simultaneously which
makes the analysis more comprehensive and precise. Second, in situations where there are a few or no labeled data
available in a particular language, available data in other languages can help in providing a model for aspect category detection in the low-resource language. In this paper, we propose a multilingual method that performs aspect category
detection for several languages simultaneously by utilizing
multilingual word embeddings (Conneau et al. 2017) which
is available for many languages. Our proposed method is
able to classify review sentences of a language even when
there are no labeled data available for that language by utilizing the available labeled data in other languages.
Many multilingual approaches have been proposed for
document-based sentiment analysis, where the goal is determining the polarity of a document like a tweet or a user comment (Banea et al. 2008),(Brooke, Tofiloski, and Taboada
2009). Cross-lingual sentiment analysis is the most common
approach for handling this problem, where machine translation techniques are utilized for translating the documents
into a target language and performing sentiment analysis in
a monolingual fashion using the resources in the target language. However, machine translation-based approaches suffer from various problems such as the effect of cultural differences between the source and the destination language
(Duh, Fujino, and Nagata 2011), the quality of the translation method, and the possible sparseness and noisiness of the
data (Balahur and Turchi 2012).
Our proposed multilingual method, MNCN, does not
need any translation techniques, and performs aspect category detection using an ngram-based deep convolutional
neural network with the multilingual word embeddings as
the input of the network. Initially, as the sentence representation, we construct a matrix of multilingual word embeddings whose rows are embedding vectors of the sentence
words, and the columns are the embedding features. Then,
three parallel ngram-based convolution layers convolve with
the sentence representation matrix to extract ngram features.
These obtained features are then concatenated together to

The advent of the Internet has caused a significant growth in
the number of opinions expressed about products or services
on e-commerce websites. Aspect category detection, which
is one of the challenging subtasks of aspect-based sentiment
analysis, deals with categorizing a given review sentence into
a set of predefined categories. Most of the research efforts in
this field are devoted to English language reviews, while there
are a large number of reviews in other languages that are left
unexplored. In this paper, we propose a multilingual method
to perform aspect category detection on reviews in different
languages, which makes use of a deep convolutional neural
network with multilingual word embeddings. To the best of
our knowledge, our method is the first attempt at performing
aspect category detection on multiple languages simultaneously. Empirical results on the multilingual dataset provided
by SemEval workshop demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method1 .

Introduction
The Internet has caused an explosion in the amount of
data produced daily such as user-generated reviews on ecommerce websites. People are often interested in the experiences and opinions of others about different products or
services expressed on these e-commerce websites like Amazon 2 and Yelp 3 . These user-generated reviews are valuable resources for researchers in natural language processing
fields, especially sentiment analysis. Aspect category detection is a subtask of aspect-based sentiment analysis, which
deals with categorizing the review sentences based on a set
of pre-defined aspect categories. These aspect categories are
common concerns for the consumers. For example in the
restaurant domain, aspect categories can be ‘FOOD’, ‘SERVICE’, etc.
Previous works in the literature that address aspect category detection are mainly devoted to the English language.
However, with the growth of the Internet and the advent of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code for this paper is available at https://github.com/erfanghadery/MNCN
2
https://www.amazon.com/
3
https://www.yelp.com/

6441

