The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Radical-Aware Attention-Based Model for Chinese Text Classification
Hanqing Tao,† Shiwei Tong,† Hongke Zhao,† Tong Xu,†§∗ Binbin Jin,† Qi Liu†§
†

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
§
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
{hqtao, tongsw, zhhk, bb0725}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tongxu, qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years, Chinese text classification has attracted more
and more research attention. However, most existing techniques which specifically aim at English materials may lose
effectiveness on this task due to the huge difference between
Chinese and English. Actually, as a special kind of hieroglyphics, Chinese characters and radicals are semantically
useful but still unexplored in the task of text classification. To
that end, in this paper, we first analyze the motives of using
multiple granularity features to represent a Chinese text by inspecting the characteristics of radicals, characters and words.
For better representing the Chinese text and then implementing Chinese text classification, we propose a novel Radicalaware Attention-based Four-Granularity (RAFG) model to
take full advantages of Chinese characters, words, characterlevel radicals, word-level radicals simultaneously. Specifically, RAFG applies a serialized BLSTM structure which is
context-aware and able to capture the long-range information
to model the character sharing property of Chinese and sequence characteristics in texts. Further, we design an attention mechanism to enhance the effects of radicals thus model
the radical sharing property when integrating granularities.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments, where the experimental results not only show the superiority of our model,
but also validate the effectiveness of radicals in the task of
Chinese text classification.

Figure 1: Glyph origin of some radicals, and the semantic
connection between Chinese characters and radicals.
As shown in Figure 1, radical is a kind of semantic unit with
some graphic characteristics. A radical is often related to
some certain concepts, e.g., we use “Eye” to “look”; we use
“Hand” to “hit” or “dig”; “sunny” and “dark” are relevant
to the light of “Sun”; the “peak” and “cliff” are places of a
“Mountain”. From these examples, we can preliminarily see
that radicals might help us to recognize semantics. Although
some scholars have realized the importance of radicals in
representing individual Chinese words, few of existing studies have exploited radicals to help classify Chinese texts.
Actually, there are two special kinds of properties in Chinese, which have not been systematically explored. The first
property is radical sharing. As illustrated above, the meaning of a Chinese character can be partly expressed through
its radical. If several Chinese characters share a common
radical, that radical is usually the core semantic association between them. As shown in Table 1, those five Chinese characters share a common radical “insect”, and in fact
they are indeed corresponding to five different kinds of insects, which reflects the important role of radicals in terms
of character semantics. Correspondingly, the other property
is character sharing. That is, the meaning of a Chinese word
can be expressed through its containing characters. If several
Chinese words have one character in common, that character
is also usually the core semantic association between these
words (see Table 2). Inspired by the importance of radicals
in Chinese and these two properties, in this study, we propose to exploit the utilities of character-level radicals and

Introduction
Text classification which aims to select the most appropriate
assignment to an untagged text from a predefined set of tags
has been widely studied (Peng et al. 2003). However, most
existing studies on text classification are professionally conducted for English. Recently, the classification of Chinese
text has attracted more and more attention.
Chinese, a language derived from pictographs, is essentially different from English or other phonetic languages.
For Chinese, one of the most unique is that the character system of Chinese is based on hieroglyphics, which has the raw
meanings. That is to say, not only words and characters can
express specific meanings, but also radicals are important
carriers of semantics. This special property is an important
difference between Chinese and English text classification.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5125

