The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ColNet: Embedding the Semantics of Web Tables for Column Type Prediction
Jiaoyan Chen,1 Ernesto Jiménez-Ruiz,2,4 Ian Horrocks,1,2 Charles Sutton2,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
3
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh, UK
4
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway

Abstract

Table annotation tasks are often transformed into matchings between the table and a KB, such as cell to entity
matching, column to class matching and column pair to
property matching. Traditional methods jointly solve all
the matching tasks with their correlations considered using
graphical models (Limaye, Sarawagi, and Chakrabarti 2010;
Mulwad, Finin, and Joshi 2013; Bhagavatula, Noraset, and
Downey 2015) or iterative procedures (Ritze, Lehmberg,
and Bizer 2015; Zhang 2014; Zhang 2017). Considering the
inter-matching correlation improves the disambiguation, but
their metrics for computing the matchings (i) mostly adopt
lexical comparisons which ignore the contextual semantics,
and (ii) rely on metadata like column names and sometimes even external information like table description, both
of which are often unavailable in real world applications.
Recent studies (Efthymiou et al. 2017) and (Luo et al.
2018) match column cells to KB entities with their contextual semantics considered using machine learning techniques like word embeddings and neural networks. With the
matched entities, the column type can be further inferred using strategies like majority voting. However, such a cell to
entity matching based column type annotation procedure assumes that the table cells have KB entity correspondences.
Its performance will decrease when the column has a small
number of cells, or there are missing or not accurate correspondences between the table cells and the KB entities,
which we refer to as knowledge gap.
This study focuses on type annotation of entity columns,
assuming table metadata like column names and table structures are unknown. We propose a neural network based
framework named ColNet, as shown in Figure 1. It first
embeds the overall semantics of columns into vector space
and then predicts their types with a set of candidate KB
classes, using machine learning techniques like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and an ensemble of results
from lookup. To automatically train robust prediction models, we use the cells to retrieve the candidate KB classes, infer their entities to construct training samples, and deal with
the challenge of sample shortage using transfer learning.
In summary, this study contributes a more accurate column type annotation framework by combining knowledge
lookup and machine learning with the knowledge gap considered. As the framework does not assume any table metadata or table structure, it can be applied to not only web ta-

Automatically annotating column types with knowledge base
(KB) concepts is a critical task to gain a basic understanding
of web tables. Current methods rely on either table metadata
like column name or entity correspondences of cells in the
KB, and may fail to deal with growing web tables with incomplete meta information. In this paper we propose a neural network based column type annotation framework named
ColNet which is able to integrate KB reasoning and lookup
with machine learning and can automatically train Convolutional Neural Networks for prediction. The prediction model
not only considers the contextual semantics within a cell using word representation, but also embeds the semantics of a
column by learning locality features from multiple cells. The
method is evaluated with DBPedia and two different web table datasets, T2Dv2 from the general Web and Limaye from
Wikipedia pages, and achieves higher performance than the
state-of-the-art approaches.

Introduction
Tables on the Web, which often contain highly valuable data,
are growing at an extremely fast speed. Their power has been
explored in various applications including web search (Cafarella et al. 2008), question answering (Sun et al. 2016),
knowledge base (KB) construction (Ritze et al. 2016) and so
on. For most applications, web table annotation which is to
gain a basic understanding of the structure and meaning of
the content is critical. This however is often difficult in practice due to metadata (e.g., table and column names) being
missing, incomplete or ambiguous.
An entity column is a table column whose cells are text
phrases, i.e., mentions of entities. Type annotation of an entity column1 means matching the common type of its cells
with widely recognized concepts such as semantic classes
of a KB. For example, a column composed of “Mute swan”,
“Yellow-billed duck” and “Wandering albatross” is annotated with dbo:Species and dbo:Bird, two classes of DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007). Column types not only enable understanding the meaning of cells but also form the base of other
table annotation tasks such as property annotation (Pham et
al. 2016) and foreign key discovery (Zhang et al. 2010).
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Note that data type prediction is not considered in this work.

29

