The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Combo-Action: Training Agent for FPS Game with Auxiliary Tasks
Shiyu Huang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu,∗ Ting Chen∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Institute for AI, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
hsy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {suhangss, dcszj, tingchen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved surpassing
human performance on Atari games, using raw pixels and
rewards to learn everything. However, first-person-shooter
(FPS) games in 3D environments contain higher levels of human concepts (enemy, weapon, spatial structure, etc.) and a
large action space. In this paper, we explore a novel method
which can plan on temporally-extended action sequences,
which we refer as Combo-Action to compress the action
space. We further train a deep recurrent Q-learning network
model as a high-level controller, called supervisory network,
to manage the Combo-Actions. Our method can be boosted
with auxiliary tasks (enemy detection and depth prediction),
which enable the agent to extract high-level concepts in the
FPS games. Extensive experiments show that our method is
efficient in training process and outperforms previous stateof-the-art approaches by a large margin. Ablation study experiments also indicate that our method can boost the performance of the FPS agent in a reasonable way.

Figure 1: An illustration of the Combo-Action in ViZDoom. We define four Combo-Actions (Forward, Turn, Rotate, Shoot) in this paper. Each Combo-Action is a temporal abstraction of the primitive actions. A depth prediction
model and an enemy detection model are used for corresponding Combo-Actions. Instead of using the whole depth
map, we divide it into a 3 × 6 grid and calculate the average
depth value for each cell. We further train a DRQN model,
called supervisory network, as a high level controller for the
Combo-Actions.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has shown great success in many games, including the computer Go game (Silver et al. 2016), Atari games (Mnih et al. 2013), etc. Besides the 2D games (e.g., Go and Atari), applying DRL to
first-person-shooter (FPS) games in an adversarial 3D environment (Kempka et al. 2016; Lample and Chaplot 2016)
has attracted attention, in which a player fights against other
computer agents or human players. Compared with the 2D
games, FPS games show a multitude of challenges since
the additional spatial dimension not only introduces notions of partial observability and occlusions, but also causes
complications due to viewpoint variance and more unpredictable actions of the enemies. Moreover, this task also involves a wide variety of actions and skills, such as navigating through a map, collecting items, fighting enemies, etc.
ViZDoom (Kempka et al. 2016) is a RL research platform
which allows researchers to develop agents to play the Doom
game with the screen buffer and game variables. Many efforts have been paid on developing AI bots to learn a strat-

egy via data-driven methods since the release of ViZDoom,
e.g., Arnold (Lample and Chaplot 2016), F1 (Wu and Tian
2017) and IntelAct (Dosovitskiy and Koltun 2016).

Challenges
Even much work has been done recently, there still remain
many problems in building agents for the FPS game.
Large Action Space: In general, there are numerous primitive actions in FPS games for an agent to interact with
the environment, which can be categorized into on-off actions and delta actions. On-off actions only contain bi-

∗

J. Zhu and T. Chen are corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

954

