The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Remote Management of Boundary
Protection Devices with Information Restrictions
Aaron Adler

Peter Samouelian

Michael Atighetchi

Yat Fu

BBN Technologies
10 Moulton Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
aaronadler@alum.mit.edu

BBN Technologies
10 Moulton Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
psamouelian@acm.org

BBN Technologies
10 Moulton Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
michael.atighetchi@raytheon.com

Air Force Research Lab
26 Electronic Parkway
Rome, New York 13441
yat.fu@us.af.mil

Abstract

Another key difference is that some BPDs are designed at
the hardware level to prevent two-way traffic by using dedicated circuits for their sending and receiving network interfaces, which are in turn separated by one-way data diodes.
This hardware architecture protects the receiving network
from data exfiltration attacks. The one-way data diodes also
prevent software failures and high load conditions for critical functions such as data filtering, auditing and logging that
occur on the BPD’s receiving side to signal the sending side.
This is by design as it limits an adversary’s ability to learn
the effectiveness of various attack strategies and, hence, the
target’s security posture.
Modern information systems include load balancers
(LBs) and application clustering to achieve resiliency, high
availability, scalability, and security. In a web-based application, for example, LBs provide these benefits by ensuring
Internet-based requests are routed to available servers across
an organization’s server pool. Hence, in their role as traffic
managers between network boundaries, LBs require server
statistics on the receiving network in order to make good
routing decisions. This information includes each server’s
basic online status, CPU utilization, available bandwidth, request completion rate, and other metrics. BPDs are designed
to prevent all such types of feedback (including the success
or failure of data transfers) to the sending network from their
receiving side.
In practice, some BPDs are equipped with pairs of oneway data diodes to support separate directional data flows,
as shown in Figure 1 between an open / low security network and a restricted / enclave / higher security network,
in this paper referred to as ‘open’ and ‘restricted.’ Sending
and receiving interfaces may also reside on completely separate BPDs, potentially across vendor types. Communication techniques that can leverage these separate directional
dataflows in a secure and coordinated manner would allow
deployments to better leverage commodity LBs to improve
scalability and fault tolerance of BPD deployments.
BPD configuration and administration tasks generally require physical access to the BPD and potentially multiple administrators working separately on each network interface.
While this process provides transparency and effective countermeasures against some types of security threats (e.g., insider threats), it is ineffective or inefficient when responding
to cyber attacks, which operate at machine speed, or sup-

Boundary Protection Devices (BPDs) are used by US Government mission partners to regulate the flow of information
across networks of differing security levels. BPDs provide
several critical functions, including preventing unauthorized
sharing, sanitizing information, and preventing cyber attacks.
Their application in national security and critical infrastructure environments (e.g., military missions, nuclear power
plants, clean water distribution systems) calls for a comprehensive load monitoring system that provides resilience and
scalability, as well as an automated and vendor neutral configuration management system that can efficiently respond to
security threats at machine speed. Their design as one-way
traffic control systems, however, presents challenges for dynamic load adaptation techniques that require access to application server performance metrics across network boundaries. Moreover, the structured review and approval process
that regulates their configuration and use presents two significant challenges: (1) Adaptation techniques that alter the
configuration of BPDs must be predictable, understandable,
and pre-approved by administrators, and (2) Software can be
installed on BPDs only after completing a stringent accreditation process. These challenges often lead to manual configuration management practices, which are inefficient or ineffective in many cases. The Hammerhead prototype, developed as
part of the SHARC project, addresses these challenges using
knowledge representation, a rule-oriented adaptation bundle
format, and an extensible, open-source constraint solver.
DISTRIBUTION A: Approved for public release; distribution unlimited (Case Number 88ABW2017-4436).
Work sponsored by AFRL under contract FA8750-16-C-0056; the views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and not AFRL or the U.S. Government.

1

Introduction

BPDs are similar to gateways or firewalls except for key differences that improve their security and the security of the
networks they bridge. For example, the types of information they are configured to transfer across networks is preconfigured and heavily scrutinized according to mission requirements. Multi-step and redundant filters perform deep
content inspection, analyzing data across multiple OSI layers and packets to ensure that the intent of the data transfer
is in compliance with the BPD’s transfer policies.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9398

