The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Disentangled Variational Representation for Heterogeneous Face Recognition
Xiang Wu,1,2 Huaibo Huang,1,2,3 Vishal M. Patel,4 Ran He,1,2∗ Zhenan Sun1,2
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC), CASIA, Beijing, China
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), CASIA, Beijing, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
alfredxiangwu@gmail.com, huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn,
vpatel36@jhu.edu, {rhe, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

Visible (VIS) to near infrared (NIR) face matching is a challenging problem due to the significant domain discrepancy
between the domains and a lack of sufficient data for training cross-modal matching algorithms. Existing approaches
attempt to tackle this problem by either synthesizing visible faces from NIR faces, extracting domain-invariant features from these modalities, or projecting heterogeneous data
onto a common latent space for cross-modal matching. In this
paper, we take a different approach in which we make use of
the Disentangled Variational Representation (DVR) for crossmodal matching. First, we model a face representation with
an intrinsic identity information and its within-person variations. By exploring the disentangled latent variable space, a
variational lower bound is employed to optimize the approximate posterior for NIR and VIS representations. Second, aiming at obtaining more compact and discriminative disentangled latent space, we impose a minimization of the identity
information for the same subject and a relaxed correlation
alignment constraint between the NIR and VIS modality variations. An alternative optimization scheme is proposed for the
disentangled variational representation part and the heterogeneous face recognition network part. The mutual promotion
between these two parts effectively reduces the NIR and VIS
domain discrepancy and alleviates over-fitting. Extensive experiments on three challenging NIR-VIS heterogeneous face
recognition databases demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves significant improvements over the state-of-the-art
methods.

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed Disentangled Variational Representation (DVR) approach for VIS-NIR matching. The NIR and VIS representations xN and xV are disentangled into (µN , σN ) and (µV , σV ), respectively. We assume that there is a linear relationship, P , between lighting
variations, i.e., σV = P σN . The mean discrepancy is used
to measure the difference between the NIR and VIS distributions in the latent space. The reconstructions x̂N and x̂V
are obtained from the likelihood p(xN |zN ) and p(xV |zV ),
respectively and are constrained by the cross-entropy loss.
recognize faces collected in thermal or near infrared (NIR)
domains. The performance of many CNN-based face recognition methods often degrades significantly when confronted
by the NIR face images. This is mainly due to the significant
distributional change between the NIR and VIS domains.
Another issue that one has to overcome when designing CNN-based models for heterogeneous face recognition
(HFR) is over-fitting, which happens due to the lack of sufficient training samples. One of the reasons why CNN-based
face recognition methods provide impressive performance
improvements on various face recognition benchmarks is
that they are trained on thousands and millions of annotated
face images often downloaded from the internet. In contrast,
there is no publicly available large-scale annotated NIR face
dataset for training deep networks. As a result, CNNs trained
on small-scale NIR data often tend to overfit. Hence, it is
necessary to explore other methods that can deal with this
issue in HFR.
Various methods have been developed in the literature for
VIS to NIR cross-modal face recognition (Li et al. 2013;

Introduction
In recent years, methods based on deep convolution neural network (CNN) have shown impressive performance
improvements for face detection and recognition problems
(Parkhi, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2015; Wu et al. 2018a).
Despite the success of CNN-based methods in addressing
various challenges in face recognition such as variations in
pose, expression, aging, occlusion, disguise, and illumination, they are specifically designed to recognize face images
that are collected at or near the visible (VIS) domain. However, in many real-world applications such as surveillance at
night-time and in low-light conditions, one has to be able to
∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9005

