The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DRr-Net: Dynamic Re-Read Network for Sentence Semantic Matching
Kun Zhang,1 Guangyi Lv,1 Linyuan Wang,1 Le Wu,2 Enhong Chen,1,* Fangzhao Wu,3 Xing Xie3
1

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China
{zhkun, gylv, wly757}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
2
Hefei University of Technology, China, lewu@hfut.edu.cn
3
Microsoft Research Asia, China, wufangzhao@gmail.com, xing.xie@microsoft.com
Abstract

As a fundamental technology, sentence semantic matching has broad applications, e.g. information retrieval (Clark
et al. 2016), question answering (Wang et al. 2017; Liu et
al. 2018), and dialog system (Serban et al. 2016). With the
large annotated datasets (Bowman et al. 2015; Iyer, Dandekar, and Csernai 2017) and advancement of representation learning techniques (Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016;
Vaswani et al. 2017), rapid development on sentence semantic matching has been enabled. Among the core semantic matching techniques, attention mechanism plays an
important role, which is known for its alignment between
representations and modeling the dependency regardless of
sequence length. For example, self-attention (Vaswani et
al. 2017) can generate better representations by relating
elements at different positions in a single sentence. Coattention (Kim et al. 2018) is capable of modeling sentence
interaction in a detailed perspective. They together have become essential for tackling numerous complicated tasks.
However, most of the existing methods select all the important parts of sentences at one time. In fact, the important
parts of sentences during semantic matching are dynamically changing with the progress of sentence understanding
and should be repeatedly read and processed. For example,
when judging the relation between “a person with a purple
shirt is painting an image of a woman on a white wall” and
“a woman paints a portrait of her best friend”, the important words will change from “person, purple, shirt, painting, image, woman” to “person, image, woman” in the first
sentence, and from “woman, paints, portrait, best friend” to
“woman, portrait, best friend”in the second sentence. As the
Chinese proverb says: “The gist of an article will come to
you after reading it over 100 times ”. The important words
should be repeatedly read and thought for the final decision.
Moreover, psychological researches have shown that humans only pay attention to a small region of information
at one time, i.e., people only focus on 1.5 words each time
when intensively reading a piece of text (Wang et al. 1999).
Koch and Tsuchiya (2007) have demonstrated that people
might focus on less than 7 different objects at the same time.
All of the studies indicate that the important words in sentences should be dynamic re-read and re-thought for better
semantic understanding and matching.
Inspired by these observations, in this paper, we propose
a novel Dynamic Re-read Network (DRr-Net) approach for

Sentence semantic matching requires an agent to determine
the semantic relation between two sentences, which is widely
used in various natural language tasks such as Natural Language Inference (NLI) and Paraphrase Identification (PI).
Among all matching methods, attention mechanism plays an
important role in capturing the semantic relations and properly aligning the elements of two sentences. Previous methods utilized attention mechanism to select important parts of
sentences at one time. However, the important parts of the
sentence during semantic matching are dynamically changing
with the degree of sentence understanding. Selecting the important parts at one time may be insufficient for semantic understanding. To this end, we propose a Dynamic Re-read Network (DRr-Net) approach for sentence semantic matching,
which is able to pay close attention to a small region of sentences at each step and re-read the important words for better sentence semantic understanding. To be specific, we first
employ Attention Stack-GRU (ASG) unit to model the original sentence repeatedly and preserve all the information from
bottom-most word embedding input to up-most recurrent output. Second, we utilize Dynamic Re-read (DRr) unit to pay
close attention to one important word at one time with the
consideration of learned information and re-read the important words for better sentence semantic understanding. Extensive experiments on three sentence matching benchmark
datasets demonstrate that DRr-Net has the ability to model
sentence semantic more precisely and significantly improve
the performance of sentence semantic matching. In addition,
it is very interesting that some of finding in our experiments
are consistent with the findings of psychological research.

1

Introduction

Sentence semantic matching, a fundamental technology in
natural language processing, requires an agent to predict
the semantic relation between two sentences. For example, in Natural Language Inference (NLI), sentence semantic matching is utilized to determine whether a hypothesis
sentence can reasonably be inferred from a given premise
sentence (Kim et al. 2018). In Paraphrase Identification (PI),
it is utilized to identify whether two sentences express the
same meaning or not (Dolan and Brockett 2005).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7442

