The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Orthogonality-Promoting Dictionary Learning via Bayesian Inference
Lei Luo,1 Jie Xu,1,2 Cheng Deng,2 Heng Huang1,3∗
1

2

Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, USA
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian, Shanxi, China, 3 JDDGlobal.com
lel94@pitt.edu, jie.xu@pitt.edu, chdeng.xd@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract

to solid theoretical studies (Candes and Tao 2005), numerous linear models following this line of sparse coding have
recently emerged as powerful tools to cope with a variety
of estimation tasks, e.g., Collaborative Representation Classifier (CRC) (Zhang, Yang, and Feng 2011), Robust Sparse
Coding (RSC) (Yang et al. 2011b), Nuclear norm based Matrix Regression (NMR) (Yang et al. 2017a), capped norm
based robust dictionary learning (Jiang, Nie, and Huang
2015), and group sparsity based model (Nie et al. 2010;
Yuan, Liu, and Ye 2011).
The dictionary plays an important role in these sparse representation based models. A desired dictionary learned from
data often outperforms a set of predefined bases (Guo et al.
2016). As a result, dictionary learning (DL) has received a
growing interest and a large number of DL algorithms have
been proposed in recent years. K-SVD (Aharon, Elad, and
Bruckstein 2006), as a classic DL algorithm, alternates between sparse coding of the examples based on the current
dictionary and a process of updating the dictionary atoms
to better fit the data. However, K-SVD focuses on only the
representational power of the dictionary (or the efficiency of
sparse coding under the dictionary) without considering its
capability for discrimination. To overcome this limitation,
(Zhang and Li 2010) proposed a discriminative K-SVD algorithm to learn an over-complete dictionary from a set of
labeled training face images. Different from (Zhang and Li
2010), (Yang et al. 2011a) employed the Fisher discrimination criterion to learn a structured dictionary (FDDL for
short). However, FDDL is not able to effectively represent
the non-linear changes introduced by the pose variation.
Thus (Shekhar et al. 2013) presented a robust supervised
method for learning a single dictionary to optimally represent both source and target data.
In practical applications, however, labeling samples is
usually expensive and time consuming due to the significant human effort involved. Thus, it is desired to develop
semi-supervised or weakly-supervised algorithms for efficiently learning a dictionary. To this end, (Wang et al. 2013)
proposed robust semi-supervised dictionary learning model,
while (Yang and Chen 2017) explored the discrimination of
labeled and unlabeled training data by requiring discriminative representation residual and coefficients. However, these
semi-supervised DL methods only modify the objective to
include a label fit term that renders the learned dictionary as

Dictionary Learning (DL) plays a crucial role in numerous
machine learning tasks. It targets at finding the dictionary
over which the training set admits a maximally sparse representation. Most existing DL algorithms are based on solving an optimization problem, where the noise variance and
sparsity level should be known as the prior knowledge. However, in practice applications, it is difficult to obtain these
knowledge. Thus, non-parametric Bayesian DL has recently
received much attention of researchers due to its adaptability and effectiveness. Although many hierarchical priors have
been used to promote the sparsity of the representation in
non-parametric Bayesian DL, the problem of redundancy for
the dictionary is still overlooked, which greatly decreases
the performance of sparse coding. To address this problem,
this paper presents a novel robust dictionary learning framework via Bayesian inference. In particular, we employ the
orthogonality-promoting regularization to mitigate correlations among dictionary atoms. Such a regularization, encouraging the dictionary atoms to be close to being orthogonal,
can alleviate overfitting to training data and improve the discrimination of the model. Moreover, we impose Scale mixture of the Vector variate Gaussian (SMVG) distribution on
the noise to capture its structure. A Regularized Expectation Maximization Algorithm is developed to estimate the
posterior distribution of the representation and dictionary
with orthogonality-promoting regularization. Numerical results show that our method can learn the dictionary with an
accuracy better than existing methods, especially when the
number of training signals is limited.

Introduction
In the last decades, sparse coding, inspired by the sparsity
mechanism of human vision system (Olshausen and Field
1996), has become a significant technique in computer vision and machine learning with many real-world applications such as image classification (Wright et al. 2009), visual
tracking (Mei and Ling 2011) and cluster analysis (Elhamifar and Vidal 2009). It models signals as linear combinations of a small number of atoms chosen from a large dictionary by solving an l0 minimization problem. In addition
∗

Corresponding Author. L. Luo, H. Huang were partially supported by U.S. NSF IIS 1836945, IIS 1836938, DBI 1836866, IIS
1845666, IIS 1852606, IIS 1838627, IIS 1837956.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4472

