The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Who Blames Whom in a Crisis? Detecting Blame Ties from News Articles Using
Neural Networks
Shuailong Liang, Olivia Nicol, Yue Zhang
Singapore University of Technology and Design
8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372
shuailong liang@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {olivia nicol, yue zhang}@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Blame games tend to follow major disruptions, be they financial crises, natural disasters or terrorist attacks. To study
how the blame game evolves and shapes the dominant crisis
narratives is of great significance, as sense-making processes
can affect regulatory outcomes, social hierarchies, and cultural norms. However, it takes tremendous time and efforts
for social scientists to manually examine each relevant news
article and extract the blame ties (A blames B). In this study,
we define a new task, Blame Tie Extraction, and construct a
new dataset related to the United States financial crisis (20072010) from The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal
and USA Today. We build a Bi-directional Long Short-Term
Memory (BiLSTM) network for contexts where the entities
appear in and it learns to automatically extract such blame
ties at the document level. Leveraging the large unsupervised
model such as GloVe and ELMo, our best model achieves an
F1 score of 70% on the test set for blame tie extraction, making it a useful tool for social scientists to extract blame ties
more efficiently.

Figure 1: An example sentence from our dataset containing
a blame tie. The red/bold words are entities involved in a
blame tie, and the blue/italic words are supporting evidence
that the blame tie exists.
Bearman 2015; Bail 2016). Based on the dataset annotated
from several new media excerpts on blame, we investigate
automatic ways to extract blame ties from new articles.
There are three main challenges. First, some patterns only
have blame meanings in specific contexts. For instance, “It
was lenders that made the lenient loans, it was home buyers
who sought out easy mortgages, and it was Wall Street underwriters that turned them into securities.” (The Wall Street
Journal, Aug 2007), only with the background of the financial crisis can we identify that the blamed targets are lenders,
home buyers and Wall Street. Second, there are many ways
to attribute blame and the structure of the sentences can be
quite complex. Third, it is common for journalists to use
metaphors and ironies to designate actors.
We design several neural models to address the problem.
First, we leverage a neural network to learn the prior information about entities for blame tie extraction. In particular, a
neural network is used to learn dense vector representations
of entities so that similar entities can be visualized close to
each other in the embedding space, and the likeliness of one
entity to blame another can be inferred automatically without further knowledge. Second, we build a BiLSTM neural
network to represent contexts, which can be used to predict
blame ties between entities mentioned in the news articles
using linguistic clues. Finally, a model that integrates entity
knowledge and linguistic knowledge is constructed by integrating the two respective networks.
We conduct a case study on blame games for the U.S. financial crisis (2007-2010), the most important event since
the Great Depression, which led to at least $6 trillion in
losses (Luttrell et al. 2013). Results show that our model can

Introduction
Blame is an issue that has been receiving increasing attention in the social sciences in recent years (Alicke 2000;
Hobolt and Tilley 2014; Hood 2010; Shaver 2012). In particular, more attention has been placed on blame dynamics following major disruptions, such as natural disasters
(Malhotra and Kuo 2008), financial crises (Nicol 2016;
Tourish and Hargie 2012), and terrorist attacks (Olmeda
2008). Studying blame is of great significance as sensemaking processes inform what and who a society values,
and ultimately shape lawmaking. For instance, the intense
blame targeting Wall Street during the financial crisis (20072010) helped lawmakers pass the July 2011 Dodd-Frank
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
Although the problem is important, it takes tremendous
time and efforts for social scientists to manually examine
each relevant news article and extract the blame ties (A
blames B). In Figure 1, for example, the tuple (John B. Taylor, Fed) is extracted as a blame tie. Recently, deep neural
networks have proved very powerful at solving many social science problems (Li and Hovy 2014; Rule, Cointet, and
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

655

