The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Gaussian Transformer: A Lightweight Approach for Natural Language Inference
Maosheng Guo, Yu Zhang, Ting Liu∗
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
{msguo, yzhang, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract

0.2

Natural Language Inference (NLI) is an active research area,
where numerous approaches based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and
self-attention networks (SANs) has been proposed. Although
obtaining impressive performance, previous recurrent approaches are hard to train in parallel; convolutional models
tend to cost more parameters, while self-attention networks
are not good at capturing local dependency of texts. To address this problem, we introduce a Gaussian prior to selfattention mechanism, for better modeling the local structure
of sentences. Then we propose an efficient RNN/CNN-free
architecture named Gaussian Transformer for NLI, which
consists of encoding blocks modeling both local and global
dependency, high-order interaction blocks collecting the evidence of multi-step inference, and a lightweight comparison block saving lots of parameters. Experiments show that
our model achieves new state-of-the-art performance on both
SNLI and MultiNLI benchmarks with significantly fewer parameters and considerably less training time. Besides, evaluation using the Hard NLI datasets demonstrates that our approach is less affected by the undesirable annotation artifacts.

0.1

(a) 0.0
0.0
0.2

0.1

(b)
0.0

(c)

0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1

-4 -3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0.0

Figure 1: Probabilities of each token attending to current
central word ‘book’: (a) illustrates the vanilla self-attention,
where the word ‘new’ appeared in different positions obtain
the same importance, which is inconsistent with our experience that adjacent words matters; (b) depicts a Gaussian
distribution over distance (x-axis) that encourages focusing
on neighboring tokens; (c) draws the attention corrected by
the Gaussian prior, where the first ‘new’ is more important.

Introduction
Natural Language Inference (NLI), also known as Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE), is a fundamental problem in the research field of natural language understanding, which could help tasks like questions answering, reading comprehension and summarization (Dagan et al. 2013).
In NLI settings, the model is presented with a pair of sentences, namely premise and hypothesis, and asked to determine the reasoning relationship between them from a set
including entailment, contradiction and neutral. Numerous
efforts have been dedicated to this task, where the dominant
trend is to build complex neural models using millions of parameters which cost lots of time to train. Although achieved
impressive accuracy, previous works using recurrent models
are hard to train in parallel while convolutional models often
need more parameters to learn.
To address this problem, we propose an efficient
RNN/CNN-free architecture named Gaussian Transformer,

which is adapted from the Transformer model in machine
translation tasks(Vaswani et al. 2017). The original Transformer is based on the self-attention mechanism, eschewing
the disadvantages of recurrence and convolution. However,
it cannot capture local structure of texts, which is enhanced
with a Gaussian prior probability in our approach according to the following observation: adjacent words contribute
more semantically to current phrase than distant ones. For
example, in the sentence ‘I bought a new book yesterday
with a new friend in New York.’, the first ‘new’ is more important to the word ‘book’ than the other two. Indeed, RNNs
tend to forget distant inputs, while CNNs exclude words outside the current convolutional window. This ‘chunking’ phenomenon is naturally modeled in RNNs and CNNs but is neglected in the original Transformer. As shown in Figure 1(a),

∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6489

