The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Active Sampling for Open-Set Classification without Initial Annotation
Zhao-Yang Liu, Sheng-Jun Huang∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
Nanjing 211106, China
{zhaoyangliu, huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract

can successfully detect those from novel classes. Obviously,
this is a much more challenging task than close-set classification.
There are some studies trying to solve this problem in
different ways. For example, (Yu et al. 2017; Júnior et
al. 2016) detects novel data by the distance difference between known data and novel class data, (Masud et al. 2010;
Guru et al. 2016) uses clustering to filter novel class data.
Most of these methods require a large set of annotated examples from known classes to train the classification model,
which however, is usually unavailable in real cases. Actually, in real tasks, label annotation is usually expensive and
time costly. Thus a more practical scenario is that we have
a dataset collected from known classes, but all examples are
unlabeled. For example, face images may automatically collected by detecting faces from a video of a known set of
people, but not precisely annotated with person ID; and web
pages of predefined genre set may be collected in batch by
a spider, yet it is not annotated for each page. This situation leads to a more challenging task of learning with least
labeled data.
Active learning is a primary approach for learning from
limited labeled data with high annotation cost. It actively select the most important examples to query their labels, and
try to train an effective model with least labeled data. In this
paper, we propose an Active Sampling algorithm for Openset Classification without Initial Annotation, and ASOCIA
for short. Specifically, given no initial labeled data, it is not
applicable to select the most important instances based on
the model prediction. Instead, active sampling of representative examples with no need of label information is a better
choice.
We extend the experimental design method in (Nie et al.
2013) to simultaneously consider the representativeness, robustness and diversity. After querying the labels of selected
examples, a model is trained based on these representative
examples, and is expected to simultaneously achieve accurate classification on known class and successful detection of
novel classes in the test phase. To distinguish novel classes
from known ones, and also to distinguish each other of the
known classes, we employ a low-rank representation learning method (Liu and Yan 2011) to obtain discriminative features. Further, to speed up the method for potential large
scale data from both known and unknown classes in the test

Open-set classification is a common problem in many real
world tasks, where data is collected for known classes, and
some novel classes occur at the test stage. In this paper, we
focus on a more challenging case where the data examples
collected for known classes are all unlabeled. Due to the
high cost of label annotation, it is rather important to train
a model with least labeled data for both accurate classification on known classes and effective detection of novel classes.
Firstly, we propose an active learning method by incorporating structured sparsity with diversity to select representative
examples for annotation. Then a latent low-rank representation is employed to simultaneously perform classification and
novel class detection. Also, the method along with a fast optimization solution is extended to a multi-stage scenario, where
classes occur and disappear in batches at each stage. Experimental results on multiple datasets validate the superiority
of the proposed method with regard to different performance
measures.

Introduction
In traditional supervised learning tasks, it is commonly assumed that the class labels are identical in the training phase
and test phase. However, in many real applications, the label set expands as more novel classes occur during the test
phase. For example, in face recognition problem, the model
is trained with data collected for a prefixed set of people, and
then is applied to real environment with many new persons
(Zhang and Patel 2017); in automated genre identification
of web pages, web page genres evolve, and the predefined
genre palette may not cover all the genres existing in a large
corpus during the test phase (Guru et al. 2016).
Such problems are formalized as a learning framework
called open-set classification (Scheirer et al. 2013). In this
framework, training examples are all collected from known
classes, while test examples are from both the known classes
and some other novel classes. The target of open-set classification is to train a model that on one hand can accurately
classify examples of known classes, and on the other hand
∗

This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1004300), NSFC (61503182, 61876081,
61732006).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4416

