The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ACE: An Actor Ensemble Algorithm for Continuous Control with Tree Search
Shangtong Zhang,∗1 Hengshuai Yao2
1

2

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta
Reinforcement Learning for Autonomous Driving Lab, Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
shangtong.zhang@ualberta.ca, hengshuai.yao@huawei.com

Abstract

ACE fits in with the option framework (Sutton, Precup,
and Singh 1999). First, each option has its intra-option policy, which maximizes the return in a certain area of the state
space. Similarly, an actor in ACE maximizes the critic in a
certain area of the domain of the critic. It may be difficult for
a single actor to maximize the critic in the whole domain due
to the complexity of the manifold of the critic. However, in
contrast, the job for action search is easier if we ask an actor
to find the best action in a local neighborhood of the action
dimension. Second, we chain the outputs of all the actors to
the critic, enabling a selection over the locally optimal action
values. In this way, the critic works similar to the policy over
options in the option framework. We quantify this similarity
between ensemble and options by extending the option-critic
architecture (OCA, Bacon, Harb, and Precup 2017) with deterministic intra-option policies. Particularly, we provide the
Deterministic Intra-option Policy Gradient theorem, based
on which we show the actor ensemble in ACE is a special
case of the general option-critic framework.
To make the state-action value function more accurate,
which is essential in the actor selection, we perform a lookahead tree search with the multiple actors. The look-ahead
tree search has achieved great success in various discrete action problems (Knuth and Moore 1975; Browne et al. 2012;
Silver et al. 2016; Oh, Singh, and Lee 2017; Farquhar et
al. 2018). Recently, look-ahead tree search was extended
to continuous-action problems. For example, Mansley, Weinstein, and Littman (2011) combined planning with adaptive discretization of a continuous action space, resulting in
a performance boost in continuous bandit problems. Nitti,
Belle, and De Raedt (2015) utilized probability programming in planning in continuous action space. Yee, Lisỳ, and
Bowling (2016) used kernel regression to generalize the values between explored actions and unexplored actions, resulting in a new Monte Carlo tree search algorithm. However,
to our best knowledge, a general tree search algorithm for
continuous-action problems is a gap. In ACE, we use the
multiple actors as meta-actions to perform a tree search with
the help of a learned value prediction model (Oh, Singh, and
Lee 2017; Farquhar et al. 2018).
We demonstrate the superiority of ACE over DDPG and
its variants empirically in Roboschool 1 , a challenging phys-

In this paper, we propose an actor ensemble algorithm, named
ACE, for continuous control with a deterministic policy in reinforcement learning. In ACE, we use actor ensemble (i.e.,
multiple actors) to search the global maxima of the critic.
Besides the ensemble perspective, we also formulate ACE
in the option framework by extending the option-critic architecture with deterministic intra-option policies, revealing
a relationship between ensemble and options. Furthermore,
we perform a look-ahead tree search with those actors and a
learned value prediction model, resulting in a refined value
estimation. We demonstrate a significant performance boost
of ACE over DDPG and its variants in challenging physical
robot simulators.

Introduction
In this paper, we propose an actor ensemble algorithm,
named ACE, for continuous control in reinforcement learning (RL). In continuous control, a deterministic policy (Silver et al. 2014) is a recent approach, which is a mapping
from state to action. In contrast, a stochastic policy is a mapping from state to a probability distribution over the actions.
Recently, neural networks has achieved great success
as function approximators in various challenging domains
(Tesauro 1995; Mnih et al. 2015; Silver et al. 2016). A deterministic policy parameterized by a neural network is usually
trained via gradient ascent to maximize the critic, which is
a state-action value function parameterized by a neural network (Silver et al. 2014; Lillicrap et al. 2015; Barth-Maron
et al. 2018). However, gradient ascent can be easily trapped
by local maxima during the search for the global maxima.
We utilize the ensemble technique to mitigate this issue. We
train multiple actors (i.e., deterministic policies) in parallel,
and each actor has a different initialization. In this way, each
actor is in charge of maximizing the state-action value function in a local area. Different actors may be trapped in different local maxima. By considering the maximum state-action
value of the actions proposed by all the actors, we are more
likely to find the global maxima of the state-action value
function than a single actor.
∗

Work done during an internship at Huawei
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5789

https://github.com/openai/roboschool

