The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hypergraph Optimization for Multi-Structural Geometric Model Fitting
Shuyuan Lin,1 Guobao Xiao,2 Yan Yan,1 David Suter,3 Hanzi Wang1∗
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City,
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Processing and Intelligent Control,
College of Computer and Control Engineering, Minjiang University, China
3
School of Science, Edith Cowan University, Australia
swin.shuyuan.lin@gmail.com, gbx@mju.edu.cn, {yanyan, hanzi.wang}@xmu.edu.cn, d.suter@ecu.edu.au
Abstract

edges (an edge of a graph connects only two vertices), and
a pairwise similarity measure (Saito, Mandic, and Suzuki
2018). Compared with a graph modelling, a hypergraph
modelling can be used to effectively describe complex data
relationship based on hyperedges (each of which may connect more than two vertices). For example, a probabilistic
hypergraph method proposed by Huang et al. (Huang et al.
2010) establishes the relationship between the vertices and
the hyperedge in terms of the local grouping information and
the similarity in a probabilistic way. Generally speaking, the
hypergraph modelling not only inherits the basic properties
of the graph modelling, but also shows superior advantages
over the graph modelling.
Recently, hypergraph analysis has been successfully applied to robust model fitting and it has achieved promising performance (Zhou, Huang, and Schölkopf 2007; Agarwal et al. 2005). The traditional hypergraph analysis usually
considers the relationship between hyperedges and vertices.
However, since data in practical tasks are often contaminated
with noises and outliers, the traditional hypergraph-based
methods suffer from two issues: 1) the hypergraph construction becomes quite complex when data points are contaminated with many outliers, and 2) a large number of hyperedges generating from noisy vertices generally increase the
computational cost. Therefore, it is quite important to optimize hypergraphs to reduce the computational complexity,
which has not been well studied yet.
In this work, we propose a novel hypergraph optimization method (i.e., HOMF) for robust model fitting (as shown
in Fig. 1) to overcome the above problems. HOMF can not
only fit multi-structural data contaminated with both noises
and outliers, but also effectively reduce the computational
complexity. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

Recently, some hypergraph-based methods have been proposed to deal with the problem of model fitting in computer
vision, mainly due to the superior capability of hypergraph to
represent the complex relationship between data points. However, a hypergraph becomes extremely complicated when the
input data include a large number of data points (usually contaminated with noises and outliers), which will significantly
increase the computational burden. In order to overcome the
above problem, we propose a novel hypergraph optimization
based model fitting (HOMF) method to construct a simple
but effective hypergraph. Specifically, HOMF includes two
main parts: an adaptive inlier estimation algorithm for vertex optimization and an iterative hyperedge optimization algorithm for hyperedge optimization. The proposed method is
highly efficient, and it can obtain accurate model fitting results within a few iterations. Moreover, HOMF can then directly apply spectral clustering, to achieve good fitting performance. Extensive experimental results show that HOMF
outperforms several state-of-the-art model fitting methods on
both synthetic data and real images, especially in sampling
efficiency and in handling data with severe outliers.

Introduction
Robust fitting of geometric structures for multi-structural
data contaminated with a number of outliers is one of the
most important and challenging research tasks for many applications of computer vision (Fischler and Bolles 1981),
such as 2D line fitting (Li 2009), vanishing point detection
(Tardif 2009), two-view segmentation (Magri and Fusiello
2014) and 3D-motion segmentation (Ochs and Brox 2012).
The task of robust model fitting is to accurately and efficiently recover meaningful structures from data. However, data in many applications are often contaminated with
noises and outliers, which makes the problem of model fitting challenging.
In the past few decades, the hypergraph representation has
attracted much attention in many computer vision applications (Parag and Elgammal 2011; Jain and Govindu 2013;
Huang et al. 2016). A hypergraph modelling is an extended
version of the traditional graph modelling. A graph modelling can be used to describe data through vertices and

• We present an adaptive inlier estimation algorithm (AIE)
based on the weighting scores of data points. As a result,
AIE can effectively distinguish significant data points
(i.e., inliers) from insignificant data points (i.e., outliers).
• We develop an iterative hyperedge optimization algorithm
(IHO) to accelerate the optimization of hyperedges. IHO
can quickly generate the optimized hyperedges with only
a few iterations based on an effective ‘exiting criterion’,
which is satisfied when the samples are selected from the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Corresponding author.

8730

