The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Weighted Channel Dropout for
Regularization of Deep Convolutional Neural Network
Saihui Hou, Zilei Wang
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
saihui@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), and Inception (Szegedy et al. 2015; 2016). In
Dropout, the output from the previous layer is flattened as
a one-dimensional vector and a randomly selected subset of
neurons is set to zero for the next layer (Figure 1). In most
cases, Dropout is used to regularize the fully-connected layers within CNN and not very suitable for the convolutional
layers. One of the main reasons is that Dropout operates on
each neuron, while in the convolutional layers each channel consisting of multiple neurons is a basic unit that corresponds to a specific pattern of input image (Zhang et al.
2016). In this work, we propose a novel regularization technique for the stack of convolutional layers1 which randomly
selects channels for the next layer.
Another inspiration of this work comes from the observation that in the stack of convolutional layers within
CNN, all the channels generated by the previous layer are
treated equally for the next layer. This is not optimal especially for high layers where the features have greater
specificity (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Yosinski et al. 2014;
Zhang et al. 2016). For each input image, only a few channels in high layers are activated while the neuron responses
in the other channels are close to zero (Zhang et al. 2016). So
instead of totally random selection, we propose to select the
channels according to the relative magnitude of activation
status, which can be treated as a special way to model the
interdependencies across the channels. To some extent, our
work is similar in spirit to the recent SE-Block (Hu, Shen,
and Sun 2017). The detailed comparison between our work
and SE-Block will be provided below.
In summary, the main contribution of this work lies in
a novel method named Weighted Channel Dropout (WCD)
for the regularization of convolutional layers within CNN,
which is illustrated in Figure 2. Notably the basic operation
unit of WCD is the channel rather than the neuron. Specifically, we first rate the channels output by the previous layer
and assign a score for each channel. The score is obtained by
Global Average Pooling, which can acquire a global view
of activation status in each channel. Second, regarding to
the channel selection, a binary mask is generated to indicate

In this work, we propose a novel method named Weighted
Channel Dropout (WCD) for the regularization of deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Different from Dropout
which randomly selects the neurons to set to zero in the
fully-connected layers, WCD operates on the channels in
the stack of convolutional layers. Specifically, WCD consists
of two steps, i.e., Rating Channels and Selecting Channels,
and three modules, i.e., Global Average Pooling, Weighted
Random Selection and Random Number Generator. It filters
the channels according to their activation status and can be
plugged into any two consecutive layers, which unifies the
original Dropout and Channel-Wise Dropout. WCD is totally
parameter-free and deployed only in training phase with very
slight computation cost. The network in test phase remains
unchanged and thus the inference cost is not added at all. Besides, when combining with the existing networks, it requires
no re-pretraining on ImageNet and thus is well-suited for the
application on small datasets. Finally, WCD with VGGNet16, ResNet-101, Inception-V3 are experimentally evaluated
on multiple datasets. The extensive results demonstrate that
WCD can bring consistent improvements over the baselines.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great bloom of deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which has significantly
boosted the performance for a variety of visual tasks (He et
al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016). The success
of deep CNN is largely due to its structure of multiple nonlinear hidden layers, which contain millions of parameters
and thus are able to learn the complicated relationship between input and output. However, when only limited training data is available, e.g., in the field of Fine-grained Visual
Categorization (FGVC), overfitting is very likely to occur,
which would incur the performance drop.
In the previous literatures, many methods have been proposed to reduce the overfitting when training CNN, such as
data augmentation, early stopping, L1 and L2 regularization,
Dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) and DropConnect (Wan
et al. 2013). Among these methods, Dropout is one of
the most popular which has been adopted in many classical network architectures, including AlexNet (Krizhevsky,

1
The stack of convolutional layers means the layers before
the fully-connected layers, mainly consisting of convolution layers (with ReLU) optionally followed by pooling layers, such as
conv1-pool5 in VGGNet-16.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8425

