The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Separating Wheat from Chaff: Joining Biomedical
Knowledge and Patient Data for Repurposing Medications
Galia Nordon

Gideon Koren, Varda Shalev

Eric Horvitz

Kira Radinsky

Technion- Israel
Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Maccabi-Kahn Institute of
Research and Innovation
Tel-Aviv, Israel

Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA

Technion- Israel
Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel

Abstract

We propose a methodology for candidate generation and
prioritization which uses both medical records and causal
hints from the biomedical literature to identify potential
drugs to be repurposed. The approach brings together principles and clinical observations to create a better understanding. We obtain access to a unique large database of medical
records containing more than 1.5 million people monitored
for more than 10 years. The data-set contains information
on patients who are routinely treated by doctors. This large,
longitudinal data-set provides an unusual and valuable picture of long-term patient health that tracks visits to primarycare physicians, hospitals and pharmacies, and demographic
attributes and their relationships to health outcomes.
We identify correlation between potential drugs and influences on diseases and mimic the process of conducting
randomized clinical trials on influences. For each potential
drug candidate, we identify a representative control group,
and verify that the candidate has the potential to be repurposed to treat a disease. The process alone cannot confirm
valuable repurposing candidates as the identification may
be the result of spurious correlations. For example, when
naively trying to identify drugs that have correlation with
the success of hypertension treatment, we find that the purchase of bandage supplies (gauze, band-aids etc.) are linked
to higher success rate for hypertension treatment (43% success rate, chi square results of 34.4 and p = 4.7e−9 ). It is
highly unlikely that this success is due to the use of bandages. Rather the bandages are likely serving as proxies for
attributes of a subgroup of people, e.g., perhaps a subgroup
that sustains more injuries because they are more physically
active or who have other distinguishing factors.
To deprioritize candidates that may have been selected
solely due to confounding variables, we implement a
methodology that searches for biological processes that
could explain how a medication might affect a target disease. We employ a graph of causal relationships mined from
PubMed to create feasible causal pathways to explain these
processes. For example, the path that our system identified
for a potential drug group, statins, in consideration for repurposing for treating hypertension is:
Statin → Atrial Natriuretic Paptide → Hypertension
Those explanations are used to identify drugs that have potential physiologic relations to the disease and help focus the
researchers on potentials drugs to focus the clinical trials on.

We present a system that jointly harnesses large-scale electronic health records data and a concept graph mined from
the medical literature to guide drug repurposing—the process
of applying known drugs in new ways to treat diseases. Our
study is unique in methods and scope, per the scale of the
concept graph and the quantity of data. We harness 10 years
of nation-wide medical records of more than 1.5 million people and extract medical knowledge from all of PubMed, the
world’s largest corpus of online biomedical literature. We employ links on the concept graph to provide causal signals to
prioritize candidate influences between medications and target diseases. We show results of the system on studies of drug
repurposing for hypertension and diabetes. In both cases, we
present drug families identified by the algorithm which were
previously unknown. We verify the results via clinical expert
opinion and by prospective clinical trials on hypertension.

1

Introduction

The cost of developing a new drug nearly doubles every nine
years (Nosengo 2016). Eroom’s law states that drug discovery is becoming slower and more expensive over time, in
spite of advances in technology. Developing a new medication requires more than 14 years and 2–3 billion dollars in
cost (Nosengo 2016).
Given the cost and expense of drug development, pharmaceutical companies have increased investments in drug
repurposing, the process of applying known drugs to treat
new diseases. Successful repurposing can reduce costs and
time to market as medications have already passed studies of human safety. It has been estimated that drug repositioning cuts development time in half and significantly
reduces costs (Nosengo 2016). Numerous successes include
a medication for high blood pressure and angina developed
in 1989 that was found to be a treatment for erectile dysfunction, branded as Viagra in 1998. Repurposing applications include re-examining failed drugs for successful treatments: Azidothymidine, originally designed as a chemotherapy drug, was repurposed in the 1980s as a therapy for HIV.
Over the last few years, the process of repurposing drugs
has become more systematic. One such example is a set of
discoveries for treating bipolar disorder (Singh et al. 2013).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9565

