The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Fuzzy Set Based Approach for Rating Bias
∗

Mingming Li,1,2,3 Jiao Dai,1 Fuqing Zhu,1 Liangjun Zang,1 Songlin Hu,1,3 Jizhong Han1
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{limingming,daijiao,zhufuqing,zangliangjun,husonglin,hanjizhong}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
In recommender systems, the user uncertain preference results in unexpected ratings. This paper makes an initial attempt in integrating the influence of user uncertain degree
into the matrix factorization framework. Specifically, a fuzzy
set of like for each user is defined, and the membership function is utilized to measure the degree of an item belonging
to the fuzzy set. Furthermore, to enhance the computational
effect on sparse matrix, the uncertain preference is formulated as a side-information for fusion. Experimental results
on three real-world datasets show that the proposed approach
produces stable improvements compared with others.

Figure 1: Illustration of rating bias.
Such approaches have a drawback: it is rough to choose a
global boundary value for all users. To overcome above limitations, we represent the notion of like by fuzzy set theory
(Ma et al. 2016).
Given the above considerations, we explore the user uncertain preference information using fuzzy set and make
them as the side-information. Then an approach of sharing
user latent factors with fuZzy Matrix Factorization (ZMF)
is proposed. Experiments show that the proposed approach
consistently achieves a stable improvement on three realworld datasets. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:

Introduction
Matrix Factorization is one of the most famous and successful recommendation approaches, which learns the discriminative latent factors for users and items by factorizing useritem interaction matrix. However, there still exists a drawback: The rating information is uncertain and imprecise. Different users have various evaluation criteria, and different
ratings also have different degrees of preferences.
To handle the uncertain and imprecise information of rating, the user/item bias vector is utilized to adjust original
ratings, such as BiasMF (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009).
Nevertheless, the impact of uncertain ratings is neglected.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 1, items with very low/high
ratings explicitly indicate that user really dislikes/like them,
whereas the majority of intermediate ratings are uncertain.
The same rating may represent different meanings since the
evaluation concepts of users are different. For an item with
rating=4, it is uncertain to determine the preference of user
i, while it indicates that the user j dislikes this item clearly.
For an item rating=7 rated by users i and j, we are not sure
whether they like it. But the degree of preference is measurable that user i may be more prone to like this item than user
j. To our best knowledge, previous approaches based on a
crisp data model fail to capture the notions of uncertainty.
A sharp boundary is often defined to differentiate members
belong to the set of like (e.g., rating>4) from non-members.

• User uncertain preference is introduced to eliminate the
effect of fuzzy information. To the best of our knowledge,
this is an initial attempt to measure the user bias by fuzzy
set theory in recommender systems.
• Fuzzy matrix factorization based approach is proposed
to integrate user uncertain preference and rating information, which could overcome the uncertain ratings and data
sparsity problems.
• On three public explicit feedback datasets, extensive
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach produces competitive performances.

Proposed Approach
Suppose there are N users, M items, and a user-item rating
matrix R ∈ RN ×M . Let Ri,j represent the rating of user i
on item j; U ∈ RN ×K and V ∈ RM ×K be latent user and

∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9969

