The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bias Reduction via End-to-End Shift Learning:
Application to Citizen Science
Di Chen

Carla P. Gomes

di@cs.cornell.edu
Cornell University

gomes@cs.cornell.edu
Cornell University

Abstract
Citizen science projects are successful at gathering rich
datasets for various applications. However, the data collected
by citizen scientists are often biased — in particular, aligned
more with the citizens’ preferences than with scientific objectives. We propose the Shift Compensation Network (SCN), an
end-to-end learning scheme which learns the shift from the
scientific objectives to the biased data while compensating
for the shift by re-weighting the training data. Applied to bird
observational data from the citizen science project eBird, we
demonstrate how SCN quantifies the data distribution shift and
outperforms supervised learning models that do not address
the data bias. Compared with competing models in the context
of covariate shift, we further demonstrate the advantage of
SCN in both its effectiveness and its capability of handling
massive high-dimensional data.

Figure 1: Highly biased distribution of eBird observations in
the continental U.S. Submissions are concentrated in or near
urban areas and along major roads.

evaluated with unbiased test data designed for the scientific
objectives.
Incentive mechanisms to shift the efforts of volunteers into
the more unexplored areas have been proposed (Xue et al.
2016), in order to improve the scientific quality of the data.
However, the scalability of those mechanisms is limited by
the budget, and it takes a long time to realize the payback.
Furthermore, the type of locality also restricts the distribution
of collected data. For example, it is difficult to incentivize
volunteers to go to remote places, such as deserts or primal
forests, to collect data. Therefore, a tactical learning scheme
is needed to bridge the gap between biased data and the
desired scientific objectives.
In general, given only the labeled training data (collected
by volunteers) and the unlabeled test data (designed for evaluating the scientific objectives), we set out to: (i) learn the shift
between the training data distribution P (associated with PDF
p(x, y)) and the test data distribution Q (associated with PDF
q(x, y)), and (ii) compensate for that shift so that the model
will perform well on the test data. To achieve these objectives,
we needed to make assumptions on how to bring the training
distribution into alignment with the test distribution. Two
candidates are covariate shift (Bickel, Brückner, and Scheffer 2009), where p(y|x) = q(y|x), and label shift (Lipton,
Wang, and Smola 2018), where p(x|y) = q(x|y). Motivated
by the field observations in the eBird project, where the habitat preference p(y|x) of a given species remains the same
throughout a season, while the occurrence records p(x|y)

Introduction
Citizen science projects (Sullivan et al. 2014; Larrivée et al.
2014; Seibert et al. 2017) play a critical role in collecting rich
datasets for scientific research, especially in computational
sustainability (Gomes 2009), because they offer an effective
low-cost way to collect large datasets for non-commercial
research. The success of these projects depends heavily on
the public’s intrinsic motivations as well as the enjoyment
of the participants, which engages them to volunteer their efforts (Bonney et al. 2009). Therefore, citizen science projects
usually have few restrictions, providing as much freedom as
possible to engage volunteers, so that they can decide where,
when, and how to collect data, based on their interests. As a
result, the data collected by volunteers are often biased, and
align more with their personal preferences, instead of providing systematic observations across various experimental
settings. For example, personal convenience has a significant
impact on the data collection process, since the participants
contribute their time and effort voluntarily. Consequently,
most data are collected in or near urban areas and along
major roads. On the other hand, most machine learning algorithms are constructed under the assumption that the training
data are governed by the same data distribution as that on
which the model will later be tested. As a result, the model
trained with biased data would perform poorly when it is
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

493

