The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Abstractive Text Summarization by Incorporating Reader Comments
Shen Gao,1 Xiuying Chen,1 Piji Li,3 Zhaochun Ren,4 Lidong Bing,5 Dongyan Zhao,1,2 Rui Yan∗1,2
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
JD.com, Beijing, China
5
R&D Center Singapore, Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba DAMO Academy
{shengao, xy-chen, zhaody, ruiyan}@pku.edu.cn, pijili@tencent.com, renzhaochun@jd.com, l.bing@alibaba-inc.com

Table 1: Examples of the text summarization. The text in
italic style denotes the focused aspect by the good summary,
while the text in bold is described by the bad summary. The
text with underline is the focused aspect by reader comments.

Abstract
In neural abstractive summarization field, conventional
sequence-to-sequence based models often suffer from summarizing the wrong aspect of the document with respect to
the main aspect. To tackle this problem, we propose the task
of reader-aware abstractive summary generation, which utilizes the reader comments to help the model produce better
summary about the main aspect. Unlike traditional abstractive
summarization task, reader-aware summarization confronts
two main challenges: (1) Comments are informal and noisy;
(2) jointly modeling the news document and the reader comments is challenging. To tackle the above challenges, we design an adversarial learning model named reader-aware summary generator (RASG), which consists of four components:
(1) a sequence-to-sequence based summary generator; (2) a
reader attention module capturing the reader focused aspects;
(3) a supervisor modeling the semantic gap between the generated summary and reader focused aspects; (4) a goal tracker
producing the goal for each generation step. The supervisor
and the goal tacker are used to guide the training of our framework in an adversarial manner. Extensive experiments are
conducted on our large-scale real-world text summarization
dataset, and the results show that RASG achieves the stateof-the-art performance in terms of both automatic metrics
and human evaluations. The experimental results also demonstrate the effectiveness of each module in our framework. We
release our large-scale dataset for further research1 .

document

comments
good summary
bad summary

On August 28, according to a person familiar with the matter,
Toyota Motor Corporation will invest 500 million U.S. dollars into the Uber, a taxi service company, with a valuation
of up to 72 billion U.S. dollars. The investment will focus on
driverless car technology. However, its development path is
not smooth. In March of this year, a Uber driverless car hit
a woman and caused her death. In last year, Softbank also
invested into Uber with a valuation of $48 billion.
Toyota’s investment in Uber is a wise choice.
$500 million investment is really a lot of money!
Toyota invests $500 million into Uber with a valuation of $72
billion
An Uber driverless car hits a passerby to death

topic which the author tends to convey to the readers. Although a document may describe an event in many different aspects, the summary of this document should always
focus on the main aspect. As shown in Table 1, the good
summary describes the main aspect and the bad summary
describes another trivial aspect that is not the main point
of the document. To focus on the main aspect, some summarization methods (Sun et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2017;
Bansal and Chen 2018) first select several sentences about
the main aspect and then generate the summary. However, it
is very challenging to discover which is the main aspect of
the news document.
Nowadays, a great number of news comments are generated by readers to express their opinions about the event.
Some comments may mention the main aspect of the document for several times. Take the case in Table 1 as an example, the focused aspect of the reader is “investment of
Toyota” which is also the main aspect of this document. To
be specific, we define “reader focused aspect” to denote
the focused aspect by a reader through the comments. Intuitively, these reader comments may help the summary generator capture the main aspect of document, thereby improving the quality of the generated summary. Therefore, in this
paper, we investigate a new problem setting of the task of

Introduction
Abstractive summarization can be regarded as a sequence
mapping task that the source text is mapped to the target
summary, and has drawn much attention since the deep neural networks are widely applied in natural language processing field. Recently, sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) framework (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) has been proved effective for the task of abstractive summarization (Chopra,
Auli, and Rush 2016; See, Liu, and Manning 2017) and
other text generation tasks (Tao et al. 2018; Gao et al.
2019). In this paper, we use “aspect” to denote the topic
described in a specific paragraph or a sentence of a news
document, and use “main aspect” to denote the central
∗
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://t.cn/EAH5JxS

6399

