The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Multi-View Learning from Disparate Sources for Poverty Mapping
Neeti Pokhriyal
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
State University of New York, US
neetipok@buffalo.edu

Many data analytics problems involve data coming from
multiple sources, sensors, modalities or feature spaces, that
describe the object of interest in a unique way, and typically
exhibit heterogeneous properties. The varied data sources
are termed as views, and the task of learning from such
multi-view data is known as multi-view learning.
In my thesis, I target the problem of poverty prediction and mapping from disparate multi-source data, namely
mobile phone data, satellite imagery, ground weather measurements and open street maps. Additionally, census data
was used to get the regression targets for poverty. Currently, poverty is estimated through intensive socioeconomic
household surveys. However, this approach is costly and
time consuming and can only be realistically carried out for
a small sample of households, thereby making timely updates of poverty challenging. Thus, the need is to timely
and accurately predict poverty and map it to spatially finegrained baseline data (Devarajan 2013).
The primary aim of my thesis is to develop novel multiview algorithms which are focused on the unique constraints and challenges of mapping poverty. Several challenges lie in establishing relationships between auxiliary
data sources (that are not collected to directly measure socioeconomic deprivations, example mobile phones, satellite
imagery, weather measurements and open street maps) and
poverty, namely varying spatial, temporal and conceptual
granularity at which the different data are available. This necessitates an aggregation mechanism to link them to individuals whose poverty is to be estimated. Other challenges include quantifying and mitigating the uncertainty associated
with each data source, and need for a validation mechanism
due to unavailability of ground-truth data.
Another aim is to relax the core assumptions faced by
existing multi-view learning algorithms. Most existing approaches either assume that the views are completely independent or fully dependent. Methods operating under the
former assumption typically involve multi-kernel learning,
while those following the latter assumption aim at learning a
shared latent subspace or manifold. However, in real scenarios, these assumptions are almost never truly satisfied. My

aim is to develop learning algorithms that learn factorized
representations, where the subspace is divided into a shared
(capturing common variance across different views), and
private subspaces (capturing remaining variance). Besides
dimensionality reduction, the aim of this factorized representation is to provide understanding of underlying structure
of data, and, thus, giving better accuracy for prediction, and
handling domain issues of missing data. I pose the problem
in both regression and classification settings.
Preliminary research has been done towards the goals of
the thesis. A naive way to work with multiple data sources is
concatenating the different feature spaces, and employing a
single classifier. I have explored the concatenation approach
while conceptualizing the idea of cognitive biometrics using
large scale social media data (Pokhriyal, Nwogu, and Govindaraju 2014; Pokhriyal et al. 2017).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where yi is the target poverty value and xi is a vector of
independent variables derived from the particular view for

Using Disparate Data Sources via GPs
I constructed two semantically distinct views: 1). mobile
phone view, using call data records and, 2). environmental
view, using satellite imagery, ground weather measurements
and open street maps. Here, poverty mapping is studied as
a regression problem, with continuous poverty values associated with each micro-region. The regression targets are
poverty values that are calculated from census data.
Gaussian process regression (GPR) (Rasmussen and
Williams 2006) models are independently trained on each
view, to infer poverty values. Gaussian Processes (GP) fall
under the class of kernel methods, where the choice of different kernel functions enables one to learn different nonlinear relationships between the independent and target variables. Each GP-based model provides a probabilistic estimate of poverty for a given location, including the mean and
variance of the estimates. The variance provides a measure
of uncertainty, which allows us to combine the predictions
from the multiple views.
To predict poverty for a location from a single data view,
the following model is assumed:
yi = β > xi + f (xi ) + 

9892

(1)

