The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Two-Individual Based Evolutionary
Algorithm for the Flexible Job Shop Scheduling Problem
Junwen Ding,1 Zhipeng Lü,1,∗ Chu-Min Li,2 Liji Shen,3 Liping Xu,1 Fred Glover4
1

School of Computer Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
MIS, University of Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France
3
Operations Management, WHU-Otto Beisheim School of Management, Vallendar, Germany
4
College of Engineering & Applied Science, University of Colorado, Colorado, USA
{dingjunwen,zhipeng.lv,xlphust}@hust.edu.cn, chu-min.li@u-picardie.fr, liji.shen@whu.edu, glover@colorado.edu
Abstract

posed in the literature. Among them we cite several exact approaches: A discrete-time integer programming based
on Lagrangian relaxation method proposed by (Thomalla
2005), a mixed-integer linear programming model proposed
by (Özgüven, Özbakr, and Yavuz 2010) with routing and
process plan flexibility, and a mixed-integer linear optimization model combined with a branch and bound algorithm
proposed by (Hansmann, Rieger, and Zimmermann 2014).
Other exact methods based on mixed-integer linear programming can be found in (Gomes, Barbosa-Pvoa, and Novais 2013; Roshanaei, Azab, and Elmaraghy 2013).
For large FJSP instances, various metaheuristic algorithms have been employed. The noteworthy literatures
include: (Brandimarte 1993), (Dauzère-Pérès and Paulli
1997), (Mastrolilli and Gambardella 2000), (Pezzella, Morganti, and Ciaschetti 2008), (Gao, Sun, and Gen 2008),
(Oddi et al. 2011), (Bożejko, Uchroński, and Wodecki
2010), (Gutiérrez and Garcı́a-Magariño 2011), (Li, Pan, and
Liang 2010), (Wang et al. 2012), (Wang et al. 2013), (Yuan
and Xu 2013a), (González, Vela, and Varela 2013), and
(Gao et al. 2016). Recent approaches include the climbing depth-bounded discrepancy search (CDDS) algorithm
(Hmida, Haouari, and Lopez 2010), hybrid differential evolution algorithm (HDE-N2) (Yuan and Xu 2013b), scatter
search with path relinking (SSPR) (González, Vela, and
Varela 2015), genetic tabu search (HGTS) (Palacios et al.
2015), hybrid genetic algorithm with tabu search (HA) (Li
and Gao 2016), and multi-start multi-level evolutionary local search (GRASP-mELS) (Kemmoé-Tchomté, Lamy, and
Tchernev 2017). Although none of these approaches dominates the others in terms of the solution quality and computational efficiency for all the benchmarks, CDDS, HDE-N2,
SSPR, HGTS, HA, and GRASP-mELS show the best performance among them.
Population-based evolutionary algorithms have good performance for tackling FJSP. However, they suffer from the
drawback of managing a large population to maintain the
diversity of the search (Lahiri and Cebrian 2010). In this paper, we propose an evolutionary algorithm using only two
individuals, called master-apprentice evolutionary (MAE)
algorithm, for solving FJSP, inspired from HEAD (Moalic
and Gondran 2017), the only previous evolutionary algorithm based on two individuals to the best of our knowledge. HEAD is for solving the k-coloring problem. The par-

Population-based evolutionary algorithms usually manage a
large number of individuals to maintain the diversity of the
search, which is complex and time-consuming. In this paper, we propose an evolutionary algorithm using only two
individuals, called master-apprentice evolutionary algorithm
(MAE), for solving the flexible job shop scheduling problem
(FJSP). To ensure the diversity and the quality of the evolution, MAE integrates a tabu search procedure, a recombination operator based on path relinking using a novel distance definition, and an effective individual updating strategy, taking into account the multiple complex constraints
of FJSP. Experiments on 313 widely-used public instances
show that MAE improves the previous best known results for
47 instances and matches the best known results on all except 3 of the remaining instances while consuming the same
computational time as current state-of-the-art metaheuristics.
MAE additionally establishes solution quality records for 10
hard instances whose previous best values were established
by a well-known industrial solver and a state-of-the-art exact
method.

Introduction
The job shop scheduling problem (JSP) is a strongly NPhard problem (Garey, Johnson, and Sethi 1976). In this
problem, there are a set of jobs J = {J1 , . . . , Jn } that
must be processed on a set M = {M1 , . . . , Mm } of machines. Each job Ji , i = 1, . . . , n, consists of ni operations
Oi = {oi1 , . . . , oini } that should be sequentially processed.
Besides, each operation oij requires uninterrupted and exclusive use of its assigned machine for its whole processing
time. The flexible job shop scheduling problem (FJSP) is
an extension of JSP by allowing an operation oij to be processed on one of a set of candidate machines M (oij ) ⊆ M .
The processing time of operation oij on machine Mk ∈
M (oij ) is denoted by toij k . The problem is to assign each
operation to a machine and to order the operations on the
machines, such that the maximum completion time of all
jobs (i.e., makespan) is minimized.
Since FJSP was introduced by (Brucker and Schlie 1991),
a large number of methods for solving it have been pro∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2262

