The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Verification of RNN-Based
Neural Agent-Environment Systems
Michael E. Akintunde, Andreea Kevorchian,
Alessio Lomuscio, Edoardo Pirovano
Department of Computing,
Imperial College London, UK

Abstract

and realised via a previously trained recurrent neural network (Hausknecht and Stone 2015). As we discuss below,
we are not aware of other methods in the literature addressing the formal verification of systems based on recurrent
networks. The present contribution focuses on reachability
analysis, that is we intend to give formal guarantees as to
whether a state, or a set of states are reached in the system.
Typically this is an unwanted state, or a bug, that we intend
to ensure is not reached in any possible execution. Similarly,
to provide safety guarantees, this analysis can be used to
show the system does not enter an unsafe region of the state
space.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. After the
discussion of related work below, in Section 2, we introduce
the basic concepts related to neural networks that are used
throughout the paper. In Section 3 we define Recurrent Neural Agent-Environment Systems and define their verification
decision problem. In Section 4 we show that for verification
purposes recurrent networks can be simulated by simpler
feed-forward networks as long as the analysis is on bounded
executions. We exploit this in Section 5 where we provide a
complete (up to bounded executions) procedure for the verification of recurrent neural agent-environment systems. We
give details of an implementation of the approach in Section 6, where we benchmark the procedures previously introduced.

We introduce agent-environment systems where the agent
is stateful and executing a ReLU recurrent neural network.
We define and study their verification problem by providing
equivalences of recurrent and feed-forward neural networks
on bounded execution traces. We give a sound and complete
procedure for their verification against properties specified
in a simplified version of LTL on bounded executions. We
present an implementation and discuss the experimental results obtained.

1

Introduction

A key obstacle in the deployment of autonomous systems is
the inherent difficulty of their verification. This is because
the behaviour of autonomous systems is hard to predict; in
turn this makes their certification a challenge.
Progress has been made over the past few years in the
area of verification of multi-agent systems where a number of methods based on model checking and theorem proving have been put forward (Alechina et al. 2010; Lomuscio,
Qu, and Raimondi 2017; Kouvaros, Lomuscio, and Pirovano
2018). Some of this work has been combined with safety
analysis and abstraction thereby resulting in the assessment
of designs such as autonomous underwater vehicles (Ezekiel
et al. 2011).
A key assumption made in the literature on autonomous
systems is that their designs have been traditionally implemented by engineers. But parts of AI systems are increasingly realised by machine learning, thereby making present
verification approaches not applicable. For example, vision
systems currently being tested in autonomous vehicles make
use of special classes of feed-forward neural networks to
classify the environment at runtime (Redmon et al. 2016). It
follows that, to be able to verify and certify forthcoming autonomous systems, methods for the verification of systems
based on neural networks are urgently required.
In this paper we develop a novel method for the verification of closed-loop systems of one agent, based on a
neural network, interacting with an environment. Specifically, we study systems in which the agent is memoryful

Related Work. As mentioned above, there is a large literature on verification of agent-based systems. With the exceptions mentioned below, differently from this paper, this body
of work deals with agents that are designed by using declarative or procedural programming languages. Therefore their
aims and techniques are different from ours.
There has been recent work on the formal verification of
feed-forward networks. This was first explored in (Pulina
and Tacchella 2010), which addressed sigmoid activation
functions, and could be scaled up to approximately 20 neurons. More recently, (Katz et al. 2017; Lomuscio and Maganti 2017; Ehlers 2017; Bunel et al. 2017; Gehr et al. 2018;
Ruan, Huang, and Kwiatkowska 2018) considered ReLU activation functions, as we do here, but differently from the
present contribution, all previous analyses are limited to
feed-forward networks and purely reachability conditions.
Instead, our contribution focuses on systems based on re-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6006

