The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Differentiated Distribution Recovery for Neural Text Generation
Jianing Li,† Yanyan Lan,†,∗ Jiafeng Guo,† Jun Xu,† Xueqi Cheng†
†CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
†University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
∗Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
{lijianing,lanyanyan,guojiafeng,cxq}@ict.ac.cn, junxu@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract

text, as shown in (Huszár 2015; Arjovsky and Bottou 2017).
The reason is that MLE is equivalent to minimizing KL divergence, which will force the generation probability to be
high for all training instances. As a result, RNNLM trained
with MLE favors high generation diversity and is easy to
be influenced by noises or rare patterns in the training data,
which harms its generation quality. What’s worse, such high
diversity usually comes from lots of generation errors, rather
than diverse good samples as expected. Beam Search can be
applied to guarantee high generation quality by only picking
the sample with highest generation probability, but significantly reduces the generation diversity and is not applicable
where far more than one samples need to be generated. How
to achieve high generation quality while making acceptable
trade-off with diversity is still an open problem.
In real applications, generation quality usually holds
much higher priority than diversity, since users are quite sensitive to logical or grammatical errors but less sensitive to
relatively low diversity. According to our observation, the
Turing Test pass rates for generation models trained with
MLE are usually far from satisfying. There are many works
focusing on achieving higher generation quality, among
which adversarial training based methods are most successful(Yu et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017; Guo et al. 2017; Zhang
et al. 2017b; Fedus, Goodfellow, and Dai 2018). While
making a big progress in the generation quality, the training with adversarial mechanism (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
is notoriously hard to tune, which easily leads to unstable
training(Arjovsky and Bottou 2017). Some of the methods
also introduce reinforcement learning as a solution for gradient passing difficulties(Yu et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2017;
Guo et al. 2017), which greatly slows down the training process as compared with MLE-based methods and makes the
parameter tuning much harder. Further more, such methods
are also observed to cause decrease in generation diversity
while promoting the quality(Lu et al. 2018), but the tradeoff can hardly be controlled.
In this paper, we propose a new approach to achieve
flexible quality-diversity trade-off and higher Turing Test
pass rate, without the costly adversarial training reinforcement learning process. Firstly, we find that the problem of
MLE comes from the theoretical fact that the optimal generated distribution Q in MLE equals to the true probability
P (x), namely precise distribution recovery. We can see that

Neural language models based on recurrent neural networks
(RNNLM) have significantly improved the performance for
text generation, yet the quality of generated text represented
by Turing Test pass rate is still far from satisfying. Some researchers propose to use adversarial training or reinforcement
learning to promote the quality, however, such methods usually introduce great challenges in the training and parameter
tuning processes. Through our analysis, we find the problem
of RNNLM comes from the usage of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) as the objective function, which requires the
generated distribution to precisely recover the true distribution. Such requirement favors high generation diversity which
restricted the generation quality. This is not suitable when the
overall quality is low, since high generation diversity usually
indicates lot of errors rather than diverse good samples. In
this paper, we propose to achieve differentiated distribution
recovery, DDR for short. The key idea is to make the optimal generation probability proportional to the β-th power
of the true probability, where β > 1. In this way, the generation quality can be greatly improved by sacrificing diversity from noises and rare patterns. Experiments on synthetic
data and two public text datasets show that our DDR method
achieves more flexible quality-diversity trade-off and higher
Turing Test pass rate, as compared with baseline methods including RNNLM, SeqGAN and LeakGAN.

1

Introduction

The ability of generating fluent, grammatical, and logical
text which can pass the Turing Test is crucial for many
natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as machine
writing (Zhang et al. 2017a), machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014), dialogue generation (Li et al.
2017), and image captioning (Rennie et al. 2017). This paper focuses mainly on unconditional text generation, which
is principle for the text generation task (Yu et al. 2017;
Guo et al. 2017; Fedus, Goodfellow, and Dai 2018).
Recently, neural generation models have gained great attention in this area. The typical method is to apply recurrent neural networks based language models (RNNLM)
(Mikolov et al. 2010), in which the model is trained using
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). However, this objective function is insufficient for generating high-quality
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6682

