The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Human Action Transfer Based on 3D Model Reconstruction
Shanyan Guan,1∗ Shuo Wen,1∗ Dexin Yang,1∗ Bingbing Ni,1,2,3†
Wendong Zhang,1 Jun Tang,1,2 Xiaokang Yang1,2,3
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
SJTU-UCLA Joint Research Center on Machine Perception and Inference
3
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science
{shyanguan, wenshuo, HaDean1998, nibingbing, diergent, tangjun1994, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
We present a practical and effective method for human action
transfer. Given a sequence of source action and limited target
information, we aim to transfer motion from source to target. Although recent works based on GAN or VAE achieved
impressive results for action transfer in 2D, there still exists a lot of problems which cannot be avoided, such as distorted and discontinuous human body shape, blurry cloth texture and so on. In this paper, we try to solve these problems in a novel 3D viewpoint. On the one hand, we design
a skeleton-to-3D-mesh generator to generate the 3D model,
which achieves huge improvement on appearance reconstruction. Furthermore, we add a temporal connection to improve
the smoothness of the model. On the other hand, instead of
directly utilizing the image in RGB space, we transform the
target appearance information into UV space for further pose
transformation. Specially, unlike conventional graphics render method directly projects visible pixels to UV space, our
transformation is according to pixel’s semantic information.
We perform experiments on Human3.6M and HumanEva-I
to evaluate the performance of pose generator. Both qualitative and quantitative results show that our method outperforms methods based on generation method in 2D. Additionally, we compare our render method with graphic methods
on Human3.6M and People-snapshot. The comparison results
show that our render method is more robust and effective.

Target
Reference

Source
Action

Target
Action

3D model

Final
Result

Previous Work
Result

Figure 1: Given the appearance of the target person and a
video of the source person, our model impose the motion of
the source person on the target person.
and video level (Chan et al. 2018). All of these works are
built on the image to image translation architecture, which
tries to solve this problem only in 2D space.
However, this task is still very challenging due to two
major reasons: (1) Discontinuity of body shape between adjacent frames and between distant frames often occurs. (2)
Detailed texture is difficult to be preserved when using image generation based methods such as GAN or VAE. For
example, the weight of the target’s arm may change in different frames; the pattern printed on clothes will be blurred.
Both of these difficulties are caused by that image generation
based methods have an upper bound on the performance of
generation quality due to its intrinsic large searching space
on high dimensions. Large number of data is needed for
these methods to learn appearance and pose information and
to generate high-quality image.
In this paper, we overcome the aforementioned problems
by proposing a novel framework for human action transfer based on 3D human body model generation, as shown
in Figure 1. Our approach differs from previous works by
adopting the 3D human model construction method based
on SMPL model (Loper et al. 2015), which narrows the
searching space to 82 shape and pose parameters. With this
method, we can easily map the appearance images and pose

Introduction
Recently, human action comprehension (such as action
recognition and detection) has attracted great interest and
attention from academic society and there are plentiful
remarkable achievements (Sigurdsson, Russakovsky, and
Gupta 2017; Fan et al. 2018; Yang, He, and Porikli 2018;
Zhou et al. 2018). However, researches on human action
transfer are still in progress. In terms of human action transfer, given the appearance of the target person and a video
(motion sequence) of the source person, our task is to impose the motion of the source person on the target person.
With the development of deep generative model, there
have been several works that can perform human action
transfer in both image level (Esser, Sutter, and Ommer 2018)
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8352

