The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Variational Autoencoder with Implicit Optimal Priors
Hiroshi Takahashi,1 Tomoharu Iwata,2 Yuki Yamanaka,3 Masanori Yamada,3 Satoshi Yagi1
1

NTT Software Innovation Center
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
3
NTT Secure Platform Laboratories
{takahashi.hiroshi, iwata.tomoharu, yamanaka.yuki, yamada.m, yagi.satoshi}@lab.ntt.co.jp
2

Abstract

whereas the decoder defines the distribution of the data point
given the latent variable. The parameters of encoder and decoder neural networks are optimized by maximizing the sum
of the evidence lower bound of the log marginal likelihood.
In the training of VAE, the prior regularizes the encoder by
Kullback Leibler (KL) divergence. The standard Gaussian
distribution is usually used for the prior since the KL divergence can be calculated in a closed form.
Recent research shows that the prior plays an important
role in the density estimation (Hoffman and Johnson 2016).
Although the standard Gaussian prior is usually used, this
simple prior incurs over-regularization, which is one of the
causes of the poor density estimation performance. This
over-regularization is also known as the posterior-collapse
phenomenon (van den Oord, Vinyals, and kavukcuoglu
2017). To improve the density estimation performance, the
aggregated posterior prior has been introduced, which is the
expectation of the encoder over the data distribution (Hoffman and Johnson 2016). The aggregated posterior is an optimal prior in terms of maximizing the training objective function of the VAE. However, KL divergence with the aggregated posterior cannot be calculated in a closed form, which
prevents us from using this optimal prior. In previous work
(Tomczak and Welling 2018), the aggregated posterior is
modeled by using the finite mixture of encoders for calculating the KL divergence in a closed form. Nevertheless, it
has sensitive hyperparameters such as the number of mixture
components, which are difficult to tune.
In this paper, we propose the VAE with implicit optimal priors, where the aggregated posterior is used as the
prior, but the KL divergence is directly estimated without modeling the aggregated posterior explicitly. This implicit modeling enables us to avoid the difficult hyperparameter tuning for the aggregated posterior model. We use
the density ratio trick, which can estimate the density ratio between two distributions without modeling each distribution explicitly, since the KL divergence is the expectation of the density ratio between the encoder and aggregated posterior. Although the density ratio trick is powerful, it has been experimentally shown to work poorly in
high dimensions (Sugiyama, Suzuki, and Kanamori 2012;
Rosca, Lakshminarayanan, and Mohamed 2018). Unfortunately, with high-dimensional datasets, the density ratio between the encoder and the aggregated posterior also be-

The variational autoencoder (VAE) is a powerful generative
model that can estimate the probability of a data point by using latent variables. In the VAE, the posterior of the latent
variable given the data point is regularized by the prior of
the latent variable using Kullback Leibler (KL) divergence.
Although the standard Gaussian distribution is usually used
for the prior, this simple prior incurs over-regularization. As
a sophisticated prior, the aggregated posterior has been introduced, which is the expectation of the posterior over the
data distribution. This prior is optimal for the VAE in terms
of maximizing the training objective function. However, KL
divergence with the aggregated posterior cannot be calculated
in a closed form, which prevents us from using this optimal
prior. With the proposed method, we introduce the density ratio trick to estimate this KL divergence without modeling the
aggregated posterior explicitly. Since the density ratio trick
does not work well in high dimensions, we rewrite this KL
divergence that contains the high-dimensional density ratio
into the sum of the analytically calculable term and the lowdimensional density ratio term, to which the density ratio
trick is applied. Experiments on various datasets show that
the VAE with this implicit optimal prior achieves high density estimation performance.

1

Introduction

Estimating data distributions is one of the important challenges of machine learning. The variational autoencoder
(VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013; Rezende, Mohamed,
and Wierstra 2014) was presented as a powerful generative model that can learn distributions by using latent variables and neural networks. Since the VAE can capture the
high-dimensional complicated data distributions, it is widely
applied to various data, such as images (Gulrajani et al.
2016), videos (Gregor et al. 2015), and audio and speech
(Hsu, Zhang, and Glass 2017; van den Oord, Vinyals, and
kavukcuoglu 2017).
The VAE is composed of three distributions: the encoder,
the decoder, and the prior of the latent variable. The encoder
and the decoder are conditional distributions, and neural networks are used to model these distributions. The encoder defines the posterior of the latent variable given the data point,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5066

