The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Synergistic Image and Feature Adaptation: Towards Cross-Modality
Domain Adaptation for Medical Image Segmentation
Cheng Chen,1 Qi Dou,1 Hao Chen,1,2 Jing Qin,3 Pheng-Ann Heng1,4
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Imsight Medical Technology Co., Ltd., China, 3 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Computer Vision and Virtual Reality Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{cchen, qdou, hchen, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk
2

MR

Abstract

CT

Model trained on MR data

Domain Shift

This paper presents a novel unsupervised domain adaptation
framework, called Synergistic Image and Feature Adaptation
(SIFA), to effectively tackle the problem of domain shift. Domain adaptation has become an important and hot topic in recent studies on deep learning, aiming to recover performance
degradation when applying the neural networks to new testing domains. Our proposed SIFA is an elegant learning diagram which presents synergistic fusion of adaptations from
both image and feature perspectives. In particular, we simultaneously transform the appearance of images across domains
and enhance domain-invariance of the extracted features towards the segmentation task. The feature encoder layers are
shared by both perspectives to grasp their mutual benefits during the end-to-end learning procedure. Without using any annotation from the target domain, the learning of our unified
model is guided by adversarial losses, with multiple discriminators employed from various aspects. We have extensively
validated our method with a challenging application of crossmodality medical image segmentation of cardiac structures.
Experimental results demonstrate that our SIFA model recovers the degraded performance from 17.2% to 73.0%, and outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin.

Test on CT
W/o adapt

Image adapt

Feature adapt

Ours

Ground truth

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1: Illustration of addressing the severe cross-modality
domain shift of medical images from different perspectives.
The segmentation results of the CT images with the DCNN
trained on MR data are shown in the bottom: a) without any
adaptation; b) with pure image adaptation; c) with pure feature adaptation; d) our proposed synergistic image and feature adaptations; e) the ground truth.

fail when being tested on CT images. To recover model performance, an easy way is to re-train or fine-tune models with
additional labeled data from the target domain (Van Opbroek
et al. 2015; Ghafoorian et al. 2017). However, annotating
data for every new domain is obviously and prohibitively
expensive, especially in medical area that requires expertise.
To tackle this problem, unsupervised domain adaptation
has been intensively studied to enable DCNNs to achieve
competitive performance on unlabeled target data, only
with annotations from the source domain. Prior works have
treated domain shift mainly from two directions. One stream
is the image adaptation, by aligning the image appearance
between domains with the pixel-to-pixel transformation. In
this way, the domain shift is addressed at input level to DCNNs. To preserve pixel-level contents in original images, the
adaptation process is usually guided by a cycle-consistency
constraint (Zhu et al. 2017; Hoffman et al. 2018). Typically, the transformed source-like images can be directly
tested by pre-trained source models (Russo et al. 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018b); alternatively, the generated target-like
images can be used to train models in target domain (Bousmalis et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2018). Although the synthesis

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have made
great breakthroughs in various challenging while crucial vision tasks (Long et al. 2015a; He et al. 2016). As investigations of DCNNs moving on, recent studies have frequently pointed out the problem of performance degradation
when encountering domain shift, i.e., attempting to apply the
learned models on testing data (target domain) that have different distributions from the training data (source domain).
In medical image computing, which is an important area to
apply AI for healthcare, the situation of heterogeneous domain shift is even more natural and severe, given the various
imaging modalities with different physical principles.
For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the cardiac areas present
significantly different visual appearance when viewed from
different modalities of medical images, such as the magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging and computed tomography (CT).
Unsurprisingly, the DCNNs trained on MR data completely
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

865

