The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cost-Sensitive Learning to Rank
Ryan McBride, Ke Wang

Zhouyang Ren, Wenyuan Li

Simon Fraser University, BC, Canada
rom2@sfu.ca and wangk@cs.sfu.ca

Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
rzhouyang@gmail.com and wenyuan.li@ieee.org

Abstract

Figure 1: An example storm-caused power outage in Illinois from interactions between weather, cable placement,
and surrounding vegetation. Ranking cities or geographical
areas by their risk of large outages in the same storm is an
example of our proposed Cost-Sensitive Ranking problem.
Image credit to Wikipedia user Robert Lawton.

We formulate the Cost-Sensitive Learning to Rank problem
of learning to prioritize limited resources to mitigate the most
costly outcomes. We develop improved ranking models to
solve this problem, as verified by experiments in diverse domains such as forest fire prevention, crime prevention, and
preventing storm caused outages in electrical networks.

1. Introduction
Motivation
Learning to Rank originated in information retrieval (IR)
and considers learning a ranking model for instances (such
as documents, movies, or web pages) according to their relevance to a query. The training data is a list of pairs (x, y)
for each query, with y as the instance’s relevance to the query
(e.g., from zero, no relevance, to five, very relevant) and x as
instance features. An effective ranking model aims to rank
relevant instances correctly based on x for a future query.
Learning to Rank research thus primarily focuses on devising more useful IR based metrics (Wang et al. 2016), improving performance on search engine data (Qin et al. 2010),
or developing solutions in new IR fields (e.g., relevant image
retrieval (Wang et al. 2014)).
However, we argue that many non-IR applications in industry could benefit from similar ranking models: companies can learn to prioritize limited resources to events
with a high y, the numeric cost/impact. One such problem is with our industrial partner BC Hydro: storm caused
power outages result in severe social peril and millions of
dollars in economic losses every year (Insurance Journal
2017)(Bukaty 2013)(CBC News 2015)(Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory 2004). A power company could rank
potential outages for the next storm so high damage outages
can be prevented. We define such problems as cost-sensitive
ranking, problems of maximizing a company’s cost-saving
via a ranking model:

Figure 2: A training set consisting of instances of electricity
supplying networks exposed to storms. Note that 1 m/s is
approximately 2.2 miles per hour or 3.6 kilometres per hour.
Storm
ID
Storm1
Storm1
Storm1
Storm2
Storm2
Storm2

City 1
City 2
City 3

Cable
Length
5 km
4 km
3 km

Wind
Speed
14 m/s
15 m/s
16 m/s

10000 customers
100 customers
0 customers

Rural 1
Rural 2
Rural 3

3 km
4 km
5 km

13 m/s
12 m/s
10 m/s

100 customers
1 customer
0 customers

Electrical
Network In

Impact (Y)

cost/impact y of each instance in the list. The goal is to
build a ranking model that can be used to rank future lists
with instances that have known x but unknown y to mitigate
damage or attain profit. Per the standard Learning to Rank
assumptions, future lists are assumed sampled from the
same underlying distribution as T (e.g., each Li = (Xi , Yi )
is i.i.d. and (xi,j , yi,j ) are also i.i.d. within each Li ).

Definition 1 (Cost-Sensitive Learning to Rank) Consider
a training set of m “lists”, T = {Li }m
i=1 . The ith list
Li = (Xi , Yi ) contains Xi = {xi,1 , · · · , xi,ni } and
Yi = {yi,1 , · · · , yi,ni } that describe the features x and the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

For example, the set T in Figure 2 contains two lists cor4570

