The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Domain Generalization Perspective on Listwise Context Modeling
Lin Zhu, Yihong Chen, Bowen He
Ctrip Travel Network Technology Co., Limited.
{zhulb, yihongchen, bwhe}@ctrip.com

Abstract

model that could encompass all these diversities. Moreover,
given the substantial variations between queries, it is quite
possible that a unseen test query have certain characteristics that are rarely encountered in the training set, leading to
degradation in generalization ability of the ranking function
(Karmaker Santu, Sondhi, and Zhai 2017).
So far, a number of approaches have been proposed to
tackle the aforementioned problem. In particular, it has
been demonstrated that the performance of a global ranking model can be greatly improved by incorporating the local ranking context information (Ai et al. 2018), which is
generally extracted from the input data via feature engineering efforts or novel model architectures (Geng et al. 2008;
Ai et al. 2018; Mottini and Acuna-Agost 2017; Zhuang,
Ou, and Wang 2018). Although some promising results have
been shown, these approaches still do not explicitly filter out
the detrimental variations of queries, which may increase the
risk of overfitting and hurt the performance.
At another extreme, we could train a ranking model for
every query independently (Ai et al. 2018; Geng et al. 2008).
While this strategy may avoid the negative influence of the
heterogeneity of queries, it does not allow information to be
shared and transfered between queries, which makes generalization to unseen queries even harder.
A better solution may lie in the middle of these two
extremes: we still learn a common ranking model for all
queries, and yet treat every query as a separate domain. All
of the queries (domains) share the same learning task and the
same input feature space, but have different distributions. In
recognition of the variations between queries (domains), we
would like the model to acquire knowledge from ‘source’
queries (domains) that are available as the training set, and
adapt the learned knowledge to unknown ‘target’ queries
(domains).
In this formulation, we notice that the LETOR problem is
equivalent to a domain generalization (DG) problem (Blanchard, Lee, and Scott 2011), where the objective is precisely
to infer a learning system that can take as input a set of training domains and will output a model that can achieve high
accuracy for new domains. To achieve this goal, many existing DG methods propose to learn domain-invariant representations that are expected to remove the negative effects of
distributional changes across domains (Muandet, Balduzzi,
and Schölkopf 2013; Xie et al. 2017).

As one of the most popular techniques for solving the ranking
problem in information retrieval, Learning-to-rank (LETOR)
has received a lot of attention both in academia and industry due to its importance in a wide variety of data mining
applications. However, most of existing LETOR approaches
choose to learn a single global ranking function to handle all
queries, and ignore the substantial differences that exist between queries. In this paper, we propose a domain generalization strategy to tackle this problem. We propose QueryInvariant Listwise Context Modeling (QILCM), a novel neural architecture which eliminates the detrimental influence
of inter-query variability by learning query-invariant latent
representations, such that the ranking system could generalize better to unseen queries. We evaluate our techniques on
benchmark datasets, demonstrating that QILCM outperforms
previous state-of-the-art approaches by a substantial margin.

Introduction
As an important learning paradigm for tackling the ranking
problem in information retrieval, learning-to-rank (LETOR)
has received a lot of attention both in academia and industry due to its importance in a wide variety of applications, such as document retrieval (Ai et al. 2018; Chapelle
and Chang 2011), recommendation systems (Freno 2017;
Volkovs and Zemel 2012), and E-commerce search (Zhuang,
Ou, and Wang 2018; Karmaker Santu, Sondhi, and Zhai
2017).
The typical assumption behind LETOR methods is that
for any given query, the relevance score of a candidate item
is a parameterized global function of a set of features that
describe the query, the item, and their interactions (Karmaker Santu, Sondhi, and Zhai 2017; Ai et al. 2018). The
parameters of this function can be determined by fitting it to
a training set that consists of query-item pairs and the associated relevance judgments. Once learned, the function is applied to handle any future query to rank the candidate items
with respect the query. However, queries may vary significantly in the underlying users’ intentions (Geng et al. 2008),
in the distributions of relevant items (Ai et al. 2018), or in the
features that are relevant to item ranking (Karmaker Santu,
Sondhi, and Zhai 2017), and it is difficult to learn a single
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5965

