The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Rensselaer Mandarin Project — A
Cognitive and Immersive Language Learning Environment
David Allen,1 Rahul R. Divekar,1 Jaimie Drozdal,1 Lilit Balagyozyan,1
Shuyue Zheng,1 Ziyi Song,1 Huang Zou,1 Jeramey Tyler,1 Xiangyang Mou,1 Rui Zhao,1
Helen Zhou,1 Jianling Yue,1 Jeffrey O. Kephart,2 Hui Su1,2
1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 Eighth Street, Troy, NY 12180 USA
IBM Thomas J Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 USA
{allend5, divekr, drozdj2, balagl, zhengs6, songz2, zouh, tylerj2, moux4, zhouy12, zhaor, yuej2, suh5}@rpi.edu,
{kephart, huisuibmres}@us.ibm.com
2

Abstract

Additionally, RMP leverages gamification to engage second language learners in an environment where they can
“self-govern” their experience, offering them activity, autonomy, and interaction (Dubbels 2011) with other students and
human-scale virtual agents simultaneously.
An initial usability study was conducted in November,
2017 with an earlier prototype. In that study, researchers collected data from 16 students: 8 male, 8 female, Ages 18-22;
first languages: 1 Taishanese, 1 Cantonese, 2 Spanish, and
12 English. A questionnaire given during the study yielded
the following key qualitative findings: 16/16 students liked
being able to use gestures (pointing) to disambiguate food
menu items and found it helpful; 14/16 students liked that
the system was able to repeat itself on command and found
it helpful. Complete findings from the usability study appear
in Divekar et al. (2018a).

The Rensselaer Mandarin Project enables a group of foreign
language students to improve functional understanding, pronunciation and vocabulary in Mandarin Chinese through authentic speaking situations in a virtual visit to China. Students
use speech, gestures, and combinations thereof to navigate
an immersive, mixed reality, stylized realism game experience through interaction with AI agents, immersive technologies, and game mechanics. The environment was developed
in a black box theater equipped with a human-scale 360◦
panoramic screen (140 h, 200 r), arrays of markerless motion
tracking sensors, and speakers for spatial audio.

Introduction
There are many reasons to learn a foreign language. The
ability to communicate in multiple languages can lead to
both a deeper understanding of cultural differences throughout our world, and the ability to thrive in the global economy. On that cornerstone, the Rensselear Mandarin Project
(RMP) leverages intelligent and immersive systems to facilitate the rapid acquisition of second language skills, and to
give students a competitive edge in a world with increasing
lingual and cultural diversity.
Work in the field suggests that interactive environments
provide significant benefits to learning a second language
when compared to traditional teaching methods (Canto and
Ondarra 2017; Güzel and Aydin 2016). Interactivity improves learning outcomes and facilitates positive learning
attitudes in the classroom (Lin and Lan 2015). It facilitates
better understanding and retention of formulaic expressions
(Taguchi, Li, and Tang 2017), persuasive talk, awareness
of audience, and collaborative communication (Yamazaki
2018) through digital immersion in authentic speaking situations (Čok 2016). At the same time, most existing technologies utilize PC-sized displays, and seldom leverage Artificial
Intelligence (AI) (Divekar et al. 2018c).
Against that backdrop, RMP presents a human scale, immersive language learning environment for an experience
that revolves around intelligent interactions with AI Agents.

Technical Details
The demo integrates AI, immersive systems, and gamification for intelligent interactions (e.g. experience through
multi-modal dialogue) which emerge from a network of
granular AI tasks. We define “agent” as components that
can do one or more tasks (e.g. transcribing speech to text).
Some of these are commercially available solutions while
others are developed internally. The following text gives a
summary of the core technologies utilized.
• Distributed architecture. The application EXECUTOR
handles all system responses at the top-most architectural level. As input, it ingests data from multiple message queue streams. On the most granular level, an array
of system agents populate streams with data packets of
formatted input from individual sensors. Mid-layer agents
then digest those raw data streams to provide higher level
inferred data packets for the EXECUTOR. Agents are distributed over both an array of physical devices within the
language learning environment and online through external web services.
• Intelligent systems. The foremost data stream of RMP is
the speech pipeline. Here, student utterances are recorded,
transcribed, and labeled with intents detected from the
transcribed text. The gesture stream, enabled by skeletal
tracking devices and custom gesture recognition software,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9845

