The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Play as You Like: Timbre-Enhanced Multi-Modal Music Style Transfer
Chien-Yu Lu,1∗ Min-Xin Xue,1* Chia-Che Chang,1 Che-Rung Lee,1 Li Su2
1

Department of Computer Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
{j19550713, liedownisok, chang810249}@gmail.com, cherung@cs.nthu.edu.tw, lisu@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract

on feature interpolation (Caetano and Rodet 2011) or matrix factorization (Driedger, Prätzlich, and Müller 2015;
Su et al. 2017) typically need a parallel dataset containing musical notes in the target-domain style, and every note
has a pair in the source domain. In other words, we need to
specify the content attribute element-wisely, and make style
transfer be performed in a supervised manner. Such restriction highly limits the scope that the system can be applied.
To achieve higher-level mapping across domains, recent approaches using deep learning methods such as the generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
allow a system to learn the content and style attributes directly from data in an unsupervised manner with extra flexibility in mining the attributes relevant to content or style
(Ulyanov and Lebedev 2016; Bohan 2017; Wu et al. 2018;
Verma and Smith 2018; Haque, Guo, and Verma 2018;
Mor et al. 2018).

Style transfer of polyphonic music recordings is a challenging
task when considering the modeling of diverse, imaginative,
and reasonable music pieces in the style different from their
original one. To achieve this, learning stable multi-modal representations for both domain-variant (i.e., style) and domaininvariant (i.e., content) information of music in an unsupervised manner is critical. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised music style transfer method without the need for
parallel data. Besides, to characterize the multi-modal distribution of music pieces, we employ the Multi-modal Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation (MUNIT) framework
in the proposed system. This allows one to generate diverse
outputs from the learned latent distributions representing contents and styles. Moreover, to better capture the granularity of
sound, such as the perceptual dimensions of timbre and the
nuance in instrument-specific performance, cognitively plausible features including mel-frequency cepstral coefficients
(MFCC), spectral difference, and spectral envelope, are combined with the widely-used mel-spectrogram into a timbreenhanced multi-channel input representation. The Relativistic
average Generative Adversarial Networks (RaGAN) is also
utilized to achieve fast convergence and high stability. We
conduct experiments on bilateral style transfer tasks among
three different genres, namely piano solo, guitar solo, and
string quartet. Results demonstrate the advantages of the proposed method in music style transfer with improved sound
quality and in allowing users to manipulate the output.

Beyond the problem of unsupervised domain adaptation,
there are still technical barriers concerning realistic music style transfer applicable for various kinds of music.
First, previous studies can still hardly achieve multi-modal
and non-deterministic mapping between different domains.
However, when we transfer a piano solo piece into guitar
solo, we often expect the outcome of the guitar solo to be
adjustable, perhaps with various fingering styles, brightness,
musical texture, or other sound quality. Second, the transferred music inevitably undergoes degradation of perceptual
quality such as severely distorted musical timbre; this indicates the need of a better representation for timbre information. Although many acoustic correlates of timbre have
been verified via psychoacoustic experiments (Grey 1977;
Alluri and Toiviainen 2010; Caclin et al. 2005) and also
been used in music information retrieval (Lartillot, Toiviainen, and Eerola 2008; Peeters et al. 2011), they are rarely
discussed in deep-learning-based music style transfer problems. This might be because of several reasons: some acoustic correlates are incompatible to the format of modern deep
learning architectures; rawer data inputs such as waveforms
and spectrograms are still preferred to reveal the strength
of deep learning; and even, an exact theory of those acoustic correlates on human perception is still not clear in cognitive science (Siedenburg, Fujinaga, and McAdams 2016;
Aucouturier and Bigand 2013). For this issue, a recently proposed method in (Mor et al. 2018) adopts the WaveNet (Van

Introduction
The music style transfer problem has been receiving increasing attention in the past decade (Dai and Xia 2018).
When discussing this problem, typically we assume that music can be decomposed into two of its attributes, namely
content and style, the former being domain-invariant and
the latter domain-variant. This problem is therefore considered as to modify the style of a music piece while preserving its content. However, the boundary that distinguishing content and style is highly dynamic; different objective functions in timbre, performance style or composition are related to different style transfer problems (Dai
and Xia 2018). Traditional style transfer methods based
∗

The first two authors are with equal contribution.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1061

