The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Self-Adversarially Learned Bayesian Sampling
Yang Zhao

Jianyi Zhang

Changyou Chen

State University of New York at Buffalo
yzhao63@buffalo.edu

Fudan University
15300180019@fudan.edu.cn

State University of New York at Buffalo
cchangyou@gmail.com

Abstract

Bayesian learning algorithms designed to efficiently sample from a target (posterior) distribution (Welling and Teh
2011; Chen, Fox, and Guestrin 2014; Ding et al. 2014;
Chen, Ding, and Carin 2015). Specifically, SG-MCMC generates samples from a Markov chain induced by an Itó diffusion. Under a standard setting, samples from SG-MCMC
can approximate a target distribution arbitrarily well given
sufficient samples (Teh, Thiery, and Vollmer 2016; Chen,
Ding, and Carin 2015). By contrast, PO-based sampling
methods such as Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD)
(Liu and Wang 2016) initiate a set of particles (or samples)
from some simple distributions, and update them iteratively
and interactively to approximate a target distribution. Recently, (Chen et al. 2018) proposed a unified Bayesian sampling framework by combing SG-MCMC and SVGD from
a Wasserstein-gradient-flow (WGF) perspective, obtaining
improved performance compared to both SG-MCMC and
SVGD. Our proposed method is partly based on the WGF
theory presented in (Chen et al. 2018).
Though achieving encouraging results, we note two issues
in the aforementioned sampling methods: i) Slow sample
generation: though SG-MCMC and SVGD achieve scalable
sampling by adopting stochastic gradient information, sample generation is still not efficient enough under complicated
models such as a very deep neural network. The problem is
even more severe in SVGD as each particle needs to interact
with all other particles in the sample-generation process; ii)
Slow mixing: samples tend to be highly correlated, leading
to slow mixing. Actually, it has been shown that diffusionbased methods such as SG-MCMC might need exponential
time to jump out of local modes (Raginsky, Rakhlin, and Telgarsky 2017; Zhang, Liang, and Charikar 2017). Thus more
sample-efficient algorithms are desperate to be designed.
In this paper, we reinterpret Bayesian sampling as learning a Markov kernel (or a transition kernel), a conditional
probability sequentially mapping an old state (sample) to
a new state. Leveraging advantages of scalable sampling
and recent developments on deep generative models, we
reformulate the sampling process based on the generativeadversarial-net (GAN) framework (Goodfellow et al. 2014).
The formulation is based on the connection between density evolution in a Bayesian sampling algorithm and WGFs.
Specifically, a conditional generator which solves the corresponding WGF is trained to mimic the sample-generation

Scalable Bayesian sampling is playing an important role in
modern machine learning, especially in the fast-developed
unsupervised-(deep)-learning models. While tremendous
progresses have been achieved via scalable Bayesian sampling such as stochastic gradient MCMC (SG-MCMC) and
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD), the generated
samples are typically highly correlated. Moreover, their
sample-generation processes are often criticized to be inefficient. In this paper, we propose a novel self-adversarial learning framework that automatically learns a conditional generator to mimic the behavior of a Markov kernel (transition kernel). High-quality samples can be efficiently generated by direct forward passes though a learned generator. Most importantly, the learning process adopts a self-learning paradigm,
requiring no information on existing Markov kernels, e.g.,
knowledge of how to draw samples from them. Specifically,
our framework learns to use current samples, either from the
generator or pre-provided training data, to update the generator such that the generated samples progressively approach a
target distribution, thus it is called self-learning. Experiments
on both synthetic and real datasets verify advantages of our
framework, outperforming related methods in terms of both
sampling efficiency and sample quality.

1

Introduction

With the abundance of unlabeled data, Bayesian methods
have been increasingly popular in modern machine learning.
Various real-world applications have greatly benefited from
Bayesian modeling through uncertainty modeling (Blundell
et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2018), deep generative models
(Feng, Wang, and Liu 2017; Chen et al. 2017) and deep reinforcement learning (Osband and Van Roy 2017; Haarnoja
et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2017). The core of Bayesian methods
is efficient Bayesian inference, among which Bayesian sampling stands as one of the most effective tools.
In the setting of big data, recent research has facilitated
the development of scalable Bayesian sampling methods.
There are mainly two directions on developing these methods, Markov-chain (MC) based and particle-optimization
(PO) based methods. Stochastic gradient Markov chain
Monte Carlo (SG-MCMC) is a family of scalable MC-based
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5893

