The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Large Scale Learning of Agent Rationality in Two-Player Zero-Sum Games
Chun Kai Ling,1 Fei Fang,1 J. Zico Kolter1,2
1

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
{chunkail, feif, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

gies, and is known to exhibit pathological behavior even in
one-player settings. Second, their solvers are computationally inefficient and are unable to scale.
Our work addresses these deficiencies in two ways. First,
we propose the Nested Logit Quantal Response equilibrium
(NLQRE), which draws upon ideas from from behavioral
science and allows for varying levels of player rationality at
each stage of the game. We show that the NLQRE is strictly
more general than the models considered by Ling, Fang,
and Kolter, and may not be replicated by a straightforward
scaling of payoff matrices. We derive the required gradients
and show that player rationality can be learned via gradient
descent can be learned using the same end-to-end learning
framework. Second, we substantially reduce training time by
reformulating the backward pass as a min-max convex optimization problem and uses state-of-the-art first order primaldual methods for both the forward pass and backward pass.
Unlike previous work, which relied on second-order methods, our first-order solver does not require explicit formation
of Hessians and only requires access to a fast best-response
oracle. In our evaluation with random payoff matrices and
one-card poker, we report orders of magnitude of speedups.
Lastly, we evaluate the NLQRE on real-world data in an
one-player information gathering game and provide qualitative insights. In total, we believe that our work is a significant step towards the practical learning of human behavior
in zero-sum settings.

With the recent advances in solving large, zero-sum extensive
form games, there is a growing interest in the inverse problem
of inferring underlying game parameters given only access to
agent actions. Although a recent work provides a powerful
differentiable end-to-end learning frameworks which embed
a game solver within a deep-learning framework, allowing
unknown game parameters to be learned via backpropagation,
this framework faces significant limitations when applied to
boundedly rational human agents and large scale problems,
leading to poor practicality. In this paper, we address these
limitations and propose a framework that is applicable for
more practical settings. First, seeking to learn the rationality of human agents in complex two-player zero-sum games,
we draw upon well-known ideas in decision theory to obtain a concise and interpretable agent behavior model, and
derive solvers and gradients for end-to-end learning. Second,
to scale up to large, real-world scenarios, we propose an efficient first-order primal-dual method which exploits the structure of extensive-form games, yielding significantly faster
computation for both game solving and gradient computation. When tested on randomly generated games, we report
speedups of orders of magnitude over previous approaches.
We also demonstrate the effectiveness of our model on both
real-world one-player settings and synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Game theory has traditionally been centered around finding players’ strategies in equilibrium. In recent years, there
has been growing interest in the inverse setting of learning game parameters from observed player actions (Vorobeychik, Wellman, and Singh 2007; Blum, Haghtalab, and
Procaccia 2014; Waugh, Ziebart, and Bagnell 2011). Recent
work by Ling, Fang, and Kolter (2018) tackle this problem
in the zero-sum setting by providing an end-to-end learning
framework to learn game parameters such as payoff matrices and chance node probability distributions assuming the
actions are sampled from the Quantal Response equilibrium.
At the core of the framework is a differentiable game solving
module.
However, their proposed method suffers from two major
flaws. Firstly, the assumption that players behave in accordance to the QRE severely limits the space of player strate-

2

Background and Related Work

Although much less well studied than traditional equilibrium finding, there are several approaches aimed at the task
of learning games in the setting where underlying game
payoffs are unknown. These include methods which rely
on specific game structure such as symmetry (Vorobeychik, Wellman, and Singh 2007), operate in an active setting (Blum, Haghtalab, and Procaccia 2014), or focus primarily on normal form games and straightforward linear
settings (Waugh, Ziebart, and Bagnell 2011). Ling, Fang,
and Kolter (2018) provide an alternative framework which
embeds a differentiable game solver within another gradient based learner (e.g., a deep network), as illustrated in
Figure 1. This enables game parameters to be learned via
simple gradient descent. We now describe their framework
briefly.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6104

