The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Personalized Question Routing via Heterogeneous Network Embedding
Zeyu Li, Jyun-Yu Jiang, Yizhou Sun, Wei Wang
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA
{zyli, jyunyu, yzsun, weiwang}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

“domain experts”. As a result, a large number of questions
remain poorly addressed.
One of the solutions to promote answer collection is to
automatically identify users that tend to contribute highquality answers and then send answer invitations to them.
The answer collection is consequently accelerated since
these users are able to immediately spot the questions of
their expertise. Such task is also known as question routing
and is previously addressed by feature engineering-based
approaches (Zhou, Lyu, and King 2012; Ji and Wang 2013;
Chang and Pal 2013). Features exploited include the statistics of users, the language modeling features of question
content, and the relationships between users and questions.
All of them focus on estimating users’ authority level and
identifying the skillful users for recommendation.
However, the feature engineering-based strategies have at
least three limitations as follows. First, they are not personalized, i.e., they cannot customize recommendations for questions raised by users with diverse characteristics due to ignoring the background and preference of the question raisers. Second, they lack explicit definitions of scoring functions for queries with multiple entities and, therefore, have
trouble computing scores for new question routing queries.
Third, they model question content by language model or
topic model features which are unable to capture the complex semantics of question content. Also, their representation power is undermined when handling questions with new
topics that are unobserved or underrepresented in the training set.
In order to overcome the above limitations, we propose
NeRank, which stands for Network embedding-augmented
Ranking for question routing. NeRank assesses the “personalized authority”, i.e., the authority of an answerer with
respect to not only the question content but also the background of the question raiser, for question routing. In addition, the recommended answerers are also expected to have
similarities with the question raiser in domains of interest
to fulfill the “personalization” requirement so that their responses conform to the raiser’s anticipation.
In particular, NeRank models CQA websites as heterogeneous information networks (HIN), namely CQA networks,
and applies a metapath-based heterogeneous network embedding algorithm to CQA networks to learn representations
for question raisers and question answerers. A long short-

Question Routing (QR) on Community-based Question Answering (CQA) websites aims at recommending answerers
that have high probabilities of providing the “accepted answers” to new questions. The existing question routing algorithms simply predict the ranking of users based on query
content. As a consequence, the question raiser information is
ignored. On the other hand, they lack learnable scoring functions to explicitly compute ranking scores.
To tackle these challenges, we propose NeRank that (1)
jointly learns representations of question content, question
raiser, and question answerers by a heterogeneous information network embedding algorithm and a long short-term
memory (LSTM) model. The embeddings of the three types
of entities are unified in the same latent space, and (2) conducts question routing for personalized queries, i.e., queries
with two entities (question content, question
raiser), by a convolutional scoring function taking the
learned embeddings of all three types of entities as input. Using the scores, NeRank routes new questions to high-ranking
answerers that are skillfulness in the question domain and
have similar backgrounds to the question raiser.
Experimental results show that NeRank significantly outperforms competitive baseline question routing models that ignore the raiser information in three ranking metrics. In addition, NeRank is convergeable in several thousand iterations
and insensitive to parameter changes, which prove its effectiveness, scalability, and robustness.

Introduction
Community-based question answering (CQA) such as Stack
Overflow1 is rapidly gaining popularity and becoming an
important type of social media for sharing and spreading
knowledge. Through CQA websites, users with questions
are able to quickly locate answers provided by experts. A
user can also create a new post if relevant and satisfactory
QA records do not exist, and then wait for answers from the
community. After several responses are gathered, the question raiser reviews the answers and selects one that he/she is
the most satisfied with as the “accepted answer”.
The answer collection can be unacceptably timeconsuming due to the lack of an efficient way to find the
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://stackoverflow.com

192

