The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partial Label Learning via Label Enhancement
Ning Xu, Jiaqi Lv, Xin Geng∗
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, China
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
{xning, lvjiaqi, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Si and therefore cannot be directly accessed by the learning
algorithm.
Intuitively, the basic strategy for handling partial label
learning problem is disambiguation, i.e., trying to identify
the ground-truth label from the candidate label set associated with each training example, where existing strategies
include disambiguation by identification or disambiguation
by averaging. For identification-based disambiguation, the
ground-truth label is regarded as latent variable and identified through iterative refining procedure such as EM (Jin
and Ghahramani 2003; Nguyen and Caruana 2008; Liu and
Dietterich 2012; Chen et al. 2014; Yu and Zhang 2017).
For averaging-based disambiguation, all the candidate labels
are treated equally and the prediction is made by averaging their modeling outputs (Hüllermeier and Beringer 2006;
Cour, Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Zhang and Yu 2015).
In order to handle partial label learning problem, we can
explicitly assign a description degree to each label instead of
disambiguation. This is similar to label distribution learning
y
(LDL) (Geng 2016). In LDL, the description degrees dxj of
all the labels constitute a real-valued
P vector called label disy
tribution. Here dxj ∈ [0, 1] and y dyx = 1. Note that the
normalized labeling confidence vector in the feature-ware
PL approach (Zhang, Zhou, and Liu 2016) can be viewed
as label distribution. In order to accommodate more flexibility on PL data sets, the description degree is generalized in
y
this paper: 1) dxj ∈ (0, 1), ∀ yj ∈ Si denotes the label reley
vance over each candidate label. 2) dxj ∈ (−1, 0), ∀ yj ∈
/ Si
denotes the label irrelevance over each non-candidate label.
Then, the generalized description degrees (GDD) of all the
labels constitute the generalized label distribution (GLD).
GDDs in partial label learning are essentially relative in
mainly two aspects:

Abstract
Partial label learning aims to learn from training examples
each associated with a set of candidate labels, among which
only one label is valid for the training example. The common strategy to induce predictive model is trying to disambiguate the candidate label set, such as disambiguation by
identifying the ground-truth label iteratively or disambiguation by treating each candidate label equally. Nonetheless,
these strategies ignore considering the generalized label distribution corresponding to each instance since the generalized label distribution is not explicitly available in the training
set. In this paper, a new partial label learning strategy named
P L - LE is proposed to learn from partial label examples via
label enhancement. Specifically, the generalized label distributions are recovered by leveraging the topological information of the feature space. After that, a multi-class predictive
model is learned by fitting a regularized multi-output regressor with the generalized label distributions. Extensive experiments show that P L - LE performs favorably against state-ofthe-art partial label learning approaches.

Introduction
Partial label (PL) learning deals with the problem where
each training example is associated with a set of candidate labels, among which only one label is valid (Cour,
Sapp, and Taskar 2011; Chen et al. 2014; Yu and Zhang
2017). In recent years, partial label learning techniques have
been found useful in solving many real-world scenarios
such as web mining (Jie and Orabona 2010), multimedia
content analysis (Zeng et al. 2013; Chen, Patel, and Chellappa in press), ecoinformatics (Liu and Dietterich 2012;
Tang and Zhang 2017), etc.
Formally speaking, let X = Rq be the q-dimensional
instance space and Y = {y1 , y2 , y3 , ..., yc } be the label
space with c class labels. Given the partial label training
set D = {(xi , Si )|1 ≤ i ≤ n}, the task of partial label
learning is to induce a multi-class classifier f : X 7→ Y
from D. Here, xi ∈ X is a q-dimensional feature vector and
Si ⊆ Y is the associated candidate label set. Partial label
learning takes the key assumption that the ground-truth label yi corresponding to xi resides in its candidate label set

• The relevance among candidate labels is different rather
than exactly equal. For example, in Figure 1(a), candidate
painting style can be freely provided by web users, while
the relevance of each style is different.
• The irrelevance of each non-candidate label may be very
different. For example, in Figure 1(b), for a car, the label
airplane is more irrelevant than the label tank.
However, GLD is not explicitly available in the training
sets. It needs to be somehow recovered from the training
set, a process which is named as label enhancement (LE)

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5557

