The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Interactive Memory Network for Aspect Based
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
Nan Xu, Wenji Mao, Guandan Chen
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{xunan2015, wenji.mao, chenguandan2014}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract

kinds of cellphone in ZOL.com, approximately 40% of the
reviews contain both text and image, and the numbers of
Reply and Like in these multimodal reviews are 3 times
and 4 times greater respectively, than those in text-only reviews. This highlights the importance of analyzing aspectlevel sentiment on multimodal data.

As a fundamental task of sentiment analysis, aspect-level sentiment analysis aims to identify the sentiment polarity of a
specific aspect in the context. Previous work on aspect-level
sentiment analysis is text-based. With the prevalence of multimodal user-generated content (e.g. text and image) on the
Internet, multimodal sentiment analysis has attracted increasing research attention in recent years. In the context of aspectlevel sentiment analysis, multimodal data are often more important than text-only data, and have various correlations including impacts that aspect brings to text and image as well
as the interactions associated with text and image. However,
there has not been any related work carried out so far at the
intersection of aspect-level and multimodal sentiment analysis. To fill this gap, we are among the first to put forward the
new task, aspect based multimodal sentiment analysis, and
propose a novel Multi-Interactive Memory Network (MIMN)
model for this task. Our model includes two interactive memory networks to supervise the textual and visual information
with the given aspect, and learns not only the interactive influences between cross-modality data but also the self influences in single-modality data. We provide a new publicly
available multimodal aspect-level sentiment dataset to evaluate our model, and the experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed model for this new task.

For the task of aspect-level sentiment analysis, image information is often as indicative as text information. On the
one hand, in multimodal data, both text and image are highly
associated with aspect sentiment. For example, when reviewing the aspect ’photographing effect’ of a cellphone,
customers may write down positive words and add highquality photos into their reviews to show their satisfaction,
or negative words and error image samples (e.g. red/ purple noise in low light photos photographed by HTC M7) to
express their dissatisfaction. Furthermore, different aspects
might be related to different parts on each modality data.
In other words, customers may write down different words
or attach different images for different aspects. On the other
hand, text and image information can mutually reinforce and
complement each other to enhance the analysis of specific
aspect sentiment. In summary, various correlations exist in
multimodal data for aspect-level sentiment analysis. However, there has not been any related work carried out so far
at the intersection of aspect-level and multimodal sentiment
analysis.

Introduction
Aspect-level sentiment analysis is a fundamental task in the
field of sentiment analysis, which has a number of practical
applications in domains such as business, public management and social security. Existing work on aspect-level sentiment analysis is based on text modality (Wang et al. 2016;
Tang, Qin, and Liu 2016; Ma et al. 2017; Chen et al.
2017). With the prevalence of multimodal user-generated
content (e.g. text and image) on the Internet, multimodal
sentiment analysis has attracted increasing research attention in recent years (Borth et al. 2013; Yu et al. 2016;
Xu, Mao, and Chen 2018). In the context of aspect-level
sentiment analysis, multimodal data are often more important than text-only data. For example, customers will browse
product reviews before they buy a product, and those multimodal reviews are more likely to attract customers’ attention. Based on a recent study on the reviews of over 1000

In this paper, we fill the research gap and propose the new
task of aspect based multimodal sentiment analysis by firstly
introducing the image modality data to traditional text based
aspect-level sentiment analysis. Specifically, we focus on
aspect based multimodal sentiment classification, with the
aim of determining the sentiment polarity that user opinions conveyed in multimodal data on a specific aspect. To
capture the impacts that aspect brings to text and image,
as well as the multiple interactions associated with text and
image, we propose a novel Multi-Interactive Memory Network (MIMN) for this task. Our model includes two interactive memory networks to supervise the textual and visual
information with the given aspect, and then learns not only
the interactive influences between cross-modality data but
also the self influences in single-modality data. In addition,
to advance and further test aspect based multimodal sentiment analysis research, we build a new multimodal dataset

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

371

