The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Collaborative, Dynamic and Diversified User Profiling
Shangsong Liang1,2
1

2

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 51006, China
liangshangsong@gmail.com

Abstract

tion that the content of documents is rich enough to infer
users’ dynamic interests. (2) They ignore any collaborative
information, such as friends’ messages when inferring users’
interests at a specific point in time. (3) They just simply retrieve a list of top-k keywords as a user’s profile that may be
semantically similar to each other and thus redundant.

In this paper, we study the problem of dynamic user profiling
in the context of streams of short texts. Previous work on user
profiling works with long documents, do not consider collaborative information, and do not diversify the keywords for
profiling users’ interests. In contrast, we address the problem
by proposing a user profiling algorithm (UPA), which consists of two models: the proposed collaborative interest tracking topic model (CITM) and the proposed streaming keyword
diversification model (SKDM). UPA first utilizes CITM to
collaboratively track each user’s and his followees’ dynamic
interest distributions in the context of streams of short texts,
and then utilizes SKDM to obtain top-k relevant and diversified keywords to profile users’ interests at a specific point in
time. Experiments were conducted on a Twitter dataset and
we found that UPA outperforms state-of-the-art non-dynamic
and dynamic user profiling algorithms.

Accordingly, in this paper, to address the aforementioned
drawbacks in the previous work, we propose a User Profiling Algorithm in the context of streams of short documents,
abbreviated as UPA, which is collaborative, dynamic and diversified. UPA consists of two proposed models– a Collaborative Interest Tracking topic Model, abbreviated as CITM,
and a Streaming Keyword Diversification Model, abbreviated as SKDM. UPA algorithm first utilizes our proposed
CITM to track the changes of users’ dynamic interests in the
context of streams of short documents. It then utilizes our
proposed SKDM to produce top-k diversified keywords for
profiling users’ interests at a specific point in time.

Introduction

Our CITM topic model works with streaming short texts
and is a dynamic multinomial Dirichlet mixture topic model
that is able to infer and track each user’s dynamic interest
distributions based not only on the user’s posts but also the
collaborative information, i.e., his followees’ posts. Our hypothesis in CITM is that accounting for collaborative information is critical, especially for those users with limited activities, infrequent short posts, and thus sparse information.
To perform the inference of users’ interest distributions in
streams of short documents, we propose a collapsed Gibbs
sampling algorithm. Then, our SKDM model works with
users’ dynamic interest distributions produced by CITM and
aims at retrieving a set of relevant and also diversified keywords for profiling users’ interests at time t such that redundancy of the retrieved keywords can be avoided while still
keeping relevant keywords to profile the users.

To capture users’ dynamic interests underlying their posts
in microblogging platforms such as Twitter is of importance to the success of further design of applications that
cater for users of such platforms, such as dynamic user
clustering (Liang et al. 2017a; 2017b). In this paper, we
study the problem of user profiling for streaming short
documents (Balog et al. 2012; Liang 2018; Liang et al.
2018): collaboratively identifying users’ dynamic interests
and tracking how they evolve over time in the context of
streaming short texts. Our goal is to infer users’ and their
collaborative topic distributions over time and dynamically
profile their interests with a set of diversified keywords in
the context of streaming short texts.
The first user profiling model was proposed in (Balog et
al. 2007), where a set of relevant keywords were identified
for each user in a static collection of long documents and the
dynamics of users’ interests were ignored. Recent work realize the importance of capturing users’ dynamic interests
over time and a number of temporal profiling algorithms
have been proposed for streams of long documents. However, previous work on user profiling suffer from the following problems: (1) They work with streams of long documents rather than short documents and made the assump-

Our contributions are: (1) We propose a user profiling
algorithm, UPA, to address the user profiling task in the
context of streams of short documents. (2) We propose a
topic model, CITM, that can collaboratively and dynamically track each user’s and his followees’ interests. (3) We
propose a collapsed Gibbs sampling algorithm to infer users’
and his followees’ interest distributions. (4) We propose a
streaming keyword diversification model, SKDM, to diversify the top-k keywords as users’ profiling results at time t.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4269

