The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MLVCNN: Multi-Loop-View
Convolutional Neural Network for 3D Shape Retrieval
Jianwen Jiang, Di Bao, Ziqiang Chen, Xibin Zhao,∗ Yue Gao∗
BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China.
{jjw17, bd17, czq18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D shape retrieval has attracted much attention and become a
hot topic in computer vision field recently.With the development of deep learning, 3D shape retrieval has also made great
progress and many view-based methods have been introduced
in recent years. However, how to represent 3D shapes better
is still a challenging problem. At the same time, the intrinsic hierarchical associations among views still have not been
well utilized. In order to tackle these problems, in this paper, we propose a multi-loop-view convolutional neural network (MLVCNN) framework for 3D shape retrieval. In this
method, multiple groups of views are extracted from different loop directions first. Given these multiple loop views,
the proposed MLVCNN framework introduces a hierarchical view-loop-shape architecture, i.e., the view level, the loop
level, and the shape level, to conduct 3D shape representation from different scales. In the view-level, a convolutional neural network is first trained to extract view features.
Then, the proposed Loop Normalization and LSTM are utilized for each loop of view to generate the loop-level features, which considering the intrinsic associations of the different views in the same loop. Finally, all the loop-level descriptors are combined into a shape-level descriptor for 3D
shape representation, which is used for 3D shape retrieval.
Our proposed method has been evaluated on the public 3D
shape benchmark, i.e., ModelNet40. Experiments and comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods show that the proposed MLVCNN method can achieve significant performance
improvement on 3D shape retrieval tasks. Our MLVCNN outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by the mAP of 4.84%
in 3D shape retrieval task. We have also evaluated the performance of the proposed method on the 3D shape classification task where MLVCNN also achieves superior performance compared with recent methods.

Figure 1: Demonstration of multiple loop views. In this example, 3 loops of views are provided, in which each loop is
perpendicular to an axis in the three-dimensional coordinate
system separately. The bottom of this figure shows the views
from the 3 loops for the ’car’ shape.

Generally, 3D shapes have complex geometries and variations, and thus it is very difficult to represent 3D shapes
well, leading it a challenging task to retrieve 3D shapes accurately. There have been plenty of works concentrated on
3D shape retrieval in the last decade. Within the proliferation of deep learning in recent years, various deep networks
have been investigated for 3D shape analysis, such as 3D
ShapeNets (Wu et al. 2015), PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) and
VoxNet (Maturana and Scherer 2015). Among these methods, view-based method has shown better performance in
many works. It is noted that it is not an easy task to represent 3D shapes well using multiple views. Existing methods
may employ a group of views generated by a loop of virtual
cameras (Su et al. 2015; Feng et al. 2018), a dense-sampled
camera dome or just several predefined directions. However,
existing methods have not taken the intra-view relationships
into consideration, simply treating all these views independently. Under such circumstances, it is important to investigate more robust view generation and representation method
for 3D shape retrieval.
In this paper, we propose a multi-loop-view convolutional

Introduction
Recently, the 3D shape retrieval problem has gradually become an important issue in computer vision due to the wide
use of 3D shapes in different areas such as automatic driving,
3D printing and gaming. The task of 3D shape retrieval targets on finding the most similar 3D models from the dataset
given the query, and the retrieval is conducted based on the
shape similarities.
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8513

