The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

KVQA: Knowledge-Aware Visual Question Answering
Sanket Shah,1* Anand Mishra,2* Naganand Yadati,2 Partha Pratim Talukdar2
1

IIIT Hyderabad, India, 2 Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
sanket.shah@research.iiit.ac.in, anandmishra@iisc.ac.in, naganand@iisc.ac.in,ppt@iisc.ac.in
1,2
: contributed equally to the paper.
1
: Research carried out during an internship at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) has emerged as an important problem spanning Computer Vision, Natural Language
Processing and Artificial Intelligence (AI). In conventional
VQA, one may ask questions about an image which can be
answered purely based on its content. For example, given
an image with people in it, a typical VQA question may
inquire about the number of people in the image. More recently, there is growing interest in answering questions which
require commonsense knowledge involving common nouns
(e.g., cats, dogs, microphones) present in the image. In spite
of this progress, the important problem of answering questions requiring world knowledge about named entities (e.g.,
Barack Obama, White House, United Nations) in the image
has not been addressed in prior research. We address this
gap in this paper, and introduce KVQA – the first dataset
for the task of (world) knowledge-aware VQA. KVQA consists of 183K question-answer pairs involving more than 18K
named entities and 24K images. Questions in this dataset
require multi-entity, multi-relation, and multi-hop reasoning
over large Knowledge Graphs (KG) to arrive at an answer. To
the best of our knowledge, KVQA is the largest dataset for
exploring VQA over KG. Further, we also provide baseline
performances using state-of-the-art methods on KVQA.

Conventional VQA (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017;
Trott, Xiong, and Socher 2018)
Q: How many people are there in the image?
A: 3
——————————————————————
Commonsense knowledge-enabled VQA (Wang et al. 2017;
2018; Su et al. 2018; G. Narasimhan and Schwing 2018)
Q: What in the image is used for amplifying sound?
A: Microphone
——————————————————————(World) knowledge-aware VQA (KVQA, this paper):
Q: Who is to the left of Barack Obama?
A: Richard Cordray
Q: Do all the people in the image have a common occupation?
A: Yes
Q: Who among the people in the image is called by the nickname Barry?
A: Person in the center

Introduction
We are witnessing a strong wave in Artificial Intelligence.
Artificially intelligent personal assistants, chatbots, and
robots are becoming reality for specific tasks. In this context,
Visual Question Answering (VQA), which given an image
aims to answer questions, provides an excellent tool to communicate effectively with such artificial agents. There has
been noticeable progress in VQA in the past few years (Antol et al. 2015; Goyal et al. 2017; Trott, Xiong, and Socher
2018; Su et al. 2018). Questions in conventional VQA can
usually be answered purely based on the content of the image alone. More recently, there is also growing interest to
answer visual questions which require commonsense knowledge, i.e., knowledge about common nouns1 (Wang et al.
2017; 2018; Su et al. 2018; G. Narasimhan and Schwing

Figure 1: An example image, questions and answers (shown
in blue) in three settings: (i) Conventional VQA, (ii)
Commonsense knowledge-enabled VQA, and (iii) (World)
knowledge-aware VQA, which requires knowledge and reasoning involving the named entities present in the image
(e.g., Barack Obama, Richard Cordray, etc. in the above image). [Best viewed in color].

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
common noun: a noun representing a class of objects or a concept, as opposed to a particular individual. (Oxford Dictionary)

2018). An example of such commonsense knowledge is microphone is used for amplifying sound, where microphone is
a common noun. Examples of a few conventional as well as
8876

