The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Enhancing Lazy Grounding with Lazy
Normalization in Answer-Set Programming
Jori Bomanson,1 Tomi Janhunen,1 Antonius Weinzierl1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
2
Institute of Logic and Computation, TU Wien, Austria
jori.bomanson@aalto.fi, tomi.janhunen@aalto.fi, antonius.weinzierl@kr.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

because they are highly expressive and enable a programmer to state complex conditions in a very concise manner.
The importance of aggregates is witnessed by a rich body
of research, see e.g., (Greco 1999; Simons, Niemelä, and
Soininen 2002; Liu and Truszczynski 2006; Ferraris 2011;
Faber, Pfeifer, and Leone 2011; Gelfond and Zhang 2014;
Alviano, Faber, and Gebser 2015). The integration of aggregates into lazy-grounding ASP systems, however, has not
been attempted so far, although there is work on first-order
rewriting of aggregates for ground-and-solve ASP systems
(Polleres et al. 2013). Realizing aggregates is feasible as native extensions of solvers in the form of propagators or by
unfolding (monotone) ground aggregates as normal rules.
The latter is known as normalization (Janhunen and Niemelä
2011; Bomanson and Janhunen 2013). Both approaches are
logical avenues of research in the lazy grounding setting.
However, normalization is particularly appealing because it
readily benefits from existing lazy solving techniques, such
that conflict-driven learning and lazy instantiation naturally
carry over to normalized aggregates. Furthermore, it easily allows to revise encodings of aggregates in a systematic
fashion. For these reasons, we focus on normalization as the
implementation strategy in this work. Moreover, we concentrate on monotone aggregates, and in particular count and
sum aggregates with only lower bounds and non-negative
weights. This provides a natural basis for implementing aggregates in practice, and paves a way for future support of
non-monotone aggregates via rewritings into monotone ones
(Alviano, Faber, and Gebser 2015).

Answer-Set Programming (ASP) is an expressive rule-based
knowledge-representation formalism. Lazy grounding is a
solving technique that avoids the well-known grounding bottleneck of traditional ASP evaluation but is restricted to normal rules, severely limiting its expressive power. In this work,
we introduce a framework to handle aggregates by normalizing them on demand during lazy grounding, hence relieving
the restrictions of lazy grounding significantly. We term our
approach as lazy normalization and demonstrate its feasibility for different types of aggregates. Asymptotic behavior is
analyzed and correctness of the presented lazy normalizations
is shown. Benchmark results indicate that lazy normalization
can bring up-to exponential gains in space and time as well
as enable ASP to be used in new application areas.

1

Introduction

Answer-Set Programming (ASP) is an expressive rule-based
knowledge-representation formalism whose success is much
due to efficient solver technology available for evaluation
(Gebser, Kaufmann, and Schaub 2012; Alviano et al. 2013;
Leone et al. 2002). State-of-the-art ASP systems follow the
ground-and-solve approach, where a first-order input program is turned into a corresponding ground (variable-free)
program for which answer sets are then computed. But, in
the worst case, the resulting ground program may become
exponentially larger than the original non-ground input program. Even a polynomial-size increase may already be prohibitive in practice. This drawback impairs the scalability
of ASP for practical applications (cf. (Falkner et al. 2016))
and is known as the grounding bottleneck of ASP. To circumvent such blow-ups, lazy-grounding ASP solvers have
been developed; cf. (Palù et al. 2009; Lefèvre et al. 2017;
Dao-Tran et al. 2012; Weinzierl 2017). The main idea is
to interleave grounding with solving and to generate only
ground rules necessary in each position of the search space.
However, existing lazy-grounding ASP systems only accept normal rules as input and they do not support a broad
range of syntactic primitives as defined by, e.g., the ASP
core language (Calimeri et al. 2012). Most notably missing are aggregates, which occur in many ASP programs,

Lazy grounding poses some unexpected challenges to
normalization, because matters like enumerating all ground
instances that are trivial in the ground-and-solve approach
suddenly become challenging: for every variable X it is unclear what the ground instances are, how many of them will
appear, and in what order. E.g., counting inherently requires
that the counted ground atoms are totally ordered; so for an
aggregate counting the cardinality of p(X) it is not known
whether the ground instances p(a) and p(c) will be grounded
lazily at some point, nor is it then known if p(c) is the second ground instance since some later grounded p(b) might
come between p(a) and p(c) in a natural order. Thus it is
not clear whether normalization can be efficiently applied in
a lazy-grounding setting. Another challenge is that the normalization of an aggregate must not require any portion of

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2694

