The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distant Supervision for Relation Extraction with Linear
Attenuation Simulation and Non-IID Relevance Embedding
∗

Changsen Yuan,1 Heyan Huang,1,2 Chong Feng,1 Xiao Liu,1 Xiaochi Wei3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
Beijing Engineering Research Center of High Volume Language Information Processing
and Cloud Computing Applications, China
3
Baidu Inc. , China
{yuanchangsen, hhy63, fengchong, xiaoliu}@bit.edu.cn weixiaochi@baidu.com
Abstract

Country) is a relational fact in KB. Each word in the sentence “many foreign investors say the investigation is emblematic of the political uncertainty they face in investing
in South Korea, a concern that looms large as Washington
and Seoul are negotiating a free trade agreement.” is not
always useful for “Country”. Some invalid words exist in
the long sentence. Moreover, (Mcdonald and Nivre 2007)
showed that the accuracy of syntactic parsing decreases significantly with increasing sentence length. In the bag, we
find that some instances are too long and contain some invalid words about target relation. And these invalid words
are usually far away from entities. Long distance between
entity and word indicates a weak correlation between them.
Conversely, short distance between entity and word possesses strong correlation. These phenomena sometimes lead
to wrong labels in distant supervision. Therefore, if we use
the same weights about words in relation extraction, weights
of words will not only affect the expression of sentences, but
also have an important impact on the judgement of labels.

Distant supervision for relation extraction is an efficient
method to reduce labor costs and has been widely used to
seek novel relational facts in large corpora, which can be
identified as a multi-instance multi-label problem. However,
existing distant supervision methods suffer from selecting important words in the sentence and extracting valid sentences
in the bag. Towards this end, we propose a novel approach
to address these problems in this paper. Firstly, we propose
a linear attenuation simulation to reflect the importance of
words in the sentence with respect to the distances between
entities and words. Secondly, we propose a non-independent
and identically distributed (non-IID) relevance embedding to
capture the relevance of sentences in the bag. Our method can
not only capture complex information of words about hidden
relations, but also express the mutual information of instances
in the bag. Extensive experiments on a benchmark dataset
have well-validated the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction

Secondly, distant supervision for relation extraction possesses an ideal hypothesis that all instances containing the
same entity pairs express the same relation. However, this
is far from reality, because there may exist multi relations
between a specific entity pairs. For example, both the relation “Born in” and “Employ by” are valid between the entity pair “Trump” and “the USA”. To solve this problem,
the multi-instance learning (Hoffmann et al. 2011; Surdeanu
et al. 2012) and sentence-level attention (Lin et al. 2016;
Ji et al. 2017) have been proposed, but the above approaches
also have flaws. In relation extraction, the multi-instance
learning only selects the instance with the highest probability to be a valid candidate, so that a large amount of rich
information is lost. And the sentence-level attention considers instances in the bag as independent and identically
distributed (IID), therefore, the relevance of instances is ignored consequently. In contrast, these instances with the
same entity pairs in the bag have more or less connections,
which are important information of sentences. Toward this
end, we assume that the relevance of sentences is able to selectively assign higher weights for valid sentences and lower
weights for invalid sentences. For example, in Figure 1, sentence S1 expresses the relation “Employ by” and sentence
S2 expresses the relation “Born in”. But we can implicitly
obtain the relation of “Born in” between “Trumph” and “the

Relation extraction, aiming to categorize semantic relations
between entity pairs in plain texts, has been widely adopted
in many natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as
question answering (Sadeghi, Divvala, and Farhadi 2015),
text categorization (Huynh et al. 2011) and web search (Yan
et al. 2009). Traditional supervised methods for relation extraction require a large amount of high-quality corpus for
model training, which is extremely expensive and timeconsuming. Additionally, these datasets are often restricted
to certain domains. In recent years, distant supervision for
relation extraction has been proposed to find abundant relational facts with large amount auto-generated labels. However, it has two major flaws in existing distant supervision
methods.
Firstly, the existing approaches acquiescently assume that
each word in the sentence has the same weight in relation
extraction. This hypothesis is too strong and usually leads to
wrong labels. The relationship between entities and words
gradually decreases with the creasing of the distant between
them. Therefore, words can not maintain the same weight
in distant supervision. For example, (South Korea, Seoul,
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7418

