The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Sentence-Level Brain Decoding with Distributed Representations
Jingyuan Sun,1,2 Shaonan Wang,1,2 Jiajun Zhang,1,2 Chengqing Zong1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing, China
{jingyuan.sun, shaonan.wang, jjzhang, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

ulus. To build the decoder, it’s thus important to find numerical representations of the sentence. Pioneering work (Wehbe
et al. 2014) in brain imaging generally uses human-elicited
features, which can’t fully express fine-gradient differences
of sentence meanings. Human-elicited features are also limited in scope to cover the large compositional space of natural language (Nishida and Nishimoto 2017). We instead
adopt distributed sentence representation (DSR) models, the
currently dominant approach in NLP community. DSR models roughly fall into two categories: unstructured and structured models (Wang, Zhang, and Zong 2017). Unstructured
models treat a sentence as a bag of words (Iyyer et al. 2015;
Shen et al. 2018), while structured models explicitly catch
the sentence structure (Kiros et al. 2015; Logeswaran and
Lee 2018), such as word order. We don’t yet know which of
the two is the better option for brain decoding. More specifically, will structured models more accurately decode the
brain activities than unstructured models? If so, under what
condition? Is the conclusion consistent with different decoding methods? We will answer these questions to benefit brain
decoding from DSR models.
Except for sentence representations, low-dimensional
representations of the brain activities are also necessary for
brain decoding. The brain images measured by fMRI usually contain hundreds of thousands of voxels, which must
be reduced in case of overfitting. Inspired by Pereira et al.
(2018), we train regression models to predict sentence representations from the brain images, and keep voxels most informative in the prediction. Other than direct dimensionality
reduction, such selection method provides an extra bonus.
Through the spatial distribution of the informative voxels on
the brain, we can study the relations between the sentence
representations and brain areas associated with high level
cognitive functions. This may offer some insights for how
sentences are represented in the human brain.
In this paper, we explore 9 DSRs, covering both unstructured and structured models, classical baselines and stateof-the-art methods, to represent the sentence stimulus 1 . We
then select informative voxels from fMRI images to represent the brain activities. With these representations at hand,

Decoding human brain activities based on linguistic representations has been actively studied in recent years. However,
most previous studies exclusively focus on word-level representations, and little is learned about decoding whole sentences from brain activation patterns. This work is our effort
to mend the gap. In this paper, we build decoders to associate brain activities with sentence stimulus via distributed
representations, the currently dominant sentence representation approach in natural language processing (NLP). We carry
out a systematic evaluation, covering both widely-used baselines and state-of-the-art sentence representation models. We
demonstrate how well different types of sentence representations decode the brain activation patterns and give empirical explanations of the performance difference. Moreover, to
explore how sentences are neurally represented in the brain,
we further compare the sentence representation’s correspondence to different brain areas associated with high-level cognitive functions. We find the supervised structured representation models most accurately probe the language atlas of human brain. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first
comprehensive evaluation of distributed sentence representations for brain decoding. We hope this work can contribute
to decoding brain activities with NLP representation models,
and understanding how linguistic items are neurally represented.

Introduction
In the past decade, brain imaging technology has been developed to reveal what a person is seeing, perceiving or
attending to through analyzing his brain activity patterns
(Tong and Pratte 2012). This approach, namely brain decoding, might one day make it possible to read a person’s
thoughts from noninvasive measurements of brain activations. One important and promising aspect of brain decoding
is in the form of language. Much has recently been learned
about reconstructing simple linguistic items, such as words
and phrases from brain activities measured by functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Thirion et al. 2006;
Wehbe et al. 2014). But only a few developments have been
made in decoding whole sentences (Matsuo et al. 2016).
The key aspect of a sentence decoder is a computational
mapping between the brain activities and the sentence stim-

1

The sentence stimulus are organized in the hierarchy of
topic—passage—sentence, allowing for decoding task in different
granularities. Fig. 1(b) gives an example of the sentence stimulus

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7047

