The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Artificial Counselor System for Stock Investment
Hadi NekoeiQachkanloo,∗ Benyamin Ghojogh,∗ Ali Saheb Pasand,∗ Mark Crowley
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
{hnekoeiq, bghojogh, ali.sahebpasand, mcrowley}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel trading system which plays the
role of an artificial counselor for stock investment. In this paper, the stock future prices (technical features) are predicted
using Support Vector Regression. Thereafter, the predicted
prices are used to recommend which portions of the budget an
investor should invest in different existing stocks to have an
optimum expected profit considering their level of risk tolerance. Two different methods are used for suggesting best portions, which are Markowitz portfolio theory and fuzzy investment counselor. The first approach is an optimization-based
method which considers merely technical features, while the
second approach is based on Fuzzy Logic taking into account
both technical and fundamental features of the stock market. The experimental results on New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) show the effectiveness of the proposed system.

Figure 1: Overall structure of the proposed system

stage can be done in two approaches which are Markowitz
portfolio theory (Bodie, Kane, and Marcus 2014) (an optimization problem with the purpose of maximizing the profit)
and fuzzy investment counselor (fuzzy logic). The latter considers both technical and fundamental features providing opportunity for other sentimental features like an expert broker.
Two approaches are commonly used to analyze the financial behaviour of the markets, (I) technical analysis, and
(II) fundamental analysis (Cavalcante et al. 2016; Atsalakis
and Valavanis 2009b). The former considers technical attributes which are the history of raw prices of stocks. Some
economists believe that all the information needed to predict
financial behaviour of the market exist in the prices. Fundamental analysis considers the economic factors, such as
liabilities, size of the firm, expenses, assets, revenue, etc, affecting the economic movements of market (Vanstone and
Finnie 2009; Abarbanell and Bushee 1997).
There have been developed different machine learning
methods for time series prediction (Makridakis, Spiliotis,
and Assimakopoulos 2018; Cavalcante et al. 2016). Two
main methods are commonly used for stock time series prediction (Cavalcante et al. 2016), which are Muli-Layer Perceptron (MLP) (e.g., (Ican and Çelik 2017; Kayal 2010)) and
Support Vector Regression (SVR) (e.g., (Cao and Tay 2003;
Chen 2010)). In this paper, the new version of the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE) dataset (https://www.kaggle.
com/dgawlik/nyse/data), including both technical and fundamental features, is utilized. In the literature, there are several works attempting to forecast the previous versions of
the NYSE dataset, such as (Atsalakis and Valavanis 2009a;
Halliday 2004) and the new version of it (Song 2018). These

Introduction
Consider the situation of an investor, with an existing budget, who wants to know how to divide the budget between
several existing stocks. The fraction of budget invested in
stock i is a weight denoted by wi in range [0, 1]. The problem is to design an artificial financial counselor system for
suggesting the optimum weights for investing in the stocks.
In order to find the optimum weights, the next day prices of
the stocks need to be estimated. Therefore, this paper firstly
tries to predict the future prices of stocks based on their
previous behaviour which can be modeled by time series.
The primary goal of this project is to find the best weights
according to the predicted prices and fluctuations of every
stock as well as the risk tolerance of the investor. The overall structure of the proposed system is depicted in Fig. 1.
In general, there are n stocks each of which has five time
series of technical features and several time series of fundamental features. Two indices, namely Average Directional
Index (ADX) and Parabolic Stop and Reverse Index (SAR),
are calculated from the technical features of stocks. The time
series are first preprocessed then a time series predictor forecasts the future prices. The variances (risks) of time series
and the future prices go to the next stage computing the optimum weights based on risk tolerance of the investor. That
∗

The first three authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9558

