The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Domain-Independent Planning via Critical Section Macro-Operators
Lukáš Chrpa

Mauro Vallati

Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague &
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University in Prague

School of Computing and Engineering
University of Huddersfield

Abstract

much more instances than ordinary operators and thus their
use might introduce additional overheads as well as larger
memory requirements. Although in theory the use of macros
might reduce complexity of planning (Korf 1985), in practice macros are considered if their use is frequent (Hofmann, Niemueller, and Lakemeyer 2017), their number of
instances is small (Chrpa, Vallati, and McCluskey 2014), or
they address weaknesses of a specific planner (Coles, Fox,
and Smith 2007).
In this paper, we introduce Critical Section Macros. Being inspired by resource locking in critical section in parallel
computing, these macros capture whole activities in which
a resource is used. For example, a robotic hand manipulates
with objects (e.g. blocks in BlocksWorld, or shaker in Barman). When the robotic hand grasps an object it becomes
“locked”, i.e., no other object can be grasped by that hand,
until the hand releases the object it holds. Hence, Critical
Section Macros aim to capture sequences of operators such
that the first operator locks a resource (e.g. a robotic hand
grasps an object), the last operator releases the resource (e.g.
the robotic hand drops the object), and the intermediate operators, if any, uses the resource (e.g. shaking a cocktail). From
the technical perspective, Critical Section Macros “bridge”
states in which the resource is locked and cannot be used.
This is thought to be particularly beneficial for techniques
that exploit delete-relaxation (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001)
as they tend to incorrectly assume that a resource can be
used by multiple activities (e.g. a robotic hand holding multiple objects) and thus provide largely incorrect heuristic estimations. As additional contributions, we illustrate how the
proposed reformulation approach can be exploited in an “aggressive” variant, that removes the elementary operators that
are included in the macros, and can be combined with more
traditional techniques for generating macros. The usefulness
of Critical Section Macros, in all the variants depicted above,
is evaluated on several state-of-the-art planners, and a wide
range of benchmarks from learning tracks of the International Planning Competition.

Macro-operators, macros for short, are a well-known technique for enhancing performance of planning engines by providing “short-cuts” in the state space. Existing macro learning systems usually generate macros from most frequent sequences of actions in training plans. Such approach priorities
frequently used sequences of actions over meaningful activities to be performed for solving planning tasks.
This paper presents a technique that, inspired by resource
locking in critical sections in parallel computing, learns
macros capturing activities in which a limited resource (e.g.,
a robotic hand) is used. In particular, such macros capture
the whole activity in which the resource is “locked” (e.g., the
robotic hand is holding an object) and thus “bridge” states in
which the resource is locked and cannot be used. We also introduce an “aggressive” variant of our technique that removes
original operators superseded by macros from the domain
model. Usefulness of macros is evaluated on several stateof-the-art planners, and a wide range of benchmarks from the
learning tracks of the 2008 and 2011 editions of the International Planning Competition.

Introduction
Automated Planning, in a nutshell, is about finding a sequence of actions whose application in an initial state of the
environment leads to a desired goal state (Ghallab, Nau, and
Traverso 2004). Whereas a lot of effort has been traditionally
given to developing efficient planning engines, usually based
on heuristic search (Bonet and Geffner 2001), another line
of research focuses on increasing efficiency of the planning
process by reformulating the domain knowledge, to obtain
models that are more amenable for automated reasoners.
A very well-known reformulation approach is the generation of macro-operators, macros for short, that encapsulate sequences of (original) planning operators. Macros
are encoded as ordinary planning operators and, hence, they
can be added into domain models such that standard planning engines can straightforwardly take advantage of them.
Macros, informally speaking, provide “short-cuts” in the
state space and, consequently, planning engines can generate plans in less number of steps. This comes with the
cost of increased branching factor since macros often have

Related Work
Using macros dates back to 1970s and 1980s. REFLECT (Dawson and Siklóssy 1977) builds macro-operators
from pairs of primitive operators that can be successively applied and share at least one argument. MOR-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7546

