The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Message-Dropout: An Efficient Training
Method for Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
Woojun Kim, Myungsik Cho, Youngchul Sung
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Korea
{woojun.kim, ms.cho, ycsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

approach eases the problem of lack of full observability of
the global state in partially observable environments (Goldman and Zilberstein 2004). However, this approach has the
problem of the curse of dimensionality because the stateaction space grows exponentially as the number of agents
increases (Buşoniu, Babuška, and De Schutter 2010). Moreover, exploration, which is essential in RL, becomes more
difficult than the single-agent RL case due to the huge stateaction space. Hence, to simplify the problem, the decentralized control approach was considered. In fully decentralized
multi-agent control, each agent decides its action based only
on own observation, while treating other agents as a part
of the environment, to reduce the curse of dimensionality.
However, this approach eliminates the cooperative benefit
from the presence of other agents and suffers from performance degradation.

In this paper, we propose a new learning technique named
message-dropout to improve the performance for multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning under two application scenarios: 1) classical multi-agent reinforcement learning with direct message communication among agents and 2) centralized training with decentralized execution. In the first application scenario of multi-agent systems in which direct message communication among agents is allowed, the messagedropout technique drops out the received messages from
other agents in a block-wise manner with a certain probability in the training phase and compensates for this effect
by multiplying the weights of the dropped-out block units
with a correction probability. The applied message-dropout
technique effectively handles the increased input dimension
in multi-agent reinforcement learning with communication
and makes learning robust against communication errors in
the execution phase. In the second application scenario of
centralized training with decentralized execution, we particularly consider the application of the proposed messagedropout to Multi-Agent Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(MADDPG), which uses a centralized critic to train a decentralized actor for each agent. We evaluate the proposed
message-dropout technique for several games, and numerical results show that the proposed message-dropout technique
with proper dropout rate improves the reinforcement learning
performance significantly in terms of the training speed and
the steady-state performance in the execution phase.

1

In order to improve the performance of the decentralized control, several methods have been studied. First, multiagent systems with decentralized control with communication (DCC) was studied (Goldman and Zilberstein 2004). In
the framework of MADRL with DCC, the agents communicate with each other by sending messages both in the training and execution phases, and the policy of each agent parameterized by a deep neural network determines the action
of the agent based on own observation and the received messages from other agents. To incorporate the messages from
other agents, the size of the deep neural network of each
agent should be increased as the number of message-passing
agents increases. However, if the network size becomes too
large, training becomes difficult and may fail. Another approach is centralized learning with decentralized execution,
allowing each agent to use the information of other agents
only in the training phase. In particular, recently-introduced
MADDPG (Lowe and Mordatch 2017), which uses a centralized critic to train a decentralized policy for each agent,
belongs to this second category. In MADDPG, the centralized critic takes all of other agents’ observations and actions
as input and hence the input space of each critic exponentially grows with the number of agents. In both approaches,
as the number of agents in the system increases, the input
dimension increases, learning becomes difficult, and much
data is required for training. Hence, it is an important problem to properly handle the increased input dimension and
devise an efficient learning algorithm for such MADRL with

Introduction

Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MADRL) is
gaining increasing attention from the research community
with the recent success of deep learning because many of
practical decision-making problems such as connected selfdriving cars and collaborative drone navigation are modeled
as multi-agent systems requiring action control. There are
mainly two approaches in MADRL: one is centralized control and the other is decentralized control. The centralized
control approach assumes that there exists a central controller which determines the actions of all agents based on all
the observations of all agents. That is, the central controller
has a policy which maps the joint observation to a joint action. Since the action is based on the joint observation, this
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6079

