The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Memory-Augmented Temporal Dynamic Learning for Action Recognition
Yuan Yuan, Dong Wang, Qi Wang
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning (OPTIMAL),
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China,
{y.yuan1.ieee, nwpuwangdong, crabwq}@gmail.com

Abstract

sification, many researchers have adopted similar methods for video understanding and human action recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Feichtenhofer, Pinz,
and Zisserman 2016; Zha et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2015)
and achieved remarkable performance on public benchmark
datasets. Deep CNNs have been shown to have an extraordinary capacity for learning discriminative representation
from raw visual data. The most successful action recognition algorithm, two-stream convents, utilizes two independent CNNs to extract pre-frame features from RGB and
optical flow images, followed by simple or strategic pooling across the temporal domain. However, traditional twostream convnets learn the action representation frame by
frame and lack the capacity to model long-range dynamics across the temporal domain. Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) is a straightforward choice to exploit the sequential
structure in videos. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and
its variants have been explored to incorporate frame-level
features in several works (Xingjian et al. 2015; Li et al. 2018;
Ma et al. 2017). These models tend to work well for actions
with short duration and little movement. However, these approaches would incur low accuracy when applied to longrange and complex motions, as verified by our experiments.
These challenges motivate us to design an effective and efficient module to (1) capture salient motion dynamics in longrange temporal structure and (2) compose complex motion
information across time for distinguishing actions.

Human actions captured in video sequences contain two crucial factors for action recognition, i.e., visual appearance
and motion dynamics. To model these two aspects, Convolutional and Recurrent Neural Networks (CNNs and RNNs)
are adopted in most existing successful methods for recognizing actions. However, CNN based methods are limited in
modeling long-term motion dynamics. RNNs are able to learn
temporal motion dynamics but lack effective ways to tackle
unsteady dynamics in long-duration motion. In this work,
we propose a memory-augmented temporal dynamic learning
network, which learns to write the most evident information
into an external memory module and ignore irrelevant ones.
In particular, we present a differential memory controller to
make a discrete decision on whether the external memory
module should be updated with current feature. The discrete
memory controller takes in the memory history, context embedding and current feature as inputs and controls information flow into the external memory module. Additionally, we
train this discrete memory controller using straight-through
estimator. We evaluate this end-to-end system on benchmark
datasets (UCF101 and HMDB51) of human action recognition. The experimental results show consistent improvements
on both datasets over prior works and our baselines.

Introduction
In recent years, video based human action recognition has
received increasing attention from the research community (Wang et al. 2011; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014;
Tran et al. 2015; Carreira and Zisserman 2017), owing to
its great potential value in many real-world applications like
surveillance (Lin et al. 2008), abnormal activity detection
(Boiman and Irani 2007) and so forth. Unlike recognition in
static images, a distinctive aspect of the action recognition
in videos is the motion dynamics, which is a crucial factor
in addition to visual appearance. The performance of action
recognition system depends, to a large extent, on whether
the dynamics can be effectively represented and utilized. A
key goal of this work is to enhance the model’s capacity for
learning and capturing the motion dynamics in videos.
Encouraged by the success of Convolutional Neural Network (CNNs) on computer vision tasks such as image clas-

In this paper, we propose a novel network structure,
named memory-augmented temporal dynamic learning network, where the frame-level feature representation is stored
and recalled from an external memory module, to maintain the informative motion dynamics for classifying actions. It can more effectively learn the long-term motion
dynamic without increasing the model complexity. Specifically, a video is converted to a sequence of frame-level features by CNN and communicates with external memory according to a memory controller. There are three elements
fed into memory controller at every frame, i.e., memory history, context embedding and current frame-level feature. The
memory history is constructed by all features in the memory
module, and the context embedding is obtained using a Long
Short-Term Memory network that skilled in modeling shortrange motion dynamics. We introduce a threshold-based selection mechanism to make memory controller output a dis-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9167

