The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Parallel Restarted SGD with Faster Convergence and Less
Communication: Demystifying Why Model Averaging Works for Deep Learning
Hao Yu, Sen Yang, Shenghuo Zhu
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group (U.S.) Inc., Bellevue, WA.

Abstract

standard stochastic optimization setting, this paper assumes
each worker can locally observe unbiased independent
stochastic gradients (around the last iteration solution xt−1
)
i
[t−1]
t−1 t
t
t
] =
given by Gi = ∇Fi (xi ; ζi ) with Eζit ∼Di [Gi |ζ

In distributed training of deep neural networks, parallel minibatch SGD is widely used to speed up the training process
by using multiple workers. It uses multiple workers to sample local stochastic gradients in parallel, aggregates all gradients in a single server to obtain the average, and updates each
worker’s local model using a SGD update with the averaged
gradient. Ideally, parallel mini-batch SGD can achieve a linear speed-up of the training time (with respect to the number
of workers) compared with SGD over a single worker. However, such linear scalability in practice is significantly limited by the growing demand for gradient communication as
more workers are involved. Model averaging, which periodically averages individual models trained over parallel workers, is another common practice used for distributed training of deep neural networks since (Zinkevich et al. 2010)
(McDonald, Hall, and Mann 2010). Compared with parallel mini-batch SGD, the communication overhead of model
averaging is significantly reduced. Impressively, tremendous
experimental works have verified that model averaging can
still achieve a good speed-up of the training time as long as
the averaging interval is carefully controlled. However, it remains a mystery in theory why such a simple heuristic works
so well. This paper provides a thorough and rigorous theoretical study on why model averaging can work as well as parallel mini-batch SGD with significantly less communication
overhead.

∆

∇fi (xt−1
), ∀i where ζ [t−1] = [ζiτ ]i∈{1,2,...,N },τ ∈{1,...,t−1}
i
denotes all the randomness up to iteration t − 1.
One classical parallel method to solve problem (1) is to
sample each worker’s local stochastic gradient in parallel,
aggregate all gradients in a single server to obtain the average, and update each worker’s local solution using the averaged gradient in its SGD step1 (Dekel et al. 2012) (Li et al.
2014). Such a classical method, called parallel mini-batch
SGD in this paper, is conceptually equivalent to a single
node Stochastic Gradient Descent
√(SGD) with a batch size
N times large and achieves O(1/ N T ) convergence with a
linear speed-up with respect to (w.r.t.) the number of workers
(Dekel et al. 2012). Since every iteration of parallel minibatch SGD requires exchanging of local gradient information among all workers, the corresponding communication
cost is heavy and often becomes a performance bottleneck.
There have been many attempts to reduce communication
overhead in parallel mini-batch SGD. One notable method
called decentralized parallel SGD (D-PSGD) is studied
in (Lian et al. 2017)(Jiang et al. 2017) (Lian et al. √
2018).
Remarkably, D-PSGD can achieve the same O(1/ N T )
convergence rate as parallel mini-batch SGD, i.e., the linear speed-up w.r.t. the number of workers is preserved,
without requiring a single server to collect stochastic gradient information from local workers. However, since DPSGD requires each worker to exchange their local solutions/gradients with its neighbors at every iteration, the total
number of communication rounds in D-PSGD is the same as
that in parallel mini-batch SGD. Another notable method to
reduce communication overhead in parallel mini-batch SGD
is to let each worker use compressed gradients rather than
raw gradients for communication. For example, quantized

Introduction
Consider the distributed training of deep neural networks
over multiple workers (Dean et al. 2012), where all workers can access all or partial training data and aim to find a
common model that yields the minimum training loss. Such
a scenario can be modeled as the following distributed parallel non-convex optimization
N

minm

x∈R

∆

f (x) =

1 X
fi (x)
N i=1

(1)

1

Equivalently, we can let the server update its solution using
the averaged gradient and broadcast this solution to all local workers. Another equivalent implementation is to let each worker take
a single SGD step using its own gradient and send the updated local solution to the server; let the server calculate the average of all
workers’ updated solutions and refresh each worker’s local solution
with the averaged version.

∆

where N is the number of nodes/workers and each fi (x) =
Eζi ∼Di [Fi (x; ζi )] is a smooth non-convex function where
Di can be possibly different for different i. Following the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5693

