The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepFuzz: Automatic Generation of Syntax Valid C Programs for Fuzz Testing
Xiao Liu, Xiaoting Li, Rupesh Prajapati, Dinghao Wu
College of Information Sciences and Technology
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA

Abstract

research (Hoare 2003). Mainstream research focuses on formal verification (Leroy and Grall 2009), translation validation (Necula 2000), and random testing (Lidbury et al. 2015;
Le, Afshari, and Su 2014; Le, Sun, and Su 2015). The first
two categories try to provide certified compilers. For example,
CompCert (Leroy et al. 2016) has made promising progress
in this area. But in practice, it is challenging to apply formal
techniques to fully verify a production compiler such as GCC,
especially when the proof is not constructed together with the
compiler. Therefore, testing remains the dominant approach
in compiler validation.
Our work focuses on compiler testing. By feeding in programs covering different features to different production compilers turning on different levels of optimizations, internal
compiler errors (genuine bugs of the compiler) may be triggered during the compilation with a detailed error message
indicating where and what the error is. However, it is challenging to generate “good” programs to make testing more
efficient and to build a continuous testing framework by automating this process. Each test, including man-crafted ones,
in the existing methods, covers some features and it is common today to see larger and larger test suites for modern
compilers. This improves the testing coverage but it takes
a lot of human effort to construct these tests. Nevertheless,
a practical way to reduce human labor for testing is fuzz
testing, or fuzzing.
Fuzzing (Bird and Munoz 1983) is a method to find bugs
or security vulnerabilities. A program is repeatedly executing
with automatically generated or modified inputs to detect
abnormal behaviors such as program crashes. Main techniques for input fuzzing in use today are black box random fuzzing (Zalewski 2015), white box constraint-based
fuzzing (Godefroid, Kiezun, and Levin 2008), and grammarbased fuzzing (Dewey, Roesch, and Hardekopf 2014). Black
box and white box fuzzing are fully automatic, and have historically been proven to be effective in finding security vulnerabilities in binary-format file parsers. In contrast, grammarbased fuzzing requires an input grammar specifying the input
format of the application under test, which is typically written by hand. This process is laborious, time-consuming, and
error-prone. However, grammar-based fuzzing is the most
effective fuzzing technique known today for fuzzing applications with complexly structured input formats, e.g., compilers.
In the scenario of compiler testing, one way to deploy the

Compilers are among the most fundamental programming
tools for building software. However, production compilers
remain buggy. Fuzz testing is often leveraged with newlygenerated, or mutated inputs in order to find new bugs or
security vulnerabilities. In this paper, we propose a grammarbased fuzzing tool called D EEP F UZZ. Based on a generative
Sequence-to-Sequence model, D EEP F UZZ automatically and
continuously generates well-formed C programs. We use this
set of new C programs to fuzz off-the-shelf C compilers, e.g.,
GCC and Clang/LLVM. We present a detailed case study to
analyze the success rate and coverage improvement of the
generated C programs for fuzz testing. We analyze the performance of D EEP F UZZ with three types of sampling methods
as well as three types of generation strategies. Consequently,
D EEP F UZZ improved the testing efficacy in regards to the line,
function, and branch coverage. In our preliminary study, we
found and reported 8 bugs of GCC, all of which are actively
being addressed by developers.

Introduction
Compilers are among the most important software of computing systems and they are typically part of the trust computing base, but they remain buggy. For example, GCC, a
long-lasting software released in 1987, is a standard compiler
for many Unix-like operating systems. Over 3,410 internal
bugs (Yang et al. 2011) have been caught since it is created. Similarly, for Java, Python, and JavaScript, thousands
of bugs have been found in those widely-used compilers and
interpreters. These compiler bugs can result in unintended
program executions and lead to catastrophic consequences in
security-sensitive applications. It may also hamper developer
productivity in debugging a program when the root cause
cannot be decided in the applications or compilers. Therefore, it is critical to improve the compiler correctness. But it
is not easy to validate compilers with the growing code base:
the code base of today’s GCC is around 15 million lines of
code (Sun et al. 2016), close to the entire Linux kernel, which
is around 19 million lines of code.
It is critical to make compilers dependable. In the past
decade, compiler verification has been an important and active area for the verification grant challenge in computing
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1044

