The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Nearest-Neighbour-Induced Isolation
Similarity and Its Impact on Density-Based Clustering
Xiaoyu Qin

Kai Ming Ting

Ye Zhu

Vincent CS Lee

Monash University
Victoria, Australia 3800
xiaoyu.qin@ieee.org

Federation University
Victoria, Australia 3842
kaiming.ting@federation.edu.au

Deakin University
Victoria, Australia 3125
ye.zhu@ieee.org

Monash University
Victoria, Australia 3800
vincent.cs.lee@monash.edu

Abstract

This paper identifies shortcomings of tree-based method
currently employed in inducing Isolation Similarities (Ting,
Zhu, and Zhou 2018). Instead, we investigate a different
method to induce the data dependent Isolation Similarity,
and evaluate its clustering performance using DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996) in comparison with the two existing improvements of density-based clustering, i.e., DScale (Zhu, Ting,
and Angelova 2018) and DP (Rodriguez and Laio 2014).
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. We reiterate
Isolation Kernel, identify the shortcomings of using the treebased method to induce Isolation Similarity, provide the proposed alternative that employs a nearest neighbour method,
the lemma and proof of the characteristic of Isolation Similarity, and the investigation in using Isolation Similarity in
density-based clustering.
The descriptions of existing works are framed in order to
clearly differentiate from the contributions we made here.

A recent proposal of data dependent similarity called Isolation Kernel/Similarity has enabled SVM to produce better
classification accuracy. We identify shortcomings of using a
tree method to implement Isolation Similarity; and propose
a nearest neighbour method instead. We formally prove the
characteristic of Isolation Similarity with the use of the proposed method. The impact of Isolation Similarity on densitybased clustering is studied here. We show for the first time
that the clustering performance of the classic density-based
clustering algorithm DBSCAN can be significantly uplifted
to surpass that of the recent density-peak clustering algorithm
DP. This is achieved by simply replacing the distance measure with the proposed nearest-neighbour-induced Isolation
Similarity in DBSCAN, leaving the rest of the procedure unchanged. A new type of clusters called mass-connected clusters is formally defined. We show that DBSCAN, which detects density-connected clusters, becomes one which detects
mass-connected clusters, when the distance measure is replaced with the proposed similarity. We also provide the condition under which mass-connected clusters can be detected,
while density-connected clusters cannot.

Isolation Kernel
Isolation Kernel/Similarity is first proposed by (Ting, Zhu,
and Zhou 2018) as a new similarity which can adapt to density structure of the given dataset, as opposed to commonly
used data independent kernels such as Gaussian and Laplacian kernels.
In the classification context, Isolation Kernel has been
shown to be an effective means to improve the accuracy of
SVM, especially in datasets which have varied densities in
the class overlap regions (Ting, Zhu, and Zhou 2018). This is
achieved by simply replacing the commonly used data independent kernel such as Gaussian and Laplacian kernels with
the Isolation Kernel.
In the context of SVM classifiers, Isolation Kernel (Ting,
Zhu, and Zhou 2018) has been shown to be more effective
than existing approaches such as distance metric learning
(Zadeh, Hosseini, and Sra 2016; Wang and Sun 2015), multiple kernel learning (Rakotomamonjy et al. 2008; Gönen and
Alpaydin 2011) and Random Forest kernel (Breiman 2000;
Davies and Ghahramani 2014).
The characteristic of Isolation Kernel is akin to one aspect
of human-judged similarity as discovered by psychologists
(Krumhansl 1978; Tversky 1977), i.e., human will judge the
two same Caucasians as less similar when compared in Europe (which have many Caucasians) than in Asia.

Introduction
Similarity measure is widely used in various data mining and
machine learning tasks. In clustering analysis, its impact to
the quality of result is critical(Steinbach, Ertöz, and Kumar
2004). A recent proposal of data dependent similarity called
Isolation Kernel has enabled SVM to produce better classification accuracy by simply replacing the commonly used
data independent kernel (such as Gaussian kernel) with Isolation Kernel (Ting, Zhu, and Zhou 2018). This is made possible on datasets of varied densities because Isolation Kernel
is adaptive to local data distribution such that two points in
a sparse region are more similar than two points of equal
inter-point distance in a dense region. Despite this success,
the kernel characteristic has not been formally proven yet.
This paper extends this line of research by investigating a
different implementation of Isolation Similarity. We provide
a formal proof of the characteristic of the Isolation Similarity for the first time since its introduction. In addition, we
focus on using Isolation Similarity to improve the clustering
performance of density-based clustering.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4755

