The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

LabelForest: Non-Parametric Semi-Supervised Learning for Activity Recognition
Yuchao Ma, Hassan Ghasemzadeh
School of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
Washington State University, Pullman WA, 99164, USA
{yuchao.ma, hassan.ghasemzadeh}@wsu.edu

Abstract

mani 2003). The former takes advantage of the pervasive nature of mobile applications to interact with the user for sensor data labeling. The latter performs label inference from
small amounts of initially labeled data samples, henceforth
referred to as “seed”, to train a machine learning model for
automated activity recognition.
Although semi-supervised learning techniques reduce the
demand for manual annotations, the limitation imposed due
to data diversity remains unsolved. In fact, many semisupervised learning algorithms attempt to fit in a generative
model with a presumed data distribution, or use predefined
hyper-parameters as thresholds in data exploration, which
relies on a priori knowledge about the dataset (Berton and
de Andrade Lopes 2015). As a result, these algorithms perform poorly on diverse data sources. In addition, new challenges arise for personalized activity recognition in practice.
For example, because it is unlikely to observe all user activities at the same pace, the desired semi-supervised learning
algorithms need to be robust to unbalanced seed data with
skewed label distribution.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we present
the development and validation of LabelForest, a nonparametric and robust semi-supervised learning framework
to train personalized activity recognition models. It improves the performance of downstream machine learning
model through an augmentation approach, which expands
the training set by selecting and labeling a subset of available data samples based on an automatic tradeoff between
pairwise similarity and accumulative dissimilarity. The experimental results show that, given only one seed data sample per activity, the machine learning model trained with a
labeled dataset augmented by LabelForest can achieve an
accuracy more than 71.9% on three activity datasets; and it
remains an accuracy more than 73.1% when the seed data
have highly skewed label distribution.

Activity recognition is central to many motion analysis applications ranging from health assessment to gaming. However, the need for obtaining sufficiently large amounts of labeled data has limited the development of personalized activity recognition models. Semi-supervised learning has traditionally been a promising approach in many application domains to alleviate reliance on large amounts of labeled data
by learning the label information from a small set of seed
labels. Nonetheless, existing approaches perform poorly in
highly dynamic settings, such as wearable systems, because
some algorithms rely on predefined hyper-parameters or distribution models that needs to be tuned for each user or context. To address these challenges, we introduce LabelForest 1 ,
a novel non-parametric semi-supervised learning framework
for activity recognition. LabelForest has two algorithms at its
core: (1) a spanning forest algorithm for sample selection and
label inference; and (2) a silhouette-based filtering method to
finalize label augmentation for machine learning model training. Our thorough analysis on three human activity datasets
demonstrate that LabelForest achieves a labeling accuracy of
90.1% in presence of a skewed label distribution in the seed
data. Compared to self-training and other sequential learning
algorithms, LabelForest achieves up to 56.9% and 175.3%
improvement in the accuracy on balanced and unbalanced
seed data, respectively.

1

Introduction

Due to the dynamic nature of human movements and the
extreme diversity in data across various users and system
settings, developing personalized activity recognition models on mobile sensor systems has remained challenging to
date (Yao et al. 2016). In particular, two major limitations
of existing machine learning algorithms for activity recognition include (1) the need for adequate labeled training data
to achieve high accuracy levels (Longstaff, Reddy, and Estrin 2010); and (2) the lack of flexibility and robustness on
diverse data sources.
One promising research direction that attempts to address
the first limitation is to combine active learning with semisupervised learning techniques (Zhu, Lafferty, and Ghahra-

2

Related Work

Along with the proliferation of sensor technologies and pervasive computing systems, many studies adopted or explored machine learning algorithms on time series sensor
data for activity recognition (Kwapisz, Weiss, and Moore
2011; Mannini et al. 2017). Although supervised learning algorithms have demonstrated effectiveness for sensor-based
activity recognition, the demand for sufficient amounts of

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Software package of LabelForest and sample data are made
publicly available at https://github.com/y-max/LabelForest.

4520

