The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bounded Suboptimal Search with Learned Heuristics for Multi-Agent Systems
Markus Spies,∗ Marco Todescato,∗ Hannes Becker, Patrick Kesper, Nicolai Waniek, Meng Guo
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI), Renningen, Germany
{markus.spies2, marco.todescato, hannes.becker,
patrick.kesper, nicolai.waniek, meng.guo2}@de.bosch.com
(*) equal contribution

Abstract

intelligent behavior without hand-crafted solutions. Specifically, rather than synthesizing an entire plan, we learn policies that output action probabilities given an observation of
the current system state. We build upon recent results where
a reactive policy was learned from expert demonstrations using a deep neural network (Groshev et al. 2017). The learned
policy generalizes to some degree to novel environments,
which is, however, limited and typically not optimal for every situation. Nevertheless the learned policy can be used as
a guiding heuristic in classical planners such as A∗ . Still, directly applying learned policies, as previously proposed by
Groshev et al. (2017), breaks optimality or even completeness guarantees, because the learned heuristic is not ensured
to be admissible (Russell and Norvig 2016).
In this paper, we therefore present a novel combination
of learned policies with ω-optimal A∗ focal search (A∗ω ), introduced by Pearl and Kim (1982). Our algorithm exploits
guidance from learned policies and ensures not only completeness but also bounds on suboptimality. We model the
generalized policy with a deep convolutional neural network
that takes observations of the environment states as input and
outputs next actions as well as the predicted remaining plan
length. Furthermore, we propose two different heuristics that
are derived from the outputs of the learned network, one that
directly predicts a value function, and a second one that estimates the path likelihood of nodes that are expanded during
search.
In summary, the contibution of this paper is (i) we propose
a novel combination of learned heuristics with A∗ω search.
This combination guarantees bounds on suboptimality while
exploiting guidance from learned policies; (ii) we present a
general framework for learning control policies and extend
previous work to multi-agent systems; (iii) we introduce a
novel problem domain based on the real world application
of autonomous valet parking. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate the advances or our approach over existing methods in this domain.

A wide range of discrete planning problems can be solved
optimally using graph search algorithms. However, optimal
search quickly becomes infeasible with increased complexity
of a problem. In such a case, heuristics that guide the planning process towards the goal state can increase performance
considerably. Unfortunately, heuristics are often unavailable
or need manual and time-consuming engineering. Building
upon recent results on applying deep learning to learn generalized reactive policies, we propose to learn heuristics by
imitation learning. After learning heuristics based on optimal
examples, they are used to guide a classical search algorithm
to solve unseen tasks. However, directly applying learned
heuristics in search algorithms such as A∗ breaks optimality guarantees, since learned heuristics are not necessarily admissible. Therefore, we (i) propose a novel method that utilizes learned heuristics to guide Focal Search A∗ , a variant of
A∗ with guarantees on bounded suboptimality; (ii) compare
the complexity and performance of jointly learning individual
policies for multiple robots with an approach that learns one
policy for all robots; (iii) thoroughly examine how learned
policies generalize to previously unseen environments and
demonstrate considerably improved performance in a simulated complex dynamic coverage problem.

1

Introduction

Intelligent robotic systems have to select from a diverse
set of actions to perform complex operations. For instance,
they must plan sequences of optimal actions to complete
specified tasks such as following trajectories, navigation
within clustered workspace, or coordination among different
robots. Unfortunately, planning is known to be a hard computational problem that often relies on heavily engineered
solutions, for instance heuristic-based rules which are tailored to specific environments (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso
2004; LaValle 2006; Latombe 2012). These solutions typically lack generalization capabilities and performance guarantees for new environments. Conversely, intelligent robotic
systems will be deployed in previously unseen, complex environments and thus need capabilities to plan dynamically
while reacting to unforeseen situations.
Here, we propose a step towards bridging this gap by exploiting recent advancements in deep learning which yields

2

Related work

Graph search has been used extensively in the past decades
to solve planning problems, resulting in search algorithms
such as A∗ (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968) that are optimal and complete if admissible guiding heuristics are used.
For problems with a large number of states, trade-offs are

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2387

