The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Stylish Image Description Generation via Domain Layer Norm
Cheng-Kuan Chen,1∗ Zhufeng Pan,1∗ Ming-Yu Liu,2 Min Sun1
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University 2 NVIDIA
{sttagomantis, nthupzf}@gmail.com, mingyul@nvidia.com,sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Most of the existing works on image description focus on
generating expressive descriptions. The only few works that
are dedicated to generating stylish (e.g., romantic, lyric, etc.)
descriptions suffer from limited style variation and content
digression. To address these limitations, we propose a controllable stylish image description generation model. It can learn
to generate stylish image descriptions that are more related to
image content and can be trained with the arbitrary monolingual corpus without collecting new paired image and stylish
descriptions. Moreover, it enables users to generate various
stylish descriptions by plugging in style-specific parameters
to include new styles into the existing model. We achieve this
capability via a novel layer normalization layer design, which
we will refer to as the Domain Layer Norm (DLN). Extensive
experimental validation and user study on various stylish image description generation tasks are conducted to show the
competitive advantages of the proposed model.

GT (unstylish): A cat laying in a luggage bag on a bed
Romance: A cat laying in a luggage bag on a bed with his beloved
owner every day. She just wake up, waiting for the kiss from owner.
Humorous: A cat laying in a luggage bag on a bed, thinking about
to spend his life in that bag. But his owner is going to kick him out.
Lyrics: Funny cat scenes, on the front of my screen. Hey,
my video on my table you know, you must know.
Fairy tale: A cat view himself as the king of the room, waiting for the
servant to serve the food and water. He said: Food!

Figure 1: An ideal IDG can generate stylish descriptions for
the given image. The generated descriptions should relate to
the image content with different language styles.

Introduction
The image description generation (IDG) problem concerns
about generating a natural language description that transcribes an input image. Over the years, tremendous effort
has been dedicated to developing models that are descriptive.
However, little effort is dedicated to generating descriptions
that are stylish (e.g. romantic, lyric, etc). Even for the handful
of stylish IDG models that exist, they only have a loose control over the style. Ideally, a stylish IDG model should allow
users to flexibly control over the generated descriptions as
shown in Fig 1. Such a model would be useful for increasing
user engagement in applications requiring human interaction
such as chatbot and social media sharing.
A naive approach to tackle the stylish IDG problem is
to collect new corpora of paired images and descriptions
for training. However, this is expensive. For each style that
we wish to generate, we have to ask human annotators to
write the romantic descriptions for each image in the training
dataset.
In this paper, we propose a controllable stylish IDG model.
Our model is jointly trained with a paired unstylish image
description corpus (source domain) and a monolingual corpus

of the specific style (target domain). In this setting, our model
can learn to generate various styles without collecting new
paired data in the target domain. Our main contribution is to
show that the layer normalization can be used to disentangle
language styles from the content of source and target domains
via a small tweak. This design enables us to use the shared
content to generate descriptions that are more relevant to
the image as well as control the style by plugging in a set
of style-specific parameters. We refer this mechanism as
Domain Layer Normalization (DLN) since we treat each
style as the target domain in the domain transfer setting.
We conduct an extensive experimental evaluation to validate the proposed approach using both subjective and objective performance metrics. We evaluate our model on four
different styles, including fairy tale, romance, humor, and
country song lyrics style (lyrics). Experiment results show
that our model generates stylish descriptions that are more
preferred by human subjects. It also outperforms prior works
on the objective performance metrics.

Related Works

∗

equal contribution
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Visual style transfer. Image style transfer has been widely
studied in computer vision. Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge (2015)
8151

