The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ABox Abduction via Forgetting in ALC
Warren Del-Pinto, Renate A. Schmidt
School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom

Abstract

was highlighted by (Elsenbroich, Kutz, and Sattler 2006).
Use cases include hypothesis generation, diagnostics and
belief expansion for which most current reasoning methods
for ontologies are not suitable. This has led to work on abduction in DLs, including studies in EL (Bienvenu 2008)
and applications such as ontology repair (Lambrix, Dragisic, and Ivanova 2012; Wei-Kleiner, Dragisic, and Lambrix 2014) and query explanation (Calvanese et al. 2013).
For ABox abduction, methods in more expressive logics
such as ALC and its extensions have been proposed (Klarman, Endriss, and Schlobach 2011; Halland and Britz 2012;
Pukancová and Homola 2017). Similarly, work exists on
TBox abduction (Wei-Kleiner, Dragisic, and Lambrix 2014;
Halland, Britz, and Klarman 2014). However, few implementations and evaluations are available for abductive reasoning. Exceptions include the ABox abduction method of
(Du, Wang, and Shen 2014) in Datalog rewritable ontologies
and a TBox abduction method using justification patterns
(Du, Wan, and Ma 2017).
The aim of this paper is to investigate the use of forgetting for ABox abduction in DL ontologies. Forgetting is a
non-standard reasoning method that restricts ontologies to a
specified set of symbols, retaining all entailments preservable in the restricted signature. It is also referred to as uniform interpolation or second-order quantifier elimination,
and has been proposed as a method for abduction in different contexts (Doherty, Łukaszewicz, and Szałas 2001;
Gabbay, Schmidt, and Szałas 2008; Wernhard 2013; Koopmann and Schmidt 2015b). However, so far the forgettingbased approach has been insufficiently studied or applied,
particularly in terms of preferred characteristics of abductive hypotheses and in the setting of large DL ontologies.
This work investigates hypotheses obtained using
forgetting-based abductive reasoning. These hypotheses are
weakest sufficient conditions (Lin 2001), related to the DL
literature notion of semantic minimality (Halland, Britz, and
Klarman 2014), meaning that they make the fewest assumptions necessary to explain an observation given the background knowledge. However, without additional steps, these
hypotheses are not guaranteed to be consistent and are likely
to be mostly redundant when the forgetting based approach
is applied to large ontologies. In this work, additional constraints are investigated to capture these redundancies and
practical methods for their removal are presented.

Abductive reasoning generates explanatory hypotheses for
new observations using prior knowledge. This paper investigates the use of forgetting, also known as uniform interpolation, to perform ABox abduction in description logic (ALC)
ontologies. Non-abducibles are specified by a forgetting signature which can contain concept, but not role, symbols. The
resulting hypotheses are semantically minimal and consist of
a disjunction of ABox axioms. These disjuncts are each independent explanations, and are not redundant with respect to
the background ontology or the other disjuncts, representing
a form of hypothesis space. The observations and hypotheses handled by the method can contain both atomic or complex ALC concepts, excluding role assertions, and are not restricted to Horn clauses. Two approaches to redundancy elimination are explored in practice: full and approximate. Using a
prototype implementation, experiments were performed over
a corpus of real world ontologies to investigate the practicality of both approaches across several settings.

Introduction
The aim of abductive reasoning is to generate explanatory
hypotheses for new observations, enabling the discovery of
new knowledge. Abduction was identified as a form of reasoning by (Peirce 1878). It has also become a recurring
topic of interest in the field of AI, leading to work such as
abductive extensions of Prolog for natural language interpretation (Stickel 1991; Hobbs et al. 1993), the integration
of abduction with induction in machine learning (Mooney
2000) including work in the fields of inductive (Muggleton
and Bryant 2000) and abductive logic programming (Kakas,
Kowalski, and Toni 1992; Ray 2009) and statistical relational AI (Raghavan and Mooney 2010).
This paper focuses on abduction in description logic
(DL) ontologies. These consist of a TBox of information
about general entities known as concepts and roles and an
ABox of assertions over instances of these concepts known
as individuals. DL ontologies are widely used to express
background knowledge and as alternative data models for
knowledge management. They are commonly used in fields
such as AI, computational linguistics, bio-informatics and
robotics. The need for abductive reasoning in ontologies
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2768

