The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generalized Batch Normalization: Towards Accelerating Deep Neural Networks
Xiaoyong Yuan∗

Zheng Feng∗

Matthew Norton

Xiaolin Li

University of Florida
chbrian@ufl.edu

University of Florida
fengzheng@ufl.edu

Naval Postgraduate School
mnorton@nps.edu

University of Florida
andyli@ece.ufl.edu

Abstract

Consider a single layer of the network which first receives output from the previous layer h and then applies
an affine transformation to get x = W h + b, followed by
an element-wise non-linearity to produce output g(x) which
is fed to the next layer. Let x = [x1 , x2 , · · · , xn ]T denote its individual components so that we can write g(x) =
[g(x1 ), g(x2 ), ..., g(xn )]T .
The BN transformation is based upon the following transformation on each dimension j of the input,

Utilizing recently introduced concepts from statistics and
quantitative risk management, we present a general variant
of Batch Normalization (BN) that offers accelerated convergence of Neural Network training compared to conventional
BN. In general, we show that mean and standard deviation are
not always the most appropriate choice for the centering and
scaling procedure within the BN transformation, particularly
if ReLU follows the normalization step. We present a Generalized Batch Normalization (GBN) transformation, which
can utilize a variety of alternative deviation measures for scaling and statistics for centering, choices which naturally arise
from the theory of generalized deviation measures and risk
theory in general. When used in conjunction with the ReLU
non-linearity, the underlying risk theory suggests natural, arguably optimal choices for the deviation measure and statistic. Utilizing the suggested deviation measure and statistic,
we show experimentally that training is accelerated more so
than with conventional BN, often with improved error rate as
well. Overall, we propose a more flexible BN transformation
supported by a complimentary theoretical framework that can
potentially guide design choices.

1

x̂j ← √

xj − E[xj ]
,
E[(xj − E[xj ])2 ]

√
where E[xj ] and E[(xj − E[xj ])2 ] are the mean and standard deviation of the random variable xj , which are estimated during training with a batch of training examples.
In this paper, we begin by asking the question: Are mean
and standard deviation the right choice for every network
architecture? This simple question leads us to the main contribution of this paper, which is the observation that batch
normalization can naturally be generalized and improved by
considering the general transformation,

Introduction

x̂j ←

Training a deep neural network has traditionally been a difficult task. Issues such as the vanishing and exploding gradient, see e.g., (Pascanu, Mikolov, and Bengio 2013), make the
use of gradient based optimization techniques difficult from
the perspective of stability and fast convergence. However,
new, seemingly simple tools have emerged to help practitioners overcome common pitfalls of neural network training. Two prominent examples are the use of Batch Normalization (BN) and Rectified Linear Units (ReLU).
Originally proposed by (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015), BN
provides a simple transformation which incentivizes the homogenization of neural network layer outputs, so as to have
the same scale and mean, eliminating what is referred to as
internal covariate shift. Intuitively, this allows the ‘signal’
flowing through the neural network to maintain a consistent center and scale, potentially stabilizing gradients and
the training procedure as a whole.

xj − S(xj )
,
D(xj )

where D is some measure of deviation, not necessarily the
standard deviation, and where S is a statistic which is not
necessarily the mean. While arising from a specific set of
axioms in risk theory, one can think of D as a general measure of the non-constancy of x and S as a type of ’center.‘
We show that there exist many different choices for D
and S besides standard deviation and mean, and that by formulating the batch normalization transformation with these
alternatives one can accelerate neural network training compared to conventional BN and, in some settings, obtain improved predictive performance. Additionally, we show how
the choice of D and S are driven not only by straightforward intuition, but also by recently developed theoretical
tools from statistics and risk theory. Specifically, the theory
of generalized deviation measures provides us with a wealth
of choices for deviation measure D, which includes standard
deviation as a special case. In addition, for any choice of D,
there is a naturally corresponding statistic S. Thus, choosing
D implies natural choices for S and vice versa.

∗

Equal Contribution
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1682

