The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Comparative Document Summarisation via Classification
Umanga Bista,?‡ Alexander Mathews,?‡ Minjeong Shin,?‡ Aditya Krishna Menon,?∗ Lexing Xie?‡
Australian National University? , Data to Decisions CRC ‡
{umanga.bista,alex.mathews,minjeong.shin,aditya.menon,lexing.xie}@anu.edu.au

Feb 2018

Abstract

Mar 2018
time

News Media

This paper considers extractive summarisation in a comparative
setting: given two or more document groups (e.g., separated
by publication time), the goal is to select a small number of
documents that are representative of each group, and also
maximally distinguishable from other groups. We formulate a
set of new objective functions for this problem that connect
recent literature on document summarisation, interpretable
machine learning, and data subset selection. In particular, by
casting the problem as a binary classification amongst different groups, we derive objectives based on the notion of
maximum mean discrepancy, as well as a simple yet effective
gradient-based optimisation strategy. Our new formulation
allows scalable evaluations of comparative summarisation as a
classification task, both automatically and via crowd-sourcing.
To this end, we evaluate comparative summarisation methods
on a newly curated collection of controversial news topics over
13 months. We observe that gradient-based optimisation outperforms discrete and baseline approaches in 15 out of 24 different
automatic evaluation settings. In crowd-sourced evaluations,
summaries from gradient optimisation elicit 7% more accurate
classification from human workers than discrete optimisation.
Our result contrasts with recent literature on submodular data
subset selection that favours discrete optimisation. We posit
that our formulation of comparative summarisation will prove
useful in a diverse range of use cases such as comparing content
sources, authors, related topics, or distinct view points.

1

AAAI Times
ML Daily News

World News
CS Press
Local News

Figure 1: An illustrative example of comparative summarisation. Squares are news articles, rows denote different news
outlets, and the x-axis denotes time. The shaded articles are
chosen to represent AI-related news during Feb and March
2018, respectively. They aim to summarise topics in each
month, and also highlight differences between the two months.

is different between the coverage in NYTimes and BBC, or
what are the key articles covering the carbon tax and the Paris
agreement? In this work, we focus on highlighting changes
within a long running news topic over time; see Figure 1 for
an illustration.
Existing methods for extractive summarisation use a variety of formulations such as structured prediction (Li et
al. 2009), optimisation of submodular functions (Lin and
Bilmes 2011), dataset interpretability (Kim, Khanna, and
Koyejo 2016), and dataset selection via submodular optimisation (Mirzasoleiman, Badanidiyuru, and Karbasi 2016;
Wei, Iyer, and Bilmes 2015; Mitrovic et al. 2018). Moreover, recent formulations of comparative summarisation
use discriminative sentence selection (Wang et al. 2012;
Li, Li, and Li 2012), or highlight differences in common concepts across documents (Huang, Wan, and Xiao 2011). But
the connections and distinctions of these approaches has yet
to be clearly articulated. To evaluate summaries, traditional
approaches employ automatic metrics such as ROUGE (Lin
2004) on manually constructed summaries (Lin and Hovy
2003; Nenkova, Passonneau, and McKeown 2007). This is
difficult to employ for new tasks and new datasets, and does
not scale.
Our approach to comparative summarisation is based on a
novel formulation of the problem in terms of two competing
classification tasks. Specifically, we formulate the problem
as finding summaries for each group such that a powerful

Introduction

Extractive summarisation is the task of selecting a few representative documents from a larger collection. In this paper, we
consider comparative summarisation: given groups of document collections, the aim is to select documents that represent
each group, but also highlight differences between groups.
This is in contrast to traditional document summaries which
aim to represent each group by independently optimising
for coverage and diversity, without considering other groups.
As a concrete example, given thousands of news articles per
month on a certain topic, groups can be formed by publication
time, by source, or by political leaning. Comparative summarisation systems can then help answer user questions such
as: what is new on the topic of climate change this week, what
∗

Now at Google Research.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

20

