The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Verifiable and Interpretable Reinforcement Learning through Program Synthesis
Abhinav Verma
Rice University
6100 Main Street
Houston, Texas 77005

Abstract

In contrast, the DNN that represents a similar policy has
three hidden layers with 600 nodes each.
The intuition behind this work is that structured programs
in a high level DSL have three key benefits. First, the DSL
can be designed to be human-readable and is hence more interpretable than a DNN. Second, the language can be used
to implicitly encode the learner’s inductive bias, which is
useful for agent generalization. Finally, it allows us to use
symbolic program verification techniques to formally reason about the learned policies and check consistency with
correctness properties.
There have been efforts in deep learning that aim to make
DNNs more interpretable (Montavon, Samek, and Müller
2017), and to formally verify DNNs directly (Katz et al.
2017). The work in this thesis differs from these approaches
in that our framework generates high-level program source
code as output, which is used in place of the policy represented by the DNN. Efforts have also been made to use neural networks for learning programs in the growing field of
neural program synthesis and induction, (Murali et al. 2018)
is one such example. In these methods a DNN is typically
trained to guide the program search. Our approach differs
from these efforts in that we use DNNs trained on the RL
environment’s task directly.

We study the problem of generating interpretable and verifiable policies for Reinforcement Learning (RL). Unlike the
popular Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) paradigm, in
which the policy is represented by a neural network, the aim
of this work is to find policies that can be represented in highlevel programming languages. Such programmatic policies
have several benefits, including being more easily interpreted
than neural networks, and being amenable to verification by
scalable symbolic methods. The generation methods for programmatic policies also provide a mechanism for systematically using domain knowledge for guiding the policy search.
The interpretability and verifiability of these policies provides
the opportunity to deploy RL based solutions in safety critical
environments. This thesis draws on, and extends, work from
both the machine learning and formal methods communities.

Introduction
Many recent advances in Reinforcement Learning have been
through models that rely on a Deep Neural Network (DNN)
(Mnih et al. 2015). However, DNNs have been called “blackbox” models due to a fundamental drawback, these models
are difficult to interpret or to be checked for consistency for
some desired properties. Consequently, there is a growing
consensus that further advancements in AI research will require models that combine DNNs with other approaches and
methods. The primary contribution of this thesis will be to
explore and exploit the connections between automatic program synthesis and deep reinforcement learning.
We propose a learning framework, called Programmatically Interpretable Reinforcement Learning (PIRL) (Verma
et al. 2018), that is based on the idea of learning policies
that are represented in a Domain Specific Language (DSL).
An example of this approach, is to synthesize a program that
drives a car around a track, by controlling the car’s acceleration and steering. The following example shows the kind of
high-level program our method finds for acceleration:

Approach
We formalized the problem of performing synthesis for reinforcement learning policies in the PIRL framework (Verma
et al. 2018). In summary, we model a reinforcement learning
setting as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process,
and we define a DSL which places a syntactic restriction on
the program search space. Then our goal is to find a program with optimal reward: e∗ = arg maxe∈[[S]] R(e). Here
[[S]] denotes the set of programs permitted by a DSL S, and
R(e) is the agent’s expected aggregate reward under the policy represented by e.
The use of a DSL to provide syntactic constraints is inspired from work in the programming languages community, where this approach has been formalized in a framework called Syntax-Guided Synthesis (Alur et al. 2015). The
DSL also provides a principled mechanism to systematically include domain knowledge into the policy search. This
mechanism modifies the learner’s inductive bias. We note
that while DRL algorithms excel in end-to-end learning, to

if −0.001 < hd(TrackPos) and hd(TrackPos) < 0.001
then P IDθ (Target1 )
else P IDθ (Target2 )
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9902

