The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

PerformanceNet: Score-to-Audio Music Generation with Multi-Band
Convolutional Residual Network
Bryan Wang, Yi-Hsuan Yang
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
{bryanw, yang}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract

music piece by merely reading its musical score. Music performance is necessary to give music meanings and feelings.
In addition, musical score only specifies ‘what’ notes to be
played instead of elaborating ‘how’ to play them. Musicians
can leverage this freedom to interpret the score and add expressiveness in their own ways, to render unique pieces of
sound and to “bring the music to life” (Raphael 2009).
The space left for human interpretation gives music the
aesthetic idiosyncrasy, but it also makes automated music
synthesis, the process of converting a musical score to audio
by machine, a challenging task. While modern music production industry has developed sophisticated digital systems
for music synthesis, using the default synthesis parameters
would still often lead to deadpan results. One has to fine-tune
the synthesis parameters for each individual note, sometimes
with laborious trial-and-error experiments, to produce a realistic music clip (Riionheimo and Välimäki 2003). These parameters include dynamics attributes such as velocities and
timing, as well as timbre attributes such as effects. This requires a great amount of time and domain expertise.
One approach to automate the fine-tuning process is to
train a machine learning model to predict the expressive parameters for the synthesizers (Macret and Pasquier 2014).
However, such an auto-parameterization approach may work
better for instruments that use relatively simple mechanisms
to produce sounds, e.g., striking instruments such as the piano and drums. Instruments that produce sounds with more
complicated methods, such as the bowing string instruments
and the aerophones, are harder to be comprehensively parameterized by pre-defined attributes.
To address this problem, we propose to directly model the
end-to-end mapping between musical scores and their audio
realizations with a deep neural network, forcing the model
to learn its own way the audio attributes that are important
and the mechanism to fine-tune them. We believe that this is
a core task in building an “AI performer”—to learn how a
human performer renders a musical score into audio. Other
tasks that are important include modeling the style and mental processes of the human performers (e.g., the emotion
they try to express), and using these personal attributes to
condition the audio generation process. We attempt to learn
only the score-to-audio mapping here, leaving the ability to
condition the generation a future work.
Text-to-speech (TTS) generation has been widely stud-

Music creation is typically composed of two parts: composing the musical score, and then performing the score with instruments to make sounds. While recent work has made much
progress in automatic music generation in the symbolic domain, few attempts have been made to build an AI model
that can render realistic music audio from musical scores.
Directly synthesizing audio with sound sample libraries often leads to mechanical and deadpan results, since musical
scores do not contain performance-level information, such
as subtle changes in timing and dynamics. Moreover, while
the task may sound like a text-to-speech synthesis problem,
there are fundamental differences since music audio has rich
polyphonic sounds. To build such an AI performer, we propose in this paper a deep convolutional model that learns in
an end-to-end manner the score-to-audio mapping between a
symbolic representation of music called the pianorolls and an
audio representation of music called the spectrograms. The
model consists of two subnets: the ContourNet, which uses
a U-Net structure to learn the correspondence between pianorolls and spectrograms and to give an initial result; and
the TextureNet, which further uses a multi-band residual network to refine the result by adding the spectral texture of
overtones and timbre. We train the model to generate music
clips of the violin, cello, and flute, with a dataset of moderate
size. We also present the result of a user study that shows our
model achieves higher mean opinion score (MOS) in naturalness and emotional expressivity than a WaveNet-based model
and two off-the-shelf synthesizers. We open our source code
at https://github.com/bwang514/PerformanceNet

Introduction
Music is an universal language used to express the emotion and feeling beyond words. We can easily enumerate a
number of commonalities between music and language. For
example, the musical score and text are both the symbolic
transcript of their analog counterparts—music and speech,
which manifest themselves by sounds organized in time.
However, a fundamental difference that distinguishes music from every other languages is that the essence of music exists mainly in its audio performance (Widmer 2016).
Humans can comprehend the meaning of language by reading text. But, we cannot fully understand the meaning of a
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1174

