The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Active Preference Learning Based on Generalized
Gini Functions: Application to the Multiagent Knapsack Problem
Nadjet Bourdache, Patrice Perny
Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6, LIP6
F-75005 Paris, France

Abstract

of preserving a good overall efficiency. One common way
of introducing fairness in Social Choice is to require the
preference to be t-monotonic, i.e., monotonic with respect
to mean preserving transfers reducing inequalities (a.k.a.
Pigou-Dalton transfers). More formally, given a utility vector x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) where xi is the value of solution x
according to agent i, any modification of x leading to a vector of the form (x1 , . . . , xi −ε, . . . , xj +ε, . . . , xn ) for some
i, j, ε such that xi − xj > ε > 0 should makes the Decision
Maker (DM) better off. Under the Pareto principle (requiring
monotonicity in every component) and some other mild requirements such as completeness, requiring t-monotonicity
of the social preference leads to define the social utility as
a Generalized
Pn Gini social-evaluation Function (GSF), i.e.,
fα (x) =
i=1 αi x(i) , as shown in (Blackorby and Donalson 1978; Weymark 1981), where x(i) is the ith smallest
component of x and α1 ≥ · · · ≥ αn ≥ 0 (more weight is
attached to the least satisfied agents). In other words, fα (x)
is an ordered weighted average (Yager 1998) of individual
utilities xi defined using decreasing weights.
The GSF fα is parameterized by the weighting vector
α = (α1 , . . . , αn ) allowing the control of the importance attached to agents according to their rank of satisfaction. The
parameterized function fα includes several well-known social evaluation functions as special cases. For example, if
α1 = 1 and αi = 0 for all i > 1 then only the least satisfied agent matters and we obtain the egalitarian criterion. On
the other hand, if αi = 1 for all i then all components have
the same importance and we obtain the utilitarian criterion.
Many nuances are possible between these two extremities,
leading to various possible tradeoffs.
Eliciting the preferences of the DM on some pairs of solutions will certainly contribute to reveal the implicit tradeoff
she makes between the need of overall efficiency and the aim
of fairly distribute the satisfaction of individuals. So, assuming that the overall utility of solutions is defined using fα ,
we need a preference elicitation procedure allowing to know
the α vector sufficiently precisely to be able to determine the
optimal solution from individual preferences. The aim of our
paper is to introduce interactive decision procedures combining the incremental elicitation of vector α modeling the
attitude of the DM towards fairness and the determination of
a fair and Pareto-optimal solution (maximizing fα ). For the
sake of illustration, we develop this study on the multi-agent

We consider the problem of actively eliciting preferences
from a Decision Maker supervising a collective decision process in the context of fair multiagent combinatorial optimization. Individual preferences are supposed to be known and
represented by linear utility functions defined on a combinatorial domain and the social utility is defined as a generalized
Gini Social evaluation Function (GSF) for the sake of fairness. The GSF is a non-linear aggregation function parameterized by weighting coefficients which allow a fine control of
the equity requirement in the aggregation of individual utilities. The paper focuses on the elicitation of these weights
by active learning in the context of the fair multiagent knapsack problem. We introduce and compare several incremental
decision procedures interleaving an adaptive preference elicitation procedure with a combinatorial optimization algorithm
to determine a GSF-optimal solution. We establish an upper
bound on the number of queries and provide numerical tests
to show the efficiency of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Fair multiagent optimization problems over combinatorial
domains appear in various contexts studied in Artificial Intelligence such as resource allocation and sharing of indivisible items (Bouveret and Lang 2008; Chevaleyre, Endriss, and Maudet 2017; Bouveret et al. 2017), assignment problems (Lesca and Perny 2010; Aziz et al. 2014;
Heinen, Nguyen, and Rothe 2015; Gal et al. 2017), multiobjective state-space search (Galand and Spanjaard 2007)
and dynamic social choice (Freeman, Zahedi, and Conitzer
2017), but also in other optimization contexts such as facility
location (Ogryczak 2009). One common characteristic in all
these problems is the focus on fairness: we are looking for
a solution allowing a balanced distribution of satisfaction on
the different agents.
Defining precisely what is a fair solution in a collective
decision context is a matter of preferences and subjectivity.
One can put more or less emphasis on the notion of fairness in preference aggregation. This leads to a wide range
of attitudes from pure egalitarism (maximization of the minimum of the individual utility functions) to softer notions
combining the objective of reducing inequalities and that
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7741

