The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Character-Level Language Modeling with Deeper Self-Attention
Rami Al-Rfou,* Dokook Choe,* Noah Constant,* Mandy Guo,* Llion Jones*
Google AI
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, California 94043
{rmyeid, choed, nconstant, xyguo, llion}@google.com

Abstract

only effectively uses around 200 tokens of context (even if
more is provided), and that word order only has an effect
within approximately the last 50 tokens.
In this paper, we show that a non-recurrent model can
achieve strong results on character-level language modeling.
Specifically, we use a network of transformer self-attention
layers (Vaswani et al. 2017) with causal (backward-looking)
attention to process fixed-length inputs and predict upcoming characters. The model is trained on mini-batches of sequences from random positions in the training corpus, with
no information passed from one batch to the next.
Our primary finding is that the transformer architecture is
well-suited to language modeling over long sequences and
could replace RNNs in this domain. We speculate that the
transformer’s success here is due to its ability to “quickly”
propagate information over arbitrary distances; by comparison, RNNs need to learn to pass relevant information forward step by step.
We also find that some modifications to the basic transformer architecture are beneficial in this domain. Most importantly, we add three auxiliary losses, requiring the model
to predict upcoming characters (i) at intermediate sequence
positions, (ii) from intermediate hidden representations, and
(iii) at target positions multiple steps in the future. These
losses speed up convergence, and make it possible to train
deeper networks.

LSTMs and other RNN variants have shown strong performance on character-level language modeling. These models
are typically trained using truncated backpropagation through
time, and it is common to assume that their success stems
from their ability to remember long-term contexts. In this
paper, we show that a deep (64-layer) transformer model
(Vaswani et al. 2017) with fixed context outperforms RNN
variants by a large margin, achieving state of the art on two
popular benchmarks: 1.13 bits per character on text8 and
1.06 on enwik8. To get good results at this depth, we show
that it is important to add auxiliary losses, both at intermediate network layers and intermediate sequence positions.

Introduction
Character-level modeling of natural language text is challenging, for several reasons. First, the model must learn a
large vocabulary of words “from scratch”. Second, natural
text exhibits dependencies over long distances of hundreds
or thousands of time steps. Third, character sequences are
longer than word sequences and thus require significantly
more steps of computation.
In recent years, strong character-level language models
typically follow a common template (Mikolov et al. 2010;
2011; Sundermeyer, Schlüter, and Ney 2012). A recurrent
neural net (RNN) is trained over mini-batches of text sequences, using a relatively short sequence length (e.g. 200
tokens). To capture context longer than the batch sequence
length, training batches are provided in sequential order, and
the hidden states from the previous batch are passed forward to the current batch. This procedure is known as “truncated backpropagation through time” (TBTT), because the
gradient computation doesn’t proceed further than a single
batch (Werbos 1990). A range of methods have arisen for
unbiasing and improving TBTT (Tallec and Ollivier 2017;
Ke et al. 2017).
While this technique gets good results, it adds complexity to the training procedure, and recent work suggests
that models trained in this manner don’t actually make
“strong” use of long-term context. For example Khandelwal
et al. (2018) find that a word-based LSTM language model

Character Transformer Model
Language models assign a probability distribution over token sequences t0:L by factoring out the joint probability as
follows, where L is the sequence length:
Pr(t0:L ) = P (t0 )

L
Y

Pr(ti |t0:i−1 ),

(1)

i=1

To model the conditional probability Pr(ti |t0:i−1 ), we
train a transformer network to process the character sequence t0:i−1 . Transformer networks have recently showed
significant gains in tasks that require processing sequences
accurately and efficiently.
Our character-level transformer architecture has 64 transformer layers. Following Vaswani et al. (2017), by “transformer layer” we mean a block containing a multihead selfattention sub-layer followed by a feed-forward network of

* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3159

