The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Plackett-Luce Mixtures from Partial Preferences
Ao Liu

Zhibing Zhao

Chao Liao

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, USA
liua6@rpi.edu

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, USA
zhaoz6@rpi.edu

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai 200240, China
chao.liao.95@gmail.com

Pinyan Lu

Lirong Xia

Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai 200433, China
lu.pinyan@mail.shufe.edu.cn

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180, USA
xial@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract

investigated. However, many real-world datasets are composed of partial orders over a subset of alternatives (Lu and
Boutilier 2014; Hüllermeier et al. 2008), e.g. the Netflix prize
data. Some of the previously proposed algorithms work only
for special structures of partial orders or general partial orders
with ignored comparisons or dependence between pairwise
comparisons. However, modern datasets can be unstructured
or even implicit, e.g., preferences implied by comparing time
users spent on news articles or whether a user finished watching a movie (Khetan and Oh 2016b). None of the existing
algorithms is able to learn PL and its mixtures with full utilization of general partial orders with no restrictions. The only
known approach to tackle general partial orders without ignoring information in literature is to sample linear extensions
from partial orders under a given model (Mallows’ model)
and learn the model from full rankings (Lu and Boutilier
2014).
This paper addresses the following problem: How can we
efficiently learn the Plackett-Luce model and its mixtures
from partial orders?
Our Contributions. We propose an EM framework to learn
mixtures of Plackett-Luce models from partial orders. The E
step consists of two parts: given the current estimate, (i) sampling multiple linear extensions from each partial order, and
(ii) computing the membership of each sampled linear order
(full ranking). The M step can adapt any learning algorithm
for the single Plackett-Luce model. In this paper, we use the
LSR algorithm by Maystre and Grossglauser (2015) as the
subroutine.
We address the technical challenge of sampling an linear
extension of a partial order under PL in part (i) by proposing
the following two samplers.
Sampler 1: GRIM-MCMC generalizes the GRIM-based
sampling algorithm by Lu and Boutilier (2014), which was
for Mallows’ model, to PL. We further prove that GRIMMCMC is efficient for a large class of preferences called
layered-structure preferences in Theorem 4.
Sampler 2: Gibbs generalizes the sampler by Azari Soufiani, Parkes, and Xia (2012) to deal with partial orders, and
can be naturally generalized to learn mixtures of Random
Utility Models (Thurstone 1927), which subsume PL.
We compare the performances of the proposed sampling

We propose an EM-based framework for learning PlackettLuce model and its mixtures from partial orders. The core of
our framework is the efficient sampling of linear extensions
of partial orders under Plackett-Luce model. We propose two
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers: Gibbs sampler and the generalized repeated insertion method tuned by
MCMC (GRIM-MCMC), and prove the efficiency of GRIMMCMC for a large class of preferences.
Experiments on synthetic data show that the algorithm with
Gibbs sampler outperforms that with GRIM-MCMC. Experiments on real-world data show that the likelihood of test
dataset increases when (i) partial orders provide more information; or (ii) the number of components in mixtures of PlackettLuce model increases.

Introduction
Rank aggregation has found applications in many areas, such
as meta-search (Dwork et al. 2001), information retrieval (Liu
2011), and recommender systems (Baltrunas, Makcinskas,
and Ricci 2010). In the rank aggregation problem, we want
to find an aggregated ranking from the rank data of a given
population. One popular approach is learning to rank, which
is to learn a statistical ranking model from the data, and
interpret the learned parameter as a ranking.
Plackett-Luce model (PL) (Plackett 1975; Luce 1959) is
one of the most widely-used models. In PL, each alternative
is assigned a positive value. The greater this value is, the
more likely its corresponding alternative is ranked at a higher
position. In recent years, mixtures of Plackett-Luce models
have drawn attention for heterogeneous data. Mixture models
provide better fitness to data (Zhao, Villamil, and Xia 2018),
and can be used for clustering. A mixture model assumes that
there are multiple clusters in the population, and each of the
clusters can be learned using a component model. In the case
of mixtures of Plackett-Luce models, each component is a
Plackett-Luce model, while the quality of a certain alternative
is usually different across different components.
Algorithms to learn a single Plackett-Luce model and its
mixtures from linear orders (full rankings) have been well
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4328

