The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Labor Division with Movable Walls: Composing Executable
Specifications with Machine Learning and Search (Blue Sky Idea)
David Harel,1 Assaf Marron,1 Ariel Rosenfeld,1 Moshe Vardi,2 Gera Weiss3
1

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
2
Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.
3
Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Abstract

by adding clarifications, refinements and exceptions in the
form of new sentences in the body of the document or
as independent appendices and footnotes. Another important property is the amenability of ES to formal verification
and analysis. This includes, e.g., model-checking in search
for undesired behaviors (Harel et al. 2013; Baier and Katoen 2008) and realizability checking—looking for inherent
conflicts within the specifications (Greenyer et al. 2016;
Vardi 1995). In this paper we outline a novel approach for
integrating the use of AI and ES techniques in developing
complex intelligent systems, which can result in systems that
are much easier to enhance and maintain compared with current uses of AI in system development.

Artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, including, e.g., machine learning, multi-agent collaboration, planning, and
heuristic search, are emerging as ever-stronger tools for solving hard problems in real-world applications. Executable
specification techniques (ES), including, e.g., Statecharts and
scenario-based programming, is a promising development approach, offering intuitiveness, ease of enhancement, compositionality, and amenability to formal analysis. We propose
an approach for integrating AI and ES techniques in developing complex intelligent systems, which can greatly simplify
agile/spiral development and maintenance processes. The approach calls for automated detection of whether certain goals
and sub-goals are met; a clear division between sub-goals
solved with AI and those solved with ES; compositional and
incremental addition of AI-based or ES-based components,
each focusing on a particular gap between a current capability
and a well-stated goal; and, iterative refinement of sub-goals
solved with AI into smaller sub-sub-goals where some are
solved with ES, and some with AI. We describe the principles
of the approach and its advantages, as well as key challenges
and suggestions for how to tackle them.

Basic Principles of the Approach
Below we list the basic general principles of the proposed
approach. Further illustration, explanations and examples
appear in Fig. 1 and in subsequent sections.
First, one must state the overall problem or mission as a
set of explicit goals, where the recognition of whether they
are achieved or not in a given system run can be automated.
While automatic detection of mission-accomplishment at
run-time is valuable, the approach initially suffices with requiring it only at development time.
Second, when such a test or verification fails, one must be
able to succinctly describe the difference, or gap, between
what the system does and what it should do, generalizing a
single or few bad runs into the common characteristics of all
bad runs that could be associated with the noticed failure.
Third, as goals are refined and requirements added, or
when certain bugs are discovered, rather than enhancing and
often complicating existing components to address the issue,
we strive to add new components that precisely address the
difference, or the gap, between the (revised) goals and the
what the existing specification accomplishes.
Fourth, we aim at an architecture in which independent
ES-only components can be readily composed with independent AI-only components, where each AI or ES component
addresses a particular (sub-)goal, and each is essentially unaware of the existence of the others.
The fifth principle calls for repeatedly identifying opportunities for replacing, at least partially, AI-based components with ES ones. Such transitions from AI to ES can be
triggered by, e.g., the emergence of a better understanding

Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) techniques are increasingly proving their power and usefulness in implementing real-world
systems — resulting in a growing use of components based
on machine learning, planning and search, multi-agent systems, a host of heuristics-based techniques, etc. In another
area of software and system engineering, certain specifications and modeling formalisms, like Statecharts (Harel
1987) and scenario-based programming (Damm and Harel
2001; Harel and Marelly 2003; Harel, Marron, and Weiss
2012), which describe separately each facet of the desired
system behavior, are also directly executable. Such formalisms, collectively referred to here as executable specifications (ES) can endow systems with often-absent properties. These include, e.g., intuitiveness of the specifications,
alignment of the system’s structure with the requirements,
and compositionality/incrementality, i.e., the ability to enhance or refine a system by simply adding modules, similarly to how one can enhance a requirements document
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9770

