The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

LENA: Locality-Expanded Neural Embedding for Knowledge Base Completion
Fanshuang Kong,1,2 Richong Zhang,∗1,2 Yongyi Mao,3 Ting Deng1,2
1

2

SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Beijing Advanced Institution on Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
kongfs,zhangrc,dengting@act.buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca

in a knowledge base is meant to indicate the fact that h
and t participates in the relation r. For example, the triple
(Paris, isCapitalOf, France) indicates the fact that Paris is
the capital of France. The cross linkage of the factual triples
in a knowledge base allows it to be interpreted as a graph
where vertices represent entities, edges represent triples, and
edge labels represent relations. Since many factual triples are
expected missing from a knowledge bases, the objective of
knowledge base completion is to discover the missing triples,
or edges.
Among the diverse studies in knowledge base completion, knowledge base embedding (Bordes et al. 2013;
Wang et al. 2014; Lin et al. 2015; Lin, Liu, and Sun 2015;
Dettmers et al. 2018) has demonstrated great successes and
is receiving increasing attention at present. Overall this embedding methodology falls in the connectionist paradigm of
artificial intelligence, in which knowledge base completion
is formulated as learning a distributed representation (Hinton,
McClelland, and Rumelhart 1986) for entities and relations.
With this methodology, the entities and relations in the knowledge base are represented as quantities (such as vectors or
matrices) in a low-dimensional vector space, and these quantities are learned by minimizing certain loss functions carefully
designed to hopefully capture the structure of the knowledge
base.
Despite the successes of the embedding models for knowledge base completion, this work is motivated by the following
observation. In all existing embedding models, the global loss
functions decomposes into “atomic” losses, each on a triple
(h, r, t). Although the parameters of the model, or the embeddings, are linked via the connectivity of the knowledge
base, a fundamental assumption in such an approach is that
the embeddings for entities, say for h and t, and for relation,
say for r, are sufficient to aggregate all structural information
contained in the knowledge base for predicting whether the
triple (h, r, t) is factual.
In this work, we hypothesize that such an assumption may
not hold sufficiently well. In particular, it is well known that
knowledge bases are usually heterogeneous in the sense that
entities have varying local or global connectivity statistics
(e.g., degree, clustering coefficient, closeness centrality, etc)
and that relations involve varying number of factual triples.
As such, the embeddings of different entities and of different
relations may capture varying degrees of global information.

Abstract
Embedding based models for knowledge base completion
have demonstrated great successes and attracted significant
research interest. In this work, we observe that existing embedding models all have their loss functions decomposed into
atomic loss functions, each on a triple or an postulated edge
in the knowledge graph. Such an approach essentially implies
that conditioned on the embeddings of the triple, whether the
triple is factual is independent of the structure of the knowledge graph. Although arguably the embeddings of the entities
and relation in the triple contain certain structural information
of the knowledge base, we believe that the global information
contained in the embeddings of the triple can be insufficient
and such an assumption is overly optimistic in heterogeneous
knowledge bases. Motivated by this understanding, in this
work we propose a new embedding model in which we discard the assumption that the embeddings of the entities and
relation in a triple is a sufficient statistic for the triple’s factual
existence. More specifically, the proposed model assumes that
whether a triple is factual depends not only on the embedding
of the triple but also on the embeddings of the entities and relations in a larger graph neighbourhood. In this model, attention
mechanisms are constructed to select the relevant information
in the graph neighbourhood so that irrelevant signals in the
neighbourhood are suppressed. Termed locality-expanded neural embedding with attention (LENA), this model is tested
on four standard datasets and compared with several stateof-the-art models for knowledge base completion. Extensive
experiments suggest that LENA outperforms the existing models in virtually every metric.

Introduction
Knowledge bases, such as YAGO, DBpedia and Freebase,
have seen explosive growth in many application domains. As
most of knowledge bases are extracted from human-edited
knowledge sources, the data integrity therein is hardly guaranteed and the information contained in the knowledge bases
is expected to be far from complete. This makes knowledge
base completion a particularly important task.
The data in a knowledge base is usually represented as
a set of triples, each in the form of (h, r, t), where h and
t are entities and r indicates a relation. The triple (h, r, t)
∗

Corresponding author:zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2895

