The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Deep Feature Learning for Decoding Imagined Speech from EEG
Pramit Saha, Sidney Fels
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
pramit@ece.ubc.ca, ssfels@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract

words and vice versa. Therefore, this is the first work that
aims to automatically learn a discriminative EEG manifold
applicable to both word and vowel/phoneme based classification at the same time, using deep learning techniques.

We propose a mixed deep neural network strategy, incorporating parallel combination of Convolutional (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), cascaded with deep autoencoders and fully connected layers towards automatic identification of imagined speech from EEG. Instead of utilizing
raw EEG channel data, we compute the joint variability of
the channels in the form of a covariance matrix that provide
spatio-temporal representations of EEG. The networks are
trained hierarchically and the extracted features are passed
onto the next network hierarchy until the final classification. Using a publicly available EEG based speech imagery
database we demonstrate around 23.45% improvement of accuracy over the baseline method. Our approach demonstrates
the promise of a mixed DNN approach for complex spatialtemporal classification problems.

Proposed framework
The problem of categorizing EEG data based on speech imagery can be formulated as a non-linear mapping f̂ of a multivariate time-series input sequence Xct to fixed output y, i.e,
mathematically f̂ : Xct −→ y.
We found that well-known deep learning techniques, like
fully connected networks, CNN, RNN, autoencoders etc.
fail to individually learn such complex feature representations from single-trial EEG data. Also, our investigation
demonstrated that it is crucial to capture the information
transfer between the electrodes rather than using the multichannel high-dimensional EEG data that otherwise needs
large training times and resource requirements. Therefore,
instead of utilizing raw EEG, we compute channel crosscovariance, resulting in positive, semi-definite matrices encoding the joint variability of electrodes. We define channel
cross-covariance (CCV) between any two electrodes c1 and
c2
) = E[X c1 (t) − µX c1 (t)][X c2 (t +
c2 as: Cov(Xtc1 , Xt+τ
c
τ ) − µX 2 (t + τ )].
This is particularly important because higher cognitive
processes underlying speech synthesis and utterances involve frequent information exchange between different parts
of the brain. Hence, such matrices often contain more discriminative features and hidden information than mere raw
signals. Besides, cognitive learning process underlying articulatory speech production involves incorporation of intermediate feedback loops and utilization of past information
stored in the form of memory as well as hierarchical combination of several feature extractors. To this end, we develop
our mixed neural network architecture composed of three
supervised and single unsupervised learning step (Fig 1).
In order to decode spatial connections between the electrodes from the channel covariance matrix, we use sixlayered 1D convolutional networks stacking two convolutional and two fully connected hidden layers with ReLU
as activations. The k th feature map at a given CNN layer
with input x, weight matrix W k and bias bk is obtained as:
hk = ReLU (W k ∗ x + bk ). The network is trained with

Introduction
In the past decade, numerous methods have been proposed
to decode speech and motor-related information from electroencephalography (EEG) signals for Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) applications. However, EEG signals are highly
session-specific; infested with noises and artifacts. Interpreting active thoughts underlying vocal communication involving labial, lingual, naso-pharyngeal and jaw motion, is even
more challenging than inferring motor imagery, since utterances involve higher degrees of freedom and additional
functions in comparison to hand movement and gestures. As
a result, it is extremely challenging to recognize phonemes,
vowels and words from single-trial EEG data. The reported
classification accuracy of existing methods (Nguyen, Karavas, and Artemiadis 2017; Min et al. 2016; DaSalla et al.
2009) are not satisfactory, showing that manual handcrafting of features or traditional signal processing algorithms
lack sufficient discriminative power to extract relevant features for classification.
This work addresses these issues by implementing a deep
learning based feature extraction scheme, targeting classification of speech imagery EEG data corresponding to vowels, short and long words. It is mentionworthy that most of
the previous works applied to vowels and phonemes classification show a degradation of performance when applied to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10019

