The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Framework for Approval-Based Budgeting Methods
Nimrod Talmon

Piotr Faliszewski

Ben-Gurion University
Be’er Sheva, Israel
talmonn@bgu.ac.il

AGH University
Krakow, Poland
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

Abstract

by the methods at hand; and (3) report on three experiments:
In the first two, we visualize the behavior of these methods
on certain Euclidean preferences, by adapting the methodology of Elkind et al. (2017a), originally developed for multiwinner voting rules; we are specifically interested in the behavior of these methods with respect to their preference for
choosing either cheap items or expensive ones. In the third
experiment we assess how well our budgeting methods deal
with local and global items.
The main contributions of our work are: (1) a general
framework of approval-based budgeting methods with several methods within; (2) several useful axiomatic properties which are relevant to budgeting methods at large; (3)
an adaptation of the methodology of Elkind et al. (2017a)
to participatory budgeting; and (4) an evaluation of certain
methods within our framework according to their axiomatic,
computational, and visual properties, as well as their ability
to deal with local and global items.
Due to space constraints, some proof details are omitted.

We define and study a general framework for approval-based
budgeting methods and compare certain methods within this
framework by their axiomatic and computational properties.
Furthermore, we visualize their behavior on certain Euclidean
distributions and analyze them experimentally.

Introduction
Participatory budgeting (Cabannes 2004), initiated by the
Brazil workers’ party (Wainwright 2003), is gaining increased attention, and is currently applied on many continents, including North America (Gilman 2012) and Europe
(e.g., Paris is organizing one of the largest citywide participatory budgeting processes1 ). The general premise of participatory budgeting is to let residents of a municipality influence the way by which their common funds are being
distributed, through a deliberative grassroots process. Concretely, residents are participating in constructing the municipal budget, by acting as voters and specifying their preferences over a set of available items; then, an aggregation
mechanism (i.e., a budgeting method) is applied to decide
upon the exact set of items to be funded.
Even though more and more funds are decided through
participatory budgets, not many budgeting methods have
been proposed, and no mathematical frameworks to allow
for a systematic comparison between budgeting methods are
available, rendering their use somewhat ad-hoc. Here we describe such a general framework for the approval-based setting, in which voters specify subsets of the available items
which they approve of. Corresponding methods within our
framework differentiate in two aspects: (1) The way by
which voter satisfaction from a given set of funded items
is defined, modeled through a satisfaction function; and (2)
The way these satisfaction functions are used.
We consider several concrete methods within our framework, including some which are used in practice and some
which generalize known multiwinner voting rules. To compare these methods, we (1) consider their computational
complexity; (2) define several axioms, relevant to budgeting methods, and study how well these axioms are satisfied

Related Work
Researchers have considered ordinal-based budgeting methods, in which voters rank budget items (Goel et al. 2015;
Shapiro and Talmon 2017); utility-based budgeting methods, in which voters have numerical utilities over budget
items (Fluschnik et al. 2017; Benade et al. 2017); and, as
we do, approval-based budgeting methods, in which each
voter approves a set of items (Goel et al. 2015; Goel, Krishnaswamy, and Sakshuwong 2016; Benade et al. 2017;
Aziz, Lee, and Talmon 2017). Specifically, Goel et al. (2015;
2016) study k-Approval, where each voter approves exactly
k items, and Knapsack voting, where each voter approves
items while respecting the budget limit. As shown below, the
aggregation method used by Goel et al., in which the winning bundle is selected by greedily considering the items in
decreasing number of approvals, fits within our framework.
Benade et al. (2017) consider the implicit utilitarian
model (Caragiannis et al. 2017) and analyze the distortion
achieved by eliciting the preferences of the voters by Knapsack voting and by Threshold voting (in which voters are
asked to approve those items which they evaluate above a
given threshold); their distortion-based aggregation methods
do not fit within our framework. Aziz et al. (2017) generalize
multiwinner proportionality axioms to the setting of partic-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://budgetparticipatif.paris.fr/bp

2181

