The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Robust and Efficient Algorithm for the PnL Problem
Using Algebraic Distance to Approximate the Reprojection Distance
Lipu Zhou, Yi Yang, Montiel Abello, Michael Kaess
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
{lipuz,yiy4,mabello,kaess}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

recent work (Přibyl, Zemčı́k, and Čadı́k 2017) has shown
that none of the existing methods universally outperforms
the others. Algorithms based on Direct Linear Transformation (DLT) (Přibyl, Zemčı́k, and Čadı́k 2017) are fast, but
are not stable or even not feasible when the number of
lines N is small. Nonlinearly formulated algorithms may become very computationally demanding when N gets large,
such as(Mirzaei and Roumeliotis 2011b; Xu et al. 2017;
Ansar and Daniilidis 2003). In addition, many PnL algorithms are not applicable to the planar configuration (i.e.
all the 3D lines are located on a plane). This paper aims to
achieve globally optimal solution for any number and configuration of lines with real-time speed.
Minimizing a geometric distance is known to lead to more
accurate results than an algebraic distance (Hartley and Zisserman 2003). However, the reprojection distance of the PnL
problem, i.e. the distance between the projection of a 3D line
and the end points of the corresponding 2D line in the image, results in a non-convex rational cost function. Thus, it
is intractable to directly solve its first-order optimality conditions. Additionally, the iterative algorithm requires high
quality initialization to converge to the globally minimal solution, and will become time-consuming when the number
of lines grows large. Therefore, different algebraic distances
are proposed in the literature to simplify the computation.
For example, Xu et al. (Xu et al. 2017) used the residual of
the equation from a minimal solution as the cost function.
But those algebraic distances may not approximate the reprojection distance. This may lead to a suboptimal solution.
The central idea of this paper is to approximate the reprojection distance with simpler functions. We design two algebraic distances to achieve this goal.
The first algebraic distance derives from the distance between a 2D line and the projection of two points on the
corresponding 3D line. We construct a fourth-order polynomial cost function for the rotation. Gröbner basis method
(Byröd, Josephson, and Åström 2009) is generally used in
the previous works (Mirzaei and Roumeliotis 2011a; 2011b;
Zheng et al. 2013; Vakhitov, Funke, and Moreno-Noguer
2016) to solve the first-order optimality conditions of a
polynomial cost function, but this method may have numeric problems which are difficult to address. We solve the
first-order optimality conditions by a novel hidden variable
method (Cox, Little, and O’shea 2006; Gelfand, Kapranov,

This paper proposes a novel algorithm to solve the pose estimation problem from 2D/3D line correspondences, known
as the Perspective-n-Line (PnL) problem. It is widely known
that minimizing the geometric distance generally results in
more accurate results than minimizing an algebraic distance.
However, the rational form of the reprojection distance of the
line yields a complicated cost function, which makes solving
the first-order optimality conditions infeasible. Furthermore,
iterative algorithms based on the reprojection distance are
time-consuming for a large-scale problem. In contrast to previous works which minimize a cost function based on an algebraic distance that may not approximate the reprojection distance of the line, we design two simple algebraic distances to
gradually approximate the reprojection distance. This speeds
up the computation, and maintains the robustness of the geometric distance. The two algebraic distances result in two
polynomial cost functions, which can be efficiently solved.
We directly solve the first-order optimality conditions of the
first problem with a novel hidden variable method. This algorithm makes use of the specific structure of the resulting
polynomial system, therefore it is more stable than the general Gröbner basis polynomial solver. Then, we minimize the
second polynomial cost function by the damped Newton iteration, starting from the solution of the first cost function.
Experimental results show that the first step of our algorithm
is already superior to the state-of-the-art algorithms in terms
of accuracy and applicability, and faster than the algorithms
based on Gröbner basis polynomial solver. The second step
yields comparable results to the results from minimizing the
reprojection distance, but is much more efficient. For speed,
our algorithm is applicable to real-time applications.

Introduction
The Perspective-n-Line (PnL) problem is to calculate the
rotation and the translation of a camera from N 2D/3D
line correspondences. It has broad applications in robotics
and 3D vision, such as Structure from Motion (SfM) (Micusik and Wildenauer 2017), and Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) (Zhang and Koch 2014), and Augmented Reality (AR) (Zhou, Duh, and Billinghurst 2008).
Because of its importance, plenty of algorithms have been
proposed to address this problem in the literature. However,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9307

