The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CISI-net: Explicit Latent Content Inference and Imitated Style
Rendering for Image Inpainting
Jing Xiao,1,2,4 Liang Liao,1,2,4* Qiegen Liu,3 Ruimin Hu1,2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
Collaborative Innovation Center of Geospatial Technology, China
3
School of Electronic Information Engineering, Nanchang University, China
4
Research Institute of Wuhan University in Jiangsu, Jiangsu, China
Email: {jing, liaoliangwhu, hrm}@whu.edu.cn liuqiegen@ncu.edu.cn

Abstract

al. 2017; Liao et al. 2018). Benefit from large scale training data, they can produce plausible inpainting result by
encoding an incomplete image to a latent code and decoding the code to a complete image. However, the latent code
usually has some difficulties to represent the highdimensional distribution of the complex real scene, such as
the changes in spatial structures, illumination and seasons,
the inpainting results are still quite blurry and contain notable artifacts.
To reduce the difficulty of using one latent code to represent complex scene, two-stage methods have been proposed to do content generation and texture refinement separately (Yang et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018; Demir et al.
2016; Yu et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). In the first stage,
the missing regions are filled by a content generation network, targeting at initializing the correct content. In the second stage, the styles are propagated from known region
by matching and adapting neural patches with the most
similar mid-layer feature in a texture refinement network,
aiming to update initially filled region with fine textures. In
this way, it not only preserves contextual structures but also produces high-frequency details. However, the matching
process is quite time consuming. Moreover, since the neural patch is a mixture of content and style, copying them
from known region into missing region in the second stage
will introduce change to the originally generated content,
still leading to some notable artifacts.
Referring to the way how people restore corrupted picture: the scene of picture should be understood prior to the
restoration; then, the main structures of missing region will
be delineated, followed by rendering of the main structures
according to the painting style of picture. According to the
way of human in picture restoration, separation of content
and style will help us to focus on the easier-to-solve subproblems of inpainting: 1) how to predict the missing con-

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have presented their
potential in filling large missing areas with plausible contents. To address the blurriness issue commonly existing in
the CNN-based inpainting, a typical approach is to conduct
texture refinement on the initially completed images by replacing the neural patch in the predicted region using the
closest one in the known region. However, such a processing might introduce undesired content change in the
predicted region, especially when the desired content does
not exist in the known region. To avoid generating such incorrect content, in this paper, we propose a content inference and style imitation network (CISI-net), which explicitly separate the image data into content code and style code.
The content inference is realized by performing inference in
the latent space to infer the content code of the corrupted
images similar to the one from the original images. It can
produce more detailed content than a similar inference procedure in the pixel domain, due to the dimensional distribution of content being lower than that of the entire image. On
the other hand, the style code is used to represent the rendering of content, which will be consistent over the entire image. The style code is then integrated with the inferred content code to generate the complete image. Experiments on
multiple datasets including structural and natural images
demonstrate that our proposed approach out-performs the
existing ones in terms of content accuracy as well as texture
details.

Introduction
Image inpainting refers to the task of filling in missing or
masked regions with synthesized contents. Recently, we
have witnessed success of learning-based image inpainting
through scene understanding (Pathak et al. 2016; Iizuka et
*Liang Liao is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

354

