The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Cleaning Noisy and Heterogeneous Metadata
for Record Linking across Scholarly Big Datasets
1

2

Athar Sefid,1 Jian Wu,3 Allen C. Ge,2 Jing Zhao,2 Lu Liu,2
Cornelia Caragea,4 Prasenjit Mitra,2 C. Lee Giles1,2

Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16801
Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16801
3
Computer Science, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, 23529
4
Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60607
azs5955@psu.edu, jwu@cs.odu.edu
Abstract

into academic and non-academic documents. Metadata, citations, and other types of content are then extracted from
these documents. Different from submission-based datasets
such as the WoS, a large fraction of documents crawled are
pre-prints and manuscripts, which do not necessarily contain
unique identifiers, e.g., DOIs. Metadata from these documents may also differ from their official published versions.
Also, errors may occur when text is extracted from PDFs,
and when metadata is parsed. As a result, metadata extracted
is likely to be incomplete and erroneous. This metadata is
also heterogeneous since the documents were written by authors using different conventions and templates. This noisy
information can propagate through to data analytics and aggregations that can then distort research, making cleaning it
a necessity. One common approach is to link document entities to corresponding entities in a cleaned dataset (reference
dataset) and then use its records to replace the automatically
extracted records.
The biggest challenge of this approach is to find the correct matching entity in the reference dataset. Though different from traditional machine learning (ML) tasks in which
there is a trade-off between precision and recalls, the entity
matching task must be accomplished with high precision.
This is because when the dataset is large, a small fraction of
false positives may lead to a large number of “false corrections”. The problem is even more challenging because there
is usually no prior knowledge of which fields are noisy.
Our contributions include: (1) developing a ML-based
paper entity matching framework which includes both
header and citation information of available scholarly documents; (2) applying the system on CiteSeerX, WoS, DBLP,
and PubMed to find overlap between these digital library
databases which is used to clean CiteSeerX data. Plus this
generates a more accurate citation graph data and links
records which can enrich the content of individual document.

Automatically extracted metadata from scholarly documents
in PDF formats is usually noisy and heterogeneous, often
containing incomplete fields and erroneous values. One common way of cleaning metadata is to use a bibliographic reference dataset. The challenge is to match records between
corpora with high precision. The existing solution which is
based on information retrieval and string similarity on titles
works well only if the titles are cleaned. We introduce a system designed to match scholarly document entities with noisy
metadata against a reference dataset. The blocking function
uses the classic BM25 algorithm to find the matching candidates from the reference data that has been indexed by
ElasticSearch. The core components use supervised methods
which combine features extracted from all available metadata
fields. The system also leverages available citation information to match entities. The combination of metadata and citation achieves high accuracy that significantly outperforms
the baseline method on the same test dataset. We apply this
system to match the database of CiteSeerX against Web of
Science, PubMed, and DBLP. This method will be deployed
in the CiteSeerX system to clean metadata and link records to
other scholarly big datasets.

Introduction
Since the advent of Scholarly Big Data (SBD)(Giles 2013),
there has been a growing interest in topics related to this big
data instance, such as scholarly article discovery (WesleySmith and West 2016), semantic analysis (Al-Zaidy and
Giles 2017), recommendation systems (Huang et al. 2015),
citation prediction (Liu et al. 2017), scalability improvement
(Kim, Sefid, and Giles 2017), and Science of Science (Chen
et al. 2018). Major SBD datasets include the Microsoft
Academic Graph (MAG), CiteSeerX (Giles, Bollacker, and
Lawrence 1998; Wu et al. 2014), DBLP, Web of Science
(WoS), and Medline, among which MAG and CiteSeerX are
the only two freely available large scale datasets which offer
citation graphs. Academic search engines such as Microsoft
Academic and CiteSeerX obtain raw PDF files by actively
crawling the Web. These PDF documents are then classified

Related Work
There are in general three types of methods in entity matching across bibliographic databases.
Information Retrieval-based: This method searches one
or multiple attributes of an entity in the target corpus against

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9601

