The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Reasoning over Assumption-Based Argumentation
Frameworks via Direct Answer Set Programming Encodings
Tuomo Lehtonen

Johannes P. Wallner

Matti Järvisalo

University of Helsinki, Finland

TU Wien, Austria

University of Helsinki, Finland

Abstract

structured argumentation formalisms which provides a suitable model for various application scenarios (Craven et al.
2012; Fan et al. 2014; Matt et al. 2008). We propose a new
computational approach to reason in ABA with and without preferences. While previous approaches are based on either specialized algorithms or translating ABA reasoning to
reasoning over AFs, we propose a direct approach to ABA
reasoning based on encoding ABA reasoning tasks in answer set programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988;
Niemelä 1999). While related encodings have been considered previously focusing on representational aspects in the
context of ABA (Egly and Woltran 2006; Caminada and
Schulz 2017), motivated by the success of ASP encodings
for AFs (Toni and Sergot 2011) we present novel types of
ASP encodings for ABA, and for ABA+ (Cyras and Toni
2016a; 2016c; Bao, Cyras, and Toni 2017) that integrates
preferences into ABA, and in particular provide a first empirical evaluation of this approach. Our approach significantly improves on the empirical performance of currently
available ABA reasoning systems, in particular the dispute derivation approach (Gaertner and Toni 2007a; 2007b;
2008; Dung, Mancarella, and Toni 2007; Craven et al. 2012;
Toni 2013; Craven, Toni, and Williams 2013) implemented
in the abagraph system (Craven and Toni 2016) and the
translation-based approach (Dung, Mancarella, and Toni
2007; Caminada et al. 2013) implemented in the aba2af system (Lehtonen, Wallner, and Järvisalo 2017) for ABA, as
well as the ABAplus system (Bao, Cyras, and Toni 2017)
for ABA+ to the extent applicable. Furthermore, while the
complexity of reasoning over ABA frameworks is wellunderstood (Dimopoulos, Nebel, and Toni 2002), the complexity of reasoning in the ABA+ formalism is currently
less understood. Towards bridging this gap, we also give
new complexity results for reasoning in ABA+ , suggesting
that the integration of preferential information into ABA results in increased problem complexity for several central argumentation semantics. The complexity results justify why
normal ASP programs are enough to encode ABA+ acceptance under stable semantics, and also explain why NPreasoning (e.g., ASP over normal logic programs) is not expected to be powerful enough to allow for direct polynomialsize encodings for the other semantics; in particular, verification of admissibility under preferences turns out to be
coNP-complete.

Focusing on assumption-based argumentation (ABA) as a
central structured formalism to AI argumentation, we propose a new approach to reasoning in ABA with and without
preferences. While previous approaches apply either specialized algorithms or translate ABA reasoning to reasoning over
abstract argumentation frameworks, we develop a direct approach by encoding ABA reasoning tasks in answer set programming. This significantly improves on the empirical performance of current ABA reasoning systems. We also give
new complexity results for reasoning in ABA+ , suggesting
that the integration of preferential information into ABA results in increased problem complexity for several central argumentation semantics.

1

Introduction

The study of computational models for argumentation is a
vibrant area of AI and knowledge representation (KR) research. As KR formalisms, computational models of argumentation capture various related paradigms, including nonmonotonic reasoning and logic programming (Dung 1995),
and furthermore open up avenues for various types of applications (Atkinson et al. 2017).
Arguments most often have an intrinsic structure
made explicit through derivations from more basic structures. Computational models for structured argumentation (Besnard et al. 2014; Bondarenko et al. 1997; Garcı́a
and Simari 2004; Besnard and Hunter 2008; Prakken 2010)
provide tools for making the internal structure of arguments explicit. This is in contrast to abstract argumentation,
where the structure of individual arguments is completely
abstract, and reasoning over abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995) is restricted to the level of pairwise knowledge of attacks between conflicting arguments.
While there has been noticeable attention on computational
approaches for AFs (Charwat et al. 2015), advancing understanding of the complexity of and algorithms for reasoning
over structured argumentation frameworks has received less
attention and can be considered more challenging.
In this paper we focus on assumption-based argumentation (ABA) (Bondarenko et al. 1997; Dung, Kowalski, and
Toni 2009; Toni 2014; Cyras et al. 2018) as one of the central
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2938

