The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

You Get What You Share: Incentives for a Sharing Economy
Sreenivas Gollapudi

Kostas Kollias

Debmalya Panigrahi

Google Research

Google Research

Duke University

Abstract

their individual resources. The platform allows the agents to
list and search for available resources, which enables them
to identify partners and form sharing groups. More specifically, in workforce and educational applications, there are
groups that work to complete a task or a project, while in
ride sharing and room sharing applications, the notion of a
group appears when agents get together to use a provided
resource, e.g., a ride or a house.
A natural goal is to partition the users into sharing groups
that maximize the overall utility or social welfare of the
system. One may model this as an optimization problem,
where a centralized authority computes the optimal partition of users. However, in typical environments, the information necessary for computing this partition is hard to obtain
due to privacy issues or due to the sheer size of the population. Moreover, the central authority has only limited control over the participants, and often cannot enforce the partition. Hence, in this paper, we study the following question:
Consider a population of individuals, who can form sharing groups and share their individual resources with group
members. What is the right way to distribute the welfare produced by each sharing group among its members so that the
population self-organizes in a socially optimal manner? The
semantics of distributing welfare are different for each application. For instance, in online learning, utility is given
in the form of course credits that depend on how students
contributed to group projects. In the ride-sharing application, using a vehicle has some value that is the same for
all agents and monetary transfers reward those providing resources and extract payments from those utilizing resources
to adjust utilities accordingly.
We model instances of this problem as games that we call
resource sharing games. The most natural way to split the
produced welfare among the group’s members is to divide it
equally. In fact, this is the method that naturally comes into
play when there are no monetary or credit transfers in our
applications of interest, i.e., everyone simply gets access to
the resources available in the group. However, we show that
this method can perform quite sub-optimally with respect to
overall social welfare. We then propose an incentive structure derived from the well-known Shapley value in the economics literature (Shapley 1953), and show that the quality
of the resulting outcomes is significantly improved.
In our model, each participant owns a subset of all possi-

In recent years, a range of online applications have facilitated
resource sharing among users, resulting in a significant increase in resource utilization. In all such applications, sharing one’s resources or skills with other agents increases social welfare. In general, each agent will look for other agents
whose available resources complement hers, thereby forming natural sharing groups. In this paper, we study settings
where a large population self-organizes into sharing groups.
In many cases, centralized optimization approaches for creating an optimal partition of the user population are infeasible
because either the central authority does not have the necessary information to compute an optimal partition, or it does
not have the power to enforce a partition. Instead, the central
authority puts in place an incentive structure in the form of
a utility sharing method, before letting the participants form
the sharing groups by themselves. We first analyze a simple
equal-sharing method, which is the one most typically encountered in practice and show that it can lead to highly inefficient equilibria. We then propose a Shapley-sharing method
and show that it significantly improves overall social welfare.

Introduction
The sharing economy (Belk 2014) is a term used to describe
the modern trend of using online platforms and applications
to increase the value of certain resources (such as goods, services, or skills) by enabling the sharing and reuse of these
resources. Carpooling and ride sharing applications (e.g.,
Uber, Lyft, RideWith) allow people to better utilize commuting resources (cars, fuel, etc.), lodging and room sharing
applications (e.g., AirBnB) allow users to share their space
when not using it, online learning platforms (e.g., Coursera,
Udacity, edX) allow students to share knowledge and collectively learn, and workforce applications (e.g., Upwork,
Amazon Mechanical Turk) allow workers to collaboratively
complete requested projects by contributing complementary
skills. In all such applications, there are natural limits on the
extent to which the resources can be shared. In carpooling,
each car can fit a small number of people; in lodging, each
room or house has a fixed capacity; in crowsourced projects
and online courses, there is a prescribed size for working
groups. In effect, this means that the agents need to be organized in groups of limited size so as to effectively share
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2004

