The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

“Reverse Gerrymandering”:
Manipulation in Multi-Group Decision Making
Omer Lev

Yoad Lewenberg

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beersheba, Israel
omerlev@bgu.ac.il

The Hebrew University
of Jerusalem, Israel
yoadlew@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract

optimal destination, while their ultimate goal is succeeding
in as many destinations as possible. This is a desirable feature in many industrial Internet of Things (IoT) applications,
but more concretely, one can think of a medical resource (or
robot) deciding which of multiple field operations it should
go to without central direction. It can be a batch of advertising resources directed to appropriate product/market without
the company headquarters deciding on it; or it can be grassroots political campaigners going to volunteer in the place
they think they will be able to challenge rival campaigns,
with no need for their candidate telling them where to go.
All these settings have to do with agents realizing whether
they are needed in their current location, and if not – looking for a better place they can contribute in, possibly only
seeing the places that are reachable by them from their area.
In this work, we are less interested in how they might reach
their destination, but in the fundamental question of what
are the effects of using a decentralized system, instead of a
hierarchal, centralized one.
Since this setting is, fundamentally, equivalent to an attempt by supporters of some candidate – which can be a
person, a policy, or an idea – to spread themselves so they
can encourage other supporters and together form a majority
in many sub-units or districts, we will use the terminology of
elections and voting. Voting and elections have been widely
studied in artificial intelligence as natural tools for aggregating preferences of independent, self-interested agents in
multiagent systems. Agents have a preference for some candidate and can see if their involvement in their district is
affecting some change (we use “district” as a shorthand for
a subunit, we do not employ geographical considerations).
If it does not, they may examine other possible districts, and
they can move to and be more helpful in (this is a similar setting to that of (Bervoets and Merlin 2012), though they were
looking for novel voting techniques). Each agent operates
independently of others, raising the question of whether this
process can converge; what are its outcomes when agents
move about; and what structural issues influence this outcome.

District-based manipulation, or gerrymandering, is usually
taken to refer to agents who are in fixed location, and an
external division is imposed upon them. However, in many
real-world setting, there is an external, fixed division – an organizational chart of a company, or markets for a particular
product. In these cases, agents may wish to move around (“reverse gerrymandering”), as each of them tries to maximize
their influence across the company’s subunits, or resources
are “working” to be allocated to areas where they will be most
needed.
In this paper we explore an iterative dynamic in this setting, finding that allowing this decentralized system results,
in some particular cases, in a stable equilibrium, though in
general, the setting may end up in a cycle. We further examine how this decentralized process affects the social welfare
of the system.

Introduction
In October 2016, just before the US presidential elections,
the New York Times published an article titled “Go Midwest, Young Hipster” (MacGillis 2016). In it, the author emphasized how crucial elections could be won if supporters of
a party would move from where they are concentrated to areas where they are more sparse. While this may be a ridiculous suggestion for national elections and the large number
of people involved (and the author did not claim otherwise),
in other settings such a proposition is not as preposterous.
An obvious, more realistic, setting of a similar idea in organizations is that of change agents (Rogers 1962). When
trying to change a corporate behavior, change agents move
around the organization, trying to form coalitions to bring
about some form of a change they are advocating for, so that
it encompasses the whole company. Many people in large
bureaucratic organizations are familiar with the sets of committees in which decision are made. In such organizations,
people seeking to push an idea (or a person) try to gain influence in multiple committees.
A wider angle reveals this to be, more generally, a model
of decentralized resource allocation. Understanding what
would be the outcome if many of our resources were autonomous and could attempt to allocate themselves to their

Related Work
As a motivation, resource allocation lies at the core of much
economic/Algorithmic Game Theory (AGT) research, and
in particular, a desire to avoid a central, all-knowing, entity

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2069

