The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Human-Like Delicate Region Erasing Strategy for Weakly Supervised Detection
Qing En,1 Lijuan Duan,1 Zhaoxiang Zhang,2∗ Xiang Bai,3 Yundong Zhang4
1

Beijing Key Laboratory of Trusted Computing, Faculty of Information Technology,
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, National Laboratory of Pattern Reconition,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
3
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
4
State Key Lab of Digital Multimedia Chip Technology, Vimicro Corp, Beijing 100191, China
qingen@emails.bjut.edu.cn, ljduan@bjut.edu.cn, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn.
xbai@hust.edu.cn, raymond@vimicro.com

Abstract

Glimpse

We explore a principle method to address the weakly supervised detection problem. Many deep learning methods solve
weakly supervised detection by mining various object proposal or pooling strategies, which may cause redundancy and
generate a coarse location. To overcome this limitation, we
propose a novel human-like active searching strategy that recurrently ignores the background and discovers class-specific
objects by erasing undesired pixels from the image. The proposed detector acts as an agent, providing guidance to erase
unremarkable regions and eventually concentrating the attention on the foreground. The proposed agents, which are composed of a deep Q-network and are trained by the Q-learning
algorithm, analyze the contents of the image features to infer
the localization action according to the learned policy. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to apply reinforcement learning to address weakly supervised localization with only image-level labels. Consequently, the proposed
method is validated on the PASCAL VOC 2007 and PASCAL
VOC 2012 datasets. The experimental results show that the
proposed method is capable of locating a single object within
5 steps and has great significance to the research on weakly
supervised localization with a human-like mechanism.

Glimpse

Glimpse

t

t+1

t+2

CNN

CNN

CNN

Agent

Agent
Action

……

Agent
Action

Action

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed idea. A sequence of
glimpsing actions are taken in each time step to locate the
object. Undesired regions are erased recurrently. The proposed agents determine which area should be attended in the
next time step, and the focusing regions are finally acquired.

been proposed to explore the exploitation of cheaper training labels to complete complex tasks. To address the weakly
supervised detection problem, several researchers integrate
bottom-up information to acquire class-specific regions of
images and treat it as a multiple instance learning (MIL)
problem (Song et al. 2014; Oquab et al. 2015). However,
although CNN-based models have demonstrated their effectiveness in weakly supervised localization, they do not follow the human visual mechanism, which guides humans to
focus on the irregular shapes of objects. Meanwhile, topdown searching cues provide a promising research line, substantially reducing the searching space in detection tasks
(Lu, Javidi, and Lazebnik 2016). Attention shifts to the object center when the viewpoint changes, which can be represented by a sequential policy routine. These methods instruct
biosystems to integrate feature maps together by combining
prior knowledge and the current target.
Accordingly, exploration of models to facilitate weakly
supervised localization in such a manner from both biological and computational perspectives is desirable. Con-

Introduction
Object detection is among the most fundamental and vital
research problems in the domain of computer vision. The
main issues in object detection lie in constructing a favorable discriminative model and gaining a more compact area.
Due to the advancement of convolutional neural networks
(He et al. 2016), researchers have made progress on this
problem. Supervised learning relies on a large set of training examples with strong supervision. However, acquiring
large amounts of strongly supervised labels entails large labor and financial expense. To alleviate the costly annotation requirement, weakly supervised learning methods have
∗

Corresponding Author (zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3502

