The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Revenue Enhancement via Asymmetric
Signaling in Interdependent-Value Auctions
Zhuoshu Li, Sanmay Das
Washington University in St. Louis
{zhuoshuli, sanmay}@wustl.edu

Abstract

about auctions with asymmetrically informed bidders, and
most of that literature has focused on understanding how
information asymmetries affect revenue rather than on the
design of the optimal signal structure. There has also been
a line of work on so-called “deliberative auctions” (Larson
and Sandholm 2005; Brinkman, Wellman, and Page 2014),
where agents have the opportunity to acquire information
about valuations before entering a bidding process. Most of
this literature focuses on strategic choices by the bidders and
how this affects equilibrium outcomes of the auction.
Here we analyze signal design in auctions as a persuasion game, following Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) who
consider the problem of designing the optimal information
environment for the case between one self-interested agent
(“sender”) and one decision-maker (“receiver”), where both
of them are rational Bayesians. The sender can design the
information structure or signal structure to release information about the state of the world to receiver before the receiver makes her choice. In the auction setting, the signal
structure induces a game between the bidders, and the equilibrium outcome of the game affects the seller’s revenue.

We consider the problem of designing the information environment for revenue maximization in a sealed-bid second
price auction with two bidders. Much of the prior literature
has focused on signal design in settings where bidders are
symmetrically informed, or on the design of optimal mechanisms under fixed information structures. We study commonand interdependent-value settings where the mechanism is
fixed (a second-price auction), but the auctioneer controls
the signal structure for bidders. We show that in a standard
common-value auction setting, there is no benefit to the auctioneer in terms of expected revenue from sharing information with the bidders, although there are effects on the distribution of revenues. In an interdependent-value model with
mixed private- and common-value components, however, we
show that asymmetric, information-revealing signals can increase revenue.

Introduction
In most of the literature on mechanism design, the model
assumes that agents’ information is given, and searches
for rules of the game that yield desired outcomes. However, there has recently been considerable interest in the
parallel problem of designing the information environment
that agents will encounter (Kamenica and Gentzkow 2011;
Das and Kamenica 2015). This paradigm is clearly applicable in many scenarios of interest to AI researchers, including online advertising, internet marketplaces, and so on. One
particular domain where this is interesting is in auctions with
signaling, which have been studied extensively in both economics and computer science. Assume a fixed mechanism;
can the seller expect to make more revenue if the bidders are
more or less informed than the “baseline”?
Auctions with signaling have been studied in several different contexts. Much of the literature assumes that agents
are symmetric with respect to the information they receive
about the value of the item, in the sense that the bidders’ signals are drawn from the same distribution. For example, the
seminal “Linkage Principal” of Milgrom and Weber (1982a)
states that fully and publicly announcing all information
available to the seller is the expected-revenue-maximizing
policy in common value auctions. Somewhat less is known

Our contribution We consider a sealed-bid second price
auction with two bidders. As usual, the winner is the bidder
who submitted the highest bid (with ties broken equiprobably in either direction), but pays to the seller the second
highest bid. The bidders and seller share the same common
prior on the underlying state of the item. Before the bidding
stage, the seller can provide a (noisy) signal to each bidder
based on the state of the world. She commits to a signaling strategy in advance, and the resultant structure becomes
common knowledge. We explore the following two auction
games: (1) a basic common-value auction model, where the
value of the item is determined either by a single attribute
or by two independent attributes when each bidder can receive information from exactly one of the attributes; (2) an
interdependent-value auction, where the valuation for each
bidder is decided by a common value attribute and a private attribute. We show that in the common-value auction
settings, there is no benefit to the auctioneer in terms of expected revenue from sharing information with the bidders,
although there are effects on the distribution of revenues.
In an interdependent-value model with mixed private- and
common-value components, however, we show that asym-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2093

