The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adaptive Sparse Confidence-Weighted Learning for Online Feature Selection
Yanbin Liu,1,2 Yan Yan,2 Ling Chen,2 Yahong Han,3 Yi Yang2
1

SUSTech-UTS Joint Centre of CIS, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{csyanbin, yanyan.tju}@gmail.com, ling.chen@uts.edu.au, yahong@tju.edu.cn, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

confidence-weighted (CW) learning (Crammer, Dredze, and
Pereira 2009), with a covariance structure exploring the feature correlations. Due to the high computation cost of covariance matrix, very few methods (Tan et al. 2016) have
been advanced for second-order online feature selection.
While class imbalance is prevalent in real-world applications, it remains to be under-studied in the context of online
feature selection. Current online learning methods usually
combine first-order updating rules with cost-sensitive learning to deal with class imbalance (Wang, Zhao, and Hoi 2014;
Zhao and Hoi 2013; Yan et al. 2017). In this sense, how
to decide appropriate cost values is the key challenge in
these methods. While most algorithms adopt fixed or ad-hoc
schemes to compute costs from the given data, OMCSL (Yan
et al. 2017) trains a number of classifiers with various costs
and achieves improved performance.
To the best of our knowledge, no previous work has uncovered the problem of online feature selection with the
presence of class imbalance. Motivated by this, we propose
an Adaptive Sparse CW algorithm (ASCW) for imbalanced
online-batch feature selection. Specifically, our method simultaneously maintains multiple sparse CW learners. For
each learner, we assign a unique cost vector to its objective
function. As the online training proceeds, we incrementally
update the target measure for each learner in an online manner. For each online-batch, we choose the best performer for
prediction. The main contributions of our paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose an adaptive sparse CW method for feature
selection on imbalanced online-batch data. Unlike previous approaches that use a fixed or ad-hoc cost vector,
our method dynamically chooses the best cost from a set
of candidates by incrementally updating the target performance for each learner.
• We enhance the theory of the existing sparse CW feature
selection algorithm and analyze the performance behavior
for F-measure.
• Empirical studies demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed algorithm. Further results show that our algorithm
is capable to automatically choose a cost that is sufficiently close to the best one.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
first briefly review related work and then present the problem

In this paper, we propose a new online feature selection algorithm for streaming data. We aim to focus on the following
two problems which remain unaddressed in literature. First,
most existing online feature selection algorithms merely utilize the first-order information of the data streams, regardless
of the fact that second-order information explores the correlations between features and significantly improves the performance. Second, most online feature selection algorithms
are based on the balanced data presumption, which is not true
in many real-world applications. For example, in fraud detection, the number of positive examples are much less than
negative examples because most cases are not fraud. The balanced assumption will make the selected features biased towards the majority class and fail to detect the fraud cases. We
propose an Adaptive Sparse Confidence-Weighted (ASCW)
algorithm to solve the aforementioned two problems. We
first introduce an `0 -norm constraint into the second-order
confidence-weighted (CW) learning for feature selection.
Then the original loss is substituted with a cost-sensitive loss
function to address the imbalanced data issue. Furthermore,
our algorithm maintains multiple sparse CW learner with the
corresponding cost vector to dynamically select an optimal
cost. We theoretically enhance the theory of sparse CW learning and analyze the performance behavior in F-measure. Empirical studies show the superior performance over the stateof-the-art online learning methods in the online-batch setting.

1

Introduction

Online learning typically receives and processes a single
instance at a time. It has become extremely popular and
been employed in many applications such as video-ad allocation (Sumita et al. 2017). In order to deal with high dimensional data streams, online feature selection (OFS) has been
proposed to select a fixed number of features for prediction
by an online learning fashion.
Existing online feature selection algorithms usually apply
the first-order updating rule (Wang et al. 2014; Han et al.
2016). For example, OFS (Wang et al. 2014) modified the
first-order Perceptron (Rosenblatt 1958) algorithm by applying truncation. However, feature interactions are ignored by
these algorithms. Prior studies in online learning have attested the effectiveness of second-order algorithms, such as
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4408

