The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Scaling-Up Split-Merge MCMC with Locality Sensitive Sampling (LSS)
Chen Luo, Anshumali Shrivastava
Department of Computer Science, Rice University
{cl67, anshumali}@rice.edu

Abstract

substitutions (Huelsenbeck and Ronquist 2001),and gene expression (Sharma and Adlakha 2015), etc.
Metropolis-Hastings (MH) (Andrieu et al. 2003) is a favorite class of MCMC methods, which includes several
state-of-the-art algorithms that have proven useful in practice. MH is associated with a transition kernel which provides a proposal step. This step is followed by appropriate
stochastic acceptance process that ensures detailed balance.
A notable example of MH is the Split-Merge MCMC algorithm (Jain and Neal 2004; Wang and Russell 2015) which is
particularly useful for problems where an MCMC state can
be thought of as consisting of a number of components (or
clusters). Here as the name suggests, the proposal step comprises of either a split or a merge. A split move partitions
an existing mixture component (or cluster) into two, while a
merge move combines two mixture components into one.
In the seminal work of (Jain and Neal 2004), split-merge
MCMC procedure was proposed. To illustrate the process,
the authors first introduce a random split-merge MCMC,
where the split and the merge decision were taken uniformly
at random. However, it was also pointed out, in the same paper, that due to the random nature of the proposal it was unlikely to lead to a new state x0 with higher likelihood L(x0 )
leading to low acceptance. To mitigate the slow progress,
the authors then propose the restricted Gibbs split-merge
(RGSM). In RGSM, the idea was to use restricted Gibbs
sampling to generate proposals with a higher likelihood of
acceptance, instead of a random proposal. Thus, a less number of MCMC iterations were sufficient for convergence due
to fewer rejections. However, the cost of restricted Gibbs is
very high. As a result, even though the iterations are less,
each iteration is costly making the overall algorithm slow,
especially for large datasets. Our experiments confirm this
slow convergence of RGSM.
An essential and surprising observation about space
asymmetry with smart proposals in split-merge MCMC was
made in (Wang and Russell 2015). The authors show the necessity to mix smart and dumb (random) proposals for faster
progress. They proposed a Smart-Dumb/Dumb-Smart Algorithm (SDDS) as an alternative to RGSM. Instead of relying
on Gibbs sampling, the SDDS algorithm uses the likelihood
of the model itself as a guiding strategy for smart proposals.
In other words, the SDDS method evaluates a large number of possible proposals x0 based on the likelihood of each

Split-Merge MCMC (Monte Carlo Markov Chain) is one of
the essential and popular variants of MCMC for problems
when an MCMC state consists of an unknown number of
components. It is well known that state-of-the-art methods
for split-merge MCMC do not scale well. Strategies for rapid
mixing requires smart and informative proposals to reduce the
rejection rate. However, all known smart proposals involve
expensive operations to suggest informative transitions. As
a result, the cost of each iteration is prohibitive for massive
scale datasets. It is further known that uninformative but computationally efficient proposals, such as random split-merge,
leads to extremely slow convergence. This tradeoff between
mixing time and per update cost seems hard to get around.
We leverage some unique properties of weighted MinHash,
which is a popular LSH, to design a novel class of split-merge
proposals which are significantly more informative than random sampling but at the same time efficient to compute.
Overall, we obtain a superior tradeoff between convergence
and per update cost. As a direct consequence, our proposals
are around 6X faster than the state-of-the-art sampling methods on two large real datasets KDDCUP and PubMed with
several millions of entities and thousands of clusters.

Introduction
Bayesian mixture models are of great interest due to their
flexibility in fitting a countably infinite number of components which can grow with the data (Medvedovic, Yeung,
and Bumgarner 2004). The growth of model complexity
with the data is also in agreement with modern progress in
machine learning over massive datasets. However, the appealing properties of Bayesian modeling come with hard
computational challenges. Even with simple mixture models, the mathematical problems associated with training and
inference are intractable. As a result, recent research focuses
on developing tractable computational techniques. In particular, the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, to sample from the posterior distribution (Andrieu et
al. 2003; Nasrabadi 2007; Wang and Blei 2012) is widely
prevalent. The practical utility of these methods is illustrated in several applications including haplotype reconstruction (Eronen, Geerts, and Toivonen 2003), nucleotide
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4464

