The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Automatic Bayesian Density Analysis
Antonio Vergari

Alejandro Molina

Robert Peharz

antonio.vergari@tue.mpg.de
MPI-IS, Tuebingen, Germany

molina@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
TU Darmstadt, Germany

rp587@cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge, UK

Zoubin Ghahramani

Kristian Kersting

Isabel Valera

zoubin@cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge, UK
Uber AI Labs, USA

kersting@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
TU Darmstadt, Germany

isabel.valera@tue.mpg.de
MPI-IS, Tuebingen, Germany

for a fully unsupervised task, with the aim of assisting domain
experts in exploratory data analysis, providing them with a
probabilistic framework to perform efﬁcient inference and
gain useful insights from the data in an automatic way.
In principle, a suitable unsupervised learning approach
to ﬁnd out what is in the data is density estimation (DE).
In order to perform DE on data in a tabular format, a practitioner would ﬁrst try to heuristically infer the statistical
types of the data features, e.g., real, positive, numerical and
nominal data types (Valera, Pradier, and Ghahramani 2017;
Valera and Ghahramani 2017). Based on this, she would need
to make assumptions about their distribution, i.e., selecting
a parametric likelihood model suitable for each marginal,
e.g., Gaussian for real, Gamma for positive, Poisson for numerical and Categorical for nominal data. Then, she could
start investigating the global interactions among them, i.e.,
determining the statistical dependencies across features. In
this process, she would also likely need to deal with missing values and reason whether the data may be corrupted or
contain anomalies.
Unfortunately, classical approaches to DE, even if ubiquitous in ML applications, are still far from delivering automatic tools suitable for performing all these steps on realworld data. First, general-purpose density estimators usually
assume the statistical data types and the likelihood models to
be known a priori and homogeneous across random variables
(RVs) or mixture model components (Valera and Ghahramani
2017). Indeed, the standard approach is still to generally treat
all continuous data as (mixtures of) Gaussian RVs and discrete data as categorical variables. Second, they either assume
“shallow” dependency structures that might be too simplistic
to capture real-world statistical dependencies or use “deeper”
latent structures which cannot be easily learned. As a result,
they lack enough ﬂexibility to deal with ﬁne grain statistical
dependencies, and to be robust to corrupt data and outliers,
especially when a maximum likelihood learning approach is
used.
A Bayesian treatment of DE, on the other hand, often struggles to scale up to high-dimensional data and approximate
inference routines are needed (Ghahramani and Beal 2000).
CrossCat (Mansinghka et al. 2016) shows a clear example of
this trade-off. Even though CrossCat models sub-populations
in the data with context-speciﬁc latent variables, this latent
structure is limited to a two-layer hierarchy, and even so

Abstract
Making sense of a dataset in an automatic and unsupervised
fashion is a challenging problem in statistics and AI. Classical
approaches for exploratory data analysis are usually not ﬂexible enough to deal with the uncertainty inherent to real-world
data: they are often restricted to ﬁxed latent interaction models
and homogeneous likelihoods; they are sensitive to missing,
corrupt and anomalous data; moreover, their expressiveness
generally comes at the price of intractable inference. As a result, supervision from statisticians is usually needed to ﬁnd the
right model for the data. However, since domain experts are
not necessarily also experts in statistics, we propose Automatic
Bayesian Density Analysis (ABDA) to make exploratory data
analysis accessible at large. Speciﬁcally, ABDA allows for
automatic and efﬁcient missing value estimation, statistical
data type and likelihood discovery, anomaly detection and
dependency structure mining, on top of providing accurate
density estimation. Extensive empirical evidence shows that
ABDA is a suitable tool for automatic exploratory analysis of
mixed continuous and discrete tabular data.

Introduction
“Making sense” of a dataset—a task often referred to as data
understanding or exploratory data analysis—is a fundamental step that precedes and guides a classical machine learning
(ML) pipeline. Without domain experts’ background knowledge, a dataset might remain nothing but a list of numbers
and arbitrary symbols. On the other hand, without statisticians’ supervision, processing the data and extracting useful
models from it might go beyond the ability of domain experts
who might not be experts in ML or statistics. Therefore, in
times of abundant data, but an insufﬁcient number of statisticians, methods which can “understand” and “make sense” of
a dataset with minimal or no supervision are in high demand.
The idea of machine-assisted data analysis has been pioneered by The Automatic Statistician project (Duvenaud et al.
2013; Lloyd et al. 2014) which proposed to automate model
selection for regression and classiﬁcation tasks via compositional kernel search. Analogously, but with a clear focus on
performance optimization, AutoML frameworks (Guyon et
al. 2016) automate the choice of supervised ML models for a
task-dependent loss. In contrast, we address model selection
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5207

