The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Pattern-Based Approach to Recognizing Time Expressions
Wentao Ding, Guanji Gao, Linfeng Shi, Yuzhong Qu
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{wtding, gjgao, lfshi}@smail.nju.edu.cn, yzqu@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

evaluating the ability of time expression recognizing systems.
Existing approaches for time expression recognizing have
achieved good performance on benchmark datasets, especially two recent approaches named SynTime and TOMN.
SynTime (Zhong, Sun, and Cambria 2017) improved previous results by grouping tokens to 3 main types, including
time token, modifier and numeral. It uses the time tokens
to trigger time expressions and expand their boundaries by
searching modifiers and numeral tokens with heuristic rules.
TOMN (Zhong and Cambria 2018) use the three types as
pre-tags instead of the classic BIO tagging scheme with a
CRF model to achieve state-of-the-art results.
However, TOMN is a black-boxed learning approach,
thus its result lacks an interpretability, and has no structure
information for further understanding. SynTime expands the
boundary of time expression by heuristically searching tokens of “PREFIX”, “SUFFIX” or numeral. Though having
a good performance, the heuristics also reduced the interpretability of SynTime and limited its adaptivity. For example, the word “in” can appear within a time expression
like “hTilate in 2018h/Ti” or in front of a time expression
like “finished in hTi2017hTi”, which cannot be distinguished
by the heuristics. On the contrary, the classic rule-based or
semantic parsing approaches can capture rich structural information, but their performances have a clear gap comparing with those newest approaches. Besides, different applications may have different precision-recall requirements on
recognizing time expressions, which is not seriously considered in the existing approaches.
The previous work has shown the power of token types
in recognizing time expressions. With these types, it is possible to generate sequential patterns from known time expressions. The generated patterns can be used to recognize
new time expressions from incoming texts, and their explicit sequential structures can also give an interpretability
to the recognized results. However, since the actual natural language utterances can be highly ambiguous and complex, the generality of token types can also bring mistakes.
For example, as shown in figure 1, the pattern “NUMBER
TIME UNIT” matches three different time expressions, “29
years”, “two days” and “one month”, but it mistakenly
matches a non-timex string “three quarters”, in which the
token “quarter” means “1 of 4 equal parts” but not 15 min-

Recognizing time expressions is a fundamental and important
task in many applications of natural language understanding, such as reading comprehension and question answering. Several newest state-of-the-art approaches have achieved
good performance on recognizing time expressions. These
approaches are black-boxed or based on heuristic rules, which
leads to the difficulty in understanding the temporal information. On the contrary, classic rule-based or semantic parsing approaches can capture rich structural information, but
their performances on recognition are not so good. In this
paper, we propose a pattern-based approach, called PTime,
which automatically generates and selects patterns for recognizing time expressions. In this approach, time expressions
in training text are abstracted into type sequences by using
fine-grained token types, thus the problem is transformed to
select an appropriate subset of the sequential patterns. We use
the Extended Budgeted Maximum Coverage (EBMC) model
to optimize the pattern selection. The main idea is to maximize the correct token sequences matched by the selected
patterns while the number of the mistakes should be limited by an adjustable budget. The interpretability of patterns
and the adjustability of permitted number of mistakes make
PTime a very promising approach for many applications. Experimental results show that PTime achieves a very competitive performance as compared with existing state-of-the-art
approaches.

1

Introduction

Along with the rapid progress of natural language understanding research area, understanding temporal information
has been increasingly important in various applications such
as reading comprehension and question answering. Recognizing time expressions, as a first and fundamental step of
understanding temporal information, has attracted considerable attention since last decade. Lots of efforts have been
paid on developing standards for modeling temporal information and annotating time expressions in free text (Pustejovsky et al. 2005; 2010; Hobbs and Pan 2006). Many annotated data corpus, such as the datasets of TempEval (Verhagen et al. 2010; UzZaman et al. 2013), the WikiWars dataset
(Mazur and Dale 2010; Lee et al. 2014) and the Tweets
dataset (Zhong, Sun, and Cambria 2017) , were built for
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6335

