The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Kernelized Hashcode Representations for Relation Extraction
Sahil Garg,1 Aram Galstyan,1 Greg Ver Steeg,1 Irina Rish,2 Guillermo Cecchi,2 Shuyang Gao1
1

USC Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, CA USA
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY USA
sahil.garg.cs@gmail.com, {galstyan, gregv}@isi.edu, {rish, gcecchi}@us.ibm.com, sgao@isi.edu
2

Abstract

ZBP2 facilitates binding of ZBP1 to beta-actin, but not to KSRP or FBP1.

Kernel methods have produced state-of-the-art results for a
number of NLP tasks such as relation extraction, but suffer from poor scalability due to the high cost of computing
kernel similarities between natural language structures. A recently proposed technique, kernelized locality-sensitive hashing (KLSH), can significantly reduce the computational cost,
but is only applicable to classifiers operating on kNN graphs.
Here we propose to use random subspaces of KLSH codes
for efficiently constructing an explicit representation of NLP
structures suitable for general classification methods. Further,
we propose an approach for optimizing the KLSH model for
classification problems by maximizing an approximation of
mutual information between the KLSH codes (feature vectors) and the class labels. We evaluate the proposed approach
on biomedical relation extraction datasets, and observe significant and robust improvements in accuracy w.r.t. state-ofthe-art classifiers, along with drastic (orders-of-magnitude)
speedup compared to conventional kernel methods.

1

Valid
ZBP2 catalyzes binding between
ZBP1 and Beta-actin.

Invalid
Beta-actin catalyzes binding
between KSRP and FBP1.

Figure 1: On the left, a parse tree of a sentence is shown. In
the sentence, the tokens corresponding to bio-entities (proteins, chemicals, etc.) or interaction types are underlined.
We highlight the result of extracting one relation from the
sentence, using color-coding for its constituents: an interaction type (green) and bio-entities either participating in the
interaction (red), or catalyzing it (orange). From two extraction candidates (valid/invalid), we obtain subgraphs from the
parse tree, used as structural features for binary classification
of the candidates.

Introduction

As the field of biomedical research expands very rapidly,
developing tools for automated information extraction from
biomedical literature becomes a necessity. In particular, the
task of identifying biological entities and their relations from
scientific papers has attracted significant attention in the past
several years (Garg et al. 2016; Hahn and Surdeanu 2015;
Krallinger et al. 2008), especially because of its potential
impact on developing personalized cancer treatments (Cohen 2015; Rzhetsky ; Valenzuela-Escárcega et al. 2017). See
Fig. 1 for an example of the relation extraction task.
For the relation extraction task, approaches based on convolution kernels (Haussler 1999) have demonstrated stateof-the-art performance (Chang et al. 2016; Tikk et al.
2010). However, despite their success and intuitive appeal, the traditional kernel-trick based methods can suffer from relatively high computational costs, since computing kernel similarities between two natural language structures (graphs, paths, sequences, etc.) can be an expensive operation. Furthermore, to build a support vector machine (SVM) or a k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classifier from

N training examples, one needs to compute kernel similarities between O(N 2 ) pairs of training points, which can be
prohibitively expensive for large N . Some approximation
methods have been built for scalability of the kernel classifiers. On such approach is kernelized locality-sensitive hashing (KLSH) (Kulis and Grauman ; Joly and Buisson 2011)
that allows to reduce the number of kernel computations to
O(N ) by providing efficient approximation for constructing
kNN graphs. However, KLSH only works with classifiers
that operate on kNN graphs. Thus, the question is whether
scalable kernel locality-sensitive hashing approaches can be
generalized to a wider range of classifiers.
The main contribution of this paper is a principled approach for building explicit representations for structured
data, as opposed to implicit ones employed in prior kNNgraph-based approaches, by using random subspaces of
KLSH codes. The intuition behind our approach is as follows. If we keep the total number of bits in the KLSH codes
of NLP structures relatively large (e.g., 1000 bits), and take
many random subsets of bits (e.g., 30 bits each), we can
build a large variety of generalized representations corre-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6431

