The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On the Optimal Efficiency of Cost-Algebraic A*
Robert C. Holte

Sandra Zilles

Computing Science Dept.
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada T6G 2E8
(rholte@ualberta.ca)

Computer Science Dept.
University of Regina
Regina, Canada S4S 0A2
(zilles@cs.uregina.ca)

Abstract

A* (Hart, Nilsson, and Raphael 1968) is a fundamental
algorithm for solving the traditional shortest path problem,
so the question naturally arises, can it also be used to solve
shortest path problems in the general cost-algebraic setting (e.g. the widest path problem)? Edelkamp et al. (2005)
showed that the answer is yes. Just as in the traditional setting, A* with an admissible heuristic is guaranteed to return
an optimal solution in the general cost-algebraic setting.
In this paper our primary focus is on the optimal efficiency
of A*: under what conditions is A* guaranteed to expand the
fewest possible states?
In the traditional setting, this question was examined in
detail by Dechter & Pearl (1985). They identified five different situations in which A* was optimally efficient (“0optimal” in their terminology), which we refer to as results
R1 through R5 (see Section 5 for details). We show that R1,
R2, and R5 continue to hold in the cost-algebraic setting, but
that R4 does not. We also show that R3 is false, it does not
hold even in the traditional setting. We introduce an alternative to R3 that does hold in the cost-algebraic setting.
Finally, we consider the following result in the traditional
setting (Nilsson 1980): if heuristics h1 and h2 are admissible
and h1 (s) > h2 (s) on every non-goal state s then every state
expanded by A* using h1 is also expanded by A* using h2 .
We show that this does not hold in the general cost-algebraic
setting but does hold in a slightly less general setting.
Proofs of some lemmas are omitted due to space limitations. A technical report with all the proofs is available from
the authors on request.

Edelkamp et al. (2005) proved that A*, given an admissible
heuristic, is guaranteed to return an optimal solution in any
cost algebra, not just in the traditional shortest path setting.
In this paper, we investigate cost-algebraic A*’s optimal efficiency: in the cost-algebraic setting, under what conditions
is A* guaranteed to expand the fewest possible states? In the
traditional setting, this question was examined in detail by
Dechter & Pearl (1985). They identified five different situations in which A* was optimally efficient. We show that three
of them continue to hold in the cost-algebraic setting, but that
one does not. We also show that one of them is false, it does
not hold even in the traditional setting. We introduce an alternative that does hold in the cost-algebraic setting. Finally, we
show that a well-known result due to Nilsson does not hold in
the general cost-algebraic setting but does hold in a slightly
less general setting.

1

Introduction

In the traditional shortest path problem, the cost of an edge
can be any non-negative real number, the cost of a path is the
sum of its edge costs, and the aim is to find a path from the
start state to a goal state whose cost is smallest according to
the usual way of ordering the real numbers. This particular
combination of permissible values, cost-aggregating operator, and value ordering is an example of a cost algebra. There
are many other ways of defining the set of permissible values, cost-aggregating operator, and value ordering, and some
of these alternatives are of practical importance, in network
routing for example (Sobrinho 2002).
An example of a “shortest path” problem based on a different cost algebra is the widest path problem. A robot travels to a goal location through a network of corridors, each of
which has a width. The aim is to find a path whose narrowest corridor is widest, so as to minimize the risk of the robot
scraping against a wall. The values in this problem are the
positive real values up to some maximum possible width, the
cost-aggregating operator is min (because it is the narrowest
corridor in a path that determines the path’s value), and the
value ordering is the opposite of the ordering used for the
normal shortest path problem (because this is a maximization problem, not a minimization problem).

2

Cost Algebra Definitions

The definitions in this section are copied from (Edelkamp,
Jabbar, and Lluch Lafuente 2005) with a few minor changes.
Informally, Ω is the set of possible edge and path costs,
1 is the cost of the empty path, × is the operator for computing a path’s cost from the costs of its edges, and  is the
ordering on costs. Those four components define a cost algebra. Isotonicity is a key defining property of a cost algebra,
almost all our theoretical results rely on it.
Definition 1. Let Ω be a set and × : Ω × Ω → Ω a binary
operator. A monoid is a triple hΩ, ×, 1i such that 1 ∈ Ω and
for all a, b, c ∈ Ω:

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• a × (b × c) = (a × b) × c
2288

