The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Adversarial Attack and Detection under the Fisher Information Metric
Chenxiao Zhao,∗1 P. Thomas Fletcher,2 Mixue Yu,1 Yaxin Peng,3,4 Guixu Zhang,1 Chaomin Shen†1,4
1

2

Department of Computer Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Virginia, USA
3
Department of Mathematics, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
4
Westlake Institute for Brain-Like Science and Technology, Zhejiang, China

Abstract

sensitive to the attacks. The existence of adversarial examples has raised severe challenges for deep learning models in
security-critical computer vision applications.
Understanding the mechanism of adversarial examples
is a fundamental problem for defending against the attacks.
Many explanations have been proposed from different facets.
(Szegedy et al. 2013) first observes the existence of adversarial examples, and suggests it is due to the excessive nonlinearity of the neural networks. On the contrary, (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014) suggests that the vulnerability results from the models being too linear. Despite its contradiction to the general impression, the explanation is supported by numbers of experimental results (Krotov and Hopfield 2017; Tabacof and Valle 2016; Tanay and Griffin 2016;
Tramèr et al. 2017). On the other hand, by approximating
the vertical direction of the decision boundary in the sample
space, (Moosavidezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016) proposes
to find the closest adversarial examples to the input with an
iterative algorithm. (Moosavidezfooli et al. 2017b) further
studies the existence of universal perturbations in state-ofthe-art deep neural networks. They suggest the phenomenon
is resulted from the high curvature regions on the decision
boundary (Moosavidezfooli et al. 2017a).
These works have built both intuitive and theoretical understanding of the adversarial examples under the Euclidean
metric. However, studying adversarial examples by the Euclidean metric has its limitations. Intrinsically, for neural
networks, the adversarial attacking is about the correlation
between the input space and the output space. Due to the
complexity of the networks, it is hard to explain why small
perturbation in the input space can result in large variation
in the output space. Many previous attack methods presume
the input space is flat, thus the gradient with respect to the
input gives the fastest changing direction in the output space.
However, if we regard the model output as the likelihood of
the discrete distribution, and regard the model input as the
pullback of the output, a meaningful distance measure for
the likelihood will not be linear, making the sample space a
manifold measured by a non-linear Riemannian metric. This
motivates us to adopt the Fisher information matrix (FIM)
of the input as a metric tensor to measure the vulnerability of
deep learning models.
The significance of introducing the Fisher information metric is three folds. First, the FIM is the Hessian matrix of the

Many deep learning models are vulnerable to the adversarial
attack, i.e., imperceptible but intentionally-designed perturbations to the input can cause incorrect output of the networks.
In this paper, using information geometry, we provide a reasonable explanation for the vulnerability of deep learning
models. By considering the data space as a non-linear space
with the Fisher information metric induced from a neural network, we first propose an adversarial attack algorithm termed
one-step spectral attack (OSSA). The method is described by
a constrained quadratic form of the Fisher information matrix,
where the optimal adversarial perturbation is given by the first
eigenvector, and the vulnerability is reflected by the eigenvalues. The larger an eigenvalue is, the more vulnerable the
model is to be attacked by the corresponding eigenvector. Taking advantage of the property, we also propose an adversarial
detection method with the eigenvalues serving as characteristics. Both our attack and detection algorithms are numerically
optimized to work efficiently on large datasets. Our evaluations
show superior performance compared with other methods, implying that the Fisher information is a promising approach to
investigate the adversarial attacks and defenses.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have achieved substantial achievements on various of computer vision tasks. Recent studies
suggest that, however, even though a well-trained neural network generalizes well on the test set, it is still vulnerable to
adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al. 2013). For image classification tasks, the perturbations applied to the images can be
imperceptible for human perception, meanwhile misclassified
by networks with a high rate. Moreover, empirical evidence
has shown that the adversarial examples have the ability to
transfer among different deep learning models. The adversarial examples generated from one model can often fool
other models which have totally different structure and parameters (Papernot, McDaniel, and Goodfellow 2016), thus
making the malicious black-box attack possible. Many deep
learning applications, e.g. the automated vehicles and face
authentication system, have low error-tolerance rate and are
∗

Email: 51174506043@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
Corresponding author. Email: cmshen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

5869

