The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Residual Attribute Attention
Network for Face Image Super-Resolution
Jingwei Xin,† Nannan Wang,‡∗ Xinbo Gao,† Jie Li†
†

State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
‡
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
Abstract
Facial prior knowledge based methods recently achieved
great success on the task of face image super-resolution (SR).
The combination of different type of facial knowledge could
be leveraged for better super-resolving face images, e.g., facial attribute information with texture and shape information.
In this paper, we present a novel deep end-to-end network
for face super resolution, named Residual Attribute Attention
Network (RAAN), which realizes the efficient feature fusion
of various types of facial information. Specifically, we construct a multi-block cascaded structure network with dense
connection. Each block has three branches: Texture Prediction Network (TPN), Shape Generation Network (SGN) and
Attribute Analysis Network (AAN). We divide the task of
face image reconstruction into three steps: extracting the pixel
level representation information from the input very low resolution (LR) image via TPN and SGN, extracting the semantic level representation information by AAN from the input,
and finally combining the pixel level and semantic level information to recover the high resolution (HR) image. Experiments on benchmark database illustrate that RAAN significantly outperforms state-of-the-arts for very low-resolution
face SR problem, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 1: Face super-resolution results by state-of-the-art
methods on scale factor 8. (a) Original HR images. (b) Input LR images. (c) Results of Ledig et al.0 s method (SRResNet) (Ledig, Theis, and Huszar 2017). (d) Results of
Tuzel et al.0 s method (GLN) (Tuzel, Taguchi, and Hershey 2016). (e) Results of Huang et al.0 s method (WaveletSRNet) (Huang, He, and Sun 2017). (f) Results of Yu et
al.0 s method (AEUN) (Yu, Basura, and Richard 2018). (g)
Results of our RAAN. (h) Results of our RAAN-GAN.

1. Introduction
Face super-resolution (SR), also known as face hallucination, is the process of recovering a high-resolution (HR) face
from an input low-resolution (LR) face image. Face SR can
be used as an important means of image preprocessing and
widely used in various fields related to face images, e.g.,
face parsing (Li 2017), identity recognition (Taigman 2014;
Wang, Ye, and Yang 2018; Wang, Hu, and Yu 2016), and
face alignment (Jourabloo, Ye, and Liu 2017), where highfrequency face details are desired.
Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) based SR
methods have achieved significant improvements over conventional SR methods. Dong et al. (Dong, Loy, and He
2016) proposed SRCNN by firstly introducing CNN to image SR, which has established a nonlinear mapping from LR
to HR image. Considering face hallucination is a domainspecific super-resolution problem, the prior knowledge in

face images could be pivotal for face image super-resolution.
Tuzel et al. (Tuzel, Taguchi, and Hershey 2016) proposed
GLN to extract the global and local information from face
images. Yu et al. (Yu and Porikli 2016) investigated GAN
(Goodfellow, Pouget-Abadie, and Mirza 2014) to create perceptually realistic HR face images. Zhu et al. (Zhu, Liu, and
Chen 2016) proposed CBN to overcome the different face
spatial configuration by dense correspondence field estimation. Tai et al. (Tai, Chen, and Liu 2018) employed facial
landmarks and parsing maps to train the network. Yu et al.
(Yu, Basura, and Richard 2018) introduced a facial attribute
embedding method into face image SR problem.
Among them, the face prior information can roughly divided into two levels: the pixel level representation and
the semantic level representation. Pixel level representation
refers to the information of landmark, component and texture. Semantic level representation could be regarded as face
attributes, e.g. age, gender and smile. However, most of existing methods explore only single type of face prior information, where prior information is not fully utilized. Fig. 1

∗
Corresponding
author:
Nannan
Wang
(nnwang@xidian.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9054

