The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Completing Sparse Knowledge
Base with Transitive Relation Embedding
Zili Zhou,1,2 Shaowu Liu,1 Guandong Xu,*,1 Wu Zhang2
1

Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University
Zili.Zhou@student.uts.edu.au, Shaowu.Liu@uts.edu.au, Guandong.Xu@uts.edu.au, wzhang@shu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

depends on the sparsity of KB and falls for infrequent entities, i.e., reliable embedding representations can’t be learnt
for entities that only appeared a few times.

Multi-relation embedding is a popular approach to knowledge base completion that learns embedding representations
of entities and relations to compute the plausibility of missing triplet. The effectiveness of embedding approach depends
on the sparsity of KB and falls for infrequent entities that
only appeared a few times. This paper addresses this issue
by proposing a new model exploiting the entity-independent
transitive relation patterns, namely Transitive Relation Embedding (TRE). The TRE model alleviates the sparsity problem for predicting on infrequent entities while enjoys the generalisation power of embedding. Experiments on three public
datasets against seven baselines showed the merits of TRE
in terms of knowledge base completion accuracy as well as
computational complexity.

b r
a r c
r1

2

3

r1
apply

d

e r
?

2

f

Figure 1: Entities a, b, c are connected through relations r1 ,
r2 , r3 . If these three relations, regardless of which entities
are connected, appeared together frequently, then we may
believe there is a pattern. The pattern is then applied to an
incomplete triangle to predict the missing relation between
entities d and f .

Introduction

We argue that the local structure can be used to alleviate
the sparsity problem by improving the completion of infrequent entities through frequent relation patterns. A typical
local structure is the transitivity among relations as illustrated in Figure 1. The basic idea is that the missing relation
between two entities could be inferred from a path connecting them. Although the idea is straightforward, it has several
nice properties. Firstly, the relation patterns are independent
of entities, thus makes it possible to predict missing relations for infrequent entities, which was a difficult task for
embedding approach. Secondly, identifying relation patterns
is less computational expensive (Tsourakakis 2008) comparing to the embedding approach because it does not require
the learning of embedding representations for individual entities. Last but not least, relation patterns have great interpretability.
Nevertheless, the plain idea illustrated in Figure 1 has its
flaws. Firstly, it favours frequent relation patterns thus unable to predict true relations that have never or infrequently
appeared in relation patterns. Secondly, it learns strictly triangle relation pattern and does not generalise. To address
these issues, we propose a new model called Transitive Relation Embedding (TRE). The idea behind TRE is to learn
embedding representations for each relation from transitive
relation patterns, which can be then used to predict missing relations. The main difference between TRE and traditional embedding models is that it does not require the learning of entity representations whilst be able to predict miss-

The last few years have seen a growing trend in constructing knowledge bases (KB) such as Freebase (Bollacker et
al. 2008), WordNet (Fellbaum 2005), DBpedia (Auer et al.
2007) and Google Knowledge Graph (Singhal 2012). KB
typically stores knowledge in form of the entity-relationentity triplet, e.g., “Sydney”-“is in”-“Australia”. Collectively, a large number of triplets connect entities into a massive graph structure, which has a wide range of applications,
such as recommender systems (Zhang et al. 2016), question
answering (Yih et al. 2015) and information extraction (Yao
and Van Durme 2014).
Despite its important role played in real-world applications, KB is often incomplete by its nature (Min et al. 2013)
which is one of the main barriers to broader adoption. To
address this issue, a considerable amount of literature on
knowledge base completion has been published with an emphasis on embedding approach (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel
2011; Bordes et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2014;
Lin et al. 2015b; Ji et al. 2015; Welbl, Riedel, and Bouchard
2016; Liu, Wu, and Yang 2017). The main idea of this approach is to learn low-dimensional representations of KB
entities and relations which can then be used to infer missing triplets. Nevertheless, embedding approach looks at the
global structures from the entire KB, thus its effectiveness
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3125

