The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

BIRD: Engineering an Efficient CNF-XOR SAT
Solver and Its Applications to Approximate Model Counting∗
Mate Soos, Kuldeep S. Meel
School of Computing
National University of Singapore

Abstract

information leakage (Biondi et al. 2018) and the like (Roth
1996; Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2009) Given a Boolean
formula φ, the problem of propositional model counting, also
referred to as #SAT, is to compute the number of solutions
of φ. In his seminal paper, Valiant showed that #SAT is
#P-complete, where #P is the set of counting problems
associated with NP decision problems (Valiant 1979).
Theoretical investigations of #P have led to the discovery of deep connections in complexity theory, and there is
strong evidence for its hardness (Arora and Barak 2009;
Toda 1989). In particular, Toda showed that every problem
in the polynomial hierarchy could be solved by just one call
to a #P oracle; more formally, P H ⊆ P #P (Toda 1989).
Given computational intractability of #SAT, attention has
focused on approximation of #SAT. In a breakthrough, Stockmeyer provided a hashing-based randomized approximation
scheme for counting that makes polynomially many invocations of NP oracle (Stockmeyer 1983). The procedure,
however, was computationally prohibitive in practice at that
time and no practical tools existed based on Stockmeyer’s proposed algorithmic framework until the early 2000s (Gomes,
Sabharwal, and Selman 2009). Motivated by the success of
SAT solvers, there has been surge of interest in the design of
hashing-based techniques for approximate model counting
for the past decade (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2006;
Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2013b; Ermon et al. 2013;
Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2016; Meel et al. 2016;
Meel 2017; Achlioptas, Hammoudeh, and Theodoropoulos
2018).
The core idea of hashing-based framework is to employ 2−universal hash functions to partition the solution
space into roughly equal small cells, wherein a cell is
called small if it has less than or equal to thresh solutions,
such that thresh is a function of . A SAT solver is employed to check if a cell is small by enumerating solutions
one-by-one until either there are no more solutions or we
have already enumerated thresh + 1 solutions. Following
the terminology of (Chakraborty, Meel, and Vardi 2013b;
2016), we refer to the above described procedure as BSAT.
To determine the number of cells, the frameworks such as
ApproxMC2 perform a search that requires O(log n) steps
and the estimate is returned as the count of the solutions
in a randomly picked small cell scaled by the total number of cells. To amplify confidence to the desired levels

Given a Boolean formula φ, the problem of model counting,
also referred to as #SAT is to compute the number of solutions
of φ. Model counting is a fundamental problem in artificial intelligence with a wide range of applications including
probabilistic reasoning, decision making under uncertainty,
quantified information flow, and the like. Motivated by the
success of SAT solvers, there has been surge of interest in the
design of hashing-based techniques for approximate model
counting for the past decade. We profiled the state of the art approximate model counter ApproxMC2 and observed that over
99.99% of time is consumed by the underlying SAT solver,
CryptoMiniSat. This observation motivated us to ask: Can
we design an efficient underlying CNF-XOR SAT solver that
can take advantage of the structure of hashing-based algorithms and would this lead to an efficient approximate model
counter?
The primary contribution of this paper is an affirmative answer
to the above question. We present a novel architecture, called
BIRD, to handle CNF-XOR formulas arising from hashingbased techniques. The resulting hashing-based approximate
model counter, called ApproxMC3, employs the BIRD framework in its underlying SAT solver, CryptoMiniSat. To the
best of our knowledge, we conducted the most comprehensive study of evaluation performance of counting algorithms
involving 1896 benchmarks with computational effort totaling 86400 computational hours. Our experimental evaluation
demonstrates significant runtime performance improvement
for ApproxMC3 over ApproxMC2. In particular, we solve
648 benchmarks more than ApproxMC2, the state of the art
approximate model counter and for all the formulas where
both ApproxMC2 and ApproxMC3 did not timeout and took
more than 1 seconds, the mean speedup is 284.40 – more than
two orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Propositional model counting is a fundamental problem in artificial intelligence with a wide range of applications ranging
from probabilistic reasoning (Roth 1996), network reliability (Dueñas-Osorio et al. 2017), decision making under uncertainty (Gomes, Sabharwal, and Selman 2009), quantified
∗
The open-source implementation along with accompanied technical report is available at https://github.com/meelgroup/approxmc
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1592

