The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Optimal Strategies to Commit To∗
Binghui Peng,1 Weiran Shen,1 Pingzhong Tang,1 Song Zuo2
1

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Google Research
pbh15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, emersonswr, kenshinping@gmail.com, szuo@google.com

Abstract

players derive payoffs. The problem is to find the leader’s
best commitment.
When the follower is perfectly rational, i.e., choosing a
pure strategy that maximizes its payoff given the commitment, the algorithmic problem has been nicely solved by
Conitzer and Sandholm (2006). The idea is to solve a sequence of LPs (that optimizes leader’s commitment), one
for each follower’s pure strategy, constrained on that strategy being the best response for the follower.
The above algorithm has been adapted to a number of realistic applications, for example, the LAX airport security
resource allocation (Pita et al. 2008), Boston coastal protection (Jain et al. 2010), and other security game applications
(An et al. 2011; Xu et al. 2015; Yin et al. 2015). However,
there are a number of limitations that prevent the algorithm
from being further applied. One of such serious limitations is
that in real applications, the payoff matrices are rarely given
as inputs (Camerer, Ho, and Chong 2004).
This paper aims to resolve this issue. In our setting, the
leader has no prior knowledge about the follower’s payoff
matrix, yet still tries to figure out the optimal strategy to
commit to. In order to do so, the leader could gain knowledge about the follower’s utility function from interactions
with the follower. We summarize this interaction as a response oracle, where the leader can commit to a mixed strategy and get the best response of the follower via a sample of
response oracle. We believe that the response oracle is rare
and valuable in real life and our goal is to minimize the number of samples needed to identify the optimal commitment.

Over the past decades, various theories and algorithms have
been developed under the framework of Stackelberg games
and part of these innovations have been fielded under the scenarios of national security defenses and wildlife protections.
However, one of the remaining difficulties in the literature is
that most of theoretical works assume full information of the
payoff matrices, while in applications, the leader often has no
prior knowledge about the follower’s payoff matrix, but may
gain information about the follower’s utility function through
repeated interactions. In this paper, we study the problem of
learning the optimal leader strategy in Stackelberg (security)
games and develop novel algorithms as well as new hardness
results.

Introduction
Computing solution concepts in game theory has been one of
the most important research agendas at the interface of computer science and economics. Over the past twenty years,
various solution concepts have been investigated through the
lens of computation, such as Nash equilibrium (Conitzer and
Sandholm 2008; Chen, Deng, and Teng 2009; Daskalakis,
Goldberg, and Papadimitriou 2009; Chen et al. 2017; Chen,
Tang, and Wang 2017), Stackelberg equilibrium (Conitzer
and Sandholm 2006; Letchford and Conitzer 2010; Zuo
and Tang 2015), correlated equilibrium (Papadimitriou and
Roughgarden 2008; Jiang and Leyton-Brown 2011).
Among these solution concepts, of particular interest to
the AI community is the computation of Stackelberg equilibrium, also known as the optimal strategy to commit to, for
several well-known successful applications of this solution
concept to the domain of security, established by the pioneer
work of Tambe (2011).
In a two-player normal-form game, a commitment is a
mixed strategy announced by one player, called the leader.
The other player, called the follower, responds to the leader’s
commitment according to its rationality model and both

Our Contributions
Prior to our work, Letchford, Conitzer, and Munagala (2009)
first study this problem and give a sampling algorithm for
this problem. However, their algorithm works well only
when the smallest volume of the feasible region for the follower’s action is large, otherwise, their algorithm would be
no better than brute force search in the worst case. To be
more specific, the sample complexity in Letchford, Conitzer,
and Munagala (2009) is O(V −1 n log n + mn2 L), where
m, n, L, V is the number of the leader’s and the follower’s
actions, the representation precision and the volume of the
smallest feasible region, respectively. We note that the term
V −1 can be of O(2mL ), with exponential dependence on
both L and m in the worst case and their algorithm is inef-

∗

The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments. This paper is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant 61561146398, a China
Youth 1000-talent Program, and an Alibaba Innovative Research
Program.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2149

