The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Inferring Concept Prerequisite
Relations from Online Educational Resources
Sudeshna Roy,1 Meghana Madhyastha,2 Sheril Lawrence,2 Vaibhav Rajan3
1
Videoken, Bangalore, India, 2 IIIT-B, India, 3 National University of Singapore
mail.sudeshna.roy@gmail.com, meghana.madhyastha@iiitb.org, sheril.lawrence@iiitb.org, vaibhav.rajan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Course Corpus 1
(e.g, MIT course web pages)

The Internet has rich and rapidly increasing sources of
high quality educational content. Inferring prerequisite relations between educational concepts is required for modern
large-scale online educational technology applications such
as personalized recommendations and automatic curriculum
creation. We present PREREQ, a new supervised learning
method for inferring concept prerequisite relations. PREREQ is designed using latent representations of concepts obtained from the Pairwise Latent Dirichlet Allocation model,
and a neural network based on the Siamese network architecture. PREREQ can learn unknown concept prerequisites
from course prerequisites and labeled concept prerequisite
data. It outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on benchmark datasets and can effectively learn from very less training data. PREREQ can also use unlabeled video playlists, a
steadily growing source of training data, to learn concept prerequisites, thus obviating the need for manual annotation of
course prerequisites.

Lin. Algebra
ML

Course Corpus 2

Stats

Neural Net

Partial
derivative

overfitting
Concept Space

Pre-requisite
edge
Concept
presence

(e.g, ML
lecture
playlist)
MOOC Corpus
(video sequences)

Figure 1: PREREQ learns unknown prerequisite edges in the
concept space, using (1) known concept prerequisite edges
and (2) either course prerequisites or video playlists.

Introduction
A concept C1 is generally called a prerequisite to another
concept C2 if the knowledge of C1 is necessary to understand C2 . Such dependencies are natural in cognitive processes when we learn, organize, and apply knowledge (Laurence and Margolis 1999). Prerequisite relations at a different level – between courses – are commonly found in university curricula. Course-level prerequisites have been manually created by experts over decades and often form a guide
to prerequisites between the more granular concepts within
the courses. For instance, the course Linear Algebra is usually a prerequisite to the course Machine Learning. Several
concepts in a course on Linear Algebra are prerequisites to
concepts in a course on Machine Learning, e.g. Eigen Analysis is a prerequisite to Principal Components Analysis.
While textual information about courses has been increasing steadily on the Internet over the years, recently there
has been a tremendous growth in online educational data
through Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) as well
as freely accessible videos and blogs from experts. This,
in turn, has spurred the development of new applications
for personalized online education such as automatic reading

list generation (Jardine 2014), automatic curriculum planning (Liu et al. 2016), and automated evaluation of curricula
(Rouly, Rangwala, and Johri 2015). Concept prerequisite relations play a fundamental role in all these applications.
The value of concept prerequisite maps has been recognized and studied in educational psychology (Novak 1990)
and these relations were manually obtained by domain experts. Such a manual process is not scalable in modern online applications that aim to (a) serve students from varying
educational backgrounds and (b) generalize to any domain.
Hence there is a need to develop methods that can automatically infer pair-wise concept prerequisite relations.
Inference of prerequisite relations has been studied in
other contexts, e.g. from Wikipedia (Talukdar and Cohen
2012), in databases (Yosef et al. 2011) and from text books
(Liang et al. 2018). These tools can be leveraged but cannot be directly used to detect prerequisite relations from
online resources like MOOCs, due to the complexity and
scale of courses and educational concepts involved (Pan et
al. 2017). There has been growing interest in designing algorithms specifically to infer educational concept prerequisites
(Liu et al. 2016; Liang et al. 2017; Pan et al. 2017).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9589

