The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploring Human-Like Reading Strategy for Abstractive Text Summarization
Min Yang,1 Qiang Qu,1∗ Wenting Tu,2 Ying Shen,3 Zhou Zhao,4 Xiaojun Chen5
1

Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
3
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, 4 Zhejiang University, 5 Shenzhen University
{min.yang, qiang}@siat.ac.cn, tu.wenting@mail.shufe.edu.cn
shenying@pkusz.edu.cn, zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn, xjchen@szu.edu.cn
Abstract

mainstream due to their capability of capturing the semantic and syntactic relations between raw documents and their
summaries in a scalable and end-to-end way.
Although great efforts have been devoted to the abstractive text summarization, generating plausible and highquality abstractive summaries remains a challenging task in
practice, because computers lack human knowledge as well
as language capability to understand the entire text and then
write a summary highlighting its main points. Despite the
significance of human reading ability, to date, no attempt has
been devoted to exploring the human-like reading strategy in
abstractive text summarization (i.e., how humans summarize
an article).
When humans read, comprehend and summarize a piece
of text, their exploration of the reading process organizes itself most naturally into an examination of three phases: general understanding of the document, task-specific reading
comprehension, and polishing process (Avery and Graves
1997; Toprak and Almacıoğlu 2009). Humans first set the
purpose of reading and pre-view the text quickly with prior
(background) knowledge to get a general understanding of
the document. As revealed by previous work (Tarchi and
others 2017), prior knowledge1 facilitates and enhances human reading, which is expected to have a large influence on
the reading process as it helps the reader to construct a coherent mental representation of the document and gain an
overview of the content in the document.
Reading comprehension is a central component of skilled
reading, which is essential to ensure the good understanding
of a document. To construct the meaning of a text, readers
have to go beyond literal information through the generation of inferences. Indeed, inferences are what make readers
move from a mere interpretation of individual sentences to
a global meaning that integrates multiple sentences (Tarchi
and others 2017). After reading the text thoroughly, readers
are required to find the task-specific information and make
many different types of inferences, such as pointing out the
category and retaining the salient information of the input
documents.
Similar to human cognitive process for writing a highquality summary, the readers will evaluate the generated

The recent artificial intelligence studies have witnessed great
interest in abstractive text summarization. Although remarkable progress has been made by deep neural network based
methods, generating plausible and high-quality abstractive
summaries remains a challenging task. The human-like reading strategy is rarely explored in abstractive text summarization, which however is able to improve the effectiveness of the
summarization by considering the process of reading comprehension and logical thinking. Motivated by the humanlike reading strategy that follows a hierarchical routine, we
propose a novel Hybrid learning model for Abstractive Text
Summarization (HATS). The model consists of three major
components, a knowledge-based attention network, a multitask encoder-decoder network, and a generative adversarial
network, which are consistent with the different stages of
the human-like reading strategy. To verify the effectiveness
of HATS, we conduct extensive experiments on two real-life
datasets, CNN/Daily Mail and Gigaword datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that HATS achieves impressive
results on both datasets.

Introduction
Abstractive text summarization aims to generate condensed
and concise summaries that retain the salient information
and overall meaning of the source articles. As opposed to the
extractive text summarization, which extracts the best summarizing components from the input documents, abstractive
summaries potentially contain new phrases that do not appear in the source articles. Abstractive text summarization
has attracted increasing attention recently due to its broad
applications in natural language processing (NLP).
Recent advances in the deep learning based approaches
(i.e., the sequence to sequence framework) (Rush, Chopra,
and Weston 2015; Nallapati et al. 2016) have taken the stateof-the-art of abstractive text summarization to a new level.
The general idea behind these methods is to encode the input documents as vector representations with a long shortterm memory (LSTM), and then use another LSTM as the
decoder to generate the corresponding summaries. The sequence to sequence (seq2seq) framework has become the
∗

Qiang Qu is corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Here, prior knowledge is defined as the reader’s actual knowledge, available before a certain learning task.

7362

