The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

FRAME Revisited: An Interpretation View Based on Particle Evolution
Xu Cai,1† Yang Wu,1† Guanbin Li,1 Ziliang Chen,1 Liang Lin1,2∗
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Dark Matter AI Inc.
caitree@foxmail.com, wuyang36@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, c.ziliang@yahoo.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
FRAME (Filters, Random fields, And Maximum Entropy) is
an energy-based descriptive model that synthesizes visual realism by capturing mutual patterns from structural input signals. The maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is applied
by default, yet conventionally causes the unstable training energy that wrecks the generated structures, which remains unexplained. In this paper, we provide a new theoretical insight
to analyze FRAME, from a perspective of particle physics
ascribing the weird phenomenon to KL-vanishing issue. In
order to stabilize the energy dissipation, we propose an alternative Wasserstein distance in discrete time based on the
conclusion that the Jordan-Kinderlehrer-Otto (JKO) discrete
flow approximates KL discrete flow when the time step size
tends to 0. Besides, this metric can still maintain the model’s
statistical consistency. Quantitative and qualitative experiments have been respectively conducted on several widely
used datasets. The empirical studies have evidenced the effectiveness and superiority of our method.

1th

10th

30th

60th

90th

Figure 1: Visual and numerical results of FRAME and
wFRAME. Left: the generating steps and selected typical
results of “spaceship” from two algorithms. The first and
the second-row images are respectively from FRAME and
wFRAME. wFRAME achieves higher quality images compared with FRAME, which collapses at the very beginning
of the sampling iteration. Right: the observed model energy
of both algorithms. The instability of the energy curve is the
signal of the model collapse. The detailed discussion can be
found in the experiment section.
Pr and model distribution Pθ . Primitive efforts model it as
KL-divergence by default, which also leads to the same results of MLE.
A large number of experimental results reveal that
FRAME tends to generate inferior synthesized images and
is often arduous to converge during training. For instance,
displayed in Fig. 1, the synthesized images of FRAME seriously deteriorates along with the model energy. This phenomenon is caused by KL-vanishing in the stepwise parameters estimation of the model due to the existence of the great
filter responses disparity between Pθ and Pr . Specifically,
the MLE-based learning algorithm attempts to optimize a
transformation from the high dimensional support of Pθ to
the non-existing support of Pr , i.e., it starts from an initialization of a Gaussian noise covering the whole support of
Pθ and Pr , then gradually updates θ by calculating the KL
discrete flow step-wisely. Therefore in the discrete time setting of the actual iterative training process, the dissipation of
the model energy may become considerably unstable, and
the stepwise minimization scheme may suffer serious KLvanishing issue during the communicative parameters estimation.
To tackle the above shortcomings, we first investigate this
model from a particle perspective by regarding all the observed signals as Brownian particles (pre-condition of KL

Introduction
FRAME (Filters, Random fields, And Maximum Entropy) (Zhu, Wu, and Mumford 1997) is a model built
on Markov random field that can be applied to approximate various types of data distributions, such as images,
videos, audios and 3D shapes (Lu, Zhu, and Wu 2015;
Xie, Zhu, and Wu 2017; Xie et al. 2018). It is an energybased descriptive model in the sense that besides its parameters are estimated, samples can be synthesized from
the probability distribution the model specifies. Such distribution is derived from maximum entropy principle (MEP),
which is consistent with the statistical properties of the observed filter responses. FRAME can be trained via an information theoretical divergence between real data distribution
∗

Xu Cai and Yang Wu contribute equally to this work and share
first-authorship. The corresponding author is Liang Lin (Email: linliang@ieee.org). This work was supported in part by the National
Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
No.2018YFC0830103, in part by the NSFC-Shenzhen Robotics
Projects (U1613211), in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No.61702565, No.61622214 and
No.61836012 and in part by National High Level Talents Special
Support Plan (Ten Thousand Talents Program).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3256

