The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Manifold Distance-Based Over-Sampling Technique for Class Imbalance Learning
Lingkai Yang, Yinan Guo, Jian Cheng
School of Information and Control Engineering, China University of
Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, 221008, Jiangsu, China, +86-15150024213
yanglk@cumt.edu.cn, nanfly@126.com, chengjian@cumt.edu.cn

Abstract

sample is produced around a original minority sample in
terms of the neighbors found in manifold space.

Over-sampling technology for handling the class imbalanced
problem generates more minority samples to balance the
dataset size of different classes. However, sampling in original data space is ineffective as the data in different classes is
overlapped or disjunct. Based on this, a new minority sample
is presented in terms of the manifold distance rather than Euclidean distance. The overlapped majority and minority samples apt to distribute in fully disjunct subspaces from the view
of manifold learning. Moreover, it can avoid generating samples between the minority data locating far away in manifold
space. Experiments on 23 UCI datasets show that the proposed method has the better classification accuracy.

The Framework of MDOTE
The key issue of manifold distance-based over-sampling
technique(MDOTE) is to generate minority samples along
the line of a minority sample and its manifold distance
extracted neighbors. An under-sampling strategy (U S) is
firstly implemented to remove redundant majority samples
when all of the k1 neighbors belong to majority class, with
the purpose of building a brief balanced dataset. Based on
this, a new minority sample is generated in original space
based on a minority sample and one of its neighbors measured by manifold distance. LLE(Roweis and Saul 2000) is
employed to extract the neighbors of minority samples. The
framework of MDOTE is listed in Algorithm 1.

Introduction
The datasets in many real classification problems are imbalanced. Dealing with class imbalanced problem normally employs data-, algorithm- or hybrid-level approaches.
SMOTE(Chawla et al. 2002), as a data-level method, created new minority examples along the line between a minority class sample and its neighbors. ADASYN(He et al.
2008) generated more data for the hard to learn minority class examples. However, over-sampling is easy to generate a wrong-labeled new sample due to the overlapped
or disjunct data in different classes. Many data-level approaches employed the clustering methods to identify and
preserve original data space for class imbalanced problem with small disjunct samples. MWMOTE(Barua et al.
2014) created the new samples within clusters of datapoints.
ECO-Ensemble(Lim, Goh, and Tan 2017) combined oversampling strategies with the clustering methods to generate synthetic samples in each minority clustering. ACOSampling(Yu, Ni, and Zhao 2013) is an under-sampling algorithm to retain important majority samples. Without loss of
generality, manifold learning extracts the essential structure
of the original dataset by the manifold distance, and maps
them to a low-dimensional manifold easy to be classified.
Based on this, a new minority sample is generated in terms
of the manifold distance rather than Euclidean distance. Especially, the overlapped minority samples may be separable in manifold space. For disjunct minority samples, a new

Algorithm 1 MDOTE
Require: Training set(O, Oy ); k1 , k2 and k3 ; ndim.
Ensure: The balanced dataset Xb , containing both the samples in U and Xnew .
1: Removing majority samples whose k1 neighbors are all
belonging to majority class,
(U, U y ) = U S(O, Oy , k1 )

(1)

2: Mapping the samples of U to LLE space and extracting

neighbors,
indices = M N E(U, k2 , ndim, k3 )

(2)

3: Calculating the totally number of minority samples need

to be generated,
g = ul − us

(3)

4: Do for i = 1, 2, ..., g
5: Choosing one minority sample x1 from U and another

minority sample x2 from its neighbors in indices.
6: Generating new minority samples between x1 and x2 .

xnew = (x2 − x1 ) × λ + x1

(4)

7: End loop

Here, U is the dataset after under-sampling. M N E represents the neighbor extraction method. indices denotes

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10071

