The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

RecurJac: An Efficient Recursive Algorithm for
Bounding Jacobian Matrix of Neural Networks and Its Applications
Huan Zhang∗

Pengchuan Zhang

Cho-Jui Hsieh

UCLA
huan@huan-zhang.com

Microsoft Research AI
penzhan@microsoft.com

UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

works (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), the training process suffers from the gradient vanishing problem and can
be very unstable. Adding the Lipschitz constant of the discriminator network as a constraint (Arjovsky, Chintala, and
Bottou 2017; Miyato et al. 2018) or as a regularizer (Gulrajani et al. 2017) significantly improves the training stability
pxq
of GANs. For neural networks, the Jacobian matrix BfBx
is also closely related to its Jacobian matrix with respect to
q
the weights Bf px;W
, whose bound directly characterizes the
BW
generalization gap in supervised learning and GANs; see,
e.g., (Vapnik and Vapnik 1998; Sriperumbudur et al. 2009;
Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky 2017; Arora and Zhang 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018b).
In this paper, we propose a novel recursive algorithm,
dubbed RecurJac, for efficiently computing a certified Jacobian bound. Unlike the layer-by-layer algorithm (Fast-Lip)
for ReLU network in (Weng et al. 2018b), we develop a recursive refinement procedure that significantly outperforms
Fast-Lip on ReLU networks, and our algorithm is general
enough to be applied to networks with most common activation functions, not limited to ReLU. Our key observation
is that the Jacobian bounds of previous layers can be used
to reduce the uncertainties of neuron activations in the current layer, and some uncertain neurons can be fixed without
affecting the final bound. We can then absorb these fixed
neurons into the previous layers’ weight matrix, which results in bounding Jacobian matrix for another shallower network. This technique can be applied recursively to get a
tighter final bound. Compared with the non-recursive algorithm (Fast-Lip), RecurJac increases the computation cost
by at most H times (H is depth of the network), which is
reasonable even for relatively large networks.
We apply RecurJac to various applications. First, we can
investigate the local optimization landscape after obtaining
the upper and lower bounds of Jacobian matrix, by guaranteeing that no stationary points exist inside a certain region. Experimental results show that the radius of this region
steadily decreases when networks become deeper. Second,
RecurJac can find a local Lipschitz constant, which up to
two magnitudes smaller than the state-of-the-art algorithm
without a recursive structure (Figure 1). Finally, we can use
RecurJac to evaluate the robustness of neural networks, by
giving a certified lower bound within which no adversarial
examples can be found.

The Jacobian matrix (or the gradient for single-output networks) is directly related to many important properties of
neural networks, such as the function landscape, stationary
points, (local) Lipschitz constants and robustness to adversarial attacks. In this paper, we propose a recursive algorithm,
RecurJac, to compute both upper and lower bounds for each
element in the Jacobian matrix of a neural network with respect to network’s input, and the network can contain a wide
range of activation functions. As a byproduct, we can efficiently obtain a (local) Lipschitz constant, which plays a crucial role in neural network robustness verification, as well as
the training stability of GANs. Experiments show that (local) Lipschitz constants produced by our method is of better
quality than previous approaches, thus providing better robustness verification results. Our algorithm has polynomial
time complexity, and its computation time is reasonable even
for relatively large networks. Additionally, we use our bounds
of Jacobian matrix to characterize the landscape of the neural
network, for example, to determine whether there exist stationary points in a local neighborhood.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have been successfully applied to
many applications, but one of the major criticisms is their
being black boxes—no satisfactory explanation of their behavior can be easily offered. Given a neural network f p¨q
with input x, one fundamental question to ask is: how does
a perturbation in the input space affect the output prediction? To formally answer this question and bound the behavior of neural networks, a critical step to answer this
question is to compute the uniform bounds of the Jacopxq
bian matrix BfBx
for all x within a certain region. Many
recent works on understanding or verifying the behavior
of neural networks rely on this quantity. For example,
once a (local) Jacobian bound is computed, one can immediately know the radius of a guaranteed “safe region”
in the input space, where no adversarial perturbation can
change the output label (Hein and Andriushchenko 2017;
Weng et al. 2018b). This is also referred to as the robustness verification problem. In generative adversarial net∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5757

