The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Loss-Balanced Task Weighting to
Reduce Negative Transfer in Multi-Task Learning
Shengchao Liu,1,2 Yingyu Liang,1 Anthony Gitter1,2,3
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
2
Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI
3
Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
{shengchao, yliang}@cs.wisc.edu, gitter@biostat.wisc.edu
Abstract

Despite abundant approaches for multi-task learning, few
methods aim to improve average task performance while
simultaneously minimizing negative transfer. Our contributions are (1) demonstrating the presence of negative transfer in a chemistry dataset and (2) proposing a preliminary
algorithm intended to reduce negative transfer by learning
task-specific weights. On our computational chemistry case
study, this algorithm has the best average performance and
fewest tasks with negative transfer.

In settings with related prediction tasks, integrated multi-task
learning models can often improve performance relative to
independent single-task models. However, even when the average task performance improves, individual tasks may experience negative transfer in which the multi-task model’s
predictions are worse than the single-task model’s. We show
the prevalence of negative transfer in a computational chemistry case study with 128 tasks and introduce a framework that
provides a foundation for reducing negative transfer in multitask models. Our Loss-Balanced Task Weighting approach
dynamically updates task weights during model training to
control the influence of individual tasks.

Methods
Our goal is to design a multi-task learning framework that
reduces negative transfer while still improving the average
task performance. We consider five neural network-based
transfer learning algorithms and a single-task baseline.
Single-Task Learning (STL) and Multi-Task Learning
(MTL) are fully-connected neural networks, where MTL
has shared hidden layers and separate outputs for T tasks in
the last layer. Fine Tuning is another transfer learning strategy that first trains a MTL model on T −1 tasks and then initializes a STL model for the final task with the MTL weights.
This strategy transfers the latent representation from the
larger multi-task dataset to the single-task dataset so as to
alleviate data insufficiency.
Another approach is to apply a task-specific weight vector. Reinforced Multi-Task Learning (RMTL) (Liu 2018)
uses cosine similarity of the gradients between T − 1 tasks
and a single emphasized task as task weights. GradNorm
(Chen et al. 2018) assumes that tasks with larger loss dominate the training and therefore learns a balanced global task
weight. In GradNorm the task weight is static because it is
identical among all batches, whereas RMTL assumes the
task weight should be dynamic. Dynamic means that the
task weight differs given different inputs. We propose that
the challenging tasks can be identified by their loss, and
the loss dynamically changes for different batches of data.
Therefore, we introduce Loss-Balanced Task Weighting
(LBTW), which combines and expands upon ideas from
RMTL and GradNorm.
LBTW follows the RMTL framework with dynamic task
weights. However, LBTW assumes that the task-specific
loss is informative for balancing different tasks. For each
task and batch, LBTW considers the loss ratio between the
current loss and the initial loss, which is a proxy for how

Introduction
Multi-task learning aims to exploit information from related
tasks to improve the generalization performance of all the
tasks jointly. Deep learning-based multi-task learning has
been successfully applied in chemical screening, genomics,
object detection, natural language processing, and other domains. Shared hidden layers in a neural network can transfer knowledge among related tasks, which may reduce overfitting and improve learned latent representations, especially
when the task-specific training data is limited. However,
when the tasks considered are not sufficiently related, the
multi-task setting can be detrimental to performance.
Although the performance may improve on average over
all tasks in the multi-task setting, for some specific tasks,
the multi-task performance can be worse than a single-task
model. This decrease in performance is known as negative
transfer. Negative transfer occurs naturally in real scenarios and is especially problematic if a subset of tasks is of
primary interest and the others are used only to improve the
representation learning. We have two conjectures for why
negative transfer may happen. (1) All tasks are diverse and
unrelated to each other; there is no suitable common latent
representation so multi-task learning produces poor representations. (2) One group of related tasks dominates the
training process. The performance for those tasks improves
as more related tasks are added, but tasks outside the dominant group suffer.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9977

