The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Interest Evolution Network for Click-Through Rate Prediction
Guorui Zhou,* Na Mou,† Ying Fan, Qi Pi, Weijie Bian,
Chang Zhou, Xiaoqiang Zhu, Kun Gai
Alibaba Inc, Beijing, China
{guorui.xgr, mouna.mn, fanying.fy, piqi.pq, weijie.bwj, ericzhou.zc, xiaoqiang.zxq, jingshi.gk}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

capture user’s interests as well as their dynamics is the key
to advance the performance of CTR prediction. Recently,
many CTR models transform from traditional methodologies (Friedman 2001; Rendle 2010) to deep CTR models (Guo et al. 2017; Qu et al. 2016; Lian et al. 2018). Most
deep CTR models focus on capturing interaction between
features from different fields and pay less attention to user
interest representation. Deep Interest Network (DIN) (Zhou
et al. 2018c) emphasizes that user interests are diverse, it
uses attention based model to capture relative interests to target item, and obtains adaptive interest representation. However, most interest models including DIN regard the behavior as the interest directly, while latent interest is hard to
be fully reflected by explicit behavior. Previous methods neglect to dig the true user interest behind behavior. Moreover,
user interest keeps evolving, capturing the dynamic of interest is important for interest representation.

Click-through rate (CTR) prediction, whose goal is to estimate the probability of a user clicking on the item, has become one of the core tasks in the advertising system. For
CTR prediction model, it is necessary to capture the latent
user interest behind the user behavior data. Besides, considering the changing of the external environment and the internal cognition, user interest evolves over time dynamically.
There are several CTR prediction methods for interest modeling, while most of them regard the representation of behavior as the interest directly, and lack specially modeling for
latent interest behind the concrete behavior. Moreover, little
work considers the changing trend of the interest. In this paper, we propose a novel model, named Deep Interest Evolution Network (DIEN), for CTR prediction. Specifically, we
design interest extractor layer to capture temporal interests
from history behavior sequence. At this layer, we introduce
an auxiliary loss to supervise interest extracting at each step.
As user interests are diverse, especially in the e-commerce
system, we propose interest evolving layer to capture interest evolving process that is relative to the target item. At interest evolving layer, attention mechanism is embedded into
the sequential structure novelly, and the effects of relative interests are strengthened during interest evolution. In the experiments on both public and industrial datasets, DIEN significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art solutions. Notably,
DIEN has been deployed in the display advertisement system
of Taobao, and obtained 20.7% improvement on CTR.

Based on all these observations, we propose Deep Interest Evolution Network (DIEN) to improve the performance
of CTR prediction. There are two key modules in DIEN,
one is for extracting latent temporal interests from explicit
user behaviors, and the other one is for modeling interest
evolving process. Proper interest representation is the footstone of interest evolving model. At interest extractor layer,
DIEN chooses GRU (Chung et al. 2014) to model the dependency between behaviors. Following the principle that interest leads to the consecutive behavior directly, we propose
auxiliary loss which uses the next behavior to supervise the
learning of current hidden state. We call these hidden states
with extra supervision as interest states. These extra supervision information helps to capture more semantic meaning
for interest representation and push hidden states of GRU to
represent interests effectively. Moreover, user interests are
diverse, which leads to interest drifting phenomenon: user’s
intentions can be very different in adjacent visitings, and one
behavior of a user may depend on the behavior that takes
long time ago. Each interest has its own evolution track.
Meanwhile, the click actions of one user on different target
items are effected by different parts of interests. At interest evolving layer, we model the interest evolving trajectory
that is relative to target item. Based on the interest sequence
obtained from interest extractor layer, we design GRU with
attentional update gate (AUGRU). Using interest state and
target item to compute relevance, AUGRU strengthens rela-

Introduction
Cost per click (CPC) billing is one of the commonest
billing forms in the advertising system, where advertisers are
charged for each click on their advertisement. In CPC advertising system, the performance of click-through rate (CTR)
prediction not only influences the final revenue of whole
platform, but also impacts user experience and satisfaction.
Modeling CTR prediction has drawn more and more attention from the communities of academia and industry.
In most non-searching e-commerce scenes, users do not
express their current intention actively. Designing model to
* Corresponding author is Guorui Zhou.
†

This author is the one who did the really hard
work for Online Testing. The source code is available at
https://github.com/mouna99/dien.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5941

