The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Automated Semi-Supervised Learning
Yu-Feng Li,1 Hai Wang,1,2 Tong Wei,1 Wei-Wei Tu2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China
{liyf,wanghai,weit}@lamda.nju.edu.cn; tuww.cn@gmail.com

Abstract

AutoML is magnificent yet challenging, since absolute
AutoML is infeasible (Guyon et al. 2016). Previous work
on AutoML typically focuses on supervised learning problems, and addresses the difficulties including feature engineering (Guyon et al. 2016), model selection (Sun 2016)
and hyperparameter optimization (Hutter, Hoos, and LeytonBrown 2011). Recently there are a couple of systematical
schemes that achieve promising performance. For example, AUTO - WEKA combines the machine learning framework WEKA (Hall et al. 2009) with a bayesian optimization method (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011) to select a good instantiation of WEKA for a new dataset. AUTO SKLEARN (Feurer et al. 2015) improves AUTO - WEKA and
uses meta-learning (Lemke, Budka, and Gabrys 2015) to
warmstart the bayesian optimization procedure, and finally
includes an automated ensemble construction step. Google
Cloud AutoML is a suite of machine learning products that
can automatically train high quality models by leveraging
google’s state-of-the-art transfer learning techniques and neural architecture search techniques.3 These above studies show
that one could automatically select a quite good learning
model and hyperparameter for supervised learning problems.
In many applications, except for supervised learning scenario, many other problems such as semi-supervised learning
(SSL) (Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien 2006; Zhou and Li
2010) are widespread in reality. However, the efforts on Automated SSL remain limited. In this work we study automated
SSL and it is notable that existing AutoML techniques could
not directly be applied for the automated SSL problem, since
SSL introduces some new challenges.
• First, although meta-learning is able to quickly suggest
some instantiations of the learning techniques which are
likely to perform quite well, the feature engineering is
much harder for SSL since many meta-features extracted
from a number of labeled examples (Feurer et al. 2015)
are no longer available and suitable.
• Second, unlike supervised learning which typically has performance improvement with more labeled examples, SSL
with the use of auxiliary unlabeled instances may sometimes even be outperformed by direct supervised learning
with only limited labeled examples (Li and Zhou 2015;
Krijthe and Loog 2015; Li, Kwok, and Zhou 2016). Such

Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) aims to build an
appropriate machine learning model for any unseen dataset
automatically, i.e., without human intervention. Great efforts
have been devoted on AutoML while they typically focus
on supervised learning. In many applications, however, semisupervised learning (SSL) are widespread and current AutoML
systems could not well address SSL problems. In this paper,
we propose to present an automated learning system for SSL
(AUTO - SSL). First, meta-learning with enhanced meta-features
is employed to quickly suggest some instantiations of the SSL
techniques which are likely to perform quite well. Second, a
large margin separation method is proposed to fine-tune the
hyperparameters and more importantly, alleviate performance
deterioration. The basic idea is that, if a certain hyperparameter owns a high quality, its predictive results on unlabeled data
may have a large margin separation. Extensive empirical results over 200 cases demonstrate that our proposal on one side
achieves highly competitive or better performance compared
to the state-of-the-art AutoML system AUTO - SKLEARN and
classical SSL techniques, on the other side unlike classical SSL
techniques which often significantly degenerate performance,
our proposal seldom suffers from such deficiency.

Introduction
In traditional machine learning, given a dataset, a finetuned learning model is built by human. Nowadays, however, along with the successfulness of machine learning,
more and more communities (governments, industrial companies) require a learning model for their specific data. Existing approaches based on manually fine-tuned learning
models consume a large amount of human resources and
efforts. To overcome this issue, the development of automated machine learning (AutoML) (Thornton et al. 2013;
Feurer et al. 2015), which attempts to build an appropriate
machine learning model for unseen dataset in an automatic
manner (without human intervention), has received increasing attention recently. For example, many workshops have
been hold in recent machine learning conferences,1 and a
number of AutoML competitions have been organized.2
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://automl.chalearn.org
2
https://www.4paradigm.com/competition/nips2018

3

4237

https://cloud.google.com/automl/

