The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

VidyutVanika: A Reinforcement Learning Based Broker Agent
for a Power Trading Competition
Susobhan Ghosh,1 Easwar Subramanian,2 Sanjay P. Bhat,2 Sujit Gujar,1 Praveen Paruchuri1
1

Machine Learning Lab, IIIT Hyderabad, India {susobhan.ghosh@research.iiit.ac.in}, {sujit.gujar, praveen.p}@iiit.ac.in
2
Tata Consultancy Services, TCS Innovation Labs, Hyderabad, India {easwar.subramanian, sanjay.bhat}@tcs.com

Abstract

in theory, offer a stable and efficient mechanism to manage
such systems (Speer et al. 2015). Smart grids also offer the
flexibility of dynamically changing tariffs to the customers.
Electricity distributing agencies operating in the smart grid,
which we refer to as brokers, can signal the supply-demand
imbalance to the market through dynamic pricing strategies,
while simultaneously reducing the overhead costs of their
customers by buying energy in bulk from generating companies. However, there are multiple challenges in the operationalization of smart grids, like managing highly fluctuating supply-demand scenarios, engaging stakeholders with
ulterior motives, and handling automation failures of participating entities.
In order to foresee such problems and examine potential
solutions, Power TAC (Ketter, Collins, and Weerdt 2017)
provides an open source simulator platform that replicates
crucial elements of a smart grid system and allows largescale experimentation. The simulation encourages the development of autonomous broker agents that aim at making a
profit by offering electricity tariffs to customers in a retail (or
tariff) market, and trading energy in a competitive wholesale
market, while carefully balancing their supply and demand.
To this end, a Power Trading Agent Competition (Power
TAC) (Ketter, Collins, and Weerdt 2017) is held annually.
Machine Learning and Game Theory-based strategies are
essential for such broker agents to dynamically price tariffs and predict customer usage while simultaneously placing bids in wholesale auctions. In the past, some broker
agents have used MDP to model strategies in the tariff market (Cuevas, Rodriguez-Gonzalez, and De Cote 2017; Yang
et al. 2018), and wholesale market (Urieli and Stone 2014;
Urieli and Stone 2016a; Reddy and Veloso 2011), while others have employed genetic algorithm, fuzzy-logic and tailored heuristics for the same (Özdemir and Unland 2018a;
Rúbio et al. 2015; Liefers, Hoogland, and La Poutré 2014).
Less attention has been paid to utilize weather data, having been used only to predict wholesale prices (Chowdhury
2016). Very few contributions have been made towards modeling the entire system as a reinforcement learning problem
(Urieli and Stone 2016a), due to its complexity.
The goal of this paper is to design a learning broker with
the following objectives: (i) React to competing tariffs (ii)
Increase market share, i.e., subscribed customers (iii) Decrease transmission capacity costs (iv) Decrease costs of

A smart grid is an efficient and sustainable energy system
that integrates diverse generation entities, distributed storage
capacity, and smart appliances and buildings. A smart grid
brings new kinds of participants in the energy market served
by it, whose effect on the grid can only be determined through
high fidelity simulations. Power TAC offers one such simulation platform using real-world weather data and complex
state-of-the-art customer models. In Power TAC, autonomous
energy brokers compete to make profits across tariff, wholesale and balancing markets while maintaining the stability
of the grid. In this paper, we design an autonomous broker
VidyutVanika, the runner-up in the 2018 Power TAC competition. VidyutVanika relies on reinforcement learning (RL) in
the tariff market and dynamic programming in the wholesale
market to solve modified versions of known Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulations in the respective markets.
The novelty lies in defining the reward functions for MDPs,
solving these MDPs, and the application of these solutions
to real actions in the market. Unlike previous participating
agents, VidyutVanika uses a neural network to predict the energy consumption of various customers using weather data.
We use several heuristic ideas to bridge the gap between the
restricted action spaces of the MDPs and the much more extensive action space available to VidyutVanika. These heuristics allow VidyutVanika to convert near-optimal fixed tariffs to time-of-use tariffs aimed at mitigating transmission
capacity fees, spread out its orders across several auctions
in the wholesale market to procure energy at a lower price,
more accurately estimate parameters required for implementing the MDP solution in the wholesale market, and account
for wholesale procurement costs while optimizing tariffs. We
use Power TAC 2018 tournament data and controlled experiments to analyze the performance of VidyutVanika, and illustrate the efficacy of the above strategies.

Introduction
A smart grid is an evolved electrical system that manages
electricity demand in a sustainable, reliable and economical
manner, built on advanced infrastructure and tuned to facilitate the integration of all the entities involved. 1 With the
efforts to move to sustainable energy sources, smart grids
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://new.abb.com/smartgrids/what-is-a-smart-grid

914

