The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Classifier-Agnostic Saliency Map Extraction
Konrad Żołna,1, 2 Krzysztof J. Geras,2, 3 Kyunghyun Cho1, 4, 5
Jagiellonian University∗
2
New York University
3
NYU School of Medicine
4
CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar
5
Facebook AI Research
konrad.zolna@gmail.com, k.j.geras@nyu.edu, kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu
1

Abstract
Extracting saliency maps, which indicate parts of the image
important to classification, requires many tricks to achieve
satisfactory performance when using classifier-dependent
methods. Instead, we propose classifier-agnostic saliency
map extraction. This allows to find all parts of the image that
any classifier could use, not just one given in advance. This
way we extract much higher quality saliency maps.

(a) CASM (Ours)

(b) Baseline

Figure 1: The original images are in the first row. In the
following rows masked-in images, masked-out images and
inpainted masked-out images are shown, respectively. The
proposed approach remove all relevant pixels and hence the
inpainted images show the background only.

Introduction
The success of deep convolutional networks for large-scale
object recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; He et al.
2016) has spurred interest in utilizing them to automatically
detect and localize objects in natural images. It has been
demonstrated that the gradient of the class-specific score of
a given classifier could be used for extracting a saliency map
of an image (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013). Such
classifier-dependent saliency maps can be utilized to analyze
inner working of a specific network. However, these are not
identifying all “evidence” in a given image because only the
part of the image that is used by a given model is highlighted.
In this work, we aim at finding saliency maps indicating
pixels which aids classification, i.e. we want to find pixels
in the input image such that if they were masked, it would
confuse an unknown classifier. Assuming we were given a
classifier, a naive approach would be to train a generative
model to output a mask (a saliency map) confusing that classifier. That can be achieved using a simple GAN-like approach (Goodfellow et al. 2014) where the classifier acts as
a fixed discriminator. Unfortunately, as we prove experimentally, this solution suffers from the same issues as prior approaches. We argue that the strong dependence on a given
classifier lies at the center of the problem. To tackle this
directly we propose to train a saliency mapping that is not
strongly coupled with any specific classifier.
We qualitatively find that the proposed approach extracts higher quality saliency maps compared to classifierdependent methods, as can be seen in Fig. 1. Extracted
saliency maps show all the evidence without using any

symptom-masking methods such as total variation regularization. We also evaluate our method quantitatively by using the extracted saliency maps for object localization. We
observe that the proposed approach outperforms the existing weakly-supervised techniques setting new state-of-the
art on ImageNet dataset and closely approaches the localization performance of a strongly supervised model.
Our method has many potential applications, in which
being classifier-agnostic is of primary importance. For instance, in medical image analysis, where we are interested
not only in class prediction but also in indicating which part
of the image is important to classification. Importantly, it is
criticial to indicate all parts of the image, which can influence diagnosis, not just ones used by a specific classifier.

Classifier-agnostic saliency map extraction
We tackle a problem of extracting a salient region of an image as a problem of extracting a mapping m : RW ×H×3 →
W ×H
[0, 1]
over an input image x ∈ RW ×H×3 . Such a
mapping should retain (=1) any pixel of the input image if
it aids classification, while it should mask (=0) any other
pixel. Earlier work has largely focused on a setting in which
a classifier f was given. These approaches can be implemented as finding m = arg maxm0 S(m0 , f ), where S
is a score function corresponding to a classification loss,
PN
i.e., S(m, f ) = N1 n=1 l(f ((1 − m(xn )) xn ), yn ) +
R(m), where
denotes a masking operation, R(m) is a
regularization term and l is a per example classification
loss, such as cross-entropy. We are given a training set

∗

ul. Łojasiewicza 6, 30-348 Kraków, Poland, +48 12 664 66 29
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10087

