The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generating Multiple Diverse Responses for Short-Text Conversation
Jun Gao,1∗ Wei Bi,2† Xiaojiang Liu,2 Junhui Li,1 Shuming Shi2
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China
imgaojun@gmail.com, lijunhui@suda.edu.cn
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{victoriabi, kieranliu, shumingshi}@tencent.com

Abstract

sation. One important issue is that they try to model the input
post and the output response as a 1-to-1 mapping. Whereas,
a post is often associated with multiple responses simultaneously in real applications, which is a 1-to-n mapping. For
example, for a user’s tweet on Twitter, there are often multiple replies obtained from the other users.
In order to handle a set of replies, a simple method is
to pair each of them with the input as multiple training
instances and then train the Seq2seq models. Previous results show that this method tends to generate generic responses (Li et al. 2016a; 2016b). Moreover, only one target
response can be generated in this method. To obtain multiple responses as in the real applications, many approaches
resort to beam search or enhanced beam search for diverse
answers (Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016; Shao et al. 2017).
Recently, Zhou et al. (2017; 2018) introduced multiple latent embeddings as language responding mechanisms into
the Seq2seq framework. By choosing different responding
mechanisms, multiple output responses can be generated.
Zhao et al. (2017) adopted the conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) and generated multiple responses by drawing samples from the prior distribution. Yet, these methods
still decomposed multiple responses into independent ones,
and did not model the fact of multiple responses.
In this paper, we propose a novel response generation
model for short-text conversation, which considers multiple responses jointly. We introduce a latent variable distribution for each post and sample different values from the
learned latent distribution to generate multiple diverse responses. Our novelty lies in two aspects. First, we model the
post with its various responses as a bag of instances and infer the distribution of the latent variable by considering multiple responses jointly. Second, unlike in CVAE, we adopt
interpretable latent variables, of which different samplings
should be capable to capture the divergence between different responses. Here, we set the latent variable as a word
in the vocabulary. Each sampling of the latent variable is
then to select a specific word, which drives the generated
response to be more meaningful around this word.
Since open-domain conversations cover a wide range of
topics and areas, we require a large vocabulary to adequately
include the possible latent words in all responses. Thus, it is
impractical to compute the exact gradient from the fully factorized probabilities over all latent variables and apply the

Neural generative models have become popular and achieved
promising performance on short-text conversation tasks.
They are generally trained to build a 1-to-1 mapping from
the input post to its output response. However, a given post is
often associated with multiple replies simultaneously in real
applications. Previous research on this task mainly focuses on
improving the relevance and informativeness of the top one
generated response for each post. Very few works study generating multiple accurate and diverse responses for the same
post. In this paper, we propose a novel response generation
model, which considers a set of responses jointly and generates multiple diverse responses simultaneously. A reinforcement learning algorithm is designed to solve our model. Experiments on two short-text conversation tasks validate that
the multiple responses generated by our model obtain higher
quality and larger diversity compared with various state-ofthe-art generative models.

Introduction
Endowing the machine with the ability to converse with
humans using natural language is one of the fundamental
challenges in artificial intelligence (Turing 1950). In particular, conversation models in open domains have received
increasing attention due to its wide applications including
chatbots, virtual personal assistants and etc. With the vast
amount of conversation data available on web services, generative models have shown their great potential. Especially,
the Sequence-to-sequence (Seq2seq) framework (Vinyals
and Le 2015; Sordoni et al. 2015), which learns the mapping from the input to its corresponding output directly, has
achieved promising performance. Following the most conventional setting for generative short-text conversation models (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016;
Mo et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2017), we consider the single
round chi-chat conversation with no context information, i.e.
an input post from a user and the output response given by
the machine.
Despite the popularity of the Seq2seq models, various
problems occur when they are applied for short-text conver∗

Work done when Jun Gao was interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

6383

