The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Efficient Solving of Birds of a Feather Puzzles
Todd W. Neller, Connor Berson, Jivan Kharel, Ryan Smolik
Gettysburg College
{tneller,bersco01,kharji01,smolry01}@gettysburg.edu

Abstract

We begin by defining search feature terms used in our
experimental work. Next, we evaluate the search time performance of various search algorithms. A state solvability
dataset is then described and used to evaluate our defined
search features, both singly and in combination with one another as suggested by regression of solvability onto feature
subsets. Next, we turn attention to the use of features for
accurate prediction of state solvability. Finally, we examine
some of the puzzle seeds that were most computationally
expensive for our best solver and consider future research
directions suggested by observations of such puzzles.

In this article, we describe the lessons learned in creating
an efficient solver for the solitaire game Birds of a Feather.
We introduce a new variant of depth-first search that we call
best-n depth-first search that achieved a 99.56% reduction in
search time over 100,000 puzzle seeds. We evaluate a number
of potential node-ordering search features and pruning tests,
perform an analysis of solvability prediction with such search
features, and consider possible future research directions suggested by the most computationally expensive puzzle seeds
encountered in our testing.

Search Features

Introduction

Our baseline for search comparison is the performance of
iterative, stack-based, depth-first search (DFS). Before describing our variations and experimental results, we first
need to define the terms and features we make use of in
search pruning and node ordering.
Two cards are said to be flockable if they have the same
suit, the same rank, or adjacent ranks. A flockability graph
is a graph where each node corresponds to the top card of
a stack, and there is an edge between two nodes if and only
if the two corresponding cards are flockable. We will refer
to the total number of flockability graph edges as a measure
of total flockability of the game state, which we will also refer to as state flockability. Card flockability is the degree of
a card’s node in the flockability graph. Flockability is different from number of legal moves since we ignore samerow/-column constraints in flockability in order to gain an
expectation of the number of legal moves in future states,
i.e. the Chess game concept of mobility.
The flockability graph structure can indicate unsolvability of a state. We define an odd bird to be a card on the
game grid that can never be flocked with another card, i.e.
having a flockability graph node degree of 0. A flockability
graph with an odd bird indicates an unsolvable game state.
More generally, a separated flock exists when the flockability graph has more than one graph component, i.e. two or
more disjoint sets of cards can never flock with each other.
Another flockability graph feature of interest was its minimum degree, i.e. the number of cards flockable with the
least flockable card. In the extreme case with a minimum
degree of 0, we have an unsolvable odd bird state. Thus, one
would expect states with a greater minimum degree to be

Birds of a Feather (Neller 2016) is an original perfectinformation solitaire game played with a standard 52-card
deck. After shuffling, the player deals the cards face-up into
an r-by-c grid of cards. In this paper we focus on the case
where r = c = 4.
The object of Birds of a Feather is to move all grid cards
into a single stack. Think of each grid cell as initially containing a 1-card stack. A stack may be moved on top of another stack in the same row or same column if the top cards
of the two stacks have the same suit, the same rank, or adjacent ranks. Aces and kings are considered low and high,
respectively, and are non-adjacent to each other.
For example, consider the initial game state shown in Figure 1(a). Having the same rank in the same column, the
JS (Jack of Spades) stack can move onto the JC (Jack of
Clubs) (Fig. 1(b)). Having adjacent rank in the same column, the TS (Ten of Spades) stack can move onto the 9H
(9 of Hearts) (Fig. 1(c)). Having the same suit in the same
row, the JS stack can move onto the 5S (Fig. 1(c)). We can
solve this deal, moving all cards into a single stack, with
this sequence of moves: JS→JC, TS→9H, JS→5S, KS→3S,
KS→KC, JS→KS, JS→TS, 6H→7D, 6H→5C, 6H→8H,
QH→AH, QH→TH, QH→3H, QH→JS, QH→6H.
In this work, our objective was to create an efficient search
algorithm that would enable us to speedily find a puzzle
solution or, through unsuccessful complete search, demonstrate that no solution exists.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9686

