The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Optimal Interdiction of Urban Criminals with the Aid of Real-Time Information
Youzhi Zhang,1 Qingyu Guo,1 Bo An,1 Long Tran-Thanh,2 Nicholas R. Jennings3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, UK
3
Departments of Computing and Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College, UK
1
{yzhang137, qguo005, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, 2 ltt08r@ecs.soton.ac.uk, 3 n.jennings@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

independent strategy without considering the dynamic relocation of security resources (Jain et al. 2011). Although a
time-dependent policy is discussed in (Zhang et al. 2017),
they do not take the real-time adversarial information into
consideration, which can cause a huge loss of effectiveness
as we will show later. Other branches of related work also
suffer from similar myopia, including pursuit-evasion games
(Parsons 1978) and patrolling security games (Vorobeychik
et al. 2014) (see the next section).
To incorporate such real-time information, we model the
urban network security problem as a zero-sum NEtwork purSuiT game (NEST). In NEST, the adversary picks one escape path to the outside world, while the defender, tracking the adversary’s previous moves, decides on the relocation of her security resources (modeled as a finite-horizon
Markov Decision Process (MDP)). Specifically, in the MDP,
each state includes information about the adversary’s previous moves and the locations of defender resources, and
each action is the next location of the defender’s resources.
This results in a game with a combinatorial action space
of each state in the MDP for the defender, where the defender has multiple resources with several actions each. For
example, for just ten resources with four actions for each,
there are more than one million joint actions of resources in
a given state. This large strategy space makes the existing
exact solution approaches unable to solve NEST efficiently.
These approaches include: i) the approach for the imperfect
recall game, i.e., normal-form game with sequential strategies (NFGSS), because their incremental strategy generation (ISG) algorithm does not set bounds to cut branches in
its best-response (BR) oracle that uses a depth-first search
through the whole state space to compute the best response
(Bošanskỳ et al. 2015); and ii) the approach for the perfect recall game (Von Stengel 1996) because it will lead to
a significantly larger strategy space than the imperfect recall approach (see the discussion in (Bošanskỳ et al. 2015)),
and the bounds are very loose in their branch-and-bound BR
(Bošanskỳ et al. 2014).
In this context, after modeling NEST as an imperfectrecall game to reduce the strategy space, this paper makes
four additional key contributions. First, we show that the ignorance of real-time information in existing work can lead to
an arbitrarily large loss of efficiency. Second, we show that
solving NEST is NP-hard. Third, after transforming the non-

Most violent crimes happen in urban and suburban cities.
With emerging tracking techniques, law enforcement officers
can have real-time location information of the escaping criminals and dynamically adjust the security resource allocation
to interdict them. Unfortunately, existing work on urban network security games largely ignores such information. This
paper addresses this omission. First, we show that ignoring
the real-time information can cause an arbitrarily large loss of
efficiency. To mitigate this loss, we propose a novel NEtwork
purSuiT game (NEST) model that captures the interaction between an escaping adversary and a defender with multiple resources and real-time information available. Second, solving
NEST is proven to be NP-hard. Third, after transforming the
non-convex program of solving NEST to a linear program,
we propose our incremental strategy generation algorithm,
including: (i) novel pruning techniques in our best response
oracle; and (ii) novel techniques for mapping strategies between subgames and adding multiple best response strategies
at one iteration to solve extremely large problems. Finally, extensive experiments show the effectiveness of our approach,
which scales up to realistic problem sizes with hundreds of
nodes on networks including the real network of Manhattan.

1

Introduction

In 2016, there were nearly 5.36 million violent crimes across
the United States, most of which happened in the urban
and suburban cities (NCVRW 2016). Considering just the
commercial banks, 4,185 robberies happened (FBI 2017).
When an urban crime occurs, the top priority of law enforcement officers is to dispatch the limited security resources to
capture the criminal. Nowadays, novel pursuit devices such
as the StarChase GPS-based system (Gaither et al. 2017),
UAVs and helicopters can provide the police with the realtime location of the criminal. Equipped with the up to date
information, the police can dynamically adjust the resource
allocation plan to interdict the adversary.
Unfortunately, existing work on resource allocation in
network security ignores the real-time information about the
adversary’s location (Jain et al. 2011; McCarthy et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2018). Specifically, in existing urban network
security games (NSG), the defender usually deploys a timeCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1262

