The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Structural Causal Bandits with Non-Manipulable Variables
Sanghack Lee, Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
{lee2995,eb}@purdue.edu

Abstract

policy-makers, physicians) are better equipped for designing cleaner, more precise, and more effective interventions
once the underlying causal mechanisms are well-understood
(Bareinboim and Pearl 2016; Pearl and Mackenzie 2018;
Lee and Bareinboim 2018).
For instance, economists strive to understand the root
causes of poverty, which could allow the design of new policies (i.e., causal interventions) to improve the population’s
socioeconomic status (SES). A considerable body of evidence
was accumulated for many decades, notably by the University of Chicago’s Professor, and Nobel Prize laureate, James
Heckman, who demonstrated the effects of early education
on families’ SES, among other indicators (Heckman 2006).
The understanding following this causal link translated to the
larger support of early childhood education, and a push for
new policies; see, for an example, Obama’s one billion dollar
investment (The White House, Office of the Press Secretary
2014). There are abundant of such cases in public health as
well — e.g., evidence supports that tobacco smoking is one
of the determinant factors of lung cancer (Cornfield 1951;
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2014), or
obesity is responsible to shortening life expectancy (Flegal,
Graubard, and Williamson 2005; Pearl 2018).
Despite all the impressive results achieved so far, the treatment of how to use causal knowledge to support decisionmaking is still in its infancy. If our goal is to build a more
automated, data-driven society, and intelligent systems that
can reason and act autonomously, we need to move from
a heuristic understanding of the interplay between causal
knowledge and decision-making (which currently relies on
the insights of highly skilled scientists) to a more fundamental understanding of the principles that allow one to translate
causal evidence into a more robust decision-making process.
In order to realize this goal, we start by highlighting the
rich literature on automated decision-making in AI, including the setting known as multi-armed bandits (MABs, for
short) (Robbins 1952; Lai and Robbins 1985). We’ll use the
MAB framework as the baseline of our analysis. In a typical MAB instance, there are multiple arms (or actions) to
play at each time step. Pulling an arm at each step returns
a stochastic reward from the underlying, unknown distribution. Algorithms for the bandit problem attempt to minimize the cumulative regret, while having to cope with an
exploration and exploitation trade-off. This setting has been

Causal knowledge is sought after throughout data-driven fields
due to its explanatory power and potential value to inform
decision-making. If the targeted system is well-understood in
terms of its causal components, one is able to design more
precise and surgical interventions so as to bring certain desired
outcomes about. The idea of leveraging the causal understanding of a system to improve decision-making has been studied
in the literature under the rubric of structural causal bandits
(Lee and Bareinboim, 2018). In this setting, (1) pulling an arm
corresponds to performing a causal intervention on a set of
variables, while (2) the associated rewards are governed by the
underlying causal mechanisms. One key assumption of this
work is that any observed variable (X) in the system is manipulable, which means that intervening and making do(X = x)
is always realizable. In many real-world scenarios, however,
this is a too stringent requirement. For instance, while scientific evidence may support that obesity shortens life, it’s not
feasible to manipulate obesity directly, but, for example, by
decreasing the amount of soda consumption (Pearl, 2018). In
this paper, we study a relaxed version of the structural causal
bandit problem when not all variables are manipulable. Specifically, we develop a procedure that takes as argument partially
specified causal knowledge and identifies the possibly-optimal
arms in structural bandits with non-manipulable variables. We
further introduce an algorithm that uncovers non-trivial dependence structure among the possibly-optimal arms. Finally, we
corroborate our findings with simulations, which shows that
MAB solvers enhanced with causal knowledge and leveraging the newly discovered dependence structure among arms
consistently outperform causal-insensitive solvers.

Introduction
Causal knowledge is deemed highly valuable and desirable
across a wide range of disciplines, including in the sciences, engineering, and businesses. The reasons for such
a prominence are various. First, causal knowledge entails
explanatory power, which epitomizes the very goal of science — i.e., opening Nature’s “black box” and explaining how reality “works,” or how it could be understood in
terms of more elementary, and interpretable components. Second, and more pragmatically, purposeful agents (AI systems,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4164

