The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Post-Processing of Word Vectors via Conceptor Negation
Tianlin Liu∗

Lyle Ungar, João Sedoc

Department of Computer Science and
Electrical Engineering
Jacobs University Bremen
28759 Bremen, Germany
t.liu@jacobs-university.de

Department of Computer and
Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
{ungar, joao}@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract

decomposition methods such as singular value decomposition (SVD) and principal component analysis (PCA) are
usually used in this line of research (Caron 2001; Bullinaria
and Levy 2012; Turney 2012; Levy and Goldberg 2014;
Levy, Goldberg, and Dagan 2015; Mu and Viswanath 2018).
The current paper is in line with the second, unsupervised,
research direction.
Among different unsupervised word vector postprocessing schemes, the all-but-the-top approach (Mu
and Viswanath 2018) is a prominent example. Empirically studying the latent features encoded by principal
components (PCs) of distributional word vectors, Mu and
Viswanath (2018) found that the variances explained by
the leading PCs “encode the frequency of the word to a
significant degree”. Since word frequencies are arguably unrelated to lexical semantics, they recommend removing such
leading PCs from word vectors using a PCA reconstruction.
The current work advances the findings of Mu and
Viswanath (2018) and improves their post-processing
scheme. Instead of discarding a fixed number of PCs, we
softly filter word vectors using matrix conceptors (Jaeger
2014; 2017), which characterize the linear space of those
word vector features having high variances – the features
most contaminated by word frequencies according to Mu
and Viswanath (2018). The proposed approach is mathematically simple and computationally efficient, as it is founded
on elementary linear algebra. Besides these traits, it is also
practically effective: using a standard set of lexical-level intrinsic evaluation tasks and a deep neural network-based dialogue state tracking task, we show that conceptor-based
post-processing considerably enhances linguistic regularities captured by word vectors. A more detailed list of our
contributions are:

Word vectors are at the core of many natural language
processing tasks. Recently, there has been interest in postprocessing word vectors to enrich their semantic information. In this paper, we introduce a novel word vector postprocessing technique based on matrix conceptors (Jaeger
2014), a family of regularized identity maps. More concretely, we propose to use conceptors to suppress those latent features of word vectors having high variances. The proposed method is purely unsupervised: it does not rely on
any corpus or external linguistic database. We evaluate the
post-processed word vectors on a battery of intrinsic lexical
evaluation tasks, showing that the proposed method consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art alternatives. We
also show that post-processed word vectors can be used for
the downstream natural language processing task of dialogue
state tracking, yielding improved results in different dialogue
domains.

Introduction
Distributional representations of words, better known as
word vectors, are a cornerstone of practical natural language processing (NLP). Examples of word vectors include Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), GloVe (Pennington,
Socher, and Manning 2014), Eigenwords (Dhillon, Foster,
and Ungar 2015), and Fasttext (Bojanowski et al. 2017).
These word vectors are usually referred to as distributional
word vectors, as their training methods rely on the distributional hypothesis of semantics (Firth 1957).
Recently, there has been interest in post-processing distributional word vectors to enrich their semantic content.
The post-process procedures are usually performed in a
lightweight fashion, i.e., without re-training word vectors
on a text corpus. In one line of study, researchers used
supervised methods to enforce linguistic constraints (e.g.,
synonym relations) on word vectors (Faruqui et al. 2015;
Mrksic et al. 2016; 2017), where the linguistic constraints
are extracted from an external linguistic knowledge base
such as WordNet (Miller 1995) and PPDB (Pavlick et al.
2015). In another line of study, researchers devised unsupervised methods to post-process word vectors. Spectral-

1. We propose an unsupervised algorithm that leverages
Boolean operations of conceptors to post-process word
vectors. The resulting word vectors achieve up to
18.86% and 28.34% improvement on the SimLex-999
and SimVerb-3500 dataset relative to the original word
representations.
2. A closer look at the proposed algorithm reveals commonalities across several existing post-processing techniques
for neural-based word vectors and pointwise mutual
information (PMI) matrix based word vectors. Unlike

∗

Research done while visiting University of Pennsylvania.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6778

