The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Differentially Private Empirical Risk Minimization with Smooth Non-Convex Loss
Functions: A Non-Stationary View∗
Di Wang, Jinhui Xu
Deparment of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, New York 14260

Abstract

sively studied in recent years. Its Differentially Private (DP)
version (DP-ERM) can be formally defined as follows.
Definition 1 (DP-ERM (Wang, Gaboardi, and Xu 2018;
Wang, Smith, and Xu 2019)). Given a dataset D =
{z1 , · · · , zn } from a data universe X and a closed convex
set C ⊆ Rp , DP-ERM is to find xpriv ∈ CPso as to minin
mize the empirical risk, i.e. F r (x, D) = n1 i=1 f (x, zi ) +
r(x), with the guarantee of being differentially private,
where f is the loss function and r is some simple (non)smooth convex function called regularizer. When the
inputs are drawn i.i.d from an unknown underlying distribution P on X , we also consider the population risk
Ez∼P [f (x, z)]. If the loss function is convex, the utility of
the algorithm is measured by the expected excess empirical risk, i.e. EA [F r (xpriv , D)] − minx∈C F r (x, D), or the
expected excess population risk (generalization error), i.e.
Ez∼P,A [f (xpriv , z)] − minx∈C Ez∼P [f (x, z)], where the expectation of A is taking over all the randomness of the algorithm.
Previous research on DP-ERM has mainly focused on
convex loss functions, starting from the work in (Chaudhuri
and Monteleoni 2009). However, several empirical studies
have revealed that non-convex loss functions can achieve
better classification accuracy than convex loss functions
(Nguyen and Sanner 2013), and recent developments in
Deep Neural Networks (Goodfellow et al. 2016) have further suggested that the loss functions are more likely to be
non-convex in real world applications. Thus, there is an urgent need for the research community to shift its focus from
convex to non-convex loss functions. However, due to the
fact that finding the global minimum for non-convex functions is NP-hard, which implies that measuring the utility
by the expected excess empirical risk may not always be a
good choice. So far, only a few papers (Zhang et al. 2017;
Wang, Ye, and Xu 2017) have considered the utility of DPERM with non-convex loss functions, but all of them measure
the utility by `2 norm of the gradient, instead of the expected
excess empirical risk.
Despite the aforementioned progresses on this problem,
there are still quite a few remaining issues. 1) Previous work
has obtained the error bounds for the smooth loss functions
with smooth regularizer; it is not clear whether they can
be extended to non-smooth regularizer, such as `1 norm. 2)
Even though existing work has considered the error bound

In this paper, we study the Differentially Private Empirical
Risk Minimization (DP-ERM) problem with non-convex loss
functions and give several upper bounds for the utility in different settings. We first consider the problem in low-dimensional
space. For DP-ERM with non-smooth regularizer, we generalize an existing work by measuring the utility using `2 norm
of the projected gradient. Also, we extend the error bound
measurement, for the first time, from empirical risk to population risk by using the expected `2 norm of the gradient. We
then investigate the problem in high dimensional space, and
show that by measuring the utility with Frank-Wolfe gap, it
is possible to bound the utility by the Gaussian Width of the
constraint set, instead of the dimensionality p of the underlying space. We further demonstrate that the advantages of
this result can be achieved by the measure of `2 norm of the
projected gradient. A somewhat surprising discovery is that
although the two kinds of measurements are quite different,
their induced utility upper bounds are asymptotically the same
under some assumptions. We also show that the utility of some
special non-convex loss functions can be reduced to a level
(i.e., depending only on log p) similar to that of convex loss
functions. Finally, we test our proposed algorithms on both
synthetic and real world datasets and the experimental results
confirm our theoretical analysis.

Introduction
Learning from sensitive data is a frequently encountered
challenging task in many data analytic applications. It requires the learning algorithm to not only learn effectively
from the data but also provide a certain level of guarantee on privacy preserving. As a rigorous notion for statistical data privacy, differential privacy has received a
great deal of attentions in recent years (Dwork et al. 2006;
Dwork 2008). It works by injecting random noise into the
statistical results obtained from the sensitive data so that the
distribution of the perturbed results are incentive to any single
record change in the original dataset.
As one of the most commonly used supervised learning
models, Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) has been exten∗
This research was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) through grants CCF-1422324 and CCF-1716400.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1182

