The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Capacity Control of ReLU Neural Networks by Basis-Path Norm
Shuxin Zheng,1 Qi Meng,2 Huishuai Zhang,2 Wei Chen,2 Nenghai Yu,1 Tie-Yan Liu2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
zhengsx@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {meq, huzhang, wche}@microsoft.com, ynh@ustc.edu.cn, Tie-Yan.Liu@microsoft.com

Abstract

and Telgarsky 2017; Neyshabur, Tomioka, and Srebro 2015;
2016).
Among different types of deep neural networks, ReLU
networks (i.e., neural networks with ReLU activations (Glorot, Bordes, and Bengio 2011)) have demonstrated their outstanding performances in many fields such as image classification (He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017), information system (Cheng et al. 2016; He et al. 2017), and text understanding (Vaswani et al. 2017) etc. It is well known that ReLU
neural networks are positively scale invariant (Neyshabur,
Salakhutdinov, and Srebro 2015; Neyshabur et al. 2016).
That is, for a hidden node with ReLU activation, if all of
its incoming weights are multiplied by a positive constant c
and its outgoing weights are divided by the same constant,
the neural network with the new weights will generate exactly the same output as the old one for any arbitrary input.
(Neyshabur, Salakhutdinov, and Srebro 2015) considered the
product of weights along all paths from the input to output units as path norm which is invariant to the rescaling of
weights, and proposed Path-SGD which takes path norm as
the regularization term to the loss function.
In fact, each path in a ReLU network can be represented
by a small group of generalized linearly independent paths
(we call them basis-path in the sequels) with multiplication
and division operation as shown in Figure 1. Thus, there is
dependency among different paths. The smaller the percentage of basis paths, the higher the dependency. As the network is determined only by the basis paths, the generalization property of the network should depend only on the basis
paths, as well as the relevant regularization methods. In addition, Path-SGD controls the capacity by solving argmin
of the regularized loss function, the solution of the argmin
problem is approximate because dependency among different values of all paths is not considered in the network. This
motivates us to establish a capacity bound based on only
the basis paths instead of all the paths. This is in contrast
to the generalization bound based on the path norm which
counts the values of all the paths and does not consider the
dependency among different paths. To tackle these problems, we define a new norm based on the values of the basis
paths called Basis-path Norm. In previous work, (Meng et
al. 2018) constructed the basis paths by skeleton method and
proved that the values of all other paths can be calculated using the values of basis paths by multiplication and division

Recently, path norm was proposed as a new capacity measure
for neural networks with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function, which takes the rescaling-invariant property
of ReLU into account. It has been shown that the generalization error bound in terms of the path norm explains the
empirical generalization behaviors of the ReLU neural networks better than that of other capacity measures. Moreover,
optimization algorithms which take path norm as the regularization term to the loss function, like Path-SGD, have been
shown to achieve better generalization performance. However, the path norm counts the values of all paths, and hence
the capacity measure based on path norm could be improperly
influenced by the dependency among different paths. It is also
known that each path of a ReLU network can be represented
by a small group of linearly independent basis paths with
multiplication and division operation, which indicates that the
generalization behavior of the network only depends on only
a few basis paths. Motivated by this, we propose a new norm
Basis-path Norm based on a group of linearly independent
paths to measure the capacity of neural networks more accurately. We establish a generalization error bound based on
this basis path norm, and show it explains the generalization
behaviors of ReLU networks more accurately than previous
capacity measures via extensive experiments. In addition, we
develop optimization algorithms which minimize the empirical risk regularized by the basis-path norm. Our experiments
on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed regularization method achieves clearly better performance on the
test set than the previous regularization approaches.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have pushed the frontiers of a wide variety of AI tasks in recent years such as speech recognition
(Xiong et al. 2016; Chan et al. 2016), computer vision (Ioffe
and Szegedy 2015; Ren et al. 2015) and neural language processing (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Gehring et al.
2017), etc. More surprisingly, deep neural networks generalize well, even when the number of parameters is significantly larger than the amount of training data (Zhang et al.
2017). To explain the generalization ability of neural networks, researchers commonly used different norms of network parameters to measure the capacity (Bartlett, Foster,
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5925

