The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Better Algorithm for Societal Tradeoffs
Hanrui Zhang

Yu Cheng

Vincent Conitzer

Computer Science Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Computer Science Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
yucheng@cs.duke.edu

Computer Science Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Abstract

moral decision making, where an AI system has to choose a
course of action based on data that it has about human judgments in similar scenarios (see, e.g., Conitzer et al. (2017)).
This problem has already been considered in the specific
contexts of self-driving vehicles making life-or-death decisions (Noothigattu et al. 2018) and kidney exchange algorithms prioritizing certain patients over others (Freedman et
al. 2018). To fit this into the framework considered in this
paper, it may be that one human subject appears to value
(say) the life of a 20-year old at 1.5 times the life of a 50year old, and another appears to use a ratio of 1.1. We then
need to find an aggregate ratio.1
When only two activities are being compared, using the
median judgment as our aggregate satisfies many nice properties. Things become more complex when more than two
activities are compared. As observed by Conitzer, Brill, and
Freeman (2015), taking the median on each pair separately
can result in inconsistent tradeoffs. For example, the resulting aggregate tradeoffs may be that (one unit of) gasoline
is 2 times as bad as trash, trash is 4 times as bad as deforestation, and gasoline is 2 times as bad as deforestation; but
2 · 4 = 8 6= 2 (Figure 1).
Conitzer et al. [2016] take consistency as a hard constraint
and specify some axioms that a rule should satisfy. Somewhat unusually2 for a social choice context, instead of leading to impossibility, the axioms uniquely pin down a single
rule. This rule involves first taking the logarithm of each
tradeoff value. Hence, the consistency constraint changes
from a multiplicative one (a · b = c) to an additive one
(log a + log b = log c), and the problem can be thought of as
follows. Each activity is to be assigned a number (its quality), and the agents express for pairs of activities what they
consider to be the ideal difference in quality between these
two activities. Then, aggregate qualities are chosen so that
the sum of the distances between the aggregate differences
and the ideal differences expressed by the voters is minimized.
Conitzer et al. [2016] show that this problem can be for-

In the societal tradeoffs problem, each agent perceives certain quantitative tradeoffs between pairs of activities, and the
goal is to aggregate these tradeoffs across agents. This is a
problem in social choice; specifically, it is a type of quantitative judgment aggregation problem. A natural rule for this
problem was axiomatized by Conitzer et al. [AAAI 2016];
they also provided several algorithms for computing the outcomes of this rule. In this paper, we present a significantly
improved algorithm and evaluate it experimentally. Our algorithm is based on a tight connection to minimum-cost flow
that we exhibit. We also show that our algorithm cannot be
improved without breakthroughs on min-cost flow.

1

Introduction

In social choice, we take as input the preferences or opinions
of multiple agents and seek to aggregate them. This is a key
problem in multiagent systems, which has given rise to the
computational social choice research community (Brandt et
al. 2015). The paradigmatic setting in social choice is that of
voting, where each agent ranks a set of alternatives. However, a ranking of alternatives is not always a natural representation of the preferences or opinions that must be aggregated. For example, in a multi-issue setting (Lang and
Xia 2015), there are exponentially many alternatives, making it infeasible to rank them all. In judgment aggregation
(in its standard form) (Endriss 2015), agents provide trueor-false judgments on various propositions, and we must aggregate these into judgments that are logically consistent. AI
researchers regularly deal with questions of how to represent
the world, so it is not surprising that these problems are receiving special attention from the AI/MAS community. And
indeed, entirely new problems in social choice are arising
from work done in this community.
One such problem is the societal tradeoffs problem (Conitzer, Brill, and Freeman 2015). In it, each agent
quantitatively compares pairs of activities. For example,
one agent may judge that using one liter of gasoline is
as bad as generating 2 bags of landfill trash; another may
judge that that number should be 3 instead of 2. One possible area of application for this framework is in automated

1

In these contexts, the word “activities” is not very appropriate
to refer to the different types of people, but we will stick with this
word for the sake of consistency with prior literature.
2
Of course, there are other results where a rule is uniquely
pinned down by axioms—for example, the Kemeny-Young rule
was uniquely axiomatized by Young and Levenglick (1978).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2229

