The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Computer Generation of Birds of a Feather Puzzles
Todd W. Neller, Daniel Ziegler
Gettysburg College
{tneller,ziegda03}@gettysburg.edu

Abstract

puzzle design. Next, we relate our insights to recent work in
characterizing tension in puzzle design. Finally, we suggest
future work that could make our puzzle generation algorithm
more efficient.

In this article, we describe a computer-aided design process
for generating high-quality Birds of a Feather solitaire card
puzzles. In each iteration, we generate puzzles via combinatorial optimization of an objective function. After solving and
subjectively rating such puzzles, we compute objective puzzle features and regress our ratings onto such features to provide insight for objective function improvements. Through
this iterative improvement process, we demonstrate the importance of the halfway solvability ratio in quality puzzle design. We relate our observations to recent work on tension in
puzzle design, and suggest next steps for more efficient puzzle generation.

Objective and Methodology
The objective of this work was to create an algorithm to
generate high-quality Birds of a Feather puzzles for varying numbers of cards within a 4-by-4 card grid. We envision the implementation of a puzzle application where the
player progresses through puzzles with greater numbers of
cards (up to 16) as they meet success with puzzles having
smaller numbers of cards. Thus, we are faced with two primary challenges: (1) defining a measure of puzzle quality,
and (2) generating such puzzles efficiently.
We first describe our general approach before delving into
specifics. Our puzzle generation methodology is similar to
that of (Neller et al. 2011), in which puzzle generation is
approached as a combinatorial optimization in the space of
possible puzzles:

Introduction
Birds of a Feather (Neller 2016) is an original perfectinformation solitaire game played with a standard 52-card
deck. After shuffling, the player deals the cards face-up into
an r-by-c grid of cards. In this paper we focus on the case
where r = c = 4.
The object of Birds of a Feather is to move all grid cards
into a single stack. Think of each grid cell as initially containing a 1-card stack. A stack may be moved on top of another stack in the same row or same column if the top cards
of the two stacks have the same suit, the same rank, or adjacent ranks. Aces and kings are considered low and high,
respectively, and are non-adjacent to each other.
For example, consider the initial game state shown in Figure 1(a). Having the same rank in the same column, the
JS (Jack of Spades) stack can move onto the JC (Jack of
Clubs) (Fig. 1(b)). Having adjacent rank in the same column, the TS (Ten of Spades) stack can move onto the 9H
(9 of Hearts) (Fig. 1(c)). Having the same suit in the same
row, the JS stack can move onto the 5S (Fig. 1(c)). We can
solve this deal, moving all cards into a single stack, with
this sequence of moves: JS→JC, TS→9H, JS→5S, KS→3S,
KS→KC, JS→KS, JS→TS, 6H→7D, 6H→5C, 6H→8H,
QH→AH, QH→TH, QH→3H, QH→JS, QH→6H.
Our paper begins with an outline of our design methodology and definitions of puzzle features we found to be of
potential interest through our process. We then share our experience of the iterative design process and what we learned
about the most important features to optimize for quality

1. Define an objective function measure of puzzle “badness”
that we seek to minimize.
2. Generate a set of puzzles by taking randomly generated
initial puzzles and approximately optimizing them for
a fixed number of iterations of stochastic local search
(SLS) (Hoos and Stützle 2004).
3. Manually solve this set of generated puzzles and rate
them according to our subjective enjoyment of their challenges. If we are satisfied with the puzzle quality, we terminate design.
4. Look for relationships between our subjective puzzle ratings and objective puzzle features in order to gain insight
into what would improve our objective function. We then
redefine our objective function, possibly introducing new
features or re-weighting previous features according to
such insight.
5. Return to step 2.
We now describe our step-by-step process in greater detail. The objective function we minimize is referred to as
our energy function using the energy-minimization physics
analogy of simulated annealing. In our very first iteration,
we began with the simplest of puzzle energy (“badness”)
measures, defining a two-valued measure with a high (1000)

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9693

