The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MonoGRNet: A Geometric Reasoning
Network for Monocular 3D Object Localization
Zengyi Qin,†∗ Jinglu Wang,‡ Yan Lu‡
Tsinghua University, ‡ Microsoft Research
{v-zeqin, jinglwa, yanlu}@microsoft.com

†

Abstract

estimation does not focus on object localization by design. It
aims to minimize the mean error for all pixels to get an average optimal estimation over the whole image, while objects
covering small regions are often neglected (Fu et al. 2018),
which drastically downgrades the 3D detection accuracy.
We propose MonoGRNet, a unified network for amodal
3D object localization from a monocular image. Our key
idea is to decouple the 3D localization problem into several
progressive sub-tasks that are solvable using only monocular RGB data. The network starts from perceiving semantics
in 2D image planes and then performs geometric reasoning
in the 3D space.
A challenging problem we overcome is to accurately estimate the depth of an instance’s 3D center without computing
pixel-level depth maps. We propose a novel instance-level
depth estimation (IDE) module, which explores large receptive fields of deep feature maps to capture coarse instance
depths and then combines early features of a higher resolution to refine the IDE.
To simultaneously retrieve the horizontal and vertical position, we first predict the 2D projection of the 3D center.
In combination with the IDE, we then extrude the projected
center into real 3D space to obtain the eventual 3D object
location. All the components are integrated into the end-toend network, MonoGRNet, featuring its three 3D reasoning
branches illustrated in Fig. 1, and is finally optimized by a
joint geometric loss that minimizes the 3D bounding box
discrepancy in the global context.
We argue that RGB information alone can provide almost
accurate 3D locations and poses of objects. Experiments on
the challenging KITTI dataset demonstrate that our network
outperforms the state-of-art monocular method in 3D object
localization with the least inference time. In summary, our
contributions are three-fold:

Localizing objects in the real 3D space, which plays a crucial role in scene understanding, is particularly challenging
given only a single RGB image due to the geometric information loss during imagery projection. We propose MonoGRNet for the amodal 3D object localization from a monocular RGB image via geometric reasoning in both the observed 2D projection and the unobserved depth dimension.
MonoGRNet is a single, unified network composed of four
task-specific subnetworks, responsible for 2D object detection, instance depth estimation (IDE), 3D localization and
local corner regression. Unlike the pixel-level depth estimation that needs per-pixel annotations, we propose a novel IDE
method that directly predicts the depth of the targeting 3D
bounding box’s center using sparse supervision. The 3D localization is further achieved by estimating the position in
the horizontal and vertical dimensions. Finally, MonoGRNet
is jointly learned by optimizing the locations and poses of
the 3D bounding boxes in the global context. We demonstrate that MonoGRNet achieves state-of-the-art performance
on challenging datasets.

Introduction
Typical object localization or detection from a RGB image
estimates 2D boxes that bound visible parts of the objects
belonging to the specific classes on the image plane. However, this kind of result cannot provide geometric perception in the real 3D world for scene understanding, which is
crucial for applications, such as robotics, mixed reality, and
autonomous driving.
In this paper, we address the problem of localizing amodal
3D bounding boxes (ABBox-3D) of objects at their full extents from a monocular RGB image. Unlike 2D analysis on
the image plane, 3D localization with the extension to an
unobserved dimension, i.e., depth, not solely enlarges the
searching space but also introduces inherent ambiguity of
2D-to-3D mapping, increasing the task’s difficulty significantly.
Most state-of-the-art monocular methods (Xu and Chen
2018; Zhuo et al. 2018) estimate pixel-level depths and then
regress 3D bounding boxes. Nevertheless, pixel-level depth

• A novel instance-level depth estimation approach that directly predicts central depths of ABBox-3D in the absence
of dense depth data, regardless of object occlusion and
truncation.
• A progressive 3D localization scheme that explores rich
feature representations in 2D images and extends geometric reasoning into 3D context.

∗

The work was done when Zengyi Qin was an intern at MSR.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• A unified network that coordinates localization of objects
in 2D, 2.5D and 3D spaces via a joint optimization, which
8851

