The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Leveraging Textual Specifications for
Grammar-Based Fuzzing of Network Protocols
Samuel Jero,1 Maria Leonor Pacheco,1 Dan Goldwasser,1 Cristina Nita-Rotaru2
1

Purdue University
Northeastern University
{sjero, pachecog, dgoldwas}@purdue.edu
c.nitarotaru@neu.edu
2

Abstract

ral language specifications of protocols to improve protocol
fuzzers?”
In this paper, we study how to improve the coverage and
effectiveness of grammar-based fuzzers for network protocols through automated learning of protocol rules from existing textual documentation. We have two design goals: (1)
minimize the manual supervision effort required for training
and (2) adapt to new protocols without re-training.
Extracting protocol information is often not straightforward. Protocol specifications intended for human readers capable of understanding context and intent are often
too ambiguous for simple rule-based extraction. Even relying on the recent advances in NLP technology by applying
“off-the-shelf” NLP tools can result in reduced performance
and brittle applications due to domain differences. The performance of these tools, typically trained on newswire data,
drops significantly when applied to technical specification
documents. Figure 1 demonstrates this point, showing a misclassification of the word “points” as a noun, common in the
newswire data used for training, but incorrect in the given
context. Note that this mistake propagates to other steps in
the pipeline, resulting in incorrect chunking and parsing decisions. Our main technical challenge is to adapt information
extraction to the new domain without incurring the high cost
of providing supervision for each individual protocol.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) We define the problem of protocol grammar extraction as a set of NLP tasks.
The grammar is designed to capture relevant aspects and
consists of the protocol’s header fields and their properties.

Grammar-based fuzzing is a technique used to find software vulnerabilities by injecting well-formed inputs generated following rules that encode application semantics. Most
grammar-based fuzzers for network protocols rely on human
experts to manually specify these rules. In this work we study
automated learning of protocol rules from textual specifications (i.e. RFCs). We evaluate the automatically extracted
protocol rules by applying them to a state-of-the-art fuzzer for
transport protocols and show that it leads to a smaller number
of test cases while finding the same attacks as the system that
uses manually specified rules.

Introduction
Ensuring that protocol implementations are free of bugs and
vulnerabilities is an important problem, given the reliance
of virtually any application on computer networks. One testing approach used to tackle this problem is protocol fuzzing,
which generates and injects packets into the protocol stream.
To successfully apply this method and increase the likelihood of finding protocol vulnerabilities, the generated packets need to be crafted carefully. A technique that has been
shown to be effective in creating these attack packets is
grammar-based fuzzing (Jero, Lee, and Nita-Rotaru 2015;
Abdelnur, State, and Festor 2007; Banks et al. 2006; Wang
et al. 2013; Jero et al. 2017). In this technique, attack packets are generated following rules that encode protocol semantics. For example, in the TCP protocol, bytes 17 and 18
contain a checksum of the rest of the TCP header. An injected packet must contain the correct checksum in order to
pass the trivial checksum check and reach the part of the
code that it intends to test.
The effectiveness of grammar-based protocol fuzzers depends significantly on the protocol rules they use. Unfortunately, these rules are usually created manually by an expert
and are not easily transferable from one protocol to another.
Our main observation is that there is an untapped resource
of information available for network protocols in the form
of natural language specification documents (e.g. RFCs).
With the recent interest in using data to solve problems in
several fields, we ask the question: “Can we leverage natu-

Figure 1: NLP analysis: two possible outcomes for the
senses of the word “points” (top: verb, bottom: noun).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9478

