The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fair and Efficient Memory Sharing: Confronting Free Riders
Eric J. Friedman

Vasilis Gkatzelis

ICSI and UC Berkeley

Drexel University

Christos-Alexandros Psomas

Scott Shenker

Carnegie Mellon University

ICSI and UC Berkeley

Abstract

that memory without isolation. But, mechanisms that strive
for non-trivial efficiency guarantees through memory sharing are susceptible to unfairness and user manipulation. Our
goal in this paper is to design novel memory sharing mechanisms that optimize efficiency while guaranteeing fairness
and truthfulness (i.e., non-manipulability).
A fundamental notion of fairness, known as sharing incentives in systems or proportionality in AI, asks that every user should always be at least as happy as she would
be if memory isolation was used instead. Many of today’s multi-tenant environments, including cache systems
for cloud serving and big data storage (e.g., (Redis 2009;
Memcached 2003)), optimize efficiency by sharing all of
the memory and using LRU or MRU to decide which files
to keep in it. But, these policies are based only on the frequency of the requests and not on the identity of the requesting users, so they can inadvertently favor some users at the
expense of others, and violate proportionality.
As fairness becomes more relevant in large computing
systems (Verma et al. 2015; Ghodsi et al. 2013; 2011), users
demand individual quality of service guarantees (QoS). A
lot of recent work in AI focuses on building the foundations
necessary to design new fair protocols for a variety of relevant settings (e.g., (Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2018;
Fain, Munagala, and Shah 2018; Conitzer, Freeman, and
Shah 2017; Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2016; Parkes,
Procaccia, and Shah 2015; Goldman and Procaccia 2015;
Dickerson et al. 2014; Friedman, Ghodsi, and Psomas 2014;
Cole, Gkatzelis, and Goel 2013a; 2013b; Chen et al. 2013;
Maya and Nisan 2012; Gutman and Nisan 2012)).
The other important concern is the manipulability of the
mechanism. For instance, users can manipulate some memory allocation policies by artificially inflating the frequency
of their requests for some files. (Pu et al. 2016) experimentally demonstrated that strategically making excessive access requests for files can improve a user’s average response
time for the files that she actually wants. Strategic user behavior has also been observed in multiple other real systems (e.g., (Verma et al. 2015; Ghodsi et al. 2011)). Two
aspects of memory allocation that make the design of truthful mechanisms particularly challenging are i) the fact that
memory is a non-rival good, i.e., multiple users can simultaneously benefit from its contents, and ii) the inability to use
monetary payments to appropriately incentivize the users.

A cache memory unit needs to be shared among n strategic
agents. Each agent has different preferences over the files to
be brought into memory. The goal is to design a mechanism
that elicits these preferences in a truthful manner and outputs
a fair and efficient memory allocation. A trivially truthful and
fair solution would isolate each agent to a 1/n fraction of the
memory. However, this could be very inefficient if the agents
have similar preferences and, thus, there is room for cooperation. On the other hand, if the agents are not isolated, unless
the mechanism is carefully designed, they have incentives to
misreport their preferences and free ride on the files that others bring into memory. In this paper we explore the power and
limitations of truthful mechanisms in this setting. We demonstrate that mechanisms blocking agents from accessing parts
of the memory can achieve improved efficiency guarantees,
despite the inherent inefficiencies of blocking.

1

Introduction

Resource allocation is the foundation of any computer system, and a particularly challenging problem in cloud environments. In shared computer systems, the users have access
to the same (relatively small) cache memory unit, which they
can use for high-speed access to data files. A naive memory
management approach would be to partition this memory
into as many blocks as the number of users and to isolate
each user to her dedicated block. Traditional memory allocation policies, e.g., LRU (Least Recently Used) or MRU
(Most Recently Used), could then be used to decide which
files to keep in each block based on the frequency of the corresponding user’s requests. This approach offers individual
fairness guarantees to each user and users have no motive to
misrepresent their preferences. However, this isolation can
come at a great cost in terms of efficiency.
Although most of the files may be “private”, i.e., only a
single user wants each file, there may also exist a “public”
file, e.g., a massive dataset that multiple users wish to access. Depending on how frequently each user is expected to
access the public file, a much more efficient utilization of
the memory may be achieved through sharing. For instance,
several user blocks could be used to store as much of the
public file as possible, and the users could then access all of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1965

