The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Transferable Interactive Memory Network for
Domain Adaptation in Fine-Grained Opinion Extraction
Wenya Wang, Sinno Jialin Pan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wangwy, sinnopan}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

To address these problems, unsupervised domain adaptation methods can be applied to transfer knowledge learned
from labeled source domain to any unlabeled target domain. Suppose the source domain contains restaurant reviews, e.g., “They have nice food”, and the target domain is laptop, e.g., “The problem is the noisy fan”. Li
et al. (2012) proposed to use opinion seeds (nice, noisy)
and pre-mined common syntactic relations between aspect
and opinion terms (noisy→amod→fan, nice→amod→food)
to bridge the gap between different domains. They applied
bootstrapping method to iteratively select candidate aspect
terms and opinion terms for the target domain. Ding, Yu,
and Jiang (2017) proposed to use auxiliary tasks as a supervision that are integrated into a recurrent neural network to
learn shared representations for words across domains. The
auxiliary tasks are generated from manually-designed rules
that could inform common syntactic relations between target words. The above works both depend on prior knowledge to construct the bridges which are fixed and inflexible.
Recently, Wang and Pan (2018) applied recursive neural networks with pre-generated dependency tree for each sentence
to learn dependency-sensitive representation for each word,
where structural correspondences across domains are built
according to syntactic structures. This approach requires a
dependency parser that is not guaranteed to be accurate especially on user-generated texts, which may lead to negative
effect on the extraction performance.

In fine-grained opinion mining, aspect and opinion terms extraction has become a fundamental task that provides key information for user-generated texts. Despite its importance,
a lack of annotated resources in many domains impede the
ability to train a precise model. Very few attempts have applied unsupervised domain adaptation methods to transfer
fine-grained knowledge (in the word level) from some labeled
source domain(s) to any unlabeled target domain. Existing
methods depend on the construction of “pivot” knowledge,
e.g., common opinion terms or syntactic relations between
aspect and opinion words. In this work, we propose an interactive memory network that consists of local and global
memory units. The model could exploit both local and global
memory interactions to capture intra-correlations among aspect words or opinion words themselves, as well as the interconnections between aspect and opinion words. The source
space and the target space are aligned through these domaininvariant interactions by incorporating an auxiliary task and
domain adversarial networks. The proposed model does not
require any external resources and demonstrates promising
results on 3 benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Fine-grained opinion extraction involves the identification
of aspect terms (a.k.a opinion targets) and opinion terms.
As an illustrating example, given a review sentence “It’s
kinda loud when the computer fan is running”, the aspect
term and the opinion term to be extracted are computer fan
and loud, respectively. Several supervised models have been
proposed for fine-grained opinion extraction given sufficient
labeled training data. They treated the task as a sequence
labeling problem and apply graphical models (Jakob and
Gurevych 2010; Li et al. 2010) or deep learning models (Liu,
Joty, and Meng 2015; Yin et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017;
Li and Lam 2017) to solve it. However, the success of these
supervised models depends on the availability of annotated
resources, which are not the case in many real situations.
Although unsupervised methods have also been proposed to
extract aspect/opinion terms without any labeled data (Hu
and Liu 2004; Qiu et al. 2011), they largely relied on manual constructions of rules with pipelined procedures and the
performances are not promising.

To alleviate the dependency on linguistic resources to
construct prior knowledge, we propose a Transferable
Interactive Memory Network (TIMN) that could learn
shared representations across domains automatically and effectively. To be specific, the model consists of multiple layers of attention modules with both local and global memory units. The local memory includes the hidden representation of each word within an input sentence, whereas the
global memory includes an aspect summary vector and an
opinion summary vector. At each layer, the attention module
produces 2 sets of transformed representation and attention
weight for each word to update global aspect memory and
opinion memory, respectively, by exploiting the complex interactions between local and global memory units. The attention mechanism selects most probable aspect words to be
incorporated in the aspect summary, and opinion words to
be incorporated in opinion summary.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7192

