The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Active Generative Adversarial Network for Image Classification
Quan Kong,∗† Bin Tong,∗† Martin Klinkigt,†
Yuki Watanabe,‡ Naoto Akira,† Tomokazu Murakami†
†

Hitachi, Ltd. R&D Group, Japan
‡
Hitachi America, Ltd. USA
{quan.kong.xz, bin.tong.hh, martin.klinkigt.ut}@hitachi.com
{naoto.akira.vu, tomokazu.murakami.xr}@hitachi.com
yuki.watanabe@hal.hitachi.com
Abstract

ples close to the hyper-plane are often uncertain for a support vector machine (SVM) based classifier. Therefore, acquiring labels of those samples can reduce the uncertainty,
thereby reducing classification errors. In the area of active
learning, informative samples are selected from a pool of
unlabeled data by using criteria, such as degree of uncertainty. The labels of the selected samples are obtained by
querying a human oracle. Recently, there have been attempts
(Zhu and Bento 2017; Huijser and van Gemert 2017) which
label informative samples generated from a generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). In these
works, GAN is used to generate samples with the same distribution as the unlabeled dataset. In (Zhu and Bento 2017),
latent variables, which are able to generate samples that
have small distances to the classification hyper-plane, are
selected. These latent variables are used to generate samples that are labeled by involving an oracle. In (Huijser and
van Gemert 2017), a GAN is used to generate samples compound of two classes and the human oracle has to choose
the sample which cannot be clearly assigned to either class.
However, the above methods still need to use a pool of unlabeled data and query the human oracle.

Sufficient supervised information is crucial for any machine
learning models to boost performance. However, labeling
data is expensive and sometimes difficult to obtain. Active
learning is an approach to acquire annotations for data from
a human oracle by selecting informative samples with a high
probability to enhance performance. In recent emerging studies, a generative adversarial network (GAN) has been integrated with active learning to generate good candidates to
be presented to the oracle. In this paper, we propose a novel
model that is able to obtain labels for data in a cheaper manner without the need to query an oracle. In the model, a novel
reward for each sample is devised to measure the degree of
uncertainty, which is obtained from a classifier trained with
existing labeled data. This reward is used to guide a conditional GAN to generate informative samples with a higher
probability for a certain label. With extensive evaluations, we
have confirmed the effectiveness of the model, showing that
the generated samples are capable of improving the classification performance in popular image classification tasks.

Introduction
Machine learning models including traditional ones and new
emerging deep neural networks require sufficient supervised
information, i.e., class labels, to achieve fair performance.
In situations in which labeled data is expensive or difficult
to obtain, these models degenerate in performance. Active
learning (Settles 2009a) is proposed for handling such a
problem. It aims to find the best approach to leverage a limited number of labeled data and to reduce the cost of data annotation. Active learning selects informative samples from a
pool of unlabeled data and obtains their labels by involving
a human oracle. In this paper, we investigate the problem
of lack of labeled data from a new and different perspective. We propose a model to improve learning performance,
which is able to make use of limited labeled data without using any additional unlabeled data nor involving any human
oracle to acquire labels.
As to a classification model, informative samples are
those that are able to better contribute to improving classification performance than other samples. For example, sam-

Unlike the above methods, we investigate the problem of
how to acquire labeled data to improve the classification performance by only using a limited number of labeled data.
A straightforward way is to use conditional GAN (Mirza
and Osindero 2014; Odena, Olah, and Shlens 2017) for generating labeled samples. However, for a class of samples,
most generated samples may fall inside its convex hull. Samples inside this convex hull are less discriminative to other
classes, while samples along or even outside of the convex hull are informative to optimize the hyper-plane of the
classifier. In the idea of active learning, a classifier trained
with existing labeled data provides a signal to determine if
a sample is uncertain to the hyper-plane of the classifier. In
this work, we use this external signal to guide the conditional GAN in generating informative labeled samples with
a higher probability that contribute to improving classification performance. This can be regarded as an optimization with a trade-off between generation of samples with the
same distribution as the training samples and generation of
informative samples. This discipline is widely used in machine learning, such as penalizing complexity of parameters
to avoid over-fitting. The contribution of our work is two-

∗

contribute equally to this paper.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4090

