The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Safeguarded Dynamic Label Regression for Noisy Supervision
Jiangchao Yao,†,‡ Hao Wu,† Ya Zhang,† Ivor W. Tsang,‡ Jun Sun†
†

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
‡
Center for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
{sunarker, howiethepeanut, ya zhang, junsun}@sjtu.edu.cn ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au

Abstract

simultaneously (Arpit et al. 2017). To overcome this issue,
several methods have been explored respectively in the perspective of model regularization, sample re-weighting and
noise transition. Arpit et al.(2017) applied the regularization
in DNNs to limit its speed of memorizing noise, which prevents the classifier from the noise pollution. Ma et al.(2018)
directly corrected the supervision of the classifier by weighting the noisy label with its prediction. However, the methods
via model regularization or sample re-weighting usually requires careful hyperparameter selection or network design.
This paper focuses on learning with noise transition. One
theoretically grounded work (Patrini et al. 2017) constructed
a pre-estimated noise transition on top of the classifier to reduce the influence of noise. Subsequent improvement (Goldberger and Ben-Reuven 2017) adapts the pre-estimation via
a Softmax layer along with the training progress. Although it
enjoys theoretical guarantees, the model performance via a
Softmax layer depends on highly tweaking and the parameters easily get stuck into undesired local minimums. To overcome this issue, we propose to model the noise transition in
a Bayesian form. Specifically, the proposed model, Latent
Class-Conditional Noise model (LCCN), embeds the noise
transition into a Dirichlet-distributed space to constrain the
learning on a simplex instead of some ad-hoc parametric
space. Furthermore, a dynamic label regression method is
deduced for LCCN to iteratively infer the latent true labels
and apply them for the classifier training and the noise modeling. It theoretically safeguards the bounded update of the
noise transition to avoid arbitrarily tuning as in (Goldberger
and Ben-Reuven 2017) via a batch of samples.
Figure 1 provides the illustration of our safeguarded dynamic label regression for LCCN. As can be seen, images
are first input to the classifier to have the prediction of latent true labels. Noisy labels are also forwarded to Bayesian
noise modeling to compute the conditional transition of latent true labels. Then, the true labels are sampled based on
their product and used to supervise the classifier and refine
the noise modeling. The whole model is trained end-to-end
and scalable to large datasets. In a nutshell, our main contribution can be summarized into the following three points.

Learning with noisy labels is imperative in the Big Data era
since it reduces expensive labor on accurate annotations. Previous method, learning with noise transition, has enjoyed theoretical guarantees when it is applied to the scenario with the
class-conditional noise. However, this approach critically depends on an accurate pre-estimated noise transition, which is
usually impractical. Subsequent improvement adapts the preestimation in the form of a Softmax layer along with the training progress. However, the parameters in the Softmax layer
are highly tweaked for the fragile performance and easily get
stuck into undesired local minimums. To overcome this issue,
we propose a Latent Class-Conditional Noise model (LCCN)
that models the noise transition in a Bayesian form. By projecting the noise transition into a Dirichlet-distributed space,
the learning is constrained on a simplex instead of some adhoc parametric space. Furthermore, we specially deduce a
dynamic label regression method for LCCN to iteratively infer the latent true labels and jointly train the classifier and
model the noise. Our approach theoretically safeguards the
bounded update of the noise transition, which avoids arbitrarily tuning via a batch of samples. Extensive experiments
have been conducted on controllable noise data with CIFAR10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, and the agnostic noise data with
Clothing1M and WebVision17 datasets. Experimental results
have demonstrated that the proposed model outperforms several state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Large-scale datasets with editorial annotations have greatly
driven the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), natural language processing (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)
and speech recognition (Hinton et al. 2012). However, it is
usually expensive to collect the clean data in such large volume in many real-world applications. As an alternative, the
noisily annotated data on the social websites can be easily
acquired inexhaustibly. For example, there are thousands of
object photos annotated by social users on the Flickr website. This motivates several works devoted to learning with
noisy labels from the deep learning community.
The challenging problem for DNNs in the setting of noisy
labels is that it easily memorizes the clean data and the noise

• We propose a Latent Class-Conditional Noise model that
embeds the noise transition into a Dirichlet space to avoid
non-trivially tweaking, and deduce a dynamic label regression method for the model learning.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9103

