The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Strategic Tasks for Explainable Reinforcement Learning
Rey Pocius, Lawrence Neal, Alan Fern
Collaborative Robotics and Intelligent Systems Institute
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA

Commonly-used sequential decision making tasks such
as the games in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE)
provide rich observation spaces suitable for deep reinforcement learning (Bellemare et al. 2013). However, they consist mostly of low-level control tasks which are of limited
use for the development of explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) due to the fine temporal resolution of the tasks. Many
of these domains also lack built-in high level abstractions
and symbols. Existing tasks that provide for both strategic
decision-making and rich observation spaces are either difficult to simulate or are intractable. We provide a set of new
strategic decision-making tasks specialized for the development and evaluation of explainable AI methods, built as constrained mini-games within the StarCraft II Learning Environment (Vinyals et al. 2017).

Figure 1: Game screenshot of the proposed partiallyobservable strategic decision-making task.

StarCraft II

Explainable Artificial Intelligence

Real time strategy games offer promising scenarios for explanation. However, full scale games such as StarCraft II are
unsolved by current techniques. Using the full state space
is not necessary for preserving the strategic features of the
game which are required for research on explanation. These
kinds of games are prime ground for XAI research but lack
tractable tasks that capture the long term strategic components of the game. Current mini-games in the StarCraft II
Learning Environment only involve low level micromanagement tasks. We propose new strategic tasks that are suited for
explainable reinforcement learning. These tasks include custom decomposed rewards which can be used by a SARSA
style algorithm to produce reward difference explanations
(Erwig et al. 2018).
In a human information processing study of StarCraft II
(Penney et al. 2017), key decision points are defined as those
that are critically important to the outcome of the game. Human evaluators of StarCraft agents consistently seek four
categories of key decision points: building/producing, fighting, moving, and scouting. Our tasks reduce the StarCraft
II action space while preserving each of these key decision
point categories.

Recent successes with training neural networks has led to
a torrent of new AI applications. However, the usability of
these systems in real world scenarios is limited by their inability to explain decision making to human users. There
exists a great need for XAI if non-expert users are to trust
and manage autonomous systems. Many state of the art reinforcement learning algorithms have received criticism for
being black boxes. Although many of these algorithms have
achieved superhuman performance on a number of the ALE
games, they are not very interpretable (Gunning et al. 2017).
We view low level control tasks as difficult for explainability. In these tasks an individual decision generally does
not have a large effect on the agent’s final outcome. Low
level explanations likely would be uninformative to the average user. Saliency maps have been proposed as way to explain intelligent decision, but these maps do not help to explain long term causality and can be sensitive (Kindermans
et al. 2017). These maps are not easy to interpret for the average user and are unexplainable on certain tasks (Greydanus
et al. 2018). Many tasks have an action space that mimics
the human user-interface. Although it is compelling to strive
to train agents on large state-action spaces, the lack of high
level abstractions for sequential actions in these games is a
roadblock for XAI techniques.

Tasks for Explainability
We developed three tasks well suited for explainability research. The tasks abstract the high level strategic features of
the game, and state transitions result in distinct states with
rich observation data to be used for interpreting the system.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10007

