The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Iterated Belief Base Revision: A Dynamic Epistemic Logic Approach
Marlo Souza,1 Álvaro Moreira,2 Renata Vieira3
1

Department of Computer Science, UFBA, Salvador, Brazil
2
Institute of Informatics, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil
3
Polytechnic School, PUCRS, Porto Alegre, Brazil
msouza1@ufba.br, alvaro.moreira@ufrgs.br, renata.vieira@pucrs.br

Abstract

formal connections have been established between belief
change postulates and these belief base change operators
- some examples of works that investigate such connection are (Hansson 1994; Fermé, Krevneris, and Reis 2008;
Fermé, Garapa, and Reis 2017). The axiomatic characterisation of syntactic-based belief change, however, has been
concentrated on the one-shot behaviour of these operations
and, thus, are not able to clarify their iterated or dynamic
behaviour.
Belief base change operators are iterated, in the sense
that they result in changing the belief state of the agent
(Nayak, Pagnucco, and Peppas 2003). As such, it is necessary to establish which formal properties these change operations satisfy on a dynamic sense, as studied in the literature of Iterated Belief Change (Darwiche and Pearl 1997;
Nayak, Pagnucco, and Peppas 2003; Jin and Thielscher
2007).
A step into connecting belief change operators and belief base change operators has been achieved by the work of
Rott (2009) and Liu (2011) which show that several belief
change operations can be defined using transformations on
some form of prioritised belief bases called priority graphs.
Souza et al. (2016), on the other hand, provide examples of
belief change operations which cannot be defined in such a
way.
While these latter works focus on using syntactic representations to construct belief change operations, they do
not provide a strong connection between the syntactic-based
transformations provided and the formal properties of the
belief change operations they represent. To our knowledge,
there is no proposed characterisation in the literature of iterated belief change postulates based on syntactic representations of an agent’s belief base.
In this work, we study the relationship between iterated
belief change postulates and properties of belief base change
operators based on the counterpart of these operators as
transformations on Liu’s priority graphs (2011). We obtain
constraints on belief base change operators that guarantee
satisfaction of some important postulates in the area of Iterated Belief Change.
We also show the limits of expressibility of belief change
operators by means of changes in belief bases. These negative results provide us with a deeper understanding of the
connections between belief base change and iterated belief

AGM’s belief revision is one of the main paradigms in the
study of belief change operations. In this context, belief
bases (prioritised bases) have been largely used to specify
the agent’s belief state - whether representing the agent’s ‘explicit beliefs’ or as a computational model for her belief state.
While the connection of iterated AGM-like operations and
their encoding in dynamic epistemic logics have been studied before, few works considered how well-known postulates
from iterated belief revision theory can be characterised by
means of belief bases and their counterpart in dynamic epistemic logic. This work investigates how priority graphs, a
syntactic representation of preference relations deeply connected to prioritised bases, can be used to characterise belief
change operators, focusing on well-known postulates of Iterated Belief Change. We provide syntactic representations
of belief change operators in a dynamic context, as well as
new negative results regarding the possibility of representing
an iterated belief revision operation using transformations on
priority graphs.

Introduction
One of the most influential models for belief change is
the so-called AGM paradigm, named after the authors of
the seminal work (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson
1985). Although the AGM’s approach has brought profound
developments for the problem of belief dynamics, influencing areas such as Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence,
and Philosophy, it has not been immune to criticism (Hansson 1992; Rott 2000; Darwiche and Pearl 1997).
Particularly, Hansson (1992) criticises the use of deductively closed sets of formulas in the AGM paradigm, providing examples for which not just the meaning, but also the
structure of the beliefs explicitly held by an agent may influence the change. This author proceeds to construct a different notion of belief revision, which became known as Belief
Base Change, relying on the structure of the information believed by the agent.
While many studies (Nebel 1991; Williams 1994; 1995;
Rott 2009) propose belief change operators based on the
syntactic structure of an agent’s explicit beliefs, or on
the syntactic representation of an agent’s belief state, few
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3076

