The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Object Context for Dense Captioning
Xiangyang Li,1,2 Shuqiang Jiang,1,2 Jungong Han3
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, United Kingdom
xiangyang.li@vipl.ict.ac.cn, sqjiang@ict.ac.cn, jungonghan77@gmail.com
Abstract

Dense captioning is a challenging task which not only detects
visual elements in images but also generates natural language
sentences to describe them. Previous approaches do not leverage object information in images for this task. However, objects provide valuable cues to help predict the locations of
caption regions as caption regions often highly overlap with
objects (i.e. caption regions are usually parts of objects or
combinations of them). Meanwhile, objects also provide important information for describing a target caption region as
the corresponding description not only depicts its properties,
but also involves its interactions with objects in the image. In
this work, we propose a novel scheme with an object context
encoding Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network to automatically learn complementary object context for each caption region, transferring knowledge from objects to caption
regions. All contextual objects are arranged as a sequence
and progressively fed into the context encoding module to
obtain context features. Then both the learned object context
features and region features are used to predict the bounding box offsets and generate the descriptions. The context
learning procedure is in conjunction with the optimization of
both location prediction and caption generation, thus enabling
the object context encoding LSTM to capture and aggregate
useful object context. Experiments on benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our proposed approach over
the state-of-the-art methods.

A boy riding a horse.
(person, horse)

The head of a girl.
(person)

Surfer with part of board out of water. Grass near the horse.
(horse)
(person, surferboard)
Caption Region

Contextual Object

Figure 1: Illustration of caption regions and contextual objects which provide valuable cues for predicting locations
and generating the target descriptions (Best viewed in color).

Yang et al. 2017) aims to describe the content of images at
local region level, which not only detects visual elements but
also generates natural language sentences to describe them.
Dense captioning is similar to object detection in the sense
that they both need to locate regions of interest in images.
The difference is that dense captioning generates natural language descriptions for regions while object detection assigns
fixed class labels to them. Currently, the prevailing framework for dense captioning consists of three components: (i)
A region proposal component is used to reduce the number of candidates to be described, which is similar to the
region proposal network (RPN) (Ren et al. 2015) in object
detection. (ii) A language component is used to generate descriptions for all the proposals. (iii) A regression component
is used to predict the bounding boxes of the captioned region candidates. Johnson et al. (Johnson, Karpathy, and FeiFei 2016) utilize a fully convolutional localization network
for this task. As bounding boxes of target regions are highly
overlapped with each other and the annotated concepts are

Introduction
Over the past few years, significant progress has been made
in image understanding. In addition to image classification
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and
Zisserman 2015; Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018), object detection
(Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016; Hu et al. 2018) and image captioning (Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Xu et al. 2015;
Gu et al. 2018), some more challenging tasks such as scene
graph generation (Xu et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017; Klawonn and Heim 2018) and visual question answering (Shih,
Singh, and Hoiem 2016; Anderson et al. 2018) can be implemented by state-of-the-art visual understanding systems.
In order to reveal more details in images and alleviate the
problem of reporting bias (Gordon and Van Durme 2013),
dense captioning (Johnson, Karpathy, and Fei-Fei 2016;
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8650

