The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Find a Reasonable Ending for Stories:
Does Logic Relation Help the Story Cloze Test?
Mingyue Shang,1, Zhenxin Fu,1 Hongzhi Yin,2 Bo Tang,4 Dongyan Zhao,1,3 Rui Yan1,3∗
1

Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, China, 2 The University of Queensland, Australia
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University, China, 4 Southern University of Science and Technology, China

Email: shangmy@pku.edu.cn
predicts a relation from {Entail, Neutral, conflict} of two
sentences. The SCT is designed to choose a reasonable ending from two candidates, given four sentences as context
(a.k.a plot). Compared with SCT, labels in the NLI task indicates explicit logic relations. In this paper, we explore to enhance the logic information representations with the help of
NLI task to infer the relationship between the story context
and the ending, as logic is an essential element of a story.
To this end, we propose a fully neural network based
method that contains three components: a Content Unit (CU)
to encode the plot and the ending to get a content vector of
the whole story; a Logic Unit (LU)–the core unit to introduce logic features–to extract the logic relationship between
each sentence in the plot and the ending, and then track the
logic flow of the whole story; a Score Unit (SU) to generate a score to indicate the reasonableness of the ending for
the plot. Drawing upon modeling both content and logic into
SCT, our method aims to provide new insights into story understanding task.

Abstract
Natural language understanding is a challenging problem that
covers a wide range of tasks. While previous methods generally train each task separately, we consider combining the
cross-task features to enhance the task performance. In this
paper, we incorporate the logic information with the help of
the Natural Language Inference (NLI) task to the Story Cloze
Test (SCT). Previous work on SCT considered various semantic information, such as sentiment and topic, but lack the
logic information between sentences which is an essential element of stories. Thus we propose to extract the logic information during the course of the story to improve the understanding of the whole story. The logic information is modeled
with the help of the NLI task. Experimental results prove the
strength of the logic information.

Introduction
Natural language understanding is an important field of Natural Language Processing which contains various tasks such
as text classification, natural language inference (NLI) and
story comprehension. These tasks differ in many aspects including the input formation and task goals. For example, the
text classification task takes one sequence (a sentence or a
document) as input to predict a label, while the NLI task
takes two sequences as inputs to infer a relationship. Previous methods typically adopt supervised training to train
a task-specific model. As the goal of tasks varies, the features that each model could extract also differs. While these
features are treated separately in previous methods, it is intuitive that combining features across tasks may help to enhance the information representations. In this paper, we aim
to explore the effectiveness of incorporating the features
from one specific task to another task.
Particularly, we investigate the feasibility of incorporating features learned in the NLI task into Story Cloze Test
(SCT) (Mostafazadeh et al. 2016) for the following reasons:
datasets of these two tasks are in similar but still subtly
different domains; the input and output form of the tasks
are completely different which means distinct features are
learned during the supervised training process. The NLI task

Architecture
Figure 1 gives an overview of the proposed model. Concretely, a plot p = {w1 , . . . , w4 } and a candidate ending
e = w5 are fed to both CU and LU, where wi means the
i-th sentence. After that, the SU takes the output of CU and
LU as input and produces a score. A higher score means the
ending is more reasonable to the plot, and vise versa.
Content Unit. Inspired by Cai, Tu, and Gimpel (2017), we
implement the hierarchical recurrent neural network (RNN)
to encode the 4-sentence plot and the ending into a content
vector. The hierarchical RNN contains a word level RNN
(referred as W-Enc) and a sentence level RNN (referred as
S-Enc), which are bi-directional GRU for both levels.
The W-Enc first converts each sentence wi into hidden
states hw,i = {h1w,i , . . . , hnw,i }, and then computes the attention of the ending over each sentence through hidden states,
denoted as βi = {βi1 , . . . , βin }. The sentence vector si is calculated as the attention-weighted sum of the hidden states.
Then the S-Enc encodes the plot P = {s1 , . . . , s4 } and the
ending E = {s5 }, respectively. The final content vector Vc
is defined as Vc = [up ; ue ], where up and ue are the hidden
state of the plot P and the ending E at the final step, and [; ]
means concatenation.
Logic Unit. Logic Unit consists of a logic extractor to capture the logic relation of two sentences and a logic tracker to

∗

Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@pku.edu.cn)
Supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No.
2017YFC0804001) and the NSFC (No. 61672058&61876196)
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10031

