The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-View Anomaly Detection:
Neighborhood in Locality Matters*
Xiang-Rong Sheng, De-Chuan Zhan, Su Lu, Yuan Jiang
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{shengxr, zhandc, lus, jiangy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

Normal
Normal

Identifying anomalies in multi-view data is a difficult task
due to the complicated data characteristics of anomalies.
Specifically, there are two types of anomalies in multi-view
data–anomalies that have inconsistent features across multiple views and anomalies that are consistently anomalous
in each view. Existing multi-view anomaly detection approaches have some issues, e.g., they assume multiple views
of a normal instance share consistent and normal clustering
structures while anomaly exhibits anomalous clustering characteristics across multiple views. When there are no clusters
in data, it is difficult for existing approaches to detect anomalies. Besides, existing approaches construct a profile of normal instances, then identify instances that do not conform to
the normal profile as anomalies. The objective is formulated
to profile normal instances, but not to estimate the set of normal instances, which results in sub-optimal detectors. In addition, the model trained to profile normal instances uses the
entire dataset including anomalies. However, anomalies could
undermine the model, i.e., the model is not robust to anomalies. To address these issues, we propose the nearest neighborbased MUlti-View Anomaly Detection (M UVAD) approach.
Specifically, we first propose an anomaly measurement criterion and utilize this criterion to formulate the objective of
M UVAD to estimate the set of normal instances explicitly.
We further develop two concrete relaxations for implementing the M UVAD as M UVAD-QPR and M UVAD-FSR. Experimental results validate the superiority of the proposed M U VAD approaches.

View 1

Attribute
Class

View 2

Figure 1: Illustration of normal instances, unanimous
anomaly and dissension anomaly. Both views derive from
the same original instances. Here, blue circles and orange
squares are normal instances with different labels. The red
up-triangle is a dissension anomaly and the green downtriangle is an unanimous anomaly. Note that labels of the
red up-triangle in two views create dissension and the green
down-triangle is consistently distant from normal instances.

signify the presence of a certain disease (Spence, Parra, and
Sajda 2001). Anomaly detection also plays a significant role
in network systems, where anomalies could stand for malicious attacks (Ding et al. 2012).
Nowadays, data are usually collected from diverse
sources and different sources of data exhibit heterogeneous
properties. Features from a particular source are regarded
as a particular view to describe the object. Multi-view
learning approaches can utilize the abundant information
of different views and explore the consistency property to
get better generalization ability (Blum and Mitchell 1998;
Wang and Zhou 2010; Bickel and Scheffer 2004; Jia, Salzmann, and Darrell 2010; Kumar, Rai, and Daumé III 2011;
Ye et al. 2015). Although the consistency property provides
more information facilitating the discrimination, it also
brings more challenges for anomaly detection since anomalies now have more complicated data characteristics. Specifically, anomalies in multi-view data can be classified into
two groups: (i) anomaly that has inconsistent features across
multiple views and (ii) anomaly that is consistently anomalous in each view. For simplicity, we will refer to viewinconsistent anomaly as “dissension anomaly” and consistently anomalous anomaly as “unanimous anomaly”. The
different characteristics of these two types of anomalies are
illustrated in Fig. 1.

Introduction
Anomalies are data patterns that possess different data characteristics from normal instances. Anomaly detection aims
at identifying anomalies in a given dataset, which is an
important task due to the fact that anomalies often provide significant and critical information. For example, in
credit card transactions, anomalies could indicate fraudulent
credit card usage (Aleskerov, Freisleben, and Rao 1997). In
computer-assisted diagnosis, anomaly detection techniques
are widely used to detect anomalous images which could
* This research was supported by the National Key R&D
Program of China (2018YFB1004300), the NSFC (61773198,
61632004)
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4894

