The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spectral Clustering in Heterogeneous Information Networks
Xiang Li,1 Ben Kao,2 Zhaochun Ren,1 Dawei Yin1
1

2

Data Science Lab, JD.com, China
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{lixiang81, renzhaochun}@jd.com, kao@cs.hku.hk, yindawei@acm.org

Abstract

A heterogeneous information network (HIN) is a network
structure whose objects could assume different object types
and links between objects could represent different kinds
of relationships between objects. HINs are ubiquitous and
are used to model many different kinds of real-world data.
For example, the Facebook open graph1 models users, posts,
events, and pages as four different kinds of objects. A user
can publish a post, attend an event, or like a page, which illustrates three different kinds of connections relating a user
object to a post/event/page object. Compared with homogeneous networks (in which objects are of single type and links
model single relation), HINs are a richer construct for capturing complex objects and their relations.
Data analytics on HINs has been an active area of research (Sun et al. 2011; Li et al. 2016). Being a fundamental task in machine learning and data mining, cluster analysis has found interesting applications in HINs. For example,
clustering Facebook users based on their interests enables
effective target and viral marketing (Li et al. 2017). Even
though spectral clustering is very effective for data that is
modeled as (homogeneous) network/graph (Liu et al. 2013),
there are surprisingly few studies that apply spectral clustering to HINs. The objective of this paper is to study how
spectral clustering can be effectively applied to HINs to improve clustering quality.

Spectral clustering transforms clustering into a graph partitioning problem that optimizes a certain criterion that measures the quality of the partitions, such as the normalized
cuts (Shi and Malik 2000). Generally, given a set of objects
X = {x1 , x2 , ..., xn }, standard spectral clustering methods
first construct an undirected graph G = (X, S), where X
denotes the vertex set and S is a matrix such that Sij measures the similarity between objects xi and xj .2 Then, the
Laplacian matrix LS is computed based on which eigendecomposition is performed to obtain k eigenvectors that
correspond to the k smallest eigenvalues, where k is the
number of desired clusters. These eigenvectors are used as
new feature space of objects. Finally, a post-processing step,
such as k-means (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002) and spectral
rotation (Yu and Shi 2003) is applied to partition the objects
into k clusters.
Previous studies have shown that the performance of spectral clustering highly depends on the “quality” of the similarity matrix (Nie et al. 2016). Intuitively, a high-quality
matrix S is one such that Sij is large if objects xi and
xj ought to be in the same cluster and Sij is small otherwise. The challenges of constructing a high-quality matrix S in HINs are two-fold. First, although the similarity between two objects in an HIN can be measured by
conventional network distances (such as shortest paths or
random-walk based similarity), previous works have shown
that meta-path/meta-structure based similarity is much more
effective in HINs (Sun et al. 2011; Huang et al. 2016;
Fang et al. 2016). (We use meta-paths in this paper and
our method can be easily adapted to using meta-structures.)
A meta-path is a sequence of object types that expresses a
path-based relation between two objects. For example, in
Facebook, the meta-path User-Event-User represents the relation between users who have attended the same event;
the meta-path User-Page-User captures the relation between
two users who have liked the same product page. An interesting issue is how various meta-paths can be integrated
to formulate a similarity matrix that exhibits a clear clustering structure. Second, a theoretically infinite number of
meta-paths can be derived from an HIN (with meta-paths
composed of different object types and of various lengths).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://developers.facebook.com/docs/sharing/opengraph

2
Given a matrix M , we use Mij or M [i, j] to refer to the (i,j)th entry of M .

A heterogeneous information network (HIN) is one whose
objects are of different types and links between objects could
model different object relations. We study how spectral clustering can be effectively applied to HINs. In particular, we
focus on how meta-path relations are used to construct an effective similarity matrix based on which spectral clustering
is done. We formulate the similarity matrix construction as
an optimization problem and propose the SClump algorithm
for solving the problem. We conduct extensive experiments
comparing SClump with other state-of-the-art clustering algorithms on HINs. Our results show that SClump outperforms the competitors over a range of datasets w.r.t. different
clustering quality measures.

1

Introduction

4221

