The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Uncovering Specific-Shape Graph Anomalies in Attributed Graphs
Nannan Wu,∗ Wenjun Wang,∗ Feng Chen,† Jianxin Li,‡ Bo Li,‡ Jinpeng Huai‡
∗

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
†
Dept. of Computer Science, University at Albany, SUNY, Albany, NY 12203
‡
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{wunannan, lijx, libo}@act.buaa.edu.cn wwj@pku.org.cn fchen5@albany.edu huaijp@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
As networks are ubiquitous in the modern era, point anomalies have been changed to graph anomalies in terms of
anomaly shapes. However, the specific-shape priors about
anomalous subgraphs of interest are seldom considered by
the traditional approaches when detecting the subgraphs
in attributed graphs (e.g., computer networks, Bitcoin networks, and etc.). This paper proposes a nonlinear approach
to specific-shape graph anomaly detection. The nonlinear approach focuses on optimizing a broad class of nonlinear cost
functions via specific-shape constraints in attributed graphs.
Our approach can be used to many different graph anomaly
settings. The traditional approaches can only support linear
cost functions (e.g., an aggregation function for the summation of node weights). However, our approach can employ
more powerful nonlinear cost functions, and enjoys a rigorous theoretical guarantee on the near-optimal solution with
the geometrical convergence rate.

Figure 1: The main idea of uncovering specific-shape graph
anomalies by the powerful nonlinear function within the
continuous space (Akoglu, Tong, and Koutra 2015). In the
attributed graph, abnormal vertices come with red circles.

Introduction
In numerous network applications, the computer network
data of interest consist of “star-shape” attacking subgraphs (Wu et al. 2017), and the political blog data of interest
consist of “core-periphery” graph shape anomalies (Zhang,
Martin, and Newman 2015). Anomalies appear in the real
network applications in the form of specific-shapes rather
than point shapes. In the cyber attack detection applications
in Figure 1, the deep node (i.e., computer) color represents
the higher “transfer rate”. Given the “star-shape” anomaly
query in Figure 1, we formulate the following specific-shape
constrained minimization problem to uncover the specific
shape attack subgraph anomalies:
min ϕ(x)

x∈Rn

s.t.

supp(x) ∈ M(Q).

graphs {C} are subgraph of the attributed graph G, and are
isomorphic to the specific-shape anomalous graph prior Q.
The basic intuition for Problem (1) is that the cost function
ϕ is minimized at the constrained x whose nonzero entry
index set supp(x) := {v | xv 6= 0, v ∈ V } corresponds to
the specific-shape vertex set VC from M(Q).
To motivate this problem, in an attributed computer network G, we represent the attribute matrix W as “transfer
T
rate” attributes. Let Wv := Wv,:
be the p-dimensional attribute vector for the vertex v ∈ V in the attributed graph
G, and W(i) := W:,i be the n-dimensional attribute vector
for the attribute i ∈ [p]. Let W(0) denote as the vector w.
Problem (1) for identifying cyber attacking scenarios can be
formulated as the least square problem: minx∈Rn ||w − x||22 ,
subject to supp(x) ∈ M(Q) (Chen and Zhou 2016).
Related work. Point anomalies (i.e., outliers) can be considered as a binary 0/1 classification problem (Akoglu, Tong,
and Koutra 2015). These approaches just assign what is
called an outlierness score to each node. The specific-shape
anomaly is not considered in these approaches. A number of approaches are proposed specifically for the graph
anomaly detection problem. They can be directly classified as vector-based and graph-based approaches from the

(1)

where ϕ : Rn 7→ R is a powerful nonlinear cost function. An
attributed graph G = (V, E, W) is comprised of a set of n
vertices V = [v] = {1, · · · , n}, an edge set E ⊆ V ×V , and
an attribute matrix W ∈ Rn×p (p, the number of attributes).
Given the specific-shape anomalous graph prior Q, let VQ
denote the vertex set of Q, and M(Q) := {VC | C ⊆ G, C ∼
=
Q} be the family set of “specific-shape” vertex sets, whose
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5433

