The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Non-Autoregressive Neural Machine Translation with Enhanced Decoder Input
Junliang Guo,†∗ Xu Tan,‡ Di He,§ Tao Qin,‡ Linli Xu,† Tie-Yan Liu‡
†
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
Microsoft Research
§
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
†
guojunll@mail.ustc.edu.cn, linlixu@ustc.edu.cn, ‡ {xuta,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com, § di he@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Since AT models generate target tokens sequentially, the
inference speed becomes a bottleneck for real-world translation systems, in which fast response and low latency are
expected. To speed up the inference of machine translation,
non-autoregressive models (Gu et al. 2017) have been proposed, which generate all target tokens independently and
simultaneously. Instead of using previously generated tokens as in AT models, NAT models take other global signals derived from the source sentence as input. Specifically,
Non-AutoRegressive Transformer (NART) (Gu et al. 2017)
takes a copy of source sentence x as the decoder input, and
the copy process is guided by fertilities (Brown et al. 1993)
which represents how many times each source token will be
copied; after that all target tokens are simultaneously predicted:
yt = D(x̂, E(x)),
(2)

Non-autoregressive translation (NAT) models, which remove
the dependence on previous target tokens from the inputs of
the decoder, achieve significantly inference speedup but at the
cost of inferior accuracy compared to autoregressive translation (AT) models. Previous work shows that the quality of
the inputs of the decoder is important and largely impacts
the model accuracy. In this paper, we propose two methods
to enhance the decoder inputs so as to improve NAT models. The first one directly leverages a phrase table generated
by conventional SMT approaches to translate source tokens
to target tokens, which are then fed into the decoder as inputs. The second one transforms source-side word embeddings to target-side word embeddings through sentence-level
alignment and word-level adversary learning, and then feeds
the transformed word embeddings into the decoder as inputs.
Experimental results show our method largely outperforms
the NAT baseline (Gu et al. 2017) by 5.11 BLEU scores
on WMT14 English-German task and 4.72 BLEU scores on
WMT16 English-Romanian task.

1

where x̂ = (x̂1 , ..., x̂Ty ) is the copied source sentence and
Ty is the length of the target sentence y.
While NAT models significantly reduce the inference latency, they suffer from accuracy degradation compared with
their autoregressive counterparts. We notice that the encoder
of AT models and that of NAT models are the same; the
differences lie in the decoder. In AT models, the generation of the t-th token yt is conditioned on previously generated tokens y1:t−1 , which provides strong target side context
information. In contrast, as NART models generate tokens
in parallel, there is no such target-side information available. Although the fertilities are learned to cover target-side
information in NART (Gu et al. 2017), such information
contained in the copied source tokens x̂ guided by fertilities is indirect and weak because the copied tokens are still
in the domain of source language, while the inputs of the
decoder of AT models are target-side tokens y1:t−1 . Consequently, the decoder of a NAT model has to handle the
translation task conditioned on less and weaker information
compared with its AT counterpart, thus leading to inferior
accuracy. As verified by our study (see Figure 2 and Table 3), NART performs poorly for long sentences, which
need stronger target-side conditional information for correct
translation than short sentences.
In this paper, we aim to enhance the decoder inputs of
NAT models so as to reduce the difficulty of the task that
the decoder needs to handle. Our basic idea is to directly
feed target-side tokens as the inputs of the decoder. We pro-

Introduction

The neural network based encoder-decoder framework has
achieved very promising performance for machine translation and different network architectures have been proposed, including RNNs (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014; Cho et al. 2014a; Wu
et al. 2016), CNNs (Gehring et al. 2017), and self-attention
based Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017). All those models
translate a source sentence in an autoregressive manner, i.e.,
they generate a target sentence word by word from left to
right (Wu et al. 2018) and the generation of t-th token yt
depends on previously generated tokens y1:t−1 :
yt = D(y1:t−1 , E(x)),

(1)

where E(·) and D(·) denote the encoder and decoder of the
model respectively, x is the source sentence and E(x) is the
output of the encoder, i.e., the set of hidden representations
in the top layer of the encoder.
∗
The work was done when the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3723

