The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dependency Grammar Induction
with a Neural Variational Transition-Based Parser
Bowen Li, Jianpeng Cheng, Yang Liu, Frank Keller
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK
{bowen.li, jianpeng.cheng, yang.liu2}@ed.ac.uk, keller@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract

Though graph-based models achieve impressive results,
their inference procedure requires O(n3 ) time complexity.
Meanwhile, features in graph-based models must be decomposable over substructures to enable dynamic programming.
In comparison, transition-based models allow faster inference with linear time complexity and richer feature sets.
Although relying on local inference, transition-based models have been shown to perform well in supervised parsing
(Kiperwasser and Goldberg 2016; Dyer et al. 2015). However, unsupervised transition parsers are not well-studied.
One exception is the work of Rasooli and Faili (2012), in
which search-based structure prediction (Daumé III 2009) is
used with a simple feature set. However, there is still a large
performance gap compared to graph-based models.
Recently, Dyer et al. (2016) proposed recurrent neural network grammars (RNNGs)—a probabilistic transitionbased model for constituency trees. RNNG can be used either in a generative way as a language model or in a discriminative way as a parser. Cheng, Lopez, and Lapata (2017)
use an autoencoder to integrate discriminative and generative RNNGs, yielding a reconstruction process with parse
trees as latent variables and enabling the two components to
be trained jointly on a language modeling objective. However, their work uses observed trees for training and does
not study unsupervised learning.
In this paper, we make a more radical departure from
the existing literature in dependency grammar induction,
by proposing an unsupervised neural variational transitionbased parser. Specifically, we first modify the transition actions in the original RNNG into a set of arc-standard actions for projective dependency parsing, and then build a dependency variant of the model of Cheng, Lopez, and Lapata
(2017). Although this approach performs well for supervised
parsing, when applied in an unsupervised setting, the performance decreases dramatically (see Experiments for details).
We hypothesize that this is because the parser is fairly unconstrained without prior linguistic knowledge (Naseem et
al. 2010; Noji, Miyao, and Johnson 2016). Therefore, we
augment the model with posterior regularization, allowing
us to seamlessly integrate linguistic knowledge in the shape
of a small number of universal linguistic rules. In addition,
we propose a novel variance reduction method for stabilizing neural variational inference with discrete latent variables. This yields the first known model that makes it possi-

Dependency grammar induction is the task of learning dependency syntax without annotated training data. Traditional
graph-based models with global inference achieve state-ofthe-art results on this task but they require O(n3 ) run time.
Transition-based models enable faster inference with O(n)
time complexity, but their performance still lags behind.
In this work, we propose a neural transition-based parser
for dependency grammar induction, whose inference procedure utilizes rich neural features with O(n) time complexity. We train the parser with an integration of variational inference, posterior regularization and variance reduction techniques. The resulting framework outperforms previous unsupervised transition-based dependency parsers and achieves
performance comparable to graph-based models, both on the
English Penn Treebank and on the Universal Dependency
Treebank. In an empirical comparison, we show that our
approach substantially increases parsing speed over graphbased models.

Introduction
Grammar induction is the task of deriving plausible syntactic structures from raw text, without the use of annotated
training data. In the case of dependency parsing, the syntactic structure takes the form of a tree whose nodes are the
words of the sentence, and whose arcs are directed and denote head-dependent relationships between words. Inducing
such a tree without annotated training data is challenging
because of data sparseness and ambiguity, and because the
search space of potential trees is huge, making optimization
difficult.
Most existing approaches to dependency grammar induction have used inference over graph structures and are
based either on the dependency model with valence (DMV)
of Klein and Manning (2004) or the maximum spanning
tree algorithm (MST) for dependency parsing by McDonald, Petrov, and Hall (2011). State-of-the-art representatives include LC-DMV (Noji, Miyao, and Johnson 2016)
and Convex-MST (Grave and Elhadad 2015). Recently, researchers have also introduced neural networks for feature
extraction in graph-based models (Jiang, Han, and Tu 2016;
Cai, Jiang, and Tu 2017).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6658

