The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Read + Verify: Machine Reading
Comprehension with Unanswerable Questions
Minghao Hu,∗1 Furu Wei,2 Yuxing Peng,1 Zhen Huang,1 Nan Yang,2 Dongsheng Li1
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{huminghao09,pengyuxing,huangzhen,dsli}@nudt.edu.cn
{fuwei,nanya}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Question: What is France a region of?

Machine reading comprehension with unanswerable questions aims to abstain from answering when no answer can
be inferred. In addition to extract answers, previous works
usually predict an additional “no-answer” probability to detect unanswerable cases. However, they fail to validate the
answerability of the question by verifying the legitimacy of
the predicted answer. To address this problem, we propose
a novel read-then-verify system, which not only utilizes a
neural reader to extract candidate answers and produce noanswer probabilities, but also leverages an answer verifier to
decide whether the predicted answer is entailed by the input snippets. Moreover, we introduce two auxiliary losses to
help the reader better handle answer extraction as well as noanswer detection, and investigate three different architectures
for the answer verifier. Our experiments on the SQuAD 2.0
dataset show that our system obtains a score of 74.2 F1 on
test set, achieving state-of-the-art results at the time of submission (Aug. 28th, 2018).

Passage: The Normans were the people who in
the 10th and 11th centuries gave their name to
Normandy, a region in France. They were ...
Read

Answer: Normandy

NA Prob: 0.4

Sentence: The Normans … in France.
Verify
NA Prob: 0.9

Introduction

Final Prob: 0.65
No answer

The ability to comprehend text and answer questions is
crucial for natural language processing. Due to the creation of various large-scale datasets (Hermann et al. 2015;
Nguyen et al. 2016; Joshi et al. 2017; Kočiskỳ et al. 2018),
remarkable advancements have been made in the task of machine reading comprehension. Nevertheless, one important
hypothesis behind current approaches is that there always
exists a correct answer in the context passage. Therefore, the
models only need to choose a most plausible text span based
on the question, instead of checking if there exists an answer
in the first place. Recently, a new version of Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD), namely SQuAD 2.0 (Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018), has been proposed to test the
ability of answering answerable questions as well as detecting unanswerable cases. To deal with unanswerable cases,
systems must learn to identify a wide range of linguistic
phenomena such as negation, antonymy and entity changes
between the passage and the question.
Previous works (Levy et al. 2017; Clark and Gardner
2018; Kundu and Ng 2018) all apply a shared-normalization

Figure 1: An overview of our approach. The reader first extracts a candidate answer and produces a no-answer probability (NA Prob). The answer verifier then checks whether
the extracted answer is legitimate or not. Finally, the system
aggregates previous results and outputs the final prediction.

operation between a “no-answer” score and answer span
scores, so as to produce a probability that a question is unanswerable as well as output a candidate answer. However,
they have not considered further validating the answerability
of the question by verifying the legitimacy of the predicted
answer. Here, answerability denotes whether the question
has an answer, and legitimacy means whether the extracted
text can be supported by the passage and the question. Human, on the contrary, tends to first find a plausible answer
given a question, and then checks if there exists any contradictory semantics.
To address the above issue, we propose a read-then-verify
system that aims to be robust to unanswerable questions in
this paper. As shown in Figure 1, our system consists of two

∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6529

