The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

A Preliminary Report of Integrating Science
and Computing Teaching Using Logic Programming
Yuanlin Zhang,1 Jianlan Wang,1 Fox Bolduc,1 William G. Murray,1 Wendy Staffen2
1

Texas Tech University, 2 Laura Bush Middle School, USA
{y.zhang, jianlan.wang, Fox.Bolduc, William.G.Murray}@ttu.edu, wstaffen@lcisd.net

Integration of Computing and Science
Teaching

Abstract
This paper presents a framework to integrate Science and
Computing teaching using Logic Programming. We developed two modules: one for chemistry and the other for chemistry and physics. They are implemented in an elective course
for 8th graders. Through clinical interviews, video taped class
observations, exit interviews and our own experiences with
the class, Logic Programming based approach is accessible
to the students.

To integrate Science and Computing teaching, we employ
a methodology with two (often iterative) sequential components:
1. Problem Description. Teach students a new science
topic (problem) or review a learned topic (problem). Students are expected to answer basic questions in this topic
and understand why their answers are correct.
2. Modeling. Ask students to build a computer model using
LP. Note that we use LP and ASP interchangeably in this
paper. The model is expected to answer the questions in
the problem descriptions.

Introduction
There is an urgent need for a well-prepared workforce in
STEM and Computing in this century. Computing is not
only a STEM discipline in its own right but also a discipline integral to the practice of all other STEM disciplines.
(STEM education act, 2015). There is consensus on the need
of integrating computing in STEM teaching and learning.
However, we know very little about how best we can teach
Computing and how to integrate it with STEM disciplines to
improve STEM and Computing learning.
The mainstream programming systems used in K-12 are
based on tinkering oriented visual languages such as Scratch
(Resnick and Rosenbaum 2013). This approach has demonstrated some benefits of integration. However, more research
is needed to understand how thinking occurs as students
are tinkering (Guzdial 2004). Second, text-based languages
have the advantage over visual languages of “taking students
deeper into both programming and science” (Sengupta et al.
2015; DiSalvo 2014). But very little is known about integration using text-based languages.
In this paper we propose to use Answer Set Programming
(ASP), a modern version of Logic Programming (LP), to integrate computing into science teaching in middle school.
In the rest of the paper, we will first give a description of
our integration methodology and argue why it will facilitate
learning of science and computer science. We will then share
our experience on developing and implementing modules on
chemistry and physics for 8th graders.

We will use food chain as an example to illustrate both the
methodology and LP.
Problem description. Food chain is a science topic in middle school. Consider a chain with carrots, rabbits, snakes
and eagles. Typical questions include “Q1: do eagles eat
snakes?” and “Q2: what would happen to eagles if snakes
become extinct?” Students are expected to review or learn
food chains and how these questions can be answered.
Modeling. To design a computer model to answer the questions above, we follow an LP modeling methodology which
consists of two steps.
1. Identify objects and relations in the problem.
2. Identify knowledge in the problem and write LP rules for
this knowledge. The final LP rules, also called a program,
form the model of the problem.
Objects. The objects here are four species of organisms,
which can be represented in LP by the following sort declaration:
#species = {eagle, snake, rabbit,
carrot}.
Note that each species is taken as an object here.
#species is called a sort name.
Relations. According to question Q1, we identify a relation of the form f eedsOn(X, Y ) which means that members of species X feed on those of species Y . In question
Q2, we introduce a relation extinct(X) which means that
species X is extinct.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9737

