The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hyperbolic Heterogeneous Information Network Embedding
Xiao Wang, Yiding Zhang, Chuan Shi∗
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{xiaowang, zyd, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract

low-dimensional spaces while preserving the structure and
semantic information, has received increasing research attention. Benefited from HIN embedding, a variety of HIN
based applications, e.g, recommendation (Shi et al. 2018;
Hu et al. 2018) and link prediction (Chen et al. 2018), can
be conducted and improved in the low-dimensional space.
So far, a number of HIN embedding methods have been
proposed. Loosely speaking, there are the works based on
random walk (Dong, Chawla, and Swami 2017; Fu, Lee, and
Lei 2017), network partition based methods (Tang, Qu, and
Mei 2015; Xu et al. 2017), and deep neural network based
HIN embedding (Chang et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2018). In
essence, because the structure and semantics are the two
most important information in an HIN, most of them focus on how to effectively preserve the HIN structures and
semantics in the low-dimensional spaces. However, another
fundamental problem is that what are the appropriate or intrinsic underlying isometric spaces of HIN? Because the Euclidean spaces are the natural generalization of our intuitionfriendly, and visual three-dimensional space, they have become the primary choice for the current HIN embedding
methods. While more and more researches demonstrate that
many types of complex data, e.g., social network, actually
exhibit a highly non-Euclidean latent anatomy (Bronstein
et al. 2017). This motivates us to rethink that whether the
current chosen low-dimensional spaces for HIN embedding,
i.e., Euclidean spaces, are optimal and are there other feasible non-Euclidean spaces?
Recently, hyperbolic spaces have gained momentum in
the context of network science. Hyperbolic spaces are spaces
of constant negative curvature (Cannon et al. 1997). A superiority of hyperbolic spaces is that they expand faster that
Euclidean spaces (Nickel and Kiela 2017). For instance,
considering a circle and a disk in a 2-dimensional hyperbolic space with constant curvature K = −1, the length
of the circle and the area of the disk of hyperbolic radius
r are given as 2π sinh r and 2π(cosh r − 1), respectively,
and both of them grow as er with r. In a 2-dimensional Euclidean space, the length of a circle and the area of a disk
of Euclidean radius r are given as 2πr and πr2 , growing
only linearly and quadratically with regard to r. For this reason, in hyperbolic spaces, it is easy to model complex data
with low-dimensional embedding. Due to the characteristic
of hyperbolic spaces, (Krioukov et al. 2010) assumes hyper-

Heterogeneous information network (HIN) embedding, aiming to project HIN into a low-dimensional space, has attracted considerable research attention. Most of the exiting HIN embedding methods focus on preserving the inherent network structure and semantic correlations in Euclidean
spaces. However, one fundamental problem is that whether
the Euclidean spaces are the appropriate or intrinsic isometric spaces of HIN? Recent researches argue that the complex
network may have the hyperbolic geometry underneath, because the underlying hyperbolic geometry can naturally reflect some properties of complex network, e.g., hierarchical
and power-law structure. In this paper, we make the first effort toward HIN embedding in hyperbolic spaces. We analyze the structures of two real-world HINs and discover some
properties, e.g., the power-law distribution, also exist in HIN.
Therefore, we propose a novel hyperbolic heterogeneous information network embedding model. Specifically, to capture
the structure and semantic relations between nodes, we employ the meta-path guided random walk to sample the sequences for each node. Then we exploit the distance in hyperbolic spaces as the proximity measurement. The hyperbolic distance is able to meet the triangle inequality and well
preserve the transitivity in HIN. Our model enables the nodes
and their neighborhoods have small hyperbolic distances. We
further derive the effective optimization strategy to update the
hyperbolic embeddings iteratively. The experimental results,
in comparison with the state-of-the-art, demonstrate that our
proposed model not only has superior performance on network reconstruction and link prediction tasks but also shows
its ability of capture hierarchy structure in HIN via visualization.

Introduction
Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) are networks
that consist of multiple types of nodes and edges. Modeling
data in the real world as HINs can capture rich data semantics. For example, the bibliographic network can be modeled as an HIN with three types of nodes: Author, paper,
and venue (Fu, Lee, and Lei 2017). Further, the relations
between nodes, such as author-paper (write), paper-venue
(publish), have different types of edges. Recently, HIN embedding, aims at learning the node representations in the
∗

Corresponding author, Chuan Shi, shichuan@bupt.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5337

