The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Declarative Question Answering over Knowledge Bases
Containing Natural Language Text with Answer Set Programming
Arindam Mitra,‡ Peter Clark,† Oyvind Tafjord,† Chitta Baral‡
†

Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, WA, U.S.A.
‡
Arizona State University, AZ, U.S.A.
{peterc,oyvindt}@allenai.org,{amitra7,chitta}@asu.edu
Life Cycle of a Frog
order: egg → tadpole → tadpole with legs → adult

Abstract
While in recent years machine learning (ML) based approaches have been the popular approach in developing endto-end question answering systems, such systems often struggle when additional knowledge is needed to correctly answer the questions. Proposed alternatives involve translating
the question and the natural language text to a logical representation and then use logical reasoning. However, this alternative falters when the size of the text gets bigger. To address this we propose an approach that does logical reasoning over premises written in natural language text. The proposed method uses recent features of Answer Set Programming (ASP) to call external NLP modules (which may be
based on ML) which perform simple textual entailment. To
test our approach we develop a corpus based on the life cycle
questions and showed that Our system achieves up to 18%
performance gain when compared to standard MCQ solvers.

egg - Tiny frog eggs are laid in masses in the water by a
female frog. The eggs hatch into tadpoles.
tadpole - (also called the polliwog) This stage hatches
from the egg. The tadpole spends its time swimming in
the water, eating and growing. Tadpoles breathe using
gills and have a tail.
tadpole with legs - In this stage the tadpole sprouts legs
(and then arms), has a longer body, and has a more distinct head. It still breathes using gills and has a tail.
froglet - In this stage, the almost mature frog breathes
with lungs and still has some of its tail.

Developing intelligent agents that can understand natural
language, reason and use commonsense knowledge has been
one of the long term goals of AI. To track the progress towards this goal, several question answering challenges have
been proposed (Levesque, Davis, and Morgenstern 2012;
Clark et al. 2018; Richardson, Burges, and Renshaw 2013;
Rajpurkar et al. 2016). Our work here is related to the school
level science question answering challenge, A RISTO (Clark
2015; Clark et al. 2018). As shown in (Clark et al. 2018)
existing IR based and end-to-end machine learning systems
work well on a subset of science questions but there exists a
significant amount of questions that appears to be hard for
existing solvers. In this work we focus on one particular
genre of such questions, namely questions about life cycles
(and more generally, sequences), even though they have a
small presence in the corpus.
To get a better understanding of the “life cycle” questions
and the “hard” ones among them consider the questions from
Table 1. The text in Table 1, which describes the life cycle of
a frog does not contain all the knowledge that is necessary to
answer the questions. In fact, all the questions require some
additional knowledge that is not given in the text. Question
1 requires knowing the definition of “middle” of a sequence.
Question 2 requires the knowledge of “between”. Question

adult - The adult frog breathes with lungs and has no
tail (it has been absorbed by the body).
1. What is the middle stage in a frog’s life? (A) tadpole
with legs (B) froglet
2. What is a stage that comes between tadpole and adult
in the life cycle of a frog? (A) egg (B) froglet
3. What best indicates that a frog has reached the adult
stage? (A) When it has lungs (B) When its tail has been
absorbed by the body
Table 1: A text for life cycle of a Frog with few questions.
3 on other hand requires the knowledge of “a good indicator”. Note that for question 3, knowing whether an adult frog
has lungs or if it is the adult stage where the frog loses its
tail is not sufficient to decide if option (A) is the indicator
or option (B). In fact an adult frog satisfies both the conditions. An adult frog has lungs and the tail gets absorbed
in the adult stage. It is the uniqueness property that decides
that option (B) is an indicator for the adult stage. We believe
to answer these questions the system requires access to this
knowledge.
Since this additional knowledge of “middle”, “between”,
“indicator” (and some related ones which are shown later)

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3003

