The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Structured and Sparse Annotations for Image Emotion Distribution Learning
Haitao Xiong,1 Hongfu Liu,2 Bineng Zhong,3 Yun Fu4
1

School of Computer and Information Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, China
2
Michtom School of Computer Science, Brandeis University, Waltham, USA
3
chool of Computer Science and Technology, Huaqiao University, Xiamen, China
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, USA
xionghaitao@btbu.edu.cn, hongfuliu@brandeis.edu, bnzhong@hqu.edu.cn, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
Abstract

reason, label distribution learning methods are designed to
reveal the extent to which each label describes the samples
through label distribution prediction and have achieved great
success (Geng 2016; Yang, Sun, and Sun 2017; Zhao et al.
2018a). Label distribution learning can provide an alternate
view of learning process, where each sample is mapped to a
label distribution instead of a single label or multiple labels.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based label distribution learning methods have shown superior performance of distribution prediction against traditional label
distribution learning methods (Yang, She, and Sun 2017).

Label distribution learning methods effectively address the label ambiguity problem and have achieved great success in image emotion analysis. However, these methods ignore structured and sparse information naturally contained in the annotations of emotions. For example, emotions can be grouped
and ordered due to their polarities and degrees. Meanwhile,
emotions have the character of intensity and are reflected in
different levels of sparse annotations. Motivated by these observations, we present a convolutional neural network based
framework called Structured and Sparse annotations for image emotion Distribution Learning (SSDL) to tackle two challenges. In order to utilize structured annotations, the Earth
Mover’s Distance is employed to calculate the minimal cost
required to transform one distribution to another for ordered
emotions and emotion groups. Combined with KullbackLeibler divergence, we design the loss to penalize the mispredictions according to the dissimilarities of same emotions
and different emotions simultaneously. Moreover, in order
to handle sparse annotations, sparse regularization based on
emotional intensity is adopted. Through combined loss and
sparse regularization, SSDL could effectively leverage structured and sparse annotations for predicting emotion distribution. Experiment results demonstrate that our proposed SSDL
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Unfortunately, most of label distribution learning based
image emotion analysis methods rarely utilize characters of
emotions. On the one hand, emotions have the character of
polarity and are presented in varying degrees (Mikels et al.
2005). This means that emotions can be grouped and ordered. Ordered emotions and emotion groups are presented
in structured annotations. Here we take seven emotions in
Emotion6 dataset (Peng et al. 2015) for example. These
emotions have ordered sequence according to the degrees
of positive or negative polarity. Besides, these emotions can
be divided into three groups with different polarities, which
are positive group, neutral group and negative group. In
image emotion analysis, mis-prediction of one emotion as
nearby emotion, such as joy and surprise, is more adorable
than as far away emotion, such as joy and sadness. Figure 1 shows polarity and group information in seven emotions from Emotion6 dataset. Red-based and gray-based colors are used to represent different degrees of positive and
negative polarity, while white color is used to represent neutral polarity. On the other hand, emotions also have the character of intensity (Sheppes et al. 2014) and are reflected in
different levels of sparse annotations. Figure 2 shows three
images from Flickr LDL dataset (Yang, Sun, and Sun 2017)
and the emotion distribution line chart of these images.
Flickr LDL has eight emotions which are amusement, contentment, awe, excitement, fear, sadness, disgust and anger.
The first four belong to the positive group and the last four
belong to the negative group. In the line chart, emotions are
in ordered sequence from emotion amusement to emotion
sadness. The top left image shows strong emotional intensity on single emotion leading to non-zero sparse annotations of emotions. The top right and bottom left image show
group strong emotional intensity on emotions from posi-

Introduction
For the reason that an image can contain rich semantics,
many people tend to use images to express their opinions
and emotions. So, it is important to find out the emotions implied in images, especially for social network sites like Twitter and so on (Zhao et al. 2016; Yang, She, and Sun 2017;
Zhao et al. 2018b). In traditional image emotion analysis,
an image is in general associated with one or more emotion
labels, which belong to single-label and multi-label learning methods (Zhang and Zhou 2014). However, there exists
an ambiguity problem for this task, which means the uncertainty of the ground-truth label (Yang, Sun, and Sun 2017;
Zhao et al. 2018a). Moreover, images often express mixture of different emotions and different people may have
totally different emotional feelings. Through single-label
and multi-label learning, the relative importance of different emotions in description of the image is not clear. For this
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

363

