The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Dimensional Classification via kNN Feature Augmentation
Bin-Bin Jia,1,2,3 Min-Ling Zhang1,3,4,∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Lanzhou University of Technology, Lanzhou 730050, China
3
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
4
Collaborative Innovation Center of Wireless Communications Technology, China
jiabb@seu.edu.cn, zhangml@seu.edu.cn* (corresponding author)
2

Abstract

(with possible classes piano, violin, guitar, etc.), and from
the language dimension (with possible classes English,
Chinese, Spanish, etc.).
Formally, let X = Rd denote the d-dimensional input
(feature) space and Y = C1 ×C2 ×· · ·×Cq denote the output
space which corresponds to the Cartesian product of q class
spaces. Here, each class space Cj (1 ≤ j ≤ q) consists of
Kj possible classes, i.e. Cj = {cj1 , cj2 , . . . , cjKj }. Given a set
of MDC training examples D = {(xi , yi ) | 1 ≤ i ≤ m},
where xi = [xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xid ]> ∈ X is a d-dimensional
feature vector and yi = [yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yiq ]> ∈ Y is the
associated class vector with each component class variable
yij assuming one possible value in Cj , the task of multidimensional classification is to learn a predictive function
f : X 7→ Y from D which can assign a proper class vector
f (x) ∈ Y for unseen instance x.
To learn from MDC examples, an intuitive solution is
to decompose the multi-dimensional classification problem
into a number of independent multi-class classification problems, one per class space. Nonetheless, dependencies among
class spaces are ignored in this case which would impact
the generalization performance of induced predictive model.
Therefore, existing MDC approaches work by modeling
dependencies among class variables from different dimensions in various ways, such as capturing pairwise interactions between class variables (Arias et al. 2016), specifying chaining order over class variables (Zaragoza et al.
2011; Read, Martino, and Luengo 2014), assuming directed
acyclic graph (DAG) structure over class variables (Bielza,
Li, and Larrañaga 2011; Batal, Hong, and Hauskrecht 2013;
Zhu, Liu, and Jiang 2016; Bolt and van der Gaag 2017;
Benjumeda, Bielza, and Larrañaga 2018), and partitioning
class variables into groups (Read, Bielza, and Larrañaga
2014), etc.
Other than modeling dependencies among class variables in the output space, we show the potential usefulness of manipulating feature space for multi-dimensional
classification. In this paper, a simple yet effective approach
named K RAM, i.e. kNN featuRe Augmentation for Multidimensional classification, is proposed. K RAM manipulates
the feature space of MDC examples by making use of the
popular kNN techniques, where specific counting statistics
on the class membership of neighboring MDC examples are
employed to enrich the original feature space. In this way,

Multi-dimensional classification (MDC) deals with the problem where one instance is associated with multiple class variables, each of which specifies its class membership w.r.t. one
specific class space. Existing approaches learn from MDC
examples by focusing on modeling dependencies among
class variables, while the potential usefulness of manipulating feature space hasn’t been investigated. In this paper, a
first attempt towards feature manipulation for MDC is proposed which enriches the original feature space with kNNaugmented features. Specifically, simple counting statistics
on the class membership of neighboring MDC examples are
used to generate augmented feature vector. In this way, discriminative information from class space is encoded into the
feature space to help train the multi-dimensional classification model. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed
feature augmentation techniques, extensive experiments over
eleven benchmark data sets as well as four state-of-the-art
MDC approaches are conducted. Experimental results clearly
show that, compared to the original feature space, classification performance of existing MDC approaches can be significantly improved by incorporating kNN-augmented features.

Introduction
Multi-dimensional classification aims at modeling realworld objects with rich semantics, which assumes a number
of class spaces to characterize the object’s semantics from
different dimensions. Here, an MDC example is associated
with multiple class variables with each of them specifying
its class membership w.r.t. one specific class space. Specifically, the need of learning from MDC examples naturally
arises in many scenarios (Theeramunkong and Lertnattee
2002; Rodrı́guez et al. 2012; Borchani et al. 2013; Sagarna
et al. 2014; Hernández-González, Inza, and Lozano 2015;
Serafino et al. 2015). For example, the semantics of a natural scene image can be characterized from the season dimension (with possible classes spring, summer, autumn, and
winter), and from the landscape dimension (with possible classes mountain, grassland, lake, etc.). For another example, the semantics of a piece of music can be characterized from the genre dimension (with possible classes rock,
popular, classical, etc.), from the instrument dimension
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3975

