The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Automated Dispatch of Helpdesk Email Tickets: Pushing the Limits with AI
Atri Mandal,1 Nikhil Malhotra,2 Shivali Agarwal,1 Anupama Ray,1 Giriprasad Sridhara1
1

IBM Research AI, Bengaluru, India
IBM Global Technology Services, Bengaluru, India
{atri.mandal,nikhilmal,shivaaga,anupamar,girisrid}@in.ibm.com
2

Abstract

turnaround time for ticket resolution, as observed in a study
of an actual production system (Agarwal, Sindhgatta, and
Sengupta 2012). Several factors make the dispatcher’s job
challenging viz. need for in-depth knowledge of the roles
and responsibilities of various groups, heterogeneous and informal nature of email text and high attrition rate in service
delivery teams (Mandal et al. 2018).
Given the fact that inefficiencies in dispatch have serious
business consequences, there has been a lot of interest in automating the assignment process, that is, the dispatching of a
ticket to an appropriate resolver group based on the problem
description. A number of different approaches have been
proposed for automating ticket dispatch (Agarwal, Sindhgatta, and Sengupta 2012)(Shao et al. 2008a)(Shao et al.
2008b)(Parvin, Bose, and Van Oyen 2009). The tickets may
be raised in different manners such as through voice, web
forms or e-mails to a centralized helpdesk team. Our proposed system focuses on email tickets only but can be applied to other forms of tickets that use text. Although email
assignment may look like a simple text classification problem at first glance it becomes quite complex and challenging
when considered at industry scale.
Firstly, for large companies the number of resolver groups
can be quite large - of the order of 500 in some cases.
Many of these resolver groups cater to overlapping problems which can be disambiguated only with domain specific knowledge. Secondly in most businesses the helpdesk
teams themselves undergo constant changes for better efficiency and productivity leading to resolver groups being
split, merged or renamed. All of these changes inevitably
impact the accuracy of machine learning classifiers. Thirdly
the problems assigned to resolver groups themselves slowly
change over time. As such a once-trained model becomes
outdated over time as it cannot effectively assign tickets
mentioning new problems or old problems with a different
terminology (Mandal et al. 2018).

Ticket assignment/dispatch is a crucial part of service delivery business with lot of scope for automation and optimization. In this paper, we present an end-to-end automated
helpdesk email ticket assignment system, which is also offered as a service. The objective of the system is to determine
the nature of the problem mentioned in an incoming email
ticket and then automatically dispatch it to an appropriate resolver group (or team) for resolution.
The proposed system uses an ensemble classifier augmented
with a configurable rule engine. While design of a classifier
that is accurate is one of the main challenges, we also need
to address the need of designing a system that is robust and
adaptive to changing business needs. We discuss some of the
main design challenges associated with email ticket assignment automation and how we solve them. The design decisions for our system are driven by high accuracy, coverage,
business continuity, scalability and optimal usage of computational resources.
Our system has been deployed in production of three major
service providers and currently assigning over 90,000 emails
per month, on an average, with an accuracy close to 90%
and covering at least 90% of email tickets. This translates to
achieving human-level accuracy and results in a net saving of
more than 50000 man-hours of effort per annum. Till date,
our deployed system has already served more than 700,000
tickets in production.

1

Introduction

The landscape of modern IT service delivery is changing
with increased focus on automation and optimization. Most
IT vendors today, have service platforms aimed towards
end-to-end automation for carrying out mundane, repetitive labor-intensive tasks and even for tasks requiring human cognizance. One such task is ticket assignment/dispatch
where the service requests submitted by the end-users to the
vendor in the form of tickets are reviewed by a centralized
dispatch team and assigned to the appropriate service team
i.e. resolver group.
The dispatch of a ticket to the correct group of practitioners is a critical step in the speedy resolution of a ticket. Incorrect dispatch decisions can significantly increase the total

Main Contributions
In this paper we present a readily deployable end-to-end automatic email dispatch system, which has the following key
features:
1. An ensemble based classification engine that uses supervised machine learning to understand the nature of the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9381

