The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Minimum Intervention Cover of a Causal Graph
Arnab Bhattacharyya

Saravanan Kandasamy

Vasant G Honavar

Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory
Dept. of Computer Science
College of Information Sciences
National Univ. of Singapore
& Technology, Pennsylvania State Univ.
Singapore
University Park, PA, USA
&
Dept. of Computer Science & Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
Mumbai, India

Abstract

2009). Given a causal model, Do-calculus (Pearl 1995;
2009) offers a general machinery that can be used to identify
causal effects from observations and interventions, answer
counterfactual queries, etc., given a causal graph.

Eliciting causal effects from interventions and observations
is one of the central concerns of science, and increasingly,
artificial intelligence. We provide an algorithm that, given a
causal graph G, determines MIC(G), a minimum intervention cover of G, i.e., a minimum set of interventions that suffices for identifying every causal effect that is identifiable in a
causal model characterized by G. We establish the completeness of do-calculus for computing MIC(G). MIC(G) effectively offers an efficient compilation of all of the information
obtainable from all possible interventions in a causal model
characterized by G. Minimum intervention cover finds applications in a variety of contexts including counterfactual inference, and generalizing causal effects across experimental
settings. We analyze the computational complexity of minimum intervention cover and identify some special cases of
practical interest in which MIC(G) can be computed in time
that is polynomial in the size of G.

Related Work
The problem of identifying causal effects from data has been
extensively studied in the literature. In the absence of unobservable variables, all causal effects are identifiable from the
observational distribution (Robins 1986; Spirtes, Glymour,
and Scheines 2000; Pearl 1995). When some of the variables
are unobservable, it is not always possible to identify causal
effects from the observational distribution alone. A series of
papers established sufficient graphical conditions for solving this problem (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000;
Pearl 1995; Galles and Pearl 1995; Pearl and Robins 1995;
Halpern 1998; Kuroki and Miyakawa 1999; Tian and Pearl
2002a), eventually leading to a sound and complete algorithm (Shpitser and Pearl 2006; Huang and Valtorta 2006).
The resulting methods have been generalized to work in settings where the underlying causal graph is unknown (Hyttinen, Eberhardt, and Järvisalo 2015).
Recent work has considered the problem of generalizing
a causal effect from one or more source domains (where observational and all interventional distributions are available)
to a target domain (where only the observational distribution
is available), provided some invariances in causal mechanisms hold across the source and target domains (Pearl and
Bareinboim 2011; Lee and Honavar 2013b; Bareinboim and
Pearl 2013b). Extensions of this problem consider the identification of causal effects in the target domain, but from the
observational and interventional distributions on subsets of
observable variables (that are amenable to intervention) of
the source domains (Bareinboim and Pearl 2013a; Lee and
Honavar 2013a; Bareinboim et al. 2013; Bareinboim and
Pearl 2014). These results provide a sound theoretical foundation for integrative analyses of observational and experimental data (Tsamardinos, Triantafillou, and Lagani 2012;
Bareinboim and Pearl 2016).
A related line of work (Shpitser and Pearl 2008) provides a sound and complete graphical characterization for
the problem of answering counterfactual queries in the setting where the observational distribution and all the interventional distributions are available.

Introduction
Determining causal effects from interventions and observations is one of the central concerns of science, and increasingly, of artificial intelligence (Pearl 2009; Spirtes,
Glymour, and Scheines 2000; Imbens and Rubin 2015;
Morgan and Winship 2014; Hernan and Robins 2010;
Berzuini, Dawid, and Bernardinell 2012; Peters, Janzing,
and Schölkopf 2017). In the framework pioneered by Pearl
(Pearl 2009), the structure of a causal model is encoded using a causal graph G, defined over a set of observable variables (vertices) V. In the resulting causal model, for any two
variables X and Y , a directed edge X → Y denotes that X
is a direct cause of Y ; and a bi-directed edge X ↔ Y indicates that X and Y are confounded by an unobservable
variable (which is a common parent). The parameters of the
causal model correspond to the probability distributions of
the variables conditioned on their parents in G. In a causal
model encoded using a graph G, for a given subset of observable variables X, and an assignment x of X, the intervention do(x) refers to the action of fixing X to x, irrespective of the values of the parents of X. For any Y ⊆ V,
the causal effect of do(x) on Y will be the interventional
distribution obtained on Y by the intervention do(x) (Pearl
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2876

