The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamic Contracting
under Positive Commitment
Ilan Lobel,1 Renato Paes Leme2
1
NYU Stern, 2 Google Research
ilobel@stern.nyu.edu, renatoppl@google.com

Selling with or without commitment power. Consider the
seller’s problem. The seller would like to design a revenuemaximizing marketplace for selling her products to the
buyer. If she is familiar with the classical mechanism design literature, her first instinct might be to sell the stream of
products via a sequence of optimal prices, where prices are
chosen according to Myerson (Myerson 1981). This market
design would closely mimic the real-time auctions that are
currently in use for selling online ad impressions. For the
case of a single buyer, which is the focus of our paper, the
optimal auction reduces to a posted pricing scheme. Therefore, a seller well-versed in the classical mechanism design
literature would probably choose to simply post items for
sale as they arrive and offer them to the buyer at the revenuemaximizing price. If, for example, the buyer valuations are
drawn independently from a uniform distribution over the
[0, 1] interval, the seller would post each item at a price of
1/2 and would sell each item with probability of 50%, leading to an average per-item revenue of 1/4. In fact, if the
seller has no commitment power, this is indeed the best she
could do. No commitment power means the seller is not able
to make any binding promises about future allocations and
prices.

Abstract
We consider a firm that sells products that arrive over time to
a buyer. We study this problem under a notion we call positive commitment, where the seller is allowed to make binding
positive promises to the buyer about items arriving in the future, but is not allowed to commit not to make further offers to
the buyer in the future. We model this problem as a dynamic
game where the seller chooses a mechanism at each period
subject to a sequential rationality constraint, and characterize
the perfect Bayesian equilibrium of this dynamic game. We
prove the equilibrium is efficient and that the seller’s revenue
is a function of the buyer’s ex ante utility under a no commitment model. In particular, all goods are sold in advance to the
buyer at what we call the positive commitment price.

Introduction
Motivation. Consider a setting with a seller (she) and a
buyer (he) interacting over time. In each period, the seller
obtains one new product she can sell to the buyer. The products are heterogeneous and the buyer learns his valuation
for a given product just before the transaction takes place.
What kind of marketplace should the seller set up to sell her
products to the buyer over time? Should the seller sell the
products in advance? If so, for how much?
Solving this problem is crucial to the design of certain
marketplaces such as the large and fast growing market for
online advertisement. Online ads arrive in the form of a
stream of impressions (or user views) that can be sold to
advertisers. Impressions are highly differentiated products
whose value to advertisers depend on many pieces of information, from the webpage being viewed to the user’s IP
address and cookie data. Online ads are currently sold via
highly fragmented ecosystem. One part of this ecosystem
consists of real-time bidding, where individual impressions
are sold milliseconds before they are delivered. Online ads
are also sold via contracts, where a seller agrees in advance
to deliver a specific number of impressions to a buyer over
a given time horizon for a pre-specified price. In our work,
we aim to understand if there is a fundamental reason behind this kind of fragmented market design, and if so, what
should be the relationship between prices in the real-time
market and the pre-sale contract market.

However, the strategy outlined above is too pessimistic
and, therefore, leaves a significant amount of revenue on the
table. In most real-world situations, the seller has at least
some commitment power which she can use to extract more
revenues. Let’s now assume the seller is well-versed in the
recent literature on dynamic mechanism design. In most of
this literature (see, for example, (Kakade, Lobel, and Nazerzadeh 2013) or (Pavan, Segal, and Toikka 2014)), the seller
is assumed to have full commitment power. With full commitment power, the seller’s optimal strategy involves offering the entire future stream of products to the buyer at a
take-it-or-leave-it price that is equal to the buyer’s expected
value for the entire stream of impressions. In our example
where the buyer valuations are drawn uniformly from [0, 1],
the seller can offer the buyer the entire set of products arriving after the first period at a price of 1/2 per item. This offer
is made to the buyer before he learns his valuation for any of
the items. In equilibrium, the buyer accepts the offer, leading to a per-item revenue of 1/2, which is double the revenue from the environment without commitment. Motivated
by this large potential boost in revenues, several recent pa-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2101

