The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DeepCCFV: Camera Constraint-Free Multi-View
Convolutional Neural Network for 3D Object Retrieval
Zhengyue Huang,1 Zhehui Zhao,1 Hengguang Zhou,2 Xibin Zhao,1∗ Yue Gao1∗
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China.
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto.
{hzy18, zhao-zh16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dsvsddr@gmail.com, {zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object retrieval has a compelling demand in the field of
computer vision with the rapid development of 3D vision
technology and increasing applications of 3D objects. 3D objects can be described in different ways such as voxel, point
cloud, and multi-view. Among them, multi-view based approaches proposed in recent years show promising results.
Most of them require a fixed predefined camera position setting which provides a complete and uniform sampling of
views for objects in the training stage. However, this causes
heavy over-fitting problems which make the models failed to
generalize well in free camera setting applications, particularly when insufficient views are provided. Experiments show
the performance drastically drops when the number of views
reduces, hindering these methods from practical applications.
In this paper, we investigate the over-fitting issue and remove the constraint of the camera setting. First, two basic feature augmentation strategies Dropout and Dropview are introduced to solve the over-fitting issue, and a more precise and
more efficient method named DropMax is proposed after analyzing the drawback of the basic ones. Then, by reducing the
over-fitting issue, a camera constraint-free multi-view convolutional neural network named DeepCCFV is constructed.
Extensive experiments on both single-modal and cross-modal
cases demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
in free camera settings comparing with existing state-of-theart 3D object retrieval methods.

Complete Information

Training stage:
predefined camera positions

Test stage (practical applications):
free camera positions

Pattern Gap

Incomplete Information

Figure 1: The pattern gap between training and test stage.
are different in the training stage and real applications, and
it brings the pattern gap as illustrated in Fig.1. This might
cause heavy over-fitting problems.
One typical multi-view based method is Multi-view Convolutional Neural Networks (MVCNN) (Su et al. 2015),
which fused the 2D CNN features extracted from rendered
views captured in a predefined camera setting in both training and test stage. Since then, more multi-view based neural
network methods (Feng et al. 2018; Kanezaki, Matsushita,
and Nishida 2018) have been introduced for 3D shape recognition and retrieval, which assumed a predefined camera setting in the test stage. However, the requirement for fixedcamera setting in test stage is impractical for real recognition tasks, in which the target 3D object may contain any
number of views captured in any position, and it could be
impossible to obtain the views from predefined directions.
Providing insufficient views to MVCNN-like networks at
test stage leads to huge performance drop as the number
of views reduces, which was demonstrated in the experi-

Introduction
3D object retrieval received growing attention in the field of
computer vision since the rapid development of 3D applications in recent years. Various methods based on different 3D
object representations, such as voxel, point cloud, and multiview, have been investigated (Maturana and Scherer 2015;
Qi et al. 2017a; Su et al. 2015). In multi-view based approaches, views can be easily captured by cameras or rendered from 3D object models, and these approaches showed
promising results. We noticed that most of the approaches
require a fixed predefined camera position setting which provides a full and uniform sampling of views for objects in
the training stage. However, in practical applications, camera positions are randomly selected, the information patterns
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8505

