The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Adaptive Random Features
Yanjun Li,1 Kai Zhang,∗2 Jun Wang,3 Sanjiv Kumar4
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 Temple University,
3
East China Normal University, 4 Google Research
1
yli145@illinois.edu, 2 zhang.kai@temple.edu,
3
jwang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, 4 sanjivk@google.com

Abstract

method resorts to the Fourier transform of positive semidefinite and shift-invariant kernels and obtains explicit feature maps using Monte Carlo approximation of the Fourier
representation. The features can then be written as the cosine
(or sine) of the inner product between the input data and random spectral samples drawn from a density specified by the
characteristic function. For example, the characteristic function for Gaussian kernel is still Gaussian, hence the spectral
samples should follow a Gaussian distribution.
In recent years, there has been continuing effort in designing optimal sampling schemes in computing Fourier
features for accurate approximation. Le et al. (2013) proposed Fastfood, a feature map that is faster to compute
thanks to a combination of diagonal Gaussian matrices and
the Hadamard transform. Yang et al. (2014) showed that
integral approximation using low-discrepancy quasi-Monte
Carlo (QMC) sequence has a faster convergence than random Monte Carlo samples, and achieves lower error especially for high-dimensional data. Shen et al. (2017) proposed to apply moment matching on the spectral samples
so that their empirical distribution is closer to the intended
Gaussian. Besides shift-invariant kernels, approximate feature maps have also been considered for other nonlinear kernels, such as additive kernels (Vedaldi and Zisserman 2012),
and polynomial kernels using spherical sampling (Pennington, Felix, and Kumar 2015). Despite these recent advances,
open challenges still exist. First, most of the existing works
ignore the impact of the input data distribution on the design of the feature map. Instead, the main dependency considered is the relation between the kernel and its characteristic function. Second, better kernel approximation with
random Fourier features may not always translate to better generalization performance. Despite reported improvements in regression/classification, it has been found that
such improvements do not correlate well with the improvements in the quality of kernel features (Avron et al. 2016;
Chang et al. 2017).
In this paper, we argue that a good Fourier feature map
should adapt to input data distribution. For example, the optimal sampling scheme in the spectral domain will ideally be
different when approximating the kernel on data from different distributions, in order to achieve a desired accuracy with
low sampling rate. To illustrate this, we use importance sampling (Barber 2012) as a motivating example in approximat-

Random Fourier features are a powerful framework to approximate shift invariant kernels with Monte Carlo integration, which has drawn considerable interest in scaling up
kernel-based learning, dimensionality reduction, and information retrieval. In the literature, many sampling schemes
have been proposed to improve the approximation performance. However, an interesting theoretic and algorithmic
challenge still remains, i.e., how to optimize the design of random Fourier features to achieve good kernel approximation
on any input data using a low spectral sampling rate? In this
paper, we propose to compute more adaptive random Fourier
features with optimized spectral samples (wj ’s) and feature
weights (pj ’s). The learning scheme not only significantly reduces the spectral sampling rate needed for accurate kernel
approximation, but also allows joint optimization with any
supervised learning framework. We establish generalization
bounds using Rademacher complexity, and demonstrate advantages over previous methods. Moreover, our experiments
show that the empirical kernel approximation provides effective regularization for supervised learning.

Introduction
Despite the immense popularity of kernel-based learning algorithms (Schölkopf and Smola 2002), the expensive evaluation of nonlinear kernels has prohibited their application to large datasets. Low-rank kernel approximation is
a powerful tool in alleviating the memory and computational cost of large kernel machines (Williams and Seeger
2001; Drineas and Mahoney 2005; Fowlkes et al. 2004;
Halko, Martinsson, and Tropp 2011; Mahoney 2011; Kumar, Mohri, and Talwalkar 2012; Si, Hsieh, and Dhillon
2014). These methods adopt various sampling schemes on
the rows/columns of the kernel matrix to obtain an efficient,
low-rank decomposition, which in turn serves as a highly
compact “empirical” kernel map that can reduce the cost of
kernel machines from cubic to linear scale.
Random Fourier features, a highly innovative feature map
pioneered by Rahimi and Recht (2008), has attracted significant interest, which will also be the focus of our work.
Rather than decomposing the kernel matrix directly, the
∗

Contact author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4229

