The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Features and Abstract Actions for Computing Generalized Plans
Blai Bonet

Guillem Francès

Hector Geffner

Universidad Simón Bolı́var
Caracas, Venezuela
bonet@usb.ve

University of Basel
Basel, Switzerland
guillem.frances@unibas.ch

ICREA & Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
hector.geffner@upf.edu

Abstract

of the actions on the features in a suitable way. The resulting
generalized plans map feature values into abstract actions,
and soundness ensures that the application of an abstract action can be mapped back into the application of a concrete
action with the same effect over the features. Moreover, the
form of the abstract actions ensures that generalized plans
can be computed using fully observable non-deterministic
(FOND) planners, once the generalized planning problem is
transformed into a FOND problem.
Bonet and Geffner’s formulation of generalized planning
assumes that the features and abstract actions are given. In
this work, we address this limitation by showing how the
features and abstract actions can be learned from the primitive predicates used to define the instances and from sampled state transitions. For example, the general policy for
achieving clear(x) is obtained using a FOND planner on an
abstraction that consists of a boolean feature H, that tracks
whether the gripper holds a block, a numerical feature n(x)
that counts the number of blocks above x, and two abstract
actions: one with preconditions ¬H and n(x) > 0, and effects H and n(x)↓ (decrement of n(x)), and the other with
precondition H and effect ¬H. We here show how to obtain
such policies from STRIPS instances alone, without having
to provide the features and the abstract actions by hand.
This work relates to a number of research threads in planning, knowledge representation, and machine learning. We
make use of SAT solvers and description logics for learning features and abstract actions. The abstract actions provide a model from which the plans are obtained via transformations and FOND planners (Geffner and Bonet 2013;
Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2016). The model is not the
model of an instance but a generalized model for obtaining plans that work for multiple instances. In this sense,
the work is different than action model learning (Yang, Wu,
and Jiang 2007) and model-based reinforcement learning
and closer in aims to work on learning general policies
from examples or experience (Martı́n and Geffner 2004;
Fern, Yoon, and Givan 2006; Sukhbaatar et al. 2015; Zhang
et al. 2018). Generalized planning has also been formulated
as a problem in first-order logic (Srivastava, Immerman, and
Zilberstein 2011), and general plans over finite horizons
have been derived using first-order regression (Boutilier,
Reiter, and Price 2001; Wang, Joshi, and Khardon 2008;
van Otterlo, M. 2012; Sanner and Boutilier 2009). Our ap-

Generalized planning is concerned with the computation of
plans that solve not one but multiple instances of a planning domain. Recently, it has been shown that generalized
plans can be expressed as mappings of feature values into
actions, and that they can often be computed with fully observable non-deterministic (FOND) planners. The actions in
such plans, however, are not the actions in the instances themselves, which are not necessarily common to other instances,
but abstract actions that are defined on a set of common features. The formulation assumes that the features and the abstract actions are given. In this work, we address this limitation by showing how to learn them automatically. The resulting account of generalized planning combines learning and
planning in a novel way: a learner, based on a Max SAT formulation, yields the features and abstract actions from sampled state transitions, and a FOND planner uses this information, suitably transformed, to produce the general plans.
Correctness guarantees are given and experimental results on
several domains are reported.

Introduction
Generalized planning studies the computation of plans that
solve multiple instances (Srivastava, Immerman, and Zilberstein 2008; Bonet, Palacios, and Geffner 2009; Hu and
De Giacomo 2011; Belle and Levesque 2016; Segovia,
Jiménez, and Jonsson 2016). For example, the plan that iteratively picks a clear block above x and places it on the
table, achieves the goal clear(x) in any instance of the
Blocksworld where the gripper is initially empty. Once this
general plan or policy is derived, it can be applied to solve
an infinite collection of instances that involve different initial states, different objects, and different (ground) actions.
In the basic formulation due to Hu and De Giacomo
(2011), a generalized plan is a mapping of observations into
actions that are assumed to be common among all the instances. More recently, this formulation has been extended
by Bonet and Geffner (2018) to account for relational domains like Blocksworld where the sets of objects and actions
change from instance to instance. In the new formulation,
the observations are replaced by a set of boolean and numerical features F and a set of abstract actions AF . These abstract actions are sound and complete if they track the effects
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2703

