The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Neural Collective Graphical Models
for Estimating Spatio-Temporal Population Flow from Aggregated Data
Tomoharu Iwata, Hitoshi Shimizu
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan

Abstract

shows an example of the input aggregated spatio-temporal
population data and the output people flow. In our task, the
number of parameters to be estimated, which correspond to
the people flow over time, is (T − 1)LM , where T is the
number of time points, L is the number of areas, and M
is the number of neighboring areas, where we assume that
people move to the neighboring areas. On the other hand,
the number of observations, which correspond to the spatiotemporal population data, is T L, which is much smaller than
the number of parameters. Learning the population flow only
from the aggregated data is an ill-posed problem.
To make the problem tractable, the proposed method assumes that the transition probabilities at different locations
and time points are correlated to each other. For example, the
transition probabilities at closely located areas or those at the
same time of day resemble each other. Since the correlation
is unknown, we automatically learn it with neural networks
from the given aggregated data. The neural networks enable
us to flexibly extract nonlinear spatio-temporal dependence.
In the following discussion, we use the locations of the center of the origin and destination areas and the time of day
as the input of a neural network. However, it can take other
auxiliary information as input, such as the day of the week
and the area’s weather. We can reduce the effective number
of parameters using a neural network whose parameter size
is less than (T −1)LM , where the neural network parameter
size is constant with respect to the number of areas and time
points.
Since no transition population data are given in our
task, standard supervised learning methods are inapplicable because they require observations of target variables
for training. The proposed model uses the framework of
collective graphical models (Sheldon and Dietterich 2011;
Sheldon et al. 2013) to estimate the population flow, where
the locations of individual persons are analytically marginalized out, and a probabilistic model is investigated about their
sufficient statistics. Sufficient statistics, which correspond
to the transition populations between areas, are modeled by
multinomial distributions, where the transition probability is
defined by the neural network described above. By maximizing the likelihood, we simultaneously estimate the transition
populations as well as the neural network parameters with
gradient-based optimization methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-

We propose a probabilistic model for estimating population
flow, which is defined as populations of the transition between areas over time, given aggregated spatio-temporal population data. Since there is no information about individual
trajectories in the aggregated data, it is not straightforward
to estimate population flow. With the proposed method, we
utilize a collective graphical model with which we can learn
individual transition models from the aggregated data by analytically marginalizing the individual locations. Learning a
spatio-temporal collective graphical model only from the aggregated data is an ill-posed problem since the number of parameters to be estimated exceeds the number of observations.
The proposed method reduces the effective number of parameters by modeling the transition probabilities with a neural
network that takes the locations of the origin and the destination areas and the time of day as inputs. By this modeling, we can automatically learn nonlinear spatio-temporal
relationships flexibly among transitions, locations, and times.
With four real-world population data sets in Japan and China,
we demonstrate that the proposed method can estimate the
transition population more accurately than existing methods.

1

Introduction

Analyzing people flow is critical in a wide variety of applications, such as location-based advertisements (Dhar and
Varshney 2011), marketing (Kuo, Chi, and Kao 2002), urban
development (Ashworth and Voogd 1990), transportation
system planning (Koopmans 1949), and evacuation guidance (Yi and Özdamar 2007). Using such sensor devices as
GPS, WiFi, Bluetooth, and infrared beacons, we can obtain
trajectories for each person. However, trajectory data are often aggregated to protect privacy. For example, mobile spatial statistics (Terada, Nagata, and Kobayashi 2013) are the
hourly aggregated spatio-temporal population data of 500meter grid squares that are generated based on operational
data from mobile terminal networks so that individuals cannot be tracked.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic model for estimating people flow given the aggregated data, which we call
the neural collective graphical models. Here the aggregated
data are the populations over time for each area, and the people flow is the transition populations between areas. Fig. 1
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3935

