The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MetaStyle: Three-Way Trade-off among
Speed, Flexibility, and Quality in Neural Style Transfer
Chi Zhang, Yixin Zhu, Song-Chun Zhu
International Center for AI and Robot Autonomy (CARA)
{chizhang,yzhu,sczhu}@cara.ai

Abstract

With the recent boost of deep neural networks and large
datasets in computer vision, ? (?) first discovered that combining multi-level VGG features (?) trained on the ImageNet (?) successfully captured the characteristics of the
style while balancing the statistics of the content, producing impressive results for the task of artistic style transfer. This serendipitous finding has brought to life a surge
of interests in the research area of style transfer. Iterative optimization methods (?; ?; ?) generate artistic images that well interpolate between arbitrary style space and
content space; but due to its iterative nature, these methods are generally slow, requiring hundreds of update steps
and becoming impractical for deployment in products. Feedforward neural networks trained with perceptual loss (?; ?;
?) overcome the speed problem and usually result in satisfactory artistic effects; however, good quality is limited to a
single or a small number of style images, sacrificing the flexibility in the original method. Feature-matching methods (?;
?) achieve arbitrary style transfer in real-time, but these
models come at the cost of compromised style transfer quality, compared to the methods mentioned above.
To address these problems, we argue that it is nontrivial
to use either sheer iterative optimization methods or singlestep feed-forward approximations to achieve the three-way
trade-off among speed, flexibility, and quality. In this work,
we seek to find, instead, an algorithm that would fast adapt
to any style by a small or even negligible number of postprocessing update steps, so that the adapted model keeps
high efficiency and satisfactory generation quality.
Specifically, we propose a novel style transfer algorithm,
coined MetaStyle, which formulates the fast adaptation requirement as the bilevel optimization, solvable by the recent meta-learning methods (?; ?). This unique problem formulation encourages the model to learn a style-free representation for content images, and to produce a new feedforward model, after only a small number of update steps,
to generate high-quality style transfer images for a single
style efficiently. From another perspective, this formulation
could also be thought of as finding a style-neutral input for
the vanilla optimization-based methods (?), but transferring
styles much more effectively.
Our model is instantiated using a neural network. The network structure is inspired by the finding (?) that scaling and
shifting parameters in instance normalization layers (?) are

An unprecedented booming has been witnessed in the research area of artistic style transfer ever since Gatys et al. introduced the neural method. One of the remaining challenges
is to balance a trade-off among three critical aspects—speed,
flexibility, and quality: (i) the vanilla optimization-based algorithm produces impressive results for arbitrary styles, but is
unsatisfyingly slow due to its iterative nature, (ii) the fast approximation methods based on feed-forward neural networks
generate satisfactory artistic effects but bound to only a limited number of styles, and (iii) feature-matching methods like
AdaIN achieve arbitrary style transfer in a real-time manner
but at a cost of the compromised quality. We find it considerably difficult to balance the trade-off well merely using a
single feed-forward step and ask, instead, whether there exists an algorithm that could adapt quickly to any style, while
the adapted model maintains high efficiency and good image
quality. Motivated by this idea, we propose a novel method,
coined MetaStyle, which formulates the neural style transfer as a bilevel optimization problem and combines learning with only a few post-processing update steps to adapt
to a fast approximation model with satisfying artistic effects,
comparable to the optimization-based methods for an arbitrary style. The qualitative and quantitative analysis in the experiments demonstrates that the proposed approach achieves
high-quality arbitrary artistic style transfer effectively, with a
good trade-off among speed, flexibility, and quality.

1

Introduction

To reduce the strenuous early-day efforts in producing pastiche, the computer vision and machine learning community
have joined forces to devise automated algorithms to render
a content image in the same style from a source artistic work.
The style transfer problem covers a wide range of work,
and at the beginning was phrased as a texture synthesis (?;
?) problem. Some notable work includes: (i) non-parametric
sampling methods (?) and acceleration methods by a treestructured vector quantization (?), (ii) patch-based sampling
methods (?; ?) for better quality and efficiency, (iii) energy
minimization methods using EM-like algorithms (?), and
(iv) image analogies (?) to produce the “filtered” results and
their extensions to portrait paintings (?).
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1254

