The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Community Detection in Social Networks Considering Topic Correlations
∗

Yingkui Wang,1 Di Jin,1, Katarzyna Musial,2 Jianwu Dang1,3
1

2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China,
Advanced Analytics Institute, School of Software, University of Technology Sydney, Australia,
3
School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
{ykwang, jindi}@tju.edu.cn, katarzyna.musial-gabrys@uts.edu.au, jdang@jaist.ac.jp

Abstract

topics. Networks are created based on a large amount of
heterogeneous and complex contents, such as microblogs,
tweets, and posts. This type of information is considered as
node contents or link contents depending on whether it is
connected with nodes or links. To understand what topics are
connected with a given community, such contents need to be
analyzed and used as integral part of community detection
process. Approaches that integrate network topologies and
node contents have been proposed (Mcauley and Leskovec
2014; Pei, Chakraborty, and Sycara 2015). Recent studies
begin to investigate community level diffusion, i.e., modeling diffusion patterns of topics across different communities
(Hu et al. 2015). The work in (Cai et al. 2017), for the first
time, formalizes the concept of community profiling, which
is to characterize the intrinsic nature and extrinsic behavior
of a community. Community structure is also incorporated
into network embedding methods (Tu et al. 2018).
However, several issues have not been well resolved by
existing methods. By analyzing a large number of social
networks, beyond the observation that a community might
focus on several topics (Jin et al. 2018), we further found
that there are correlations between the topics, which significantly affect community structures. Users focusing on
a topic might have great interests in interacting with others focusing on a different topic, which means that these
two topics are highly correlated. While there are also opposite situations between two topics, which means that the
topics are minorly correlated. Take paper co-authorship network as example. Suppose that the topics in a network include Machine learning, Image processing and Data mining. The correlation between Machine learning and Image
processing is closer than that between Image processing and
Data mining. To characterize the correlations among latent
topics, some studies have made great efforts, such as correlated topic models (Blei and Lafferty 2006; Chen et al. 2013)
which replace Dirichlet distribution with logistic normal
distribution in LDA, and topic embedding (Li et al. 2016;
Jiang et al. 2013; He et al. 2017b; Li et al. 2018a) which
represents topics in a low-dimension space. However, none
of existing works consider the factor above in community
detection. Existing methods are limited to resolve following
issues corresponding to the observation.
First, topics are inferred from network contents including
node contents and edge contents. While edge contents are

Network contents including node contents and edge contents
can be utilized for community detection in social networks.
Thus, the topic of each community can be extracted as its
semantic information. A plethora of models integrating topic
model and network topologies have been proposed. However,
a key problem has not been resolved that is the semantic division of a community. Since the definition of community is
based on topology, a community might involve several topics. To achieve better community detection results and to better understand the fundamental community semantics, we investigate the correlations of different topics in community
detection model. This work models the formation of each
edge assuming that users are more likely to communicate
with each other when they are in the same community and
their topics are closely correlated. A Topic Correlations based
Community Detection (TCCD) model is proposed, which
can learn community structure and semantic interpretation of
each community. Our model is evaluated on two real datasets
and is compared with four state-of-the-art methods. Experimental results show that TCCD significantly improves the
accuracy of community detection. Finally, a case study shows
that TCCD can detect the topic correlations inside a community. And we can infer better semantic interpretation of each
community.

Introduction
In recent years, research in the area of community detection in networks has become a hot topic (Newman 2006;
Fortunato and Hric 2016). This is due to the fact that communities play a very important role in a network and they
enable to understand and interpret networks functions and
characteristics. Community is defined as a group of nodes
that are densely connected internally (Girvan and Newman
2002). Recent community detection methods not only detect
community structures but also identify semantics of communities (He et al. 2017a; Zhang et al. 2018). It is significant to
understand the innate character of communities as we can
learn what users are interested in, what they care about in a
community, and how the topic of communities evolves.
In real social networks, e.g., Weibo, Twitter, and Facebook, users interact with each other talking about different
∗

Corresponding author
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

321

