The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cogra: Concept-Drift-Aware Stochastic
Gradient Descent for Time-Series Forecasting
Kohei Miyaguchi

Hiroshi Kajino

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
kohei miyaguchi@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

IBM Research – Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
kajino@jp.ibm.com

Abstract

adaptation, including instance-based methods (Widmer and
Kubat 1996; Klinkenberg and Joachims 2000; Kolter and
Maloof 2005; Wang and Abraham 2015) and ensemble methods (Schlimmer and Granger 1986; Street and Kim 2001;
Minku and Yao 2012). The instance-based ones judge
whether a concept drift occurs, and if it does, they retrain their
models using the relevant instances. The ensemble ones keep
training a set of multiple predictive models, and when necessary, replace them with new models trained using the recent
data. Another research line is based on tracking parameter via
stochastic gradient descent algorithms (Almeida et al. 1999;
Kushner and Yin 2003; Baydin et al. 2017). While these algorithms are computationally efficient by their nature, one
of their technical challenges is the learning rate scheduling,
which controls the trade-off between convergence and adaptation. When the environment is stationary, the learning rate
should decrease so as to converge to the optimal parameter,
and when the environment changes, the learning rate should
increase so as to adapt to the changing environment.

We approach the time-series forecasting problem in the presence of concept drift by automatic learning rate tuning of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The SGD-based approach
is preferable to other concept drift algorithms in that it can be
applied to any model and it can keep learning efficiently whilst
predicting online. Among a number of SGD algorithms, the
variance-based SGD (vSGD) can successfully handle concept
drift by automatic learning rate tuning, which is reduced to an
adaptive mean estimation problem. However, its performance
is still limited because of its heuristic mean estimator. In this
paper, we present a concept-drift-aware stochastic gradient descent (Cogra), equipped with more theoretically-sound mean
estimator called sequential mean tracker (SMT). Our key contribution is that we define a goodness criterion for the mean
estimators; SMT is designed to be optimal according to this
criterion. As a result of comprehensive experiments, we find
that (i) our SMT can estimate the mean better than vSGD’s
estimator in the presence of concept drift, and (ii) in terms of
predictive performance, Cogra reduces the predictive loss by
16–67% for real-world datasets, indicating that SMT improves
the prediction accuracy significantly.

1

When these two lines are compared, the SGD-based ones
are preferable in our setting, because it maintains only a
single predictive model without retraining. In particular,
we consider that the variance-based stochastic gradient descent (vSGD) (Schaul, Zhang, and LeCun 2013) is promising, because vSGD can balance the convergence-adaptation
trade-off without pesky hyperparameter tuning; on the other
hand, other SGDs that can control the trade-off typically
have hyperparameters. vSGD is designed to minimize the
expected loss function EXt [`(θ; Xt )] at each time step t. A
key observation is that the optimal learning rate is given
E [∇ `(θ;X )]2
by ηt? = EX [∇21`(θ;Xt )] E Xt[(∇θ `(θ;Xt ))2 ] . This result indit
Xt
θ
t
cates that the automatic learning rate scheduling problem is
reduced to the adaptive estimation of the first and second
order moments of the per-example gradient, E[∇`(θ; Xt )]
2
and E[(∇`(θ; Xt )) ], as well as the curvature of the objective
2
function, E[∇ `(θ; Xt )]. These statistics are estimated online
by moving averages with adaptive weights that control how
many past observations should be used for estimation; when
the environment is stationary, more observations should be
used, and after concept drift, only the recent observations
should be used. In this way, in the vSGD paradigm, the automatic learning rate scheduling boils down to the adaptive
control of the weights used for the moment estimation.

Introduction

This work is concerned with online time-series forecasting
in a concept-drifting environment, where a probability distribution generating the data may change over time. Concept
drift is ubiquitous in real-world time-series (Tsymbal 2004;
Gama et al. 2014). For example, the probability distribution
of sensor data will drift when there is a change in the environment where the sensors are distributed. For another example,
the probability distribution of financial time-series will be
also time-variant reflecting the economic climate. These applications motivate us to investigate a method to learn from
a concept-drifting environment. In addition, such a learning
algorithm needs to be computationally efficient so that it
can keep learning while forecasting the future. Otherwise,
a trained model will be degraded severely as the environment changes. Therefore, we are interested in a time-series
forecasting algorithm that can handle concept drift and is
computationally efficient.
There are two research lines towards achieving our grand
goal. The first one is mainly concerned with concept drift
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4594

