The Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-19)

Logistic Regression on Homomorphic Encrypted Data at Scale
Kyoohyung Han

Seungwan Hong

Jung Hee Cheon

Daejun Park

Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
satanigh@snu.ac.kr

Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
swanhong@snu.ac.kr

Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
jhcheon@snu.ac.kr

University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
dpark69@illinois.edu

Abstract
Machine learning on (homomorphic) encrypted data is a
cryptographic method for analyzing private and/or sensitive
data while keeping privacy. In the training phase, it takes as
input an encrypted training data and outputs an encrypted
model without ever decrypting. In the prediction phase, it
uses the encrypted model to predict results on new encrypted
data. In each phase, no decryption key is needed, and thus
the data privacy is ultimately guaranteed. It has many applications in various areas such as finance, education, genomics,
and medical field that have sensitive private data. While several studies have been reported on the prediction phase, few
studies have been conducted on the training phase.
In this paper, we present an efficient algorithm for logistic regression on homomorphic encrypted data, and evaluate our
algorithm on real financial data consisting of 422,108 samples over 200 features. Our experiment shows that an encrypted model with a sufficient Kolmogorov Smirnow statistic value can be obtained in ∼17 hours in a single machine.
We also evaluate our algorithm on the public MNIST dataset,
and it takes ∼2 hours to learn an encrypted model with 96.4%
accuracy. Considering the inefficiency of homomorphic encryption, our result is encouraging and demonstrates the practical feasibility of the logistic regression training on large encrypted data, for the first time to the best of our knowledge.

1

Figure 1: Machine learning on homomorphic encrypted data
machine learning algorithms on the encrypted data without
decryption.
Figure 1 illustrates this idea. First, each data owner shares
the public key of the HE scheme and uploads his data to the
cloud after encrypting with HE. Then the cloud performs the
machine learning training on the encrypted data and outputs
an encrypted model. This model can be decrypted by a decryptor who owns the private key. Here the decryptor can be
either a single entity or a group of entities that have their
own share of the private key.1 Note that, in this HE-based
approach, no information is revealed to each other except
the learned model unless the underlying HE scheme is broken or its secret key is disclosed. This is the case even if the
cloud is compromised. Thus it could be an ultimate solution
for analyzing private or sensitive data while keeping privacy.
This HE-based approach is also flexible in that the training computation can be delegated to any party (or even an
untrusted third party) without revealing the training data
(other than their own). This flexibility is desirable, as other
approaches require additional assumptions and conditions
that may not be realizable in practice. For example, in the
multi-party computation (MPC)-based approaches (see Section 5), it is not straightforward to delegate the machine
learning training to untrusted (or colluding) third parties.
Also, they incur large communication overhead, where the
communication overhead increases drastically as the num-

Introduction

Suppose multiple financial institutions want to predict the
credit scores of their customers. Although each institution
could independently learn a prediction model using various
machine learning techniques, they may be able to collectively learn a better model by considering all of their data
together for training. However, it is risky in terms of data
security to share financial data between institutions, being
even illegal in many countries.
Homomorphic encryption (HE), an encryption scheme
that allows arbitrary computations on encrypted data, can be
used to solve this dilemma. (Precisely, it is a fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) that supports the unlimited number
of operations on ciphertexts. However, throughout the paper, we will refer to it as simply HE as long as the precise
meaning is clear in the context.) Using HE, multiple institutions can share their data in an encrypted form and run

1
In the latter case, an additional key sharing protocol is required
for the public key to be jointly generated from the entities that have
a random share of the private key, by using, e.g., the threshold HE
schemes (Jain, Rasmussen, and Sahai 2017).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9466

