The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Compiling Bayesian Network Classifiers into Decision Graphs
Andy Shih, Arthur Choi, Adnan Darwiche
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
{andyshih,aychoi,darwiche}@cs.ucla.edu

In particular, our algorithm compiles a Bayesian network classifier into an ordered decision graph, a well-known
and tractable class of decision graphs in which features are
tested in the same order, along each path from the root
of the graph to any of its leaves. When the features and
the class variable are binary, the ordered decision graph is
known in the literature as an Ordered Binary Decision Diagram (OBDD) (Bryant 1986; Meinel and Theobald 1998;
Wegener 2000). When only the class variable is binary, it is
known as an Ordered Decision Diagram (ODD) (Chan and
Darwiche 2003). In this paper, we focus on the case of binary classifiers, but discuss an adaptation of our proposed
compilation algorithm to support multi-class classifiers.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides
an introduction to Bayesian network classifiers and ODDs.
Sections 3 and 4 provide key results on Bayesian network
classifiers, which are utilized by our compilation algorithm
in Section 5. Experimental results relating to scalability are
then given in Section 6, followed by a case study in Section 7. We finally conclude in Section 8.

Abstract
We propose an algorithm for compiling Bayesian network
classifiers into decision graphs that mimic the input and
output behavior of the classifiers. In particular, we compile
Bayesian network classifiers into ordered decision graphs,
which are tractable and can be exponentially smaller in
size than decision trees. This tractability facilitates reasoning
about the behavior of Bayesian network classifiers, including
the explanation of decisions they make. Our compilation algorithm comes with guarantees on the time of compilation
and the size of compiled decision graphs. We apply our compilation algorithm to classifiers from the literature and discuss
some case studies in which we show how to automatically explain their decisions and verify properties of their behavior.

1

Introduction

Bayesian network classifiers have been used extensively
in the literature (Friedman, Geiger, and Goldszmidt 1997;
Ng and Jordan 2002; Pernkopf and Bilmes 2005; Roos et
al. 2005). These classifiers encode a probability distribution
over a set of features and a class variable, and then classify
an observation on features based on the posterior marginal of
the class variable. Although the classification process computes probabilities, the classifier’s behavior can be captured
as a discrete mapping from the states of features (instances)
to the states of the class variable (classes). We refer to this
mapping as the classifier’s decision function. Obtaining the
decision function in a symbolic, tractable form was recently
shown to be useful for explaining the decisions and formally
verifying the properties of classifiers (Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018a; 2018b).
Previous work proposed algorithms for compiling Naive
Bayes and latent tree classifiers into decision graphs (Chan
and Darwiche 2003; Shih, Choi, and Darwiche 2018b).
In this paper, we propose an algorithm that compiles a
Bayesian network classifier with an arbitrary structure.
We then illustrate the utility of our compilation algorithm
through case studies, in which we symbolically reason about
the behavior of some Bayesian network classifiers from the
literature. This follows a recent trend in analyzing machine
learning models using symbolic approaches (Narodytska et
al. 2018; Katz et al. 2017).

2

Background

In this section, we describe Bayesian network classifiers and
Ordered Decision Diagrams in more detail.

Bayesian Network Classifiers
A Bayesian network classifier is a Bayesian network containing a special set of variables: a single class variable C
and n feature variables X = {X1 , . . . , Xn }. The class C
is usually a root in the network and the features X are usually leaves. An instantiation of variables X is denoted x and
called an instance. When the class variable is binary, its two
values c and c̄ correspond to 1 and 0 decisions. A binary
Bayesian network classifier specifying probability distribution Pr (.) will classify an instance x as 1 iff Pr (c | x) ≥ T ,
where T is called the classification threshold. We denote the
decision function of a classifier B as FB .

Ordered Decision Diagrams
An Ordered Binary Decision Diagram (OBDD) is a
tractable representation of a Boolean function over variables
X = X1 , . . . , Xn (Bryant 1986; Meinel and Theobald 1998;
Wegener 2000). An OBDD is a rooted, directed acyclic

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7966

