The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Image Block Augmentation for One-Shot Learning
Zitian Chen,1 Yanwei Fu,2,3 Kaiyu Chen,1 Yu-Gang Jiang1,2,3
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, 2 School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University,
{chenzt15, yanweifu,kychen15, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Given one or a few training instances of novel classes, oneshot learning task requires that the classifier generalizes to
these novel classes. Directly training one-shot classifier may
suffer from insufficient training instances in one-shot learning. Previous one-shot learning works investigate the metalearning or metric-based algorithms; in contrast, this paper proposes a Self-Training Jigsaw Augmentation (Self-Jig)
method for one-shot learning. Particularly, we solve one-shot
learning by directly augmenting the training images through
leveraging the vast unlabeled instances. Precisely our proposed Self-Jig algorithm can synthesize new images from
the labeled probe and unlabeled gallery images. The labels
of gallery images are predicted to help the augmentation
process, which can be taken as a self-training scheme. Intrinsically, we argue that we provide a very useful way of
directly generating massive amounts of training images for
novel classes. Extensive experiments and ablation study not
only evaluate the efficacy but also reveal the insights, of the
proposed Self-Jig method.

(a) Jigsaw Augmentation Method

(b) Self-training Jigsaw Augmentation

Introduction

Figure 1: Illustration of our augmentation method. The synthesized image is visually consistent in each block (i.e., local
consistent), but not in all blocks (i.e., not global consistent).

Inspired by the ability of people to acquire a new concept
from a handful of examples, one-shot learning is recently
studied with the goal of learning classifiers that generalize to novel classes which only have one, or a few training
instances of each class. While this problem is quite difficult, the main obstacle is lacking enough training images in
the novel classes. To address this task, previous efforts explored transferring knowledge from source base classes to
help learn a classifier on target novel classes, by the ways
of meta-learner (Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and
Zemeln 2017) or metric space(Finn, Abbeel, and Levine
2017; Zhou, Wu, and Li 2018; Li et al. 2017), and to a lesser
extent, data augmentation in novel classes (Wang et al. 2018;
Hariharan and Girshick 2017).
In term of Gestalt principles of perceptual grouping (Desolneux, Moisan, and Morel 2004), humans can naturally perceive objects as the organized patterns and objects. People
have been entertained by solving Jigsaw puzzles by assembling the pieces into a complete picture. In this game, even
though some pieces are missing, we are still able to infer the

content drawn in Jigsaw. This game thus inspires us a totally
different way of addressing one-shot learning by replacing
some pieces of labeled images and producing the deformed
additional images to help train the one-shot classifier.
Formally, to address one-shot learning task, we propose a
Self-Training Jigsaw Augmentation (Self-Jig) model to generate synthesized training images of novel classes. In particular, our fundamental idea is the proposed Jigsaw augmentation algorithm that can create a new image from the
probe and gallery images. In the source domain, we first
train a base network; the synthesized images are composed
by the labeled probe and labeled gallery images which are
randomly sampled from training data. In the target domain,
we learn to generalize the one-shot classifier. Particularly,
the Self-Jig algorithm learns to synthesize new images from
the labeled probe image, and unlabeled gallery image which
must have the same class label predicted as the probe image
by one-shot classifier. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), our Jigsaw

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3379

