The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Residual Invertible Spatio-Temporal Network for Video Super-Resolution
Xiaobin Zhu,1,2∗ Zhuangzi Li,2∗ Xiao-Yu Zhang,3† Changsheng Li,4† Yaqi Liu,3 Ziyu Xue5
1

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University
3
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
Information Technology Institute, Academy of Broadcasting Science, NRTA, China
{brucezhucas, lizhuangzi}@gmail.com, zhangxiaoyu@iie.ac.cn,
lichangsheng@uestc.edu.cn, liuyaqi@iie.ac.cn, xueziyu@abs.ac.cn
Abstract

Video super-resolution is a challenging task, which has attracted great attention in research and industry communities. In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end architecture, called Residual Invertible Spatio-Temporal Network
(RISTN) for video super-resolution. The RISTN can sufficiently exploit the spatial information from low-resolution
to high-resolution, and effectively models the temporal consistency from consecutive video frames. Compared with existing recurrent convolutional network based approaches,
RISTN is much deeper but more efficient. It consists of three
major components: In the spatial component, a lightweight
residual invertible block is designed to reduce information
loss during feature transformation and provide robust feature
representations. In the temporal component, a novel recurrent
convolutional model with residual dense connections is proposed to construct deeper network and avoid feature degradation. In the reconstruction component, a new fusion method
based on the sparse strategy is proposed to integrate the spatial and temporal features. Experiments on public benchmark
datasets demonstrate that RISTN outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods.

Bicubic

Ours

HR

Figure 1: Side-by-side comparisons of bicubic interpolation, our result, and HR ground truth for 4× upsampling.
approaches emerged and achieved promising performances
(Dong et al. 2016; Tong et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018). However, the single-image methods completely ignore the intrinsic temporal information and motion nature, therefore can
not well adapted to the VSR task. Some deep architectures
were proposed to capture temporal consistency of consecutive frames, which can be mainly divided into two categories: motion compensation based approaches (Kappeler et
al. 2016; Caballero et al. 2017; Tao et al. 2017), and Recurrent Convolutional Networks (RCNs) based approaches
(Guo and Chao 2017; Huang, Wang, and Wang 2018;
Yang et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018). The motion compensation
based approaches tried to extract explicit motion information, e.g., optical flow, to model the temporal dependency
for highlighting visual continuity. However, the high computational cost of these type of approaches is terrifying. Afterwards, the RCNs based approaches were proposed to extract the motion information of consecutive frames and enhance visual quality in an end-to-end manner. For instance,
in (Guo and Chao 2017), the stack of convolutional layers
was adopted to extract the spatial and content information of
a input single frame, and the recurrent convolutional layers
is adopted to capture the temporal information of consecutive frames.
The aforementioned RCNs based approaches can adaptively deal with complicated and large motions with relatively low computational cost. However, the performances
are always not remarkable for the following reasons: 1) The
LR video frames must be interpolated in advance, which not
only consumes a large amount of additional memory space,

Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to generate highresolution (HR) video frames from its low-resolution (LR)
version, as shown in Figure 1. It can be widely applied
to various intelligent image processing tasks, e.g., satellite
videos (Demirel and Anbarjafari 2011), the surveillance and
4K televisions recovery (Zhang et al. 2010), and so on. VSR
is a long-standing challenging task, mainly due to the following two reasons: Firstly, super-resolution is an inherently
ill-posed problem for its one-to-many mapping nature, i.e.,
one LR frame can map to various HR frames. Secondly,
there is no a satisfying architecture designed to integrate spatial and temporal information in a joint framework by far.
Along with flourishing of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), a series of single image super-resolution
∗
These authors contributed equally to this study and share the
first authorship.
†
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5981

