The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Type Sequence Preserving Heterogeneous Information Network Embedding∗
Yuxin Chen,1,2 Tengjiao Wang,1,2,3 Wei Chen,1,2 Qiang Li,4 Zhen Qiu4
1

Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies(MOE), School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871
2
Center for Computational Social Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 100871
4
State Grid Information and Telecommunication Group, Beijing, China, 102209
{chen.yuxin, tjwang, pekingchenwei}@pku.edu.cn, {liqiang, qiuzhen}@sgitg.sgcc.com.cn
belongT o

actIn

T heGreatGatsby −
−−−−−→Romantic, Leonardo−−−→Inception

Abstract

belongT o

−−−−−−→Sciencef iction}. Due to lack of the sequence maintaining mechanism in the existing methods, the type sequence information is not fully exploited. We believe this
partly account for the application accuracy bottleneck of the
existing HIN embedding. It is thus of great need to study
type sequence preserving HIN embedding.
The challenges are two folds: 1) how to preserve: Existing embedding methods cannot maintain complex type
sequence information, so an effective model is required.
2) which to preserve: The theoretically optimal way is to
retain all the type sequence information in the HIN. As the
length of the sequence increases, the cost grows exponentially. Thus which to preserve is worth exploring.
To preserve type sequences, our model (SeqHINE) is designed as a novel encoder-decoder framework with typeaware GRU to incorporate the sequence and type information. For the second challenge, representativeness of the type
sequence is highly related with the distance to the current
node. Intuitively, the closer the better. We devise a nearest
first policy and further design the decay function for various
hop-count distances to implement it.

Lacking in sequence preserving mechanism, existing heterogeneous information network (HIN) embedding discards the
essential type sequence information during embedding. We
propose a Type Sequence Preserving HIN Embedding model
(SeqHINE) which expands the HIN embedding to sequence
level. SeqHINE incorporates the type sequence information
via type-aware GRU and preserves representative sequence
information by decay function. Abundant experiments show
that SeqHINE can outperform state-of-the-art even with 50%
less labeled data.

Introduction
Network embedding maps nodes into low-dimensional vectors which can be used as the feature input for various
downstream analyses. Existing approaches mainly focus on
homogeneous networks. Compared with homogeneous networks, heterogeneous information networks (HINs), consisting of multi-typed entities and relations, have been
demonstrated as a more efficient way to model real-world
data (Shi et al. 2017). Since the various type information
carries rich semantics, HIN embedding is worthwhile and
challenging.
Abundant intrinsic semantic information was lost in
the existing HIN embedding process, especially type sequences. Type sequence, a series of entity types and
relation types, expresses rich semantic relationships beactIn
tween nodes. For example, the type sequence “Actor−−−→
belongT o
M ovie−
−−−−−→Genre” indicates the genre of film the actor starred in. Based on this type sequence, existing
methods (Dong, Chawla, and Swami 2017; Fu, Lee,
and Lei 2017) generate a node set as the context:
Context
Leonardo DiCaprio =======⇒ {T itanic, T heGreatGatsby,
Extracting
Inception, Sciencef iction, Romantic}. The sequence information is lost in the context extracting phase. The better
Context
context is a sequence set: Leonardo DiCaprio ==
=====⇒
Extracting
actIn

belongT o

{Leonardo−−−→T itanic−
−−−−−→Romantic,

Encoder

Decoder
Type sequence !"

Node

vi
y0

x
Node type

Typeaware
GRU

h

Typeaware
GRU

yl

y1 … yl-1
t1

t0

tx

Edge type

…

…

s1

Typeaware
GRU

tl

tl-1
s2

Node
vector
Type
vector

Types
… l-1 aware sl …
GRU

Decay factor

Figure 1: SeqHINE model.

actIn

Leonardo−−−→

SeqHINE Model

∗

This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation
of China (No.61572043) and State Grid Technical Project (No.
52110418002W). Tengjiao Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

SeqHINE is an encoder-decoder model with type-aware
GRU and decay function to embed HINs into lowdimensional vectors. SeqHINE, as shown in Figure 1, has
an encoder to map the node vi into an embedding vector and
9931

