The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Localizing Natural Language in Videos
Jingyuan Chen,1∗ Lin Ma,2† Xinpeng Chen,2∗ Zequn Jie,2 Jiebo Luo3
1

Alibaba Group, 2 Tencent AI Lab, 3 University of Rochester
{jingyuanchen91, forest.linma, jschenxinpeng, zequn.nus}@gmail.com, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Text query: cyclist in white shirt carries bike up the steps

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the task of natural language video
localization (NLVL): given an untrimmed video and a natural
language description, the goal is to localize a segment in the
video which semantically corresponds to the given natural
language description. We propose a localizing network (LNet), working in an end-to-end fashion, to tackle the NLVL
task. We first match the natural sentence and video sequence
by cross-gated attended recurrent networks to exploit their
fine-grained interactions and generate a sentence-aware video
representation. A self interactor is proposed to perform crossframe matching, which dynamically encodes and aggregates
the matching evidences. Finally, a boundary model is proposed
to locate the positions of video segments corresponding to the
natural sentence description by predicting the starting and ending points of the segment. Extensive experiments conducted on
the public TACoS and DiDeMo datasets demonstrate that our
proposed model performs effectively and efficiently against
the state-of-the-art approaches.

23s

31s

Figure 1: Natural language video localization is designed to
localize a segment (the green box) with a start point (23rd s)
and an end point (31st s) in the video given natural language
description.
Existing techniques (Gao et al. 2017; Hendricks et al. 2017;
Lin et al. 2014; Tellex and Roy 2009) for natural language
localization in videos often rely on temporal sliding windows
over a video sequence to generate segment candidates, which
are then independently compared (Hendricks et al. 2017) or
combined (Gao et al. 2017) with the given natural sentence to
perform the localization. These models enable a good global
matching between the segment candidates and sentences.
However, they often suffer from overlooking the fine-grained
interactions and limited context information, as well as low
efficiency. Specifically, the fine-grained interactions between
the frames and words across video-sentence modalities and
the rich visual context information are not fully exploited. In
addition, these methods are computationally expensive due
to the exhaustive search in the temporal domain.
In order to handle the drawbacks, we propose a localization
network (L-Net) for the NLVL task. The untrimmed video
sequence is processed frame by frame without the need to
handle overlapping temporal segments. The key contributions
of this work are four-fold:

Introduction
Visual understanding tasks involving language, such as
captioning (Chen et al. 2018b; 2018a; Reed et al. 2016;
Vinyals et al. 2015; Jiang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b;
2018a), visual question answering (Ma, Lu, and Li 2016;
Antol et al. 2015; Xiong, Merity, and Socher 2016; Yang et
al. 2016), image and sentence matching (Ma et al. 2015) natural language object retrieval (Hu et al. 2016), have emerged as
avenues for expanding the diversity of information that can be
recovered from visual contents. With the recent release of the
TACoS (Gao et al. 2017) and DiDeMo datasets (Hendricks
et al. 2017), the task of natural language video localization
(NLVL) has gained considerable attentions. As shown in
Fig. 1, the task aims to localize a segment in the video which
semantically corresponds to the given natural language description. However, similar to other vision-language tasks,
cross-modal interactions and complicated context information issue pose significant challenge to natural language localization in videos.

• We propose a cross-gated attended recurrent network to
exploit the fine-grained interactions between the natural
sentence and video. In particular, the frame-specific sentence representation is generated by attending the sentence
representations with respect to each video frame. Further, a
cross gating process is introduced to assign different levels
of importance to video (or sentence) parts depending on
their relevance to the sentence description (or video content). In this way, the relevant video parts are emphasized
while the irrelevant ones are gated out.

∗
Work done while Jingyuan Chen and Xinpeng Chen were Research Interns with Tencent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We propose a self interactor to exploit the rich contextual information. We perform cross-frame matching on
8175

