The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Granger-Causal Attentive Mixtures of Experts:
Learning Important Features with Neural Networks
Patrick Schwab,1 Djordje Miladinovic,2 Walter Karlen1
1

Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems, 2 Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
patrick.schwab@hest.ethz.ch

Abstract

+

Knowledge of the importance of input features towards decisions made by machine-learning models is essential to increase our understanding of both the models and the underlying data. Here, we present a new approach to estimating
feature importance with neural networks based on the idea
of distributing the features of interest among experts in an
attentive mixture of experts (AME). AMEs use attentive gating networks trained with a Granger-causal objective to learn
to jointly produce accurate predictions as well as estimates
of feature importance in a single model. Our experiments
show (i) that the feature importance estimates provided by
AMEs compare favourably to those provided by state-of-theart methods, (ii) that AMEs are significantly faster at estimating feature importance than existing methods, and (iii)
that the associations discovered by AMEs are consistent with
those reported by domain experts.

c1

h1

a1

Expert E1

G1
h2

y

c2

Granger-causally grounded
a2

Expert E2

G2
h3

c3

a3

Expert E3

Attentive Gating
Network G3
hall = (h1,c1,h2,c2,h3,c3)

Figure 1: An overview of attentive mixtures of experts
(AMEs). The attentive gating networks Gi (red) attend to
the combined hidden state hall (blue) of the AME. Each expert’s Gi assigns an attentive factor ai to opportunistically
control its contribution ci to the AME’s final prediction y.

through the network (Montavon et al. 2017). We propose a new approach to feature importance estimation that
optimises jointly for predictive performance and accurate
assignment of feature importance in a single end-to-end
trained neural network. Structurally, our approach builds on
the idea of distributing the features of interest among experts
in a mixture of experts (Jordan and Jacobs 1994). The mixture of experts uses attentive gating networks to assign importance weights to individual experts (Figure 1). However,
when trained naı̈vely, this structure alone does not generally
learn to accurately assign weights that correspond to the importance of the experts’ input features. We therefore draw
upon a previously unreported connection between Grangercausality and feature importance estimation to define a secondary Granger-causal objective. Using the Granger-causal
objective, we ensure that the weights given to individual experts correlate strongly and measurably with their ability to
contribute to the decision at hand. Our experiments demonstrate that this optimisation-based approach towards learning to estimate feature importance leads to improvements of
several orders of magnitude in computational performance
over state-of-the-art methods. In addition, we show that the
Granger-causal objective correlates with the expected quality of importance estimates, that AMEs compare favourably
to the best existing methods in terms of feature importance
estimation accuracy, and that AMEs discover associations
that are consistent with those reported by domain experts1 .

Introduction
Neural networks are often criticised for being black-box
models (Castelvecchi 2016). Researchers have addressed
this criticism by developing tools that provide visualisations and explanations for the decisions of neural networks
(Baehrens et al. 2010; Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman
2014; Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Xu et al. 2015; Shrikumar et
al. 2017; Krause, Perer, and Ng 2016; Montavon et al. 2017;
Koh and Liang 2017). These explanations are desirable for
the many machine-learning use cases in which both predictive performance and interpretability are of paramount
importance (Kindermans et al. 2017; Smilkov et al. 2017;
Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017). They enable us to argue for
the decisions of machine-learning models, show when algorithmic decisions might be biased or discriminating (Hardt
et al. 2016), help uncover the basis of decisions when there
are legal or ethical circumstances that call for explanations
(Goodman and Flaxman 2016), and may facilitate the discovery of patterns that could advance our understanding of
the underlying phenomena (Shrikumar et al. 2017).
Estimating the relative contribution of individual input
features towards outputs of a deep neural network is hard
because the input features undergo multiple hierarchical, interdependent and non-linear transformations as they pass
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4846

Source code at https://github.com/d909b/ame

