The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SCFont: Structure-Guided Chinese Font Generation via Deep Stacked Networks
Yue Jiang, Zhouhui Lian,* Yingmin Tang, Jianguo Xiao
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
{yue.jiang, lianzhouhui, tangyingmin, xiaojianguo}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic generation of Chinese fonts that consist of large
numbers of glyphs with complicated structures is now still a
challenging and ongoing problem in areas of AI and Computer Graphics (CG). Traditional CG-based methods typically rely heavily on manual interventions, while recentlypopularized deep learning-based end-to-end approaches often
obtain synthesis results with incorrect structures and/or serious artifacts. To address those problems, this paper proposes
a structure-guided Chinese font generation system, SCFont,
by using deep stacked networks. The key idea is to integrate
the domain knowledge of Chinese characters with deep generative networks to ensure that high-quality glyphs with correct structures can be synthesized. More specifically, we first
apply a CNN model to learn how to transfer the writing trajectories with separated strokes in the reference font style into
those in the target style. Then, we train another CNN model
learning how to recover shape details on the contour for synthesized writing trajectories. Experimental results validate the
superiority of the proposed SCFont compared to the state of
the art in both visual and quantitative assessments.

Figure 1: An overview of our system.
style consistency. 3) The handwriting fonts now available
on electronic devices are mainly produced by professional
font designers in commercial companies. They rely heavily
on elaborate adjustments for each glyph, which is impractical and infeasible for fast font generation aiming at common
customers. Thereby, generating Chinese handwriting fonts
for ordinary people is still a tough task.
The majority of traditional CG-based methods take advantage of structural correlations among Chinese characters
to reuse parts of input glyphs. Typically, the input character
images are first decomposed into pre-defined strokes or radials. Then, unseen characters are synthesized by properly assembling the extracted components. Nevertheless, the qualities of many synthesized glyphs are unsatisfactory such that
manual interventions are typically required.
Recently, the utilization of deep learning-based approaches enables the font generation problem to be resolved
in an end-to-end manner. For one thing, the font generation
can be regarded as a style transfer problem where characters in the reference style are transferred to a specific style
while maintaining the consistency of the contents. For another, with the advances of generative adversarial networks
(GAN), more realistic and higher-quality glyphs can be synthesized. However, the entire generative process is uncontrollable and unpredictable. Blur and ghosting artifacts are
often contained in the generated glyphs. Besides, for characters with complicated structures and/or in cursive handwriting styles, those end-to-end approaches often produce
results with unreasonable strokes or/and incorrect structures.
In this paper, we propose a structure-guided Chinese font
generation system, SCFont, which integrates the prior domain knowledge of Chinese characters with deep stacked
networks to synthesize visually-pleasing character images
with correct contents. We decompose the font generation
task into two separate procedures, namely writing trajectories synthesis and font style rendering. The whole pipeline

Introduction
Compared to uniform-looking glyphs, now more and more
people prefer using personalized fonts, especially those in
distinguished handwriting styles, in many scenarios. On the
one hand, handwriting styles are flexible to express personality and endow texts with writers’ distinctive characteristics
and hallmarks. On the other hand, glyphs in personalized
handwriting styles bring about dynamic visual perceptions,
which are able to attract more attentions in various social
networking media.
However, creating a handwriting Chinese font library is
still a time-consuming and laborious work with long production cycle. The reasons are threefold: 1) Chinese characters have complex structures and thus yield great variance in
writing styles. 2) Unlike the English or Latin typefaces that
only contain a small number of glyphs, even the most commonly used Chinese charset (i.e., GB2312) is composed of
6763 characters. It is hard for ordinary people to write out
such large amounts of characters while still maintaining the
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4015

