The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Angular Triplet-Center Loss for Multi-View 3D Shape Retrieval
Zhaoqun Li,1∗ Cheng Xu,1∗ Biao Leng1,2,3†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191
2
Research Institute of Beihang University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518057
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191
{lizhaoqun, cxu, lengbiao}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

The most fundamental issue in 3D shape retrieval is how
to capture the efficient shape embeddings that make the instances from the same category closer and those from different categories farther away. A well-known general retrieval algorithm of view-based methods is Multi-view Convolutional Neural Networks (MVCNN) (Su et al. 2015),
extracting the visual feature of each view and aggregating them into a compact shape representation in a unified
framework. Most view-based methods (Leng et al. 2018;
2016) like MVCNN build discriminative shape features for
the object classification task with the softmax loss. However, softmax loss only focuses on distinguishing features
across classes and it ignores the intra-class similarity, which
is not specifically suitable for 3D shape retrieval task. Recently, (He et al. 2018) firstly formally introduce deep metric learning in 3D shape retrieval community to tackle this
problem, arguing that the metric loss such as triplet loss
or center loss can bring the performance benefits to 3D
shape retrieval. Moreover, they propose the triplet-center
loss (TCL) that can optimize the features by minimizing the
intra-class variance while also maximizing the inter-class
variance at the same time. Inspired by their work, we develop our method with regard to the deep metric learning in
view-based retrieval methods.
Most 3D shape retrieval approaches based on the metric
loss like TCL (He et al. 2018) use the Euclidean distance
of features to optimize the embedding space in the training,
while the cosine distance is adopted for measuring shape
similarity in the testing. This inconsistent metric restricts the
feature learning of these methods. Moreover, the desirable
Euclidean margin is difficult to determine because the range
of Euclidean distance between features could be very large.
In this paper, we propose the angular triplet-center loss
(ATCL) to build the discriminative and robust shape embeddings for multi-view 3D shape retrieval. Since 3D shape retrieval methods usually adopt cosine distance for measuring
feature similarity, the ATCL is designed based on the simple intuition that the cosine distance of features should be
close enough within the same class and far away across different classes. Motivated by TCL, the proposed metric loss
learns a center for each class and aims to make the cosine
distances between an instance and its corresponding center
smaller than the distance between it and other centers of different classes. Moreover, considering the metric loss based

How to obtain the desirable representation of a 3D shape,
which is discriminative across categories and polymerized
within classes, is a significant challenge in 3D shape retrieval.
Most existing 3D shape retrieval methods focus on capturing
strong discriminative shape representation with softmax loss
for the classification task, while the shape feature learning
with metric loss is neglected for 3D shape retrieval. In this
paper, we address this problem based on the intuition that the
cosine distance of shape embeddings should be close enough
within the same class and far away across categories. Since
most of 3D shape retrieval tasks use cosine distance of shape
features for measuring shape similarity, we propose a novel
metric loss named angular triplet-center loss, which directly
optimizes the cosine distances between the features. It inherits the triplet-center loss property to achieve larger inter-class
distance and smaller intra-class distance simultaneously. Unlike previous metric loss utilized in 3D shape retrieval methods, where Euclidean distance is adopted and the margin design is difficult, the proposed method is more convenient to
train feature embeddings and more suitable for 3D shape retrieval. Moreover, the angle margin is adopted to replace the
cosine margin in order to provide more explicit discriminative
constraints on an embedding space. Extensive experimental
results on two popular 3D object retrieval benchmarks, ModelNet40 and ShapeNetCore 55, demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed loss, and our method has achieved state-ofthe-art results on various 3D shape datasets.

Introduction
With the development of 3D sensing techniques and availability of large-scale 3D shape repositories (Chang et al.
2015; Wu et al. 2015), 3D shape retrieval has become more
significant in 3D shape analysis communities with wide application prospects. Among the existing 3D shape retrieval
methods, view-based methods have achieved best performance so far. In view-based 3D shape retrieval, deep shape
representation learning over multi-view image sequences of
3D shapes (Xu et al. 2018; Dai, Xie, and Fang 2018) have
dramatically advanced various 3D shape retrieval tasks in
recent years.
∗

They contributed equally to this work
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8682

