The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Accurate and Interpretable Factorization Machines
Liang Lan

Yu Geng

Department of Computer Science,
Hong Kong Baptist University,
Hong Kong SAR, China
lanliang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Department of Computer Science
and Technology,
East China Normal University, China
gydatoow@163.com

Abstract

action). Therefore, these approaches only work on low degree feature interaction. To overcome this issue, FMs (Rendle 2010) were proposed to model feature interactions using factorized parameters. FMs can model high-degree feature interaction in linear time O(d). In recent years, FMs
have been widely used for many classification, regression
and ranking problems.
Despite many successful applications of FMs, there are
two main limitations of FMs: (1) FMs consider feature interactions among input features by using only polynomial
expansion; (2) FMs do not provide interpretable prediction
to user. With regards to the first limitation, FMs fail to capture complex nonlinear patterns in data. For example, many
classification problems are not linear separately after polynomial feature mapping. Recently, Locally Linear Factorization Machine (LLFM) (Liu et al. 2017) was proposed to
learn a complex nonlinear model by exploring local coding
technique. They formulated a joint optimization to learn anchor points, local coordinates and FMs parameters together.
However, due to the procedures of searching and updating local coding coordinates, LLFM requires high computational cost compared with standard FMs.
Apart from unable to capture complex nonlinear patterns, another limitation of FMs is the model interpretability. The feature interactions in FMs are modeled by polynomial expansion which are not easy to explain to users.
In past few year, interpretability of machine learning models has attracted great research attention (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016; Chu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2018).
(Lou, Caruana, and Gehrke 2012) proposed Generalized Additive Models (GAM) to provide interpretable prediciton.
The prediction of GAM is a sum of univariate models built
on individual features. GAM can be explained because the
user can visualize the contribution scores of individual input features (computed by univariate models) to final prediction by histogram. However, GAM does not consider
feature interactions. GAM was further extended to Generalized Additive Models Plus Interactions (GA2 M) (Lou et
al. 2013) by adding pairwise feature interactions among input features. The contribution scores of pairwise interactions to final prediction are visualized as heatmap in twodimensional plane for interpretability. To avoid high computational cost of considering all pairwise feature interactions, GA2 M uses a heuristic method to select highly infor-

Factorization Machines (FMs), a general predictor that can
efficiently model high-order feature interactions, have been
widely used for regression, classification and ranking problems. However, despite many successful applications of FMs,
there are two main limitations of FMs: (1) FMs consider feature interactions among input features by using only polynomial expansion which fail to capture complex nonlinear patterns in data. (2) Existing FMs do not provide interpretable
prediction to users. In this paper, we present a novel method
named Subspace Encoding Factorization Machines (SEFM)
to overcome these two limitations by using non-parametric
subspace feature mapping. Due to the high sparsity of new
feature representation, our proposed method achieves the
same time complexity as the standard FMs but can capture
more complex nonlinear patterns. Moreover, since the prediction score of our proposed model for a sample is a sum of contribution scores of the bins and grid cells that this sample lies
in low-dimensional subspaces, it works similar like a scoring system which only involves data binning and score addition. Therefore, our proposed method naturally provides interpretable prediction. Our experimental results demonstrate
that our proposed method efficiently provides accurate and
interpretable prediction.

Introduction
Feature interactions play an important role in many machine
learning algorithms for capturing nonlinear patterns in data.
One popular example of using feature-interaction is Support Vector Machine (SVM) with polynomial kernel (Cortes
and Vapnik 1995). However, implicit polynomial mapping
via kernel trick induces huge computational cost since the
number of support vectors in the SVM model increases
linearly with the dataset size (Zhang et al. 2012). This is
also known as the curse of kernelization (Wang, Crammer,
and Vucetic 2012). Efficient approaches (Chang et al. 2010;
Sonnenburg and Franc 2010) were proposed to explicitly
pre-compute the low-degree polynomial kernel mapping and
then apply linear SVM on mapped data. However, the number of features in polynomial kernel mapping scales as
O(dq ), where d is the number of input features and q is the
degree of polynomial kernel (i.e. the degree of feature interCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4139

