The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Predicting Hurricane Trajectories Using a Recurrent Neural Network
Sheila Alemany,1 Jonathan Beltran,1 Adrian Perez,1 Sam Ganzfried1,2
1

School of Computing and Information Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, FL
2
Ganzfried Research, Miami, FL
{salem010, jbelt021, apere946}@fiu.edu, sam.ganzfried@gmail.com

Abstract

have been recently used to forecast increasingly complicated systems. RNNs are a class of artificial neural networks
where the modification of weights allows the model to learn
intricate dynamic temporal behaviors. A RNN with the capability of efficiently modeling complex nonlinear temporal
relationships of a hurricane could increase the accuracy of
predicting future hurricane path forecasts. Development of
such an approach is the focus of this paper.
While others have used RNNs in the forecasting of
weather data, to our knowledge this is the first fully connected recurrent neural networks employed using a grid
model for hurricane trajectory forecasts. The proposed
method can more accurately predict trajectories of hurricanes compared to traditional forecast methods employed
by the National Hurricane Center (NHC) of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). This paper summarizes our present state of model development. After reviewing the related work and background of recurrent
neural networks, we describe in detail the elements of our
proposed approach. Subsequently, we compare our results
with other hurricane forecasting techniques, including ones
employed by the NHC.

Hurricanes are cyclones circulating about a defined center
whose closed wind speeds exceed 75 mph originating over
tropical and subtropical waters. At landfall, hurricanes can
result in severe disasters. The accuracy of predicting their trajectory paths is critical to reduce economic loss and save human lives. Given the complexity and nonlinearity of weather
data, a recurrent neural network (RNN) could be beneficial
in modeling hurricane behavior. We propose the application
of a fully connected RNN to predict the trajectory of hurricanes. We employed the RNN over a fine grid to reduce
typical truncation errors. We utilized their latitude, longitude,
wind speed, and pressure publicly provided by the National
Hurricane Center (NHC) to predict the trajectory of a hurricane at 6-hour intervals. Results show that this proposed
technique is competitive to methods currently employed by
the NHC and can predict up to approximately 120 hours of
hurricane path.

Introduction
Hurricanes are thermally driven, large-scale cyclones whose
wind speeds exceed 75 miles per hour and circulate about a
well-defined center (Miller 1967). They arise from the warm
waters of the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea and
typically travel North, Northwest, or Northeast from their
point of origin. Hurricanes’ nature of having strong winds,
heavy precipitation, and dangerous tides typically result in
severe economic disasters and loss of lives. In 1965 Hurricane Betsy caused $1.5 billion of property damage at Florida
and the Gulf States (Miller 1967). In 2005, Hurricane Katrina resulted in 853 recorded fatalities also in regions of
Florida (Jonkman et al. 2009). The prediction of hurricane
trajectories allows for civilians to properly evacuate and prepare for these dangerous and destructive storms. Hurricane
track forecasting is not simple, however, as hurricanes are
highly erratic in their movements.
The development of current seasonal hurricane forecast
methods has advanced over the past decades. However, most
of the current hurricane trajectory forecast methods are statistical in nature (Wang et al. 2009). These statistical approaches are limiting due to the complexity and nonlinearity
of atmospheric systems. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)

Related Work
Scientists are interested in improving the capability of predictive models for tracking hurricanes for the safety of
individuals. There exist various forecast prediction models for the tracking of hurricanes. The present-day models
vary immensely in structure and complexity. The National
Hurricane Center (NHC) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) uses four main types
of models in their path predictions: dynamical, statistical,
statistical-dynamical, and ensemble or consensus models.1
Dynamical models, or numerical models, are complex
as they require the highest computational power to process
physical equations of motion in the atmosphere. Kurihara
et al. describe a dynamical model called the Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) Hurricane Prediction
System that was created to simulate hurricanes (Kurihara,
Tuleya, and Bender 1998). This model created a multiply
nested movable mesh system to generate the interior struc1
NHC Track and Intensity models provided at: https://www.
nhc.noaa.gov/modelsummary.shtml

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

468

