The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Sequential Set Generation Method for Predicting Set-Valued Outputs
Tian Gao, Jie Chen, Vijil Chenthamarakshan, Michael Witbrock
IBM Research
Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY
{tgao, chenjie, ecvijil, witbroc}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

to enumerate relevant rules and possible bindings of a logicbased inference system, producing all descriptions of a picture, and generating relevant images for a given query.
A major goal of our lab is to work toward unifying the
capabilities of deep learning approaches with the AI capabilities supported by symbolic computation, and a major
thread of such work concerns logical inference, including
mathematical theorem proving. In theorem proving applications (Irving et al. 2016), one needs to produce sets of
complex structures representing a search state and its possible extension, and then reduction, as a solution is constructed. For example, one needs to select a set of mathematical statements relevant to finding solutions for a given
conjecture, say A(x, Volume6), such as {y 7→ Volume6}/
{A(x, y) ← B(x) ∧ C(y, x) ∧ D(y), A(x, y) ← F (y) ∧
E(x, y)}. One also needs to find, and then apply, a set of
bindings that satisfy at least one of the possible solution
paths, such as x 7→ {5, 8, 1} supposing that F (Volume6)
and D(Volume6) hold, and so do E(1, Volume6), B(5),
B(8), C(Volume6, 5) and C(Volume6, 8). Note that in both
these cases —finding relevant conjectures, and finding bindings that satisfy those conjectures— what is being manipulated is a set of complex sequences representing logical formulas.
While it is conceivable for an algorithm to be trained to
produce a sequence representing the relevant output set, doing so often requires the introduction of some artificial order over the elements, which is quite unnatural. Moreover,
the complexity of choosing a particular ”good” list order
may be prohibitive, and finding this ”best” order during inference may be simultaneously challenging and pointless.
Recent work has shown that choosing such a ”right” order
is crucial for prediction performance (Vinyals, Bengio, and
Kudlur 2016).
In this work, we aim at predicting an output set (of symbols or sequences) that has bounded (but varying) size and
is order-free. We propose a meta-algorithm, called Sequential Set Generation (SSG), that predicts output elements one
by one until the full set is produced. SSG handles sets of labels as in the standard classification setting, as well as sets
of sequences needed for rule induction, inference, or image
generation. We demonstrate these two capabilities with synthetic data sets and show the empirical success of the proposed algorithm.

Consider a general machine learning setting where the output
is a set of labels or sequences. This output set is unordered
and its size varies with the input. Whereas multi-label classification methods seem a natural first resort, they are not
readily applicable to set-valued outputs because of the growth
rate of the output space; and because conventional sequence
generation doesn’t reflect sets’ order-free nature. In this paper, we propose a unified framework—sequential set generation (SSG)—that can handle output sets of labels and sequences. SSG is a meta-algorithm that leverages any probabilistic learning method for label or sequence prediction, but
employs a proper regularization such that a new label or sequence is generated repeatedly until the full set is produced.
Though SSG is sequential in nature, it does not penalize the
ordering of the appearance of the set elements and can be
applied to a variety of set output problems, such as a set of
classification labels or sequences. We perform experiments
with both benchmark and synthetic data sets and demonstrate
SSG’s strong performance over baseline methods.

Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning, particularly deep
learning models and training algorithms, have resulted in
significant breakthroughs in a variety of AI areas, including
computer vision, natural language processing, and speech
recognition. Most of these applications have been formulated as classification problems: a label is predicted for a
given input. The output label could be the category of an
image, the word uttered in an audio signal, or the topic of
a news paragraph. For sequence generation problems, an ordered list of tokens is generated sequentially, with the output
of each token being essentially a label prediction. In this paper, we pursue the capability to predict sets, the size of which
may vary, and for which the order of the elements is irrelevant. We call this problem set prediction. The challenge lies
in the fact that the output space, or the universe of set elements, may be enormously large or even infinite, especially
for sets of sequences. Thus, treating the general problem as
multi-label classification is inefficient or effectively impossible. Examples of set prediction problems include learning
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2835

