The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Explicitly Imposing Constraints in Deep Networks via
Conditional Gradients Gives Improved Generalization and Faster Convergence
Sathya N. Ravi, Tuan Dinh, Vishnu Suresh Lokhande, Vikas Singh
{ravi5@wisc.edu}, {tuandinh, lokhande, vsingh}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract

the above task are non-convex but results in the last 5 years
show that good minimizers can be found via SGD and its
variants. Recent results have also explored the interplay between the overparameterization of the network, its degrees
of freedom and issues related to global optimality (Soudry
and Carmon 2016).
Regularizers. Independent of the architecture we choose
to deploy for a given task, one may often want to impose
additional constraints or regularizers, pertinent to the application domain of interest. In fact, the use of task specific constraints to improve the behavioral performance of
neural networks, both from a computational and statistical perspective, has a long history dating back at least to
the 1980s (Platt and Barr 1988; Zhang and Constantinides
1992). These ideas are being revisited (Rudd, Di Muro, and
Ferrari 2014) motivated by generalization, convergence or
simply as a strategy for compression (Cheng and others
2017). However, using constraints on the types of architectures that are common in modern AI problems is still
being actively researched by various groups. For example,
(Mikolov and others 2014) demonstrated that training Recurrent Networks can be accelerated by constraining a part
of the recurrent matrix to be close to identity. Sparsity and
low-rank encouraging constraints have shown promise in a
number of settings (Tai and others 2015). In an interesting
paper, (Pathak, Krahenbuhl, and Darrell 2015) showed that
linear constraints on the output layer improves the accuracy
on a semantic image segmentation task. (Márquez-Neila,
Salzmann, and Fua 2017) showed that hard constraints on
the output layer yield competitive results on the pose estimation task and (Oktay and others 2017) used anatomical constraints for cardiac image analysis. This suggests that while
there are some results demonstrating the value of specific
constraints for specific problems, the development is still in
a nascent stage. It is, therefore, not surprising that the existing software libraries for deep learning (DL) offer little to no
support for hard constraints. For example, Keras only offers
support for simple bound constraints.
Optimization Schemes. Let us momentarily set aside the
issue of constraints and discuss the choice of the optimization schemes that are in use today. There is little doubt that
SGD algorithms dominate the landscape of DL problems in
AI. Instead of evaluating the loss and the gradient over the
full training set, SGD computes the gradient of the param-

A number of results have recently demonstrated the benefits
of incorporating various constraints when training deep architectures in vision and machine learning. The advantages
range from guarantees for statistical generalization to better accuracy to compression. But support for general constraints within widely used libraries remains scarce and their
broader deployment within many applications that can benefit
from them remains under-explored. Part of the reason is that
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD), the workhorse for training
deep neural networks, does not natively deal with constraints
with global scope very well. In this paper, we revisit a classical first order scheme from numerical optimization, Conditional Gradients (CG), that has, thus far had limited applicability in training deep models. We show via rigorous analysis
how various constraints can be naturally handled by modifications of this algorithm. We provide convergence guarantees
and show a suite of immediate benefits that are possible —
from training ResNets with fewer layers but better accuracy
simply by substituting in our version of CG to faster training of GANs with 50% fewer epochs in image inpainting applications to provably better generalization guarantees using
efficiently implementable forms of recently proposed regularizers.

Introduction
The learning or fitting problem in deep neural networks in
the supervised setting is often expressed as the following
stochastic optimization problem,
min

E

W (x,y)∼D

L(W ; (x, y))

(1)

where W = W1 × · · · × Wl denotes the Cartesian product
of the weight matrices of the network with l layers that we
seek to learn from the data (x, y) sampled from the underlying distribution D. Here, x can be thought of the “features”
(or predictor variables) of the data and y denotes the “labels”
(or the response variable). The variable W parameterizes the
function that predicts the labels given the features whose accuracy is measured using the loss function L. For simplicity, the specification above is intentionally agnostic of the
activation function we use between the layers and the specific network architecture. Most common instantiations of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4772

