The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

DialogueRNN: An Attentive RNN for Emotion Detection in Conversations
Navonil Majumder,†≡ Soujanya Poria,‡≡ Devamanyu Hazarika,Φ
Rada Mihalcea,▽ Alexander Gelbukh,† Erik Cambria‡
†

‡

Centro de Investigación en Computación, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Φ
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
▽
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
≡
means authors contributed equally
Abstract

state, respectively. The global GRU encodes corresponding
party information while encoding an utterance.
Attending over this GRU gives contextual representation
that has information of all preceding utterances by different
parties in the conversation. The speaker state depends on this
context through attention and the speaker’s previous state.
This ensures that at time t, the speaker state directly gets information from the speaker’s previous state and global GRU
which has information on the preceding parties. Finally, the
updated speaker state is fed into the emotion GRU to decode
the emotion representation of the given utterance, which is
used for emotion classification. At time t, the emotion GRU
cell gets the emotion representation of t − 1 and the speaker
state of t.
The emotion GRU, along with the global GRU, plays a
pivotal role in inter-party relation modeling. On the other
hand, party GRU models relation between two sequential
states of the same party. In DialogueRNN, all these three
different types of GRUs are connected in a recurrent manner.
We believe that DialogueRNN outperforms state-of-the-art
contextual emotion classifiers such as (Hazarika et al. 2018;
Poria et al. 2017) because of better context representation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
discusses related work; Section 3 provides detailed description of our model; Sections 4 and 5 present the experimental
results; finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

Emotion detection in conversations is a necessary step for a
number of applications, including opinion mining over chat
history, social media threads, debates, argumentation mining,
understanding consumer feedback in live conversations, and
so on. Currently systems do not treat the parties in the conversation individually by adapting to the speaker of each utterance. In this paper, we describe a new method based on recurrent neural networks that keeps track of the individual party
states throughout the conversation and uses this information
for emotion classification. Our model outperforms the stateof-the-art by a significant margin on two different datasets.

1

Introduction

Emotion detection in conversations has been gaining increasing attention from the research community due to its
applications in many important tasks such as opinion mining over chat history and social media threads in YouTube,
Facebook, Twitter, and so on. In this paper, we present a
method based on recurrent neural networks (RNN) that can
cater to these needs by processing the huge amount of available conversational data.
Current systems, including the state of the art (Hazarika et
al. 2018), do not distinguish different parties in a conversation in a meaningful way. They are not aware of the speaker
of a given utterance. In contrast, we model individual parties
with party states, as the conversation flows, by relying on the
utterance, the context, and current party state. Our model is
based on the assumption that there are three major aspects
relevant to the emotion in a conversation: the speaker, the
context from the preceding utterances, and the emotion of
the preceding utterances. These three aspects are not necessarily independent, but their separate modeling significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art (Table 2). In dyadic conversations, the parties have distinct roles. Hence, to extract the
context, it is crucial to consider the preceding turns of both
the speaker and the listener at a given moment (Fig. 1).
Our proposed DialogueRNN system employs three gated
recurrent units (GRU) (Chung et al. 2014) to model these
aspects. The incoming utterance is fed into two GRUs called
global GRU and party GRU to update the context and party

2

Related Work

Emotion recognition has attracted attention in various fields
such as natural language processing, psychology, cognitive science, and so on (Picard 2010). Ekman (1993) found
correlation between emotion and facial cues. Datcu and
Rothkrantz (2008) fused acoustic information with visual
cues for emotion recognition. Alm, Roth, and Sproat (2005)
introduced text-based emotion recognition, developed in
the work of Strapparava and Mihalcea (2010). Wöllmer et
al. (2010) used contextual information for emotion recognition in multimodal setting. Recently, Poria et al. (2017)
successfully used RNN-based deep networks for multimodal emotion recognition, which was followed by other
works (Chen et al. 2017; Zadeh et al. 2018a; 2018b).
Reproducing human interaction requires deep understanding of conversation. Ruusuvuori (2013) states that
emotion plays a pivotal role in conversations. It has been ar-

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6818

