The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Optimal Classification Trees
Using a Binary Linear Program Formulation
Sicco Verwer

Yingqian Zhang

Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
s.e.verwer@tudelft.nl

Eindhoven University of Technology
The Netherlands
yqzhang@tue.nl

Abstract

of learning optimal classification trees of given depths such
that the total classification error is minimized on the training
data.
A limitation of the state-of-the-art Mathematical Optimization formulations for this problem is that they create constraints and variables for every row in the training
data (Verwer and Zhang 2017; Bertsimas and Dunn 2017).
Consequently, the solving time of finding decision trees increases dramatically with the problem size.
We formulate the problem of constructing the optimal decision tree of a given depth as an binary linear program. We
call our method BinOCT, a Binary encoding for constructing
Optimal Classification Trees. Our novel formulation models
the selection of decision threshold via a binary search procedure encoded using a type of big-M constraints. This requires a very small number of binary decision variables and
is therefore able to find good quality solutions within limited
time. Noteworthy is that the number of decision variables
is largely independent of the number of training data rows:
it only depends logarithmically on the number of unique
feature values. Furthermore, our formulation requires fewer
constraints than existing approaches. Although this number
still depends linearly on the number of data rows. We show
using experiments that BinOCT outperforms existing MO
based approaches on a variety of data sets in terms of accuracy and computation time.

We provide a new formulation for the problem of learning
the optimal classification tree of a given depth as a binary
linear program. A limitation of previously proposed Mathematical Optimization formulations is that they create constraints and variables for every row in the training data. As
a result, the running time of the existing Integer Linear programming (ILP) formulations increases dramatically with the
size of data. In our new binary formulation, we aim to circumvent this problem by making the formulation size largely
independent from the training data size. We show experimentally that our formulation achieves better performance than
existing formulations on both small and large problem instances within shorter running time.

Introduction
Decision trees (Breiman et al. 1984) have gained increasing popularity these years due to their effectiveness in solving classification and regression problems and their capability to explain prediction results. Learning an optimal decision tree with a predefined depth is NP-hard (Hyafil and
Rivest 1976). Hence, greedy based heuristics such as CART
(Breiman et al. 1984) and ID3 (Quinlan 1986) have been
widely used to construct sub-optimal trees. Recent years
have seen an increasing number of work that employ various
Mathematical Optimization methods to build better quality decision trees, e.g., (Bennett and Blue 1996; Bessiere,
Hebrard, and O’Sullivan 2009; Verwer and Zhang 2017;
Bertsimas and Dunn 2017; Silva 2017; Dash, Günlük, and
Wei 2018; Blanquero et al. 2018a; 2018b; Firat et al. 2018).
An advantage of these Mathematical Optimization based
approaches is that they are able to employ the powerful
optimization solvers to find decision trees. This power has
led to interesting new approaches for learning models and
rules, see e.g., (Bessiere, Hebrard, and O’Sullivan 2009;
De Raedt, Guns, and Nijssen 2010; Narodytska et al. 2018;
Verwer, Zhang, and Ye 2017). In addition, the mathematical optimization models allow flexibility on modeling different learning objectives. For instance, (Verwer and Zhang
2017) incorporate constraints in the proposed Integer Linear Programming (ILP) model to learn discrimination-aware
classification trees. In this paper, we focus on the problem

Related work
Many studies have investigated the interplay of data mining and machine learning with mathematical modeling
techniques, see overview in e.g. (Bennett and ParradoHernández 2006). In this paper, we are interested in using mathematical optimization methods in order to increase
learning performance. For instance, (Bennett and Mangasarian 1993) use linear programming for determining linear
combination splits within two-class decision trees. (Chang,
Ratinov, and Roth 2012) propose a Constrained Conditional
Model (CCM) framework to incorporate domain knowledge
into a conditional model for structured learning, in the form
of declarative constraints. CCMs solves prediction problems. (Uney and Turkay 2006) build a mixed integer program for multi-class data classification.
(Bennett and Blue 1996) construct binary classification
trees with fixed structure and labels. The paths of the tree are

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1625

