The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

On Limited Conjunctions and Partial
Features in Parameter-Tractable Feature Logics
Stephanie McIntyre,1 Alexander Borgida,2 David Toman,1 Grant Weddell1
1

Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada
2
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, NJ, U.S.A.
{srmcinty,david,gweddell}@uwaterloo.ca, borgida@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract

but actually define StudentWorker as anyone who is
both, by adding the axiom

Standard reasoning problems are complete for EXPTIME in
common feature-based description logics—ones in which all
roles are restricted to being functions. We show how to control conjunctions on left-hand-sides of subsumptions and use
this restriction to develop a parameter-tractable algorithm for
reasoning about knowledge base consistency. We then show
how the resulting logic can simulate partial features, and
present algorithms for efficient query answering in that setting.

1

(Student u Employee) v StudentWorker.
This distinction between “primitive concepts” (“phones,
which happen to all be black”) and “defined concepts”
(“black phones”) was one of the key insights that drove
Brachman (Brachman 1977) to the development of KLONE, the progenitor of DLs, and was an important missing
ingredient in semantic data models (Hull and King 1987),
such as Taxis (Mylopoulos, Bernstein, and Wong 1980) and
GEM (Zaniolo 1983), as well as UML.
A frequently remarked limitation of the CF D family, including CF DI ∀−
nc , is that features connecting objects are
total functions. An interesting and important benefit of allowing limited conjunctions on the left-hand side of subsumption will be the ability to encode and support reasoning
with features that are instead partial functions. This means
that we can now explicitly require that a Building never
has a salary. In relational database terms, this means that
CF DI ∀−
kc can indirectly represent “null inapplicable”, in addition to the usual “null unknown”, which comes from the
open world assumption of DLs. In particular, we also in∀−
troduce partial-CF DI ∀−
kc variants of CF DI kc DLs, which
add an ability to capture partial features, and show how any
partial-CF DI ∀−
kc terminology can always be mapped to a
terminology.
The remaining technical contriCF DI ∀−
(k +1 )c
butions of this paper are to show that each of the following
problems are parameter-tractable in k:

Introduction

Ontology-based data access (OBDA) emphasizes the use of
ontologies, usually expressed in a description logic (DL),
as a preferred front end for interacting with (multiple)
databases, containing facts about a domain (Calvanese et
al. 2007; Kontchakov et al. 2010; Lutz et al. 2013). A desirable DL for OBDA supports (i) more expressive conceptual modelling of the domain, (ii) capturing domain semantics embedded in relational schema, and (iii) effective
query answering. The CF D family of feature-based DLs
has been designed primarily to support PTIME reasoning in
accessing relational data sources. A distinguishing property
of this family is support for expressing complex functional
dependencies, which are the most widely used way to capture domain semantics in relational databases, in addition
to foreign keys. One dialect, called CF DI ∀−
nc (St. Jacques,
Toman, and Weddell 2016), supported OBDA to relational
databases, and was able to do so without “loading” the relational database into an ABox. In addition, it was capable of
emulating DL-LiteF
core .
Our main contribution is a new parameterized member
of this family called CF DI ∀−
kc , which adds the ability to
use conjunctions on the left-hand side of subsumptions in
a CF DI ∀−
nc TBox, where the parameter k is a positive integer that constitutes a limit on the number of conjunctions
that need to be considered in reasoning services. (Indeed,
∀−
any CF DI ∀−
nc TBox can be easily mapped to a CF DI 2c
∀−
TBox.) This enhances the modelling capacity of CF DI kc :
in a university context, we can now not only specify that a
StudentWorker is both a Student and an Employee,

1. (parameter diagnosis) given an arbitrary CF DI ∀ TBox
T and integer k, determining if T is a CF DI ∀−
kc TBox;
2. (concept satisfiability) given a CF DI ∀−
kc TBox and concept C, determining if C is satisfiable;
3. (knowledge base consistency) determining if a given
CF DI ∀−
kc knowledge base is consistent; and
4. (query answering in OBDA) computing the certain answers for conjunctive queries over a given CF DI ∀−
kc
knowledge base.
Note that, similarly to other approaches to defining (parameter-)tractable fragments of first-order logic, e.g., (Simancik, Motik, and Horrocks 2014; Bienvenu et al. 2017;

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2995

