The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Biomedical Image Segmentation via Representative Annotation
Hao Zheng, Lin Yang, Jianxu Chen,∗ Jun Han, Yizhe Zhang,
Peixian Liang, Zhuo Zhao, Chaoli Wang, Danny Z. Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
{hzheng3, lyang5, jchen16, jhan5, yzhang29, pliang, zzhao3, cwang11, dchen}@nd.edu

Abstract

resources (e.g., money, time, and available experts), reducing annotation efforts while maintaining the best possible
performance of DL models becomes a critical problem.
Currently, there are two main categories of methods for
alleviating the burden of annotation. The methods in the
first category aim to utilize unannotated data by leveraging
weakly/semi-supervised learning methods (Lin et al. 2016;
Yang et al. 2018a; Cheplygina, de Bruijne, and Pluim 2018).
Though promising, the performance of such methods is still
far from that of supervised learning methods. Accuracy in
biomedical analysis is of high importance and thus performance is a big concern.
The methods in the second category aim to identify and
annotate only the most valuable image areas that contribute
to the final segmentation accuracy. To achieve this goal, such
methods usually explore the following two properties of
biomedical images. (1) Biomedical images for a certain type
of applications are usually similar to one another (e.g., gland
segmentation, heart segmentation). Thus, a great deal of redundancy may exist in biomedical image datasets. Fig. 1(a)
and (c) show some frequent patterns in glands and heart MR
images, respectively. (2) Although regions of interest (ROIs)
in biomedical images may have different appearances, we
notice that they can be roughly divided into a certain number
of groups (e.g., see Fig. 1(b)). Hence, it is helpful to select
representative samples to cover the diverse cases in order to
achieve good segmentation performance.
Up to date, the most popular approaches (Jain and Grauman 2016; Yang et al. 2017) designed to leverage these two
properties are all based on active learning (AL). In general,
AL based approaches iteratively conduct two steps: selecting informative samples from unlabeled sets and querying
labels from human experts. The ability of AL on reducing annotation cost while maintaining good learning performance hinges on the fact that it can iteratively add the
most diverse and influential samples from unlabeled sets for
learning a better model and simultaneously update its selection strategy to help human experts reduce labeling redundant samples. However, this iterative process is usually
quite time-consuming and not practical in real-world applications for several reasons. (1) It is implied that human experts should be constantly and readily available for labeling whenever new unlabeled samples are queried. (2) The
AL process needs to be suspended until newly queried sam-

Deep learning has been applied successfully to many biomedical image segmentation tasks. However, due to the diversity
and complexity of biomedical image data, manual annotation for training common deep learning models is very timeconsuming and labor-intensive, especially because normally
only biomedical experts can annotate image data well. Human experts are often involved in a long and iterative process
of annotation, as in active learning type annotation schemes.
In this paper, we propose representative annotation (RA), a
new deep learning framework for reducing annotation effort
in biomedical image segmentation. RA uses unsupervised
networks for feature extraction and selects representative image patches for annotation in the latent space of learned feature descriptors, which implicitly characterizes the underlying data while minimizing redundancy. A fully convolutional
network (FCN) is then trained using the annotated selected
image patches for image segmentation. Our RA scheme offers three compelling advantages: (1) It leverages the ability
of deep neural networks to learn better representations of image data; (2) it performs one-shot selection for manual annotation and frees annotators from the iterative process of common active learning based annotation schemes; (3) it can be
deployed to 3D images with simple extensions. We evaluate
our RA approach using three datasets (two 2D and one 3D)
and show our framework yields competitive segmentation results comparing with state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Image segmentation is a central task in diverse biomedical
imaging applications. Recently, deep learning (DL) has been
successfully applied to many image segmentation tasks and
achieved state-of-the-art or even human-level performance
(Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Chen et al. 2016a;
2016b; Zhang et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2017). It is well known
that the amount and variety of data that DL networks use
for model training drastically affect their performance. However, it is often quite difficult to acquire sufficient training
data for DL based biomedical image segmentation tasks, because biomedical image annotation highly depends on expert experience and variations in biomedical data (e.g., different modalities and object types) can be large. With limited
∗

J. Chen is now at Allen Institute for Cell Science.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5901

