The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Estimating the Days to Success of Campaigns
in Crowdfunding: A Deep Survival Perspective
Binbin Jin,† Hongke Zhao,† Enhong Chen,†§∗ Qi Liu,†§ Yong Ge‡
†

Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
§
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
Eller College of Management, University of Arizona
{bb0725, zhhk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {cheneh, qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn, yongge@email.arizona.edu
HAL 9000 Product Line from 2001: A Space Odyssey

Abstract

Description
For 50 years, fans have been waiting for the ultimate replica
of the HAL 9000 computer from "2001: A Space Odyssey."
MRG is proud to announce that the wait is finally over! ...

Crowdfunding is an emerging mechanism for entrepreneurs
or individuals to solicit funding from the public for their creative ideas. However, in these platforms, quite a large proportion of campaigns (projects) fail to raise enough money of
backers’ supports by the declared expiration date. Actually, it
is very urgent to predict the exact success time of campaigns.
But this problem has not been well explored due to a series
of domain and technical challenges. In this paper, we notice
the implicit factor of distribution of backing behaviors has a
positive impact on estimating the success time of the campaign. Therefore, we present a focused study on predicting
two specific tasks, i.e., backing distribution prediction and
success time prediction of campaigns. Specifically, we propose a Seq2seq based model with Multi-facet Priors (SMP),
which can integrate heterogeneous features to jointly model
the backing distribution and success time. Additionally, to
keep the change of backing distributions more smooth as the
backing behaviors increases, we develop a linear evolutionary
prior for backing distribution prediction. Furthermore, due to
high failure rate, the success time of most campaigns is unobservable. We model this censoring phenomenon from the survival analysis perspective and also develop a non-increasing
prior and a partial prior for success time prediction. Finally,
we conduct extensive experiments on a real-world dataset
from Indiegogo. Experimental results clearly validate the effectiveness of SMP.

Perks

Comments
Kevin Dackiw:
The command console will be a wonderful addition to my home theater. ...
Alex Balcanquall:
Hi, I am really excited by this, I own
one of the original MR millennium
falcons and know you guys have
awesome attention to detail. ...

Funding price: $419 USD
Funding price: $889 USD
Rewards:
Rewards:
Early Bird Desktop Bundle
Early Bird Command Console LE
Estimated delivery: Jan. 2019 Estimated delivery: Mar. 2019

Funding Process
Funding goal: $80,000
Expiration date: 28 days left; Funding duration: 40 days
Current progress: $71,519 (89%) USD raised by 90 backers

Figure 1: A campaign example from Indiegogo.

rewards (often vowing future productions), and its funding
process with a pledged goal, expiration date, etc. Anyone
interested in the project can choose any perk to support and
expect the corresponding rewards in return. Among these
heterogeneous features, it is challenging to comprehensively
analyze and integrate them to predict the success time of
campaigns (i.e., success time prediction). Fortunately, Indiegogo also reveals the backers’ comments which generally affect the following backing behaviors (i.e., funding
the campaign or not; selecting specific perks) and the speed
of funding process. For example, in Figure 1, the positive
comments (highlighted in blue) encourage this campaign to
quickly raise 89% of its funding goal in a short term. Actually, with the help of comments, creators can more accurately estimate the backing distribution in the future (i.e., the
ratio of backing behaviors in different price ranges or perks),
which is related to the backers’ preference or perk popularity. Intuitively, more backing behaviors with higher funding
prices lead to rapid fundraising. Therefore, backing distribution prediction is significant for creators to assess and update
the campaign design in time. Additionally, due to the limited backing behaviors on each campaign (around 3 backing
behaviors per day on average), the change of backing distributions is slow and smooth so that creators could further estimate the success time of campaigns based on the predicted
backing distribution. However, how to construct the predictions of backing distribution and success time remains to be
open issues.

Introduction
In recent years, crowdfunding has gradually become a popular way for entrepreneurs and individuals to solicit funding from the public for their creative ideas. Among various
types of crowdfunding platforms, reward-based ones (e.g.,
Indiegogo) are considered as the most popular (Bannerman
2013). Nowadays, thousands of entrepreneurs and individuals create campaigns for funding and demonstrate their practical productions on these platforms every day. They expect
to attract enough backers to meet their financial demands so
that they can witness the birth of their ideal productions.
For example, Figure 1 shows an example of the campaign
from Indiegogo. Generally, a campaign contains a detailed
description, several perks with different funding prices and
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4023

