The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Heterogeneous Spatial-Temporal Representation
for Bike-Sharing Demand Prediction
Youru Li,†,‡ Zhenfeng Zhu,†,‡ Deqiang Kong,≡ Meixiang Xu,†,‡ Yao Zhao†,‡
†

‡

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing, China
≡
Microsoft Multimedia, Beijing, China
†,‡
{liyouru,zhfzhu,xumx0721,yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn, ≡ kodeqian@microsoft.com
Abstract

Bike-sharing demand prediction can usually be defined
as a time series prediction problem from multi-source and
heterogeneous data. Traditionally, time series prediction can
be considered as building a suitable predictive model (Yule
1927) for a series of data points indexed in time order so as
to make good use of the complex sequence dependencies.
As a representative of the statistical regression methods,
the auto-regressive moving average model (ARMA) and the
auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model
(Box and Pierce 1968) are both well-known models for time
series prediction. As machine learning methods grow popular gradually, more researchers focused on the studies to
establish nonlinear prediction model based on a large scale
of historical data. Typical models such as the support vector regression (SVR)(Drucker et al. 1996) based on kernel
methods and the artificial neural networks (ANN) (Davoian
and Lippe 2007) with strong nonlinear function approximation ability and the k-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN) regression
(Wang and Chaib-draa 2013) based on distance metric in
feature space and some tree-based ensemble learning methods, for instance, the random forests (RF) regression (Johansson et al. 2014) and the gradient boosting regression
tree (GBRT) (Li and Bai 2016).
With the rise of deep learning methods, the recurrent neural network (RNN) (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986)
gradually becomes the state-of-the-art method for temporal modeling. However, with longer driving sequence, some
problems such as vanishing gradient limit the prediction accuracy of this model. To address these issue, the long shortterm memory units (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997) and its variants the gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Cho
et al. 2014a) were proposed based on the original RNN
which balances memorizing and forgetting by adding multiple threshold gates. Learning from cognitive neuroscience
and inspired by some successful applications in natural
language processing (Cho et al. 2014b), some researchers
(Liang et al. 2018) introduce attention mechanisms to the
encoding-decoding framework based on LSTMs to better select from input series and encode information in long-term
memory for time series prediction.
Although the LSTM-based models can achieve satisfactory effect in temporal modeling, their ability to model complex non-linear spatial-temporal relations is clearly insufficient (Yao et al. 2018). Particularly, bike-sharing demand

Bike-sharing systems, aiming at meeting the public’s need
for ”last mile” transportation, are becoming popular in recent years. With an accurate demand prediction model, shared
bikes, though with a limited amount, can be effectively utilized whenever and wherever there are travel demands. Despite that some deep learning methods, especially long shortterm memory neural networks (LSTMs), can improve the
performance of traditional demand prediction methods only
based on temporal representation, such improvement is limited due to a lack of mining complex spatial-temporal relations. To address this issue, we proposed a novel model
named STG2Vec to learn the representation from heterogeneous spatial-temporal graph. Specifically, we developed an
event-flow serializing method to encode the evolution of dynamic heterogeneous graph into a special language pattern
such as word sequence in a corpus. Furthermore, a dynamic
attention-based graph embedding model is introduced to obtain an importance-awareness vectorized representation of
the event flow. Additionally, together with other multi-source
information such as geographical position, historical transition patterns and weather, e.g., the representation learned by
STG2Vec can be fed into the LSTMs for temporal modeling.
Experimental results from Citi-Bike electronic usage records
dataset in New York City have illustrated that the proposed
model can achieve competitive prediction performance compared with its variants and other baseline models.

Introduction
Bike-Sharing systems have been widely used in urban public transportation due to their convenience and environmental friendliness in recent years. As a representative product
of the sharing economy, it is often hailed as a good helper to
solve the ”last mile” in citizen transportation. Its users can
check out a bike where they depart and return it to a station close to their destination. However, due to the high frequency and randomness of using, the system has come to be
unbalanced in bike distribution. This will result in short supply of bikes in some places and oversupply in others, thus reducing user satisfaction. In general, to solve this unbalanced
bike-sharing distribution problem, it is vital to propose an
accurate demand prediction model.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1004

