The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Context-Aware Self-Attention Networks
Baosong Yang1

Jian Li2

Derek F. Wong1

Lidia S. Chao1

Xing Wang3

Zhaopeng Tu3 *

NLP CT Lab, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
nlp2ct.baosong@gmail.com, {derekfw,lidiasc}@umac.mo
2
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Tencent AI Lab
jianli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
{brightxwang,zptu}@tencent.com
1

2

Abstract

al. (2017) and Zhang et al. (2017) respectively enhanced the
query and memory of a standard attention model (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2015) with internal contextual representations. Wang et al. (2017) and Voita et al. (2018) enhanced
the two components with external contextual representations
that summarizes previous source sentences.
In this work, we propose to strengthen SANs through capturing the richness of context, and meanwhile maintain their
simplicity and flexibility. To this end, we employ the internal
representations as context vectors, thus avoid relying on external resources, e.g. the embeddings of previous sentences.
Specifically, we contextualize the transformations from the
input layer to the query and key layers, which are used to
calculate the relevance between elements. We exploit several strategies for the contextualization, including: 1) global
context that represents the global information of a sequence;
2) deep context that embeds syntactic and semantic information summarized by multiple-layer representations; and 3)
deep-global context that combines information of both the
above two context vectors.
Some researchers may doubt that, for a multi-layer selfattentive model (e.g. T RANSFORMER (Vaswani et al. 2017)),
each input state has summarized the global information from
its lower layer through the weighted sum operation. Our
study dispels the doubt by showing that such summarization does not fully captures the richness of contextual information. We conducted experiments on two widely-used
WMT14 English⇒German and WMT17 Chinese⇒English
translation tasks. The proposed approach consistently improves translation performance over the strong T RANS FORMER baseline, while only marginally decreases the
speed. Extensive analyses reveal that there exists separate requirement of contextual information for different representations, e.g., the representation of the function words distinctly
require more contexts than that of the content words.

Self-attention model has shown its flexibility in parallel computation and the effectiveness on modeling both long- and
short-term dependencies. However, it calculates the dependencies between representations without considering the contextual information, which has proven useful for modeling
dependencies among neural representations in various natural language tasks. In this work, we focus on improving
self-attention networks through capturing the richness of context. To maintain the simplicity and flexibility of the selfattention networks, we propose to contextualize the transformations of the query and key layers, which are used to calculate the relevance between elements. Specifically, we leverage
the internal representations that embed both global and deep
contexts, thus avoid relying on external resources. Experimental results on WMT14 English⇒German and WMT17
Chinese⇒English translation tasks demonstrate the effectiveness and universality of the proposed methods. Furthermore,
we conducted extensive analyses to quantify how the context
vectors participate in the self-attention model.

Introduction
Self-attention networks (SANs) (Lin et al. 2017) have shown
promising empirical results in various NLP tasks, such as
machine translation (Vaswani et al. 2017), nature language
inference (Shen et al. 2018), and acoustic modeling (Sperber
et al. 2018). One strong point of SANs is the strength of
capturing long-range dependencies by explicitly attending
to all the signals, which allows the model to build a direct
relation with another long-distance representation.
However, SANs treat the input sequence as a bag-ofword tokens and each token individually performs attention over the bag-of-word tokens. Consequently, the contextual information is not taken into account in the calculation of dependencies between elements. Several researchers
have shown that contextual information can enhance the
ability of modeling dependencies among neural representations, especially for the attention models. For example, Tu et

Background
Recently, as a variant of attention model, self-attention networks (Lin et al. 2017) have attracted a lot of interests due
to their flexibility in parallel computation and modeling both
long- and short-term dependencies. SANs calculate attention weights between each pair of tokens in a single se-

* Zhaopeng Tu is the corresponding author. Work was done
when Baosong Yang and Jian Li were interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

387

