The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Task-Driven Common
Representation Learning via Bridge Neural Network
Yao Xu,1,2 Xueshuang Xiang,1,2,∗ Meiyu Huang1
1

Qian Xuesen Laboratory of Space Technology, China Academy of Space Technology, Beijing, 100190
2
School of Aerospace Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xian, 710071
{xuyao, xiangxueshuang, huangmeiyu}@qxslab.cn

Abstract

sources and it is supposed to maximize the linear correlation between them. CCA methods are always developed as
a strategy to build common representations, which makes
it an intermediate task rather than a final application objective. (iii) For the task of transfer learning, the common representations need to be features which are useful for a certain
learning objective, such as classification. The relationship of
those features can be more complex than the linear correlation. (iv) Reconstruction of a missing view requires the common representations to be an encoder, which should contain
the information of the views as whole as possible.

This paper introduces a novel deep learning based method,
named bridge neural network (BNN) to dig the potential relationship between two given data sources task by task. The
proposed approach employs two convolutional neural networks that project the two data sources into a feature space
to learn the desired common representation required by the
specific task. The training objective with artificial negative
samples is introduced with the ability of mini-batch training and it’s asymptotically equivalent to maximizing the total
correlation of the two data sources, which is verified by the
theoretical analysis. The experiments on the tasks, including
pair matching, canonical correlation analysis, transfer learning, and reconstruction demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of BNN, which may provide new insights into the
aspect of common representation learning.

Reconstruction

Introduction
In the real world, a potential relationship always exists between two sets of data, which can be either from multi-views
of one data source, e.g., two voices of songs, audio and subtitles of movies, or from two different data sources, e.g., faces
of couples, objects with the same labels. One idea of mining the potential relationship of given data pairs is learning
a common representation of them, which has achieved lots
of interests (Ngiam et al. 2011; Eisenschtat and Wolf 2017;
Andrew et al. 2013; Chandar et al. 2016). These methods
tried to build a universal model motivated by more than one
task, including (i) pair matching across views, (ii) canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hotelling 1936), (iii) transfer learning and (iv) reconstruction of a missing view. However, different task imposes different complexity levels of
common representations, as shown in Figure 1.
To clarify Figure 1, the complexity level of common representations for each task will be described briefly, from
simple to complex. (i) For the task of pair matching across
views, the common representations are just some potential information which can build a connection between data
pairs. This connection can be just a few similarities between
pairs, which can be fairly simple. (ii) For the task of CCA,
the common representations are the projections of two data

Transfer learning
Canonical correlation analysis
Pair matching across views

Figure 1: The complexity of common representations varying from different tasks. A task on the top of the triangle is
more complex than a bottom one.
Because of the diversity of different tasks, different tasks
impose different levels of complexity of the common representations. Motivated by this understanding, we propose a
novel deep learning based method, named bridge neural network (BNN) to learn common representations by mining the
potential relationship of the specified data sources according
to a given task, as shown in Figure 2. Given a task, we first
construct the correlated data source, named positive samples and build the negative samples according to the positive
samples. Then both positive samples and negative samples
are used to train a BNN to handle the given task.
As that shown in Figure 3, BNN employs two convolutional neural networks that project the two data sources into
a common feature space and use the Euclidean loss to de-

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5573

