The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Feasibility Test on Preventing PRMDs Based on Deep Learning
So-Hyun Park,1 Sun-Young Ihm,1 Aziz Nasridinov,2 Young-Ho Park1,*
1

Dept. of IT Engineering, Sookmyung Women’s University, Seoul, 04310, South Korea, +82-10-3907-9274
{shpark, sunnyihm, yhpark}@sookmyung.ac.kr
2
Dept. of Computer Science, Chungbuk National University, Cheong-Ju, 28644, South Korea
aziz@chungbuk.ac.kr
*
Corresponding Author

Our Approach

Abstract

In this section, we first describe the details of the proposed
C3P dataset, and then explain posture classification.

This study proposes a method to reduce the playing-related
musculoskeletal disorders (PRMDs) that often occur among
pianists. Specifically, we propose a feasibility test that evaluates several state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms to prevent injuries of pianist. For this, we propose (1) a C3P dataset
including various piano playing postures and show (2) the
application of four learning algorithms, which demonstrated
their superiority in video classification, to the proposed C3P
datasets. To our knowledge, this is the first study that attempted to apply the deep learning paradigm to reduce the
PRMDs in pianist. The experimental results demonstrated
that the classification accuracy is 80% on average, indicating that the proposed hypothesis about the effectiveness of
the deep learning algorithms to prevent injuries of pianist is
true.

C3P Dataset
The total number of clips is 102 and the mean clip length
is 7.5 s. The numbers of pianist and music pieces are 15
each. The clips in one part have the same features, such
as the pianist. The videos are obtained via YouTube, where
the clips contain a fixed frame rate of 25 frame per second
and resolution of 720 × 576, respectively. The videos are
stored as .avi files processed using DV PAL codec existing
in Adobe Premiere Pro. We intentionally removed the audio. The dataset contains web videos obtained from various
environments that include camera motion, various lighting
conditions, partial occlusion, low-quality frames, etc. Table
1 shows the summary of proposed C3P dataset.

Introduction

Number of players
Mean clip length
Clips
Min clip length
Max clip length
Number of music piece
Frame rate
Resolution
Total duration
Audio

Playing-related musculoskeletal disorders (PRMDs) are a
frequent occurrence among musical instrument players;
such disorders can profoundly affect the technique of piano players (Dommerholt 2010). The medical community
and piano player association have long noted that utilizing
a wrong or a stiff posture can be a major cause of PRMDs
(Zaza 1998). To prevent PRMDs, a variety of methods have
been proposed including the analysis of players’ posture
through wearable and physical sensors. However, the dataset
used in these studies (Winges and Furuya 2015), (Park et al.
2016) do not consider various situations of the pianist, and
are thus biased in posture classification.
This paper proposes the following contributions. (1) A
classical piano performance posture (C3P) dataset, which
unlike existing datasets contains various data, such as diverse environments, pianists, songs, and information of
major/minor students. (2) We applied the state-of-the-art
deep learning algorithms on video classification to the C3P
dataset and performed a feasibility test that recommends a
suitable algorithm to determine the correct posture for a pianist.

15
7.5 sec
102
5 sec
12 sec
17
25 fps
720 × 576
766 sec
no

Table 1: Summary of characteristics of C3P
The purpose of this study is to classify the postures of pianists into two kinds, correct and incorrect, as shown in Figure 1, presenting sample frames of two action classes from
C3P. The injury-related poses were classified with the help
of a specialist who had more than 10 years of experience in
piano education field.

Video Classification
Figure 2 shows the posture classification procedure. We used
four deep learning algorithms that stand out in the field of
video classification. That is, we used 2D Convolutional Networks (2D CNN) that classifies the image frame by frame,

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10005

