The Twenty-Fourth AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (AAAI-19)

Multi-Agent Coordination under Uncertain Communication
Nikhil Bhargava
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
nkb@mit.edu

Abstract

to schedule every last event, which is too strong of an assumption in practice. Simple Temporal Networks with Uncertainty (STNUs) (Vidal and Fargier 1999) augment STNs
to provide a way to model this kind of uncertainty by adding
the ability to model actions whose durations are uncontrollable and, as such, are a useful starting point when considering how to model multi-agent coordination. From the perspective of one particular agent, an activity with uncertain
duration can be used to represent the fact that the time window for another agent’s activity is known a priori while the
amount of time spent on that activity by that agent is not.

Multi-agent coordination is not a simple problem. While significant research has gone into computing plans efficiently
and managing competing preferences, the execution of multiagent plans can still fail even when the plan space is small
and agent goals are universally aligned. The reason for this
difficulty is that in order to guarantee successful execution of
a plan, effective multi-agent coordination requires communication to ensure that all actors have accurate beliefs about the
state of the world. My thesis will focus on the problem of
characterizing, modeling, and providing efficient algorithms
for addressing planning and execution when there agents cannot maintain perfect communication.

Definition 1. STNU (Vidal and Fargier 1999)
An STNU is a 4-tuple hXb , Xe , Rc , Rg i where:

Introduction

• Xb is the set of activated timepoints
• Xe is the set of received timepoints
• Rg is the set of contingent constraints of the form lg ≤
ei − bj ≤ ug , where ei ∈ Xe , bj ∈ Xb
• Rc is the set of requirement constraints of the form lc ≤
xi − xj ≤ uc , where xi , xj ∈ Xb ∪ Xe

Multi-agent coordination is not a simple problem. While
significant research has gone into computing plans efficiently and managing competing preferences, the execution
of multi-agent plans can still fail even when the plan space
is small and agent goals are universally aligned. The reason
for this difficulty is that in order to guarantee successful execution of a plan, effective multi-agent coordination requires
communication to ensure that all actors have accurate beliefs
about the state of the world. The communication of information in and of itself can be quite complex and nuanced,
but despite the importance of understanding communication
during execution, little work has been done to understand
how different patterns of communication affect the robustness of generated plans.
The aim of my thesis is to characterize the effects of communication in temporal plans and to provide algorithms that
can efficiently construct schedules for temporal plans and
provide a robust execution strategy for those plans subject
to communication constraints. By incorporating communication into temporal planning, the resulting plans will both
have higher utility and lower risks of failure.

When discussing the scheduling in the context of an
STNU, we usually refer to its controllability. To characterize controllability in a multi-agent context, my prior work
defines the notion of delay controllability (Bhargava et al.
2018a). Delay controllability generalizes strong and dynamic controllability in STNUs (Vidal and Fargier 1999)
and uses a delay function to parameterize what information
the scheduling actor has when making decisions. The relevant definitions are reproduced below.
Definition 2. Delay Function
A delay function, γ : Xe → R+ ∪ {∞}, takes a received
timepoint and outputs the maximum amount of time that
may pass after its assignment before its value is observed
and the underlying uncertainty is resolved.
Definition 3. Delay Controllability An STNU S is delay
controllable with respect to a delay function γ if it is possible to dynamically construct a schedule when learning about
each received event xe only after γ(xe ) time has passed.

Background
In temporal planning, Simple Temporal Networks (STNs)
provide a straightforward way to express constraints
(Dechter, Meiri, and Pearl 1991) but assume it is possible

This definition allows us to model some of the most basic
forms of communication in a temporal planning setting by
modeling communication as a single event displaced in time.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9878

