The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Algorithms for Estimating Trends
in Global Temperature Volatility
Arash Khodadadi, Daniel J. McDonald
Department of Statistics
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408
{arakhoda,dajmcdon}@indiana.edu
Abstract

climate literature suggests that it is more difficult for society to adapt to these extremes than to the gradual increase
in the mean temperature (Hansen, Sato, and Ruedy 2012;
Huntingford et al. 2013). Furthermore, the willingness of popular media to emphasize the prevalence extreme cold events
coupled with a fundamental misunderstanding of the relationship between climate (the global distribution of weather
over the long run) and weather (observed short-term, localized behavior) leads to public misunderstanding of climate
change. In fact, a point of active debate is the extent to which
the observed increased frequency of extreme cold events
in the northern hemisphere can be attributed to increases
in temperature variance rather than to changes in mean
climate (Screen 2014; Fischer, Beyerle, and Knutti 2013;
Trenberth et al. 2014).
Nevertheless, research examining trends in the volatility
of spatio-temporal climate data is scarce. Hansen, Sato, and
Ruedy (2012) studied the change in the standard deviation
(SD) of the surface temperature in the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies gridded temperature dataset by examining the empirical SD at each spatial location relative to that
location’s SD over a base period and showed that these estimates are increasing. Huntingford et al. (2013) took a similar
approach in analyzing the ERA-40 data set. They argued that,
while there is an increase in the SDs from 1958-1970 to 19912001, it is much smaller than found by Hansen, Sato, and
Ruedy (2012). Huntingford et al. (2013) also computed the
time-evolving global SD from the detrended time-series at
each position and argued that the global SD has been stable.
These and other related work (e.g., Rhines and Huybers
2013) have several shortcomings which our work seeks to
remedy. First, no statistical analysis has been performed to
examine if the changes in the SD are statistically significant.
Second, the methodologies for computing the SDs are highly
sensitive to the choice of base period. Third, and most importantly, temporal and spatial correlations between observations
are completely ignored.
Importantly, existing literature and our present work examines variance (rather than the mean) for a number of reasons.
First, instrument bias in the satellites increases over time so
examining the mean over time conflates that bias with any
actual change in mean (though the variance is unaffected).
Second, extreme weather events (hurricanes, droughts, wildfires in California, heatwaves in Europe) may be driven more

Trends in terrestrial temperature variability are perhaps more
relevant for species viability than trends in mean temperature.
In this paper, we develop methodology for estimating such
trends using multi-resolution climate data from polar orbiting
weather satellites. We derive two novel algorithms for computation that are tailored for dense, gridded observations over
both space and time. We evaluate our methods with a simulation that mimics these data’s features and on a large, publicly
available, global temperature dataset with the eventual goal of
tracking trends in cloud reflectance temperature variability.

1

Introduction

The amount of sunlight reflected from clouds is among the
largest sources of uncertainty in climate prediction (Boucher
et al. 2013). But climate models fail to reproduce global
cloud statistics, and understanding the reasons for this failure
is a grand challenge of the World Climate Research Programme (Bony et al. 2015). While numerous studies have
examined the overall impacts of clouds on climate variability (Myers, Mechoso, and DeFlorio 2018; Grise et al. 2013;
Bender, Ramanathan, and Tselioudis 2012), such investigations have been hampered by the lack of a suitable dataset.
Ideal data would have global coverage at high spatial resolution, a long enough record to recover temporal trends,
and be multispectral (Wielicki et al. 2013). To address this
gap, current work (Staten et al. 2016; Schreier et al. 2010;
Kahn et al. 2007) seeks to create a spectrally-detailed dataset
by combining radiance data from Advanced Very High
Resolution Radiometer imagers with readings from Highresolution Infrared Radiation Sounders, instruments onboard
legacy weather satellites. In anticipation of this new dataset,
our work develops novel methodology for examining the
trends in variability of climate data across space and time.

1.1

Variability Rather Than Average

Trends in terrestrial temperature variability are perhaps more
relevant for species viability than trends in mean temperature (Huntingford et al. 2013), because an increase in
temperature variability will increase the probability of extreme hot or cold outliers (Vasseur et al. 2014). Recent
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

614

