The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Convex Formulations for Fair Principal Component Analysis
Matt Olfat,1 Anil Aswani1
1

UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
molfat@berkeley.edu, aaswani@berkeley.edu

1.1

Abstract
Though there is a growing literature on fairness for supervised
learning, incorporating fairness into unsupervised learning
has been less well-studied. This paper studies fairness in the
context of principal component analysis (PCA). We first define
fairness for dimensionality reduction, and our definition can
be interpreted as saying a reduction is fair if information about
a protected class (e.g., race or gender) cannot be inferred
from the dimensionality-reduced data points. Next, we develop
convex optimization formulations that can improve the fairness
(with respect to our definition) of PCA and kernel PCA. These
formulations are semidefinite programs, and we demonstrate
their effectiveness using several datasets. We conclude by
showing how our approach can be used to perform a fair (with
respect to age) clustering of health data that may be used to
set health insurance rates.

1

Relevance of fairness to unsupervised
learning

Fairness is important to unsupervised learning: First, unsupervised learning is often used to generate qualitative insights
from data. Examples include visualizing high-dimensional
data through dimensionality-reduction and clustering data
to identify common trends or behaviors. If such qualitative
insights are used to generate policies, then there is an opportunity to introduce unfairness in the resulting policies if the
results of the unsupervised learning are unequal for different
protected classes (e.g., race or gender). We present such an
example in Section 6 using individual health data.
Second, unsupervised learning is often useSd as a preprocessing step for other learning methods. For instance,
dimensionality reduction is sometimes performed prior to
clustering, and hence fair dimensionality reduction could indirectly provide methods for fair clustering. Similarly, there
are no fairness-enhancing versions of most supervised learners. Consequently, techniques for fair unsupervised learning
could be combined with state-of-the-art supervised learners
to develop new fair supervised learners. In fact, the past work
most related to this paper concerns techniques that have been
developed to generate fair data transformations that maintaining high prediction accuracy for classifiers that make
predictions using the transformed data (Dwork et al. 2012;
Zemel et al. 2013; Feldman et al. 2015); however, these past
works are most accurately classified as supervised learning
because the data transformations are computed with respect
to a label used for predictions.
We briefly review this work. Dwork et al. (2012) propose
a linear program that maps individuals to probability distributions over possible classifications such that similar individuals are classified similarly. Zemel et al. (2013) and
Calmon et al. (2017) generate an intermediate representation for fair clustering using a non-convex formulation that
is difficult to solve. Feldman et al. (2015) propose an algorithm that scales data points such that the distributions of
features, conditioned on the protected attribute, are matched;
however, this approach makes the restrictive assumption that
predictions are monotonic with respect to each dimension.
Chierichetti et al. (2017) directly perform fair clustering
by approximating an NP-hard preprocessing step; however,
this approach only applies to specific clustering techniques
whereas the approach we develop can be used with arbitrary

Introduction

Despite the success of machine learning in informing policies
and automating decision-making, there is growing concern
about the fairness (with respect to protected classes like race
or gender) of the resulting policies and decisions (Miller
2015; Rudin 2013; Angwin et al. 2016; Munoz, Smith, and
Patil 2016). Hence, several groups have studied how to define
fairness for supervised learning (Hardt, Price, and Srebro
2016; Calders, Kamiran, and Pechenizkiy 2009; Dwork et al.
2012; Zliobaite 2015) and developed supervised learners that
maintain high prediction accuracy while reducing unfairness
(Berk et al. 2017; Chouldechova 2017; Hardt, Price, and
Srebro 2016; Zafar et al. 2017; Olfat and Aswani 2017).
However, fairness in the context of unsupervised learning
has not been well-studied to date. One reason is that fairness
is easier to define in the supervised setting, where positive
predictions can often be mapped to positive decisions (e.g.,
an individual who is predicted to not default on a loan maps to
the individual being offered a loan). Such notions of fairness
cannot be used for unsupervised learning, which does not
involve making predictions. A second reason is that it is not
obvious why fairness is an issue of relevance to unsupervised
learning, since predictions are not made.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

663

