The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning from Web Data Using Adversarial Discriminative Neural Networks
for Fine-Grained Classification
Xiaoxiao Sun, Liyi Chen, Jufeng Yang*
College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China
*corresponding author: yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract



Fine-grained classification is absorbed in recognizing the
subordinate categories of one field, which need a large number of labeled images, while it is expensive to label these
images. Utilizing web data has been an attractive option to
meet the demands of training data for convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), especially when the well-labeled data is
not enough. However, directly training on such easily obtained images often leads to unsatisfactory performance due
to factors such as noisy labels. This has been conventionally
addressed by reducing the noise level of web data. In this
paper, we take a fundamentally different view and propose
an adversarial discriminative loss to advocate representation
coherence between standard and web data. This is further
encapsulated in a simple, scalable and end-to-end trainable
multi-task learning framework. We experiment on three public datasets using large-scale web data to evaluate the effectiveness and generalizability of the proposed approach. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach performs
favorably against the state-of-the-art methods.

Tr

Te (a)

(b)

(a)
(b)
Generalization
Te (a)
Tr

(b) Web-Dog

(c)

(a)
(c)
(a) Stanford Dogs

(c) L-Dog

Figure 1: Examples from (a) the Stanford Dogs dataset, (b)
the web images (Web-Dog) and (c) the L-Dog dataset. Note
the Stanford Dogs dataset is well-labeled by users, while the
other two datasets are labeled with keywords on the web.
The cross dataset training-testing accuracies are shown in
the center, where “Tr” and “Te” indicate training set and test
set respectively. The gap between the results of Tr and Te
on the same dataset and those of Tr and Te on different
datasets shows that these datasets are not generalized well
to each other.

Introduction
Deep learning has shown impressive improvement on many
computer vision tasks, e.g., general image classification, object detection and scene recognition etc. Many fine-grained
classification works using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) also achieved surprising results (Xiao et al. 2015).
The success of CNNs is inseparable from large-scale wellannotated image datasets. Nevertheless, CNNs are datahungry. (Oquab et al. 2014; Yang et al. 2015) consider the
transferability of CNNs by firstly initializing parameters
with a pre-trained model (e.g., AlexNet, VggNet) generated
on a large-scale dataset and then fine-tuning it on a target
well-labeled dataset. This is partially mitigated by employing pre-trained models, but a large-scale dataset is still necessary for better domain adaptation. Hence, they are becoming the de facto standard for tasks where it is possible to
collect large well-annotated training sets, often by crowdsourcing manual annotations. However, manual labeling is
costly, time-consuming and error-prone, raises privacy concerns, and requires massive human intervention for every
new task.

As an alternative approach, using network can collect a
large number of images more quickly and easily. Although
it is inevitable that the web data has some noise, the large
number of network data can make up for this deficiency.
Some recent works (Chen and Gupta 2015; Xu et al. 2015;
Gong and Wang 2017) have shown that fine-tuning CNNs
with extensive web data can be more effective than only
with a small-scale clean dataset. Different from work focusing on reducing the noisy level of web data, we consider
that the content of the web image is usually complicated
comparing with the clean dataset. For example, a web image contains several objects including a target object, where
the target object is located at the edge of the image or has
a small size, which makes the target object difficult to be
distinguished. Therefore, there is a gap between web images and well-labeled images, which may be produced by

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

273

