The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Understanding Dropouts in MOOCs
Wenzheng Feng,† Jie Tang,† Tracy Xiao Liu‡ *
†

‡

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Department of Economics, School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University
fwz17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn, liuxiao@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

learners who complete courses, where 61% of survey respondents report MOOCs’ education benefits and 72% of
those report career benefits (Zhenghao et al. 2015).
However, on the other hand, MOOCs are criticized for
the low completion ratio (He et al. 2015). Indeed, the average course completion rate on edX is only 5% (Kizilcec,
Piech, and Schneider 2013; Seaton et al. 2014). We did a
similar statistic for 1,000 courses on XuetangX, and resulted
in a similar number — 4.5%. Figure 1 shows several observational analyses. As can be seen, Age is an important
factor — young people are more inclined to drop out; Gender is another important factor — roughly, female users are
more likely to drop science courses and male users are more
likely to give up non-science courses; finally, educational
background is also important. This raises several interesting
questions: 1) what are the major dropout reasons? 2) what
are the deep motivations that drive the users to study or induce them to drop out? 3) is that possible to predict users’
dropout behavior in advance, so that the MOOCs platform
could deliver some kind of useful interventions (Halawa,
Greene, and Mitchell 2014; Qi et al. 2018)?
Employing a dataset from XuetangX, the largest MOOC
platform in China, we aim to conduct a systematical exploration for the aforementioned questions. We first perform
a clustering analysis over users’ learning activity data and
found that users’ studying behavior can be grouped into
several categories, which implicitly correspond to different
motivations that users study MOOC courses. The analyses
also disclose several interesting patterns. For example, the
dropout rates between similar courses is highly correlated;
friends’ dropout behaviors strongly influence each other —
the probability that a user drops out from a course increases
quickly to 65% when the number of her/his dropout friends
increases to 5.
Based on the analyses results, we propose a Contextaware Feature Interaction Network (CFIN) to model and
to predict users’ dropout behavior. In CFIN, we utilize a
context-smoothing technique to smooth values of activity
features using the convolutional neural network (CNN). Attention mechanisms are then used to combine user and
course information into the modeling framework. We evaluate the proposed CFIN on two datasets: KDDCUP and
XuetangX. The first dataset was used in KDDCUP 2015
and the second one is larger, extracted from the XuetangX

Massive open online courses (MOOCs) have developed
rapidly in recent years, and have attracted millions of online users. However, a central challenge is the extremely high
dropout rate — recent reports show that the completion rate
in MOOCs is below 5% (Onah, Sinclair, and Boyatt 2014;
Kizilcec, Piech, and Schneider 2013; Seaton et al. 2014).
What are the major factors that cause the users to drop out?
What are the major motivations for the users to study in
MOOCs? In this paper, employing a dataset from XuetangX1 ,
one of the largest MOOCs in China, we conduct a systematical study for the dropout problem in MOOCs. We found
that the users’ learning behavior can be clustered into several
distinct categories. Our statistics also reveal high correlation
between dropouts of different courses and strong influence
between friends’ dropout behaviors. Based on the gained insights, we propose a Context-aware Feature Interaction Network (CFIN) to model and to predict users’ dropout behavior.
CFIN utilizes context-smoothing technique to smooth feature values with different context, and use attention mechanism to combine user and course information into the modeling framework. Experiments on two large datasets show that
the proposed method achieves better performance than several state-of-the-art methods. The proposed method model
has been deployed on a real system to help improve user retention.

Introduction
Massive open online courses (MOOCs) have become increasingly popular. Many MOOC platforms have been
launched. For example, Coursera, edX, and Udacity are
three pioneers, followed by many others from different
countries such as XuetangX in China, Khan Academy in
North America, Miriada in Spain, Iversity in German, FutureLearn in England, Open2Study in Australia, Fun in
France, Veduca in Brazil, and Schoo in Japan (Qiu et al.
2016). By the end of 2017, the MOOC platforms have offered 9,400 courses worldwide and attracted 81,000,000 online registered students (Shah 2018). Recently, a survey from
Coursera shows that MOOCs are really beneficial to the
* The other authors include Shuhuai Zhang from PBC School of
Finance of Tsinghua University and Jian Guan from XuetangX.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://xuetangx.com

517

