The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Task Deep Reinforcement Learning with PopArt
Matteo Hessel

Hubert Soyer

Lasse Espeholt

DeepMind

DeepMind

DeepMind

Wojciech Czarnecki

Simon Schmitt

Hado van Hasselt

DeepMind

DeepMind

DeepMind

Abstract

of multi-task reinforcement learning that have been explored
in the literature: off-policy learning of many predictions
about the same stream of experience (Schmidhuber 1990;
Sutton et al. 2011; Jaderberg et al. 2016), continual learning in a sequence of tasks (Ring 1994; Thrun 1996; 2012;
Rusu et al. 2016), distillation of task-specific experts into a
single shared model (Parisotto, Ba, and Salakhutdinov 2015;
Rusu et al. 2015; Schmitt et al. 2018; Teh et al. 2017),
and parallel learning of multiple tasks at once (Sharma and
Ravindran 2017; Caruana 1998). We will focus on the latter.
Parallel multi-task learning has recently achieved remarkable success in enabling a single system to learn a large
number of diverse tasks. The Importance Weighted ActorLearner Architecture, henceforth IMPALA (Espeholt et al.
2018), achieved a 59.7% median human normalised score
across 57 Atari games, and a 49.4% mean human normalised
score across 30 DeepMind Lab levels. These results are state
of the art for multi-task RL, but they are far from the humanlevel performance demonstrated by deep RL agents on the
same domains, when trained on each task individually.
Part of why multi-task learning is much harder than single task learning is that a balance must be found between
the needs of multiple tasks, that compete for the limited
resources of a single learning system (for instance, for its
limited representation capacity). We observed that the naive
transposition of common RL algorithms to the multi-task
setting may not perform well in this respect. More specifically, the saliency of a task for the agent increases with
the scale of the returns observed in that task, and these may
differ arbitrarily across tasks. This affects value-based algorithms such as Q-learning (Watkins 1989), as well as policybased algorithms such as REINFORCE (Williams 1992).
The problem of scaling individual rewards appropriately
is not novel, and has often been addressed through reward clipping (Mnih et al. 2015). This heuristic changes the
agent’s objective, e.g., if all rewards are non-negative the
algorithm optimises frequency of rewards rather than their
cumulative sum. If the two objectives are sufficiently well
aligned, clipping can be effective. However, the scale of returns also depends on the rewards’ sparsity. This implies
that, even with reward clipping, in a multi-task setting the
magnitude of updates can still differ significantly between
tasks, causing some tasks to have a larger impact on the
learning dynamics than other equally important ones.

The reinforcement learning (RL) community has made great
strides in designing algorithms capable of exceeding human
performance on specific tasks. These algorithms are mostly
trained one task at the time, each new task requiring to train
a brand new agent instance. This means the learning algorithm is general, but each solution is not; each agent can only
solve the one task it was trained on. In this work, we study the
problem of learning to master not one but multiple sequentialdecision tasks at once. A general issue in multi-task learning
is that a balance must be found between the needs of multiple
tasks competing for the limited resources of a single learning system. Many learning algorithms can get distracted by
certain tasks in the set of tasks to solve. Such tasks appear
more salient to the learning process, for instance because of
the density or magnitude of the in-task rewards. This causes
the algorithm to focus on those salient tasks at the expense of
generality. We propose to automatically adapt the contribution of each task to the agent’s updates, so that all tasks have
a similar impact on the learning dynamics. This resulted in
state of the art performance on learning to play all games in a
set of 57 diverse Atari games. Excitingly, our method learned
a single trained policy - with a single set of weights - that
exceeds median human performance. To our knowledge, this
was the first time a single agent surpassed human-level performance on this multi-task domain. The same approach also
demonstrated state of the art performance on a set of 30 tasks
in the 3D reinforcement learning platform DeepMind Lab.

Introduction
In recent years, the field of deep reinforcement learning (RL)
has enjoyed many successes. Deep RL agents have been applied to board games such as Go (Silver et al. 2016) and
chess (Silver et al. 2017), continuous control tasks (Lillicrap
et al. 2016; Duan et al. 2016), classic video-games such as
Atari (Mnih et al. 2015; Hessel et al. 2018; Gruslys et al.
2018; Schulman et al. 2015; 2017; Bacon, Harb, and Precup
2017), and 3D first person environments (Mnih et al. 2016;
Jaderberg et al. 2016). While the results are impressive, they
were achieved on one task at the time, each new task requiring to train a brand new agent instance from scratch.
Multi-task and transfer learning remain important open
problems in deep RL. There are at least four different strains
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3796

