The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hotels-50K: A Global Hotel Recognition Dataset
Abby Stylianou,1 Hong Xuan,1 Maya Shende,1
Jonathan Brandt,2 Richard Souvenir,3 Robert Pless1
1

George Washington University
2
Adobe Research
3
Temple University
astylianou,xuanhong,mshende@gwu.edu, jbrandt@adobe.com, souvenir@temple.edu, pless@gwu.edu
Abstract
Recognizing a hotel from an image of a hotel room is important for human trafficking investigations. Images directly
link victims to places and can help verify where victims have
been trafficked, and where their traffickers might move them
or others in the future. Recognizing the hotel from images is
challenging because of low image quality, uncommon camera
perspectives, large occlusions (often the victim), and the similarity of objects (e.g., furniture, art, bedding) across different hotel rooms. To support efforts towards this hotel recognition task, we have curated a dataset of over 1 million annotated hotel room images from 50,000 hotels. These images include professionally captured photographs from travel
websites and crowd-sourced images from a mobile application, which are more similar to the types of images analyzed
in real-world investigations. We present a baseline approach
based on a standard network architecture and a collection of
data-augmentation approaches tuned to this problem domain.

Figure 1: The Hotels-50K dataset supports the development
of hotel recognition algorithms to help in investigations of
human trafficking by identifying the hotel where a picture
was taken.
from a mobile application, which are more similar to the
types of images analyzed in real-world investigations.
This domain poses unique challenges compared to generic
scene and place recognition tasks. These recognition problems can be grouped based on the specificity of the categories (Grauman and Leibe 2011):

Introduction
In recent years, the number of images of victims of human trafficking available online has grown at an alarming
rate (Bouché 2015; NCMEC 2014). Whether used for advertising or exchanged among criminal networks, these photographs can serve as visual evidence of where the victim was trafficked. Such images are often captured in hotel rooms. Identifying the hotels in these photographs to understand where a victim was (Figure 1), gives insight into
trafficking operations, which is a a top priority for law enforcement (DOJ 2017).
Figure 2 shows a few example of law enforcement
queries. Often the region of the images containing the victim is masked for privacy and legal reasons. Algorithms for
recognition in this context must be robust to large occlusions, varying lighting conditions, and the unique perspectives of a hotel room.
This paper introduces the Hotels-50K dataset, which includes over 1 million images from 50,000 hotels around the
world, designed to support efforts that address this challenging recognition task. Hotels-50K includes both professional
photographs from travel websites and crowd-sourced images

1. Basic-level categories (e.g., ‘building’)
2. Specialized categories (e.g., ‘church’)
3. Exact instances (e.g., ‘the Notre-Dame’)
The second task (”What type of building is this?”) is often
referred to as scene recognition and the third task (”What
specific church is this?”) as place recognition. Scene recognition requires learning the shared properties of the examples in the specialized class, while place recognition requires
learning the specific components and their configuration that
correspond to a particular instance. Hotel recognition does
not fit neatly into either task. It requires learning both the
general, shared properties of all of the rooms in a particular hotel, such as its decor or star rating, or commonly used
color profiles, as well as recognizing duplicated instances of
furniture, art and bedding that may be used in different configurations throughout the hotel.
This paper has three main contributions. First, we propose and formulate the problem of hotel instance recognition. Second, we curate and share a data set and evaluation
protocol for this problem at a scale that is relevant to international efforts to address trafficking. Third, we describe

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

726

