The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Training Complex Models with Multi-Task Weak Supervision
Alexander Ratner, Braden Hancock, Jared Dunnmon, Frederic Sala,
Shreyash Pandey, Christopher Ré
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{ajratner, bradenjh, jdunnmon, fredsala, shreyash, chrismre}@stanford.edu
Abstract

domains (Zhang et al. 2017a; Xiao et al. 2015). A theme of
weak supervision is that using the full diversity of available
sources is critical to training high-quality models (Ratner et
al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2017a).
The key technical difficulty of weak supervision is determining how to combine the labels of multiple sources that
have different, unknown accuracies, may be correlated, and
may label at different levels of granularity. In our experience with users in academia and industry, the complexity of
real world weak supervision sources makes this integration
phase the key time sink and stumbling block. For example,
if we are training a model to classify entities in text, we may
have one available source of high-quality but coarse-grained
labels (e.g. “Person” vs. “Organization”) and one source that
provides lower-quality but finer-grained labels (e.g. “Doctor” vs. “Lawyer”); moreover, these sources might be correlated due to some shared component or data source (Bach
et al. 2017; Varma et al. 2017). Handling such diversity requires addressing a core technical challenge: estimating the
unknown accuracies of multi-granular and potentially correlated supervision sources without any labeled data.
To overcome this challenge, we propose MeTaL, a framework for modeling and integrating weak supervision sources
with different unknown accuracies, correlations, and granularities. In MeTaL, we view each source as labeling one
of several related sub-tasks of a problem—we refer to this
as the multi-task weak supervision setting. We then show
that given the dependency structure of the sources, we can
use their observed agreement and disagreement rates to recover their unknown accuracies. Moreover, we exploit the
relationship structure between tasks to observe additional
cross-task agreements and disagreements, effectively providing extra signal from which to learn. In contrast to previous approaches based on sampling from the posterior of
a graphical model directly (Ratner et al. 2016; Bach et al.
2017), we develop a simple and scalable matrix completionstyle algorithm, which we are able to analyze by applying
strong matrix concentration bounds (Tropp 2015). We use
this algorithm to learn and model the accuracies of diverse
weak supervision sources, and then combine their labels to
produce training data that can be used to supervise arbitrary
models, including increasingly popular multi-task learning
models (Caruana 1993; Ruder 2017).
Compared to previous methods which only handled the

As machine learning models continue to increase in complexity, collecting large hand-labeled training sets has become
one of the biggest roadblocks in practice. Instead, weaker
forms of supervision that provide noisier but cheaper labels
are often used. However, these weak supervision sources have
diverse and unknown accuracies, may output correlated labels, and may label different tasks or apply at different levels
of granularity. We propose a framework for integrating and
modeling such weak supervision sources by viewing them as
labeling different related sub-tasks of a problem, which we
refer to as the multi-task weak supervision setting. We show
that by solving a matrix completion-style problem, we can
recover the accuracies of these multi-task sources given their
dependency structure, but without any labeled data, leading
to higher-quality supervision for training an end model. Theoretically, we show that the generalization error of models
trained with this approach improves with the number of unlabeled data points, and characterize the scaling with respect
to the task and dependency structures. On three fine-grained
classification problems, we show that our approach leads to
average gains of 20.2 points in accuracy over a traditional supervised approach, 6.8 points over a majority vote baseline,
and 4.1 points over a previously proposed weak supervision
method that models tasks separately.

1

Introduction

One of the greatest roadblocks to using modern machine
learning models is collecting hand-labeled training data at
the massive scale they require. In real-world settings where
domain expertise is needed and modeling goals change frequently, hand-labeling training sets is prohibitively slow, expensive, and static. For these reasons, practitioners are increasingly turning to weak supervision techniques wherein
noisier, often programmatically-generated labels are used
instead. Common weak supervision sources include external knowledge bases (Mintz et al. 2009; Zhang et al. 2017a;
Craven and Kumlien 1999; Takamatsu, Sato, and Nakagawa
2012), heuristic patterns (Gupta and Manning 2014; Ratner
et al. 2018), feature annotations (Mann and McCallum 2010;
Zaidan and Eisner 2008), and noisy crowd labels (Karger,
Oh, and Shah 2011; Dawid and Skene 1979). The use of
these sources has led to state-of-the-art results in a range of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4763

