The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

RepeatNet: A Repeat Aware Neural
Recommendation Machine for Session-Based Recommendation
Pengjie Ren,1,2 Zhumin Chen,1 Jing Li,1 Zhaochun Ren,3 Jun Ma,1 Maarten de Rijke2
1

2

Shandong University, Jinan, China
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
3
Data Science Lab, JD.com, Beijing, China

Abstract

user selections over all items. Recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) have recently been used for the purpose of sessionbased recommendations and attracted significant attention.
Hidasi et al. (2016a) introduce RNNs with gated recurrent
units (GRUs) for session-based recommendation. They introduce a number of parallel RNN (p-RNN) architectures to
model sessions based on both clicks and features (images
and text) of clicked items (Hidasi et al. 2016b). Quadrana et
al. (2017) personalize RNN models with cross-session information transfer and devise a Hierarchical RNN model
that relays and evolves latent hidden states of the RNNs
across user sessions. Li et al. (2017b) introduce an attention mechanism into session-based recommendations and
outperform (Hidasi et al. 2016a). Though the number of
studies that apply deep learning to session-based recommendation is increasing, none has emphasized so-called repeat
consumptions, which are a common phenomenon in many
recommendation scenarios (e.g., e-commerce, music, and
TV program recommendations), where the same item is reconsumed repeatedly over time.
Repeat consumption exists because people have regular
habits. For example, we all buy the same things repeatedly,
we eat at the same restaurants regularly, we listen to the same
songs and artists frequently (Anderson et al. 2014). Table
1 shows the repeat consumption ratio for three benchmark
datasets that are commonly used in related studies (Hidasi
et al. 2016a; Li et al. 2017b). Repeat consumption not only

Recurrent neural networks for session-based recommendation have attracted a lot of attention recently because of
their promising performance. repeat consumption is a common phenomenon in many recommendation scenarios (e.g.,
e-commerce, music, and TV program recommendations),
where the same item is re-consumed repeatedly over time.
However, no previous studies have emphasized repeat consumption with neural networks. An effective neural approach
is needed to decide when to perform repeat recommendation. In this paper, we incorporate a repeat-explore mechanism into neural networks and propose a new model, called
RepeatNet, with an encoder-decoder structure. RepeatNet integrates a regular neural recommendation approach in the decoder with a new repeat recommendation mechanism that can
choose items from a user’s history and recommends them at
the right time. We report on extensive experiments on three
benchmark datasets. RepeatNet outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines on all three datasets in terms of MRR and Recall.
Furthermore, as the dataset size and the repeat ratio increase,
the improvements of RepeatNet over the baselines also increase, which demonstrates its advantage in handling repeat
recommendation scenarios.

Introduction
Session-based recommendations have received increasing
interest recently, due to their broad applicability in many online services (e.g., e-commerce, video watching, music listening) (Cheng et al. 2017). Here, a session is a group of
interactions that take place within a given time frame. Sessions from a user can occur on the same day, or over several
days, weeks, or even months (Quadrana et al. 2017).
Conventional recommendation methods tackle sessionbased recommendations based on either the last interaction
or the last session. Zimdars, Chickering, and Meek (2001)
and Shani, Heckerman, and Brafman (2005) investigate how
to extract sequential patterns to predict the next item using Markov models. Then, Chen et al. (2012) propose logistic Markov embeddings to learn the representations of
songs for playlist prediction. A major issue for these models is that the state space quickly becomes unmanageable
when trying to include all possible sequences of potential

Table 1: Repeat ratio (%) on three benchmark datasets.
Datasets
Train Validation Test
YOOCHOOSE 1/4
DIGINETICA
LASTFM

25.52
19.94
20.72

25.51
20.06
20.42

26.02
20.49
20.95

exists but also accounts for a large proportion of the interactions in some applications. In this paper, we investigate
repeat consumption by incorporating a repeat-explore mechanism into neural networks and propose a new model called
RepeatNet with an encoder-decoder structure. Unlike existing work that evaluates a score for each item using a single
decoder, RepeatNet evaluates the recommendation probabilities of each item with two decoders in a repeat mode and an

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4806

