The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Bandit Approach to Maximum Inner Product Search
Rui Liu

Tianyi Wu

Barzan Mozafari

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
ruixliu@umich.edu

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
tianyiwu@umich.edu

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
mozafari@umich.edu

Abstract

problem approximately, including the best paper award at
NIPS’14 (Shrivastava and Li 2014) and many other proposals (Yu et al. 2017; Neyshabur and Srebro 2015; Bachrach et
al. 2014).
Motivation I: Preprocessing Overhead. Despite their different merits, existing approximate techniques for MIPS all
share a common pattern: they require a substantial time for
preprocessing the data set S, during which they construct a
data structure that can then be used to answer queries more
efficiently. For example, they construct a hash table (Shrivastava and Li 2014), a sorted index (Yu et al. 2017), space
partition trees (Bachrach et al. 2014), or other data structures
(Auvolat et al. 2015). Existing methods require various data
structures to be built during preprocessing time. In fact, the
preprocessing time is, in some cases, so large that it even
exceeds the time complexity of the naı̈ve approach for answering log n queries, i.e., O(N n log n) (Yu et al. 2017).
We have summarized the preprocessing time of the previous techniques in Table 1. The rationale is that query times
will be faster after the preprocessing step. The preprocessing time is therefore justified when there are many queries
and the set S remains the same, i.e., once the preprocessing
is done it would benefit many subsequent queries. However,
there are many cases where either the number of queries is
relatively small (or even 1), or the set S changes frequently,
e.g., the approximate Linear Minimization Oracle (LMO) in
Matching Pursuit and Frank-Wolfe optimization (Locatello
et al. 2017; Jaggi 2013). In these scenarios, the preprocessing time is simply a burden. In this paper, our first motivation
is to design an approach to MIPS that will not require any
preprocessing, while still achieving a query speed-up better
than those approaches that do require it.
Motivation II: Suboptimality Bounds. As summarized in
Table 1, specific parameters such as the number of hash
functions or depth of partition trees are used to trade search
accuracy with search efficiency. Various data structures
with pre-specified parameters (Shrivastava and Li 2014;
Bachrach et al. 2014; Auvolat et al. 2015) are built before
any query is given, which means that the trade-off is somewhat fixed for all queries. Thus, the computational cost for
a given query is fixed. However, in many real-world scenarios, each query might have a different computational budget. (Yu et al. 2017) proposed a greedy method where the
user could control the computational budget for each query.

There has been substantial research on sub-linear time approximate algorithms for Maximum Inner Product Search
(MIPS). To achieve fast query time, state-of-the-art techniques require significant preprocessing, which can be a burden when the number of subsequent queries is not sufficiently
large to amortize the cost. Furthermore, existing methods do
not have the ability to directly control the suboptimality of
their approximate results with theoretical guarantees. In this
paper, we propose the first approximate algorithm for MIPS
that does not require any preprocessing, and allows users to
control and bound the suboptimality of the results. We cast
MIPS as a Best Arm Identification problem, and introduce a
new bandit setting that can fully exploit the special structure
of MIPS. Our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

Introduction
The problem of Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) has
received significant attention in recent years (Yu et al. 2017;
Shrivastava and Li 2014; Neyshabur and Srebro 2015) as a
key step in many machine learning algorithms and applications. For instance, it appears in matrix-factorization-based
recommender systems (Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009;
Cremonesi, Koren, and Turrin 2010; Liu et al. 2015), multiclass prediction (Dean et al. 2013; Jain and Kapoor 2009),
structural SVM (Joachims 2006; Joachims, Finley, and Yu
2009), and vision applications (Dean et al. 2013). The MIPS
problem can be formally defined as follows: given a collection of n data vectors, S = {v1 , v2 , · · · , vn }, where
vi ∈ RN , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and a query vector q ∈ RN , the
goal is to find v ∗ ∈ S that maximizes (or approximately
maximizes) the inner product q T v ∗ . In other words, MIPS is
the following problem:
v ∗ = arg max q T v
v∈S

(1)

The naı̈ve linear search for solving MIPS requires O(n · N )
time to exhaustively compute all n inner products, which
can be daunting for massive datasets (large n) and/or highdimensional data (large N ). This has led to significant interest in devising sub-linear time algorithms to solve the MIPS
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4376

