The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Dynamic Bayesian Network Based Merge Mechanism for Autonomous Vehicles
Kherroubi Zine el abidine

Aknine Samir

Bacha Rebiha

Groupe Renault
1 Avenue du Golf, 78180 Guyancourt

Claude Bernard Lyon 1 university
69100 Villeurbanne

Groupe Renault
1 Avenue du Golf, 78180 Guyancourt

Abstract

sors and significant computing capacity compared to the onboard calculators of the vehicles. Nevertheless, the exploitation of vehicles data using communication to improve driving automation requires taking into account several essential locks such as the communication latency, the loss of the
communicated data and the random behavior of drivers.
The present work is part of an industrial research project
for a car manufacturer. The objective is to design a centralized collaborative driving strategy that uses embedded data
sharing to perform highway on-ramp merging (fig. 1). We
propose a Hidden Markov Model to estimate driver behaviors and decisions in the highway on-ramp merge situation.
The proposed model uses contextual states which greatly reduce calculation while keeping a good output precision. The
results show that the model has good performance.

This work explores the design of a central collaborative driving strategy between connected cars with the objective of improving road safety in case of highway on-ramp merging scenario. Based on a suitable method for predicting vehicle motion and behavior for a central collaborative strategy, a dynamic Bayesian network method that predicts the intention
of drivers in highway on-ramp is proposed. The method was
validated using real data of detailed vehicle trajectories on a
segment of interstate 80 in Emeryville, California.

Introduction
Interest in intelligent vehicles research has been growing
in the last two decades, which significantly improves transportation security and comfort (Ozbilgin et al. 2016). In full
collaborative autonomy, on-board sensors from individual
cars and data sharing between connected vehicles are used
in conjunction to increase the overall “intelligence” of traffic (Ozbilgin et al. 2016)(Bengler et al. 2014). In order to
exploit the advantages of the combination of communication technology and autonomous driving that use artificial
intelligence techniques, we designed a centralized decisionmaking strategy for autonomous vehicles.

Dynamic Bayesian Network Model
The proposed Dynamic Bayesian Network is composed of
three layers: Vector X which contains vehicle data (mainly
dynamic data), Vector C which contains vehicle situation context, and finally the Output I which is the intention of merging or not merging for the vehicle: Vector X: contains vehicle states: {Position, Speed, Acceleration}, Vector C: contains the features of local situational context, which are expressed mathematically as a
Dirac distribution of a certain mapping function of the vehicle state vector and the main lane vehicle state vector:
δmap f unction (Xmerge lane , Xmain lane ). This vector contains for the vehicle in the merge lane (resp. main lane): C1
0
0
(resp. C1 ): Distance from the merging point, C2 (resp. C2 ):
0
0
Speed, C3 (resp. C3 ): Acceleration, C4 (resp. C4 ): Relative
distance from the vehicle ahead in the main lane (resp. from
0
the vehicle in the merge lane), C5 (resp. C5 ): Relative speed
from the vehicle ahead in the main lane (resp. from the vehi0
cle in the merge lane), C6 (resp. C6 ): Relative acceleration
from the vehicle ahead in the main lane (resp. from the vehi0
cle in the merge lane), C7 (resp. C7 ): Relative distance from
the vehicle behind in the main lane (resp. from the vehicle
0
ahead in the main lane), C8 (resp. C8 ): Relative speed from
the vehicle behind in the main lane (resp. from the vehicle
0
ahead in the main lane), C9 (resp. C9 ): Relative acceleration
from the vehicle behind in the main lane (resp. from the vehicle ahead in the main lane).

Figure 1: Highway on-ramp merge in situation of connected and autonomous vehicles: vehicles send a Cooperative Awareness Message (CAM) to the off-board unit that
processes vehicles data and sends a Maneuver Coordination
Message (MCM).
This configuration may have various advantages such as increased perception that exceeds the limits of embedded senCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9953

