The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Solve NP-Complete
Problems: A Graph Neural Network for Decision TSP
Marcelo Prates,∗1 Pedro H. C. Avelar,∗1 Henrique Lemos,∗1 Luis C. Lamb,1 Moshe Y. Vardi2
1

Institute of Informatics, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil
Dept. of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX
morprates@inf.ufrgs.br, pedro.avelar@inf.ufrgs.br, hlsantos@inf.ufrgs.br, lamb@inf.ufrgs.br, vardi@cs.ride.edu
2

Abstract

A promising meta-architecture to engineer models that
learn on symbolic domains is to instantiate neural modules
and assemble them in various configurations, each manifesting a graph representation of a given instance of the problem
at hand (Scarselli et al. 2009). In this context, the neural components can be trained to learn to compute messages to send
between nodes, yielding a differentiable message-passing
algorithm whose parameters can be improved via gradient
descent. This technique has been successfully applied to a
growing range of problem domains, although with different
names. Gilmer et al., which apply it to quantum chemistry
problems, adopt the term “neural message passing” (Gilmer
et al. 2017), while Palm et al. refer to “recurrent relational
networks” in an attempt to train neural networks to solve
Sudoku puzzles (Palm, Paquet, and Winther 2017).
A recent review of related techniques chooses the term
graph networks (Battaglia et al. 2018), but we shall refer to
graph neural networks named by Scarselli et al. who were
among the first to propose such a model (Scarselli et al. 2009).
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently been successfully applied to the problem of predicting the boolean satisfiability of a CNF formula, a very relevant N P-Complete
combinatorial problem (SAT) (Selsam et al. 2018). Selsam
et al. show that GNNs can be trained to obtain satisfactory
accuracy (approximately 85%) on small instances, and further that their performance can be improved by running the
model for more message-passing timesteps. In addition, they
show that satisfying assignments can be extracted from the
network, which is never trained explicitly to produce them.
The promising results of NeuroSAT (as the authors named it)
is an invitation to assess whether other hard combinatorial
problems lend themselves to a simple GNN solution.
In this paper, we investigate whether GNNs can be trained
to solve another N P-Complete problem: the decision variant of the Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP), assigned
with deciding whether a given graph admits a Hamiltonian
route with cost no greater than C. The NeuroSAT experiment
from (Selsam et al. 2018) shows that graph neural networks
can be trained to compute hard combinatorial problems, albeit for small instances. Nevertheless, SAT is a conceptually
simpler problem, which can be defined purely in terms of
boolean formulas. Thus, an open research question is to investigate whether GNNs can be trained to solve N P-Complete
problems involving numerical information (edge weights)

Graph Neural Networks (GNN) are a promising technique for
bridging differential programming and combinatorial domains.
GNNs employ trainable modules which can be assembled in
different configurations that reflect the relational structure of
each problem instance. In this paper, we show that GNNs can
learn to solve, with very little supervision, the decision variant
of the Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP), a highly relevant
N P-Complete problem. Our model is trained to function as
an effective message-passing algorithm in which edges (embedded with their weights) communicate with vertices for a
number of iterations after which the model is asked to decide
whether a route with cost < C exists. We show that such a
network can be trained with sets of dual examples: given the
optimal tour cost C ∗ , we produce one decision instance with
target cost x% smaller and one with target cost x% larger
than C ∗ . We were able to obtain 80% accuracy training with
−2%, +2% deviations, and the same trained model can generalize for more relaxed deviations with increasing performance.
We also show that the model is capable of generalizing for
larger problem sizes. Finally, we provide a method for predicting the optimal route cost within 2% deviation from the
ground truth. In summary, our work shows that Graph Neural Networks are powerful enough to solve N P-Complete
problems which combine symbolic and numeric data.

Introduction
Deep learning has accomplished much in the last decade,
advancing the state-of-the art of areas such as image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014; Li et al. 2015), natural language processing (Cho et al. 2014b; 2014a; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio
2014) and reinforcement learning (Mnih et al. 2013; 2015;
Silver et al. 2016; 2017), which has been successfully combined with deep neural networks to master classic Atari
games and yield superhuman performance in the Chinese
boardgame Go (Mnih et al. 2013; 2015; Silver et al. 2016;
2017). However, the application of deep learning to symbolic domains directly, as opposed to their use in reinforcement learning agents, is still incipient (d’Avila Garcez,
Lamb, and Gabbay 2009; d’Avila Garcez et al. 2015;
Evans and Grefenstette 2018).
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4731

