The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Compressing Recurrent Neural Networks with Tensor Ring for Action Recognition
Yu Pan,1 Jing Xu,1 Maolin Wang,1 Jinmian Ye,1 Fei Wang,2 Kun Bai,3 Zenglin Xu1∗
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Sichuan, China
Emails:{ypyupan, xujing.may, morin.w98, jinmian.y, zenglin}@gmail.com
2
Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA
Email:few201@cornell.edu
3
Mobile Internet Group, Tencent Inc., Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
Email: kunbai@tencent.com

Abstract

the size of the input-to-hidden matrix extremely large. For
example, in the UCF11 (Liu, Luo, and Shah 2009), a video
action recognition dataset, an RGB video clip is a frame with
a size of 160 × 120 × 3, and the dimension of the input vector fed to the vanilla RNN can be over 57,000. Assume that
the length of hidden layer vector is 256. Then, the input-tohidden layer matrix has a load of parameters up to 14 millions. Although a pre-processing feature extraction step via
deep convolutional neural networks can be utilized to obtain
static feature maps as inputs to RNNs (Donahue et al. 2015),
the over-parametric problem is still not fully solved.
A promising direction to reduce the parameter size is to
explore the low-rank structures in the weight matrices. Inspired from the success of tensor decomposition methods in
CNNs (Novikov et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017), various tensor
decomposition methods have been explored in RNNs (Yang,
Krompass, and Tresp 2017; Ye et al. 2018). In particular, in
(Yang, Krompass, and Tresp 2017), the tensor train (TT) decomposition has been applied to RNNs in an end-to-end way
to replace the input-to-hidden matrix, and achieved stateof-the-art performance in finding the low-rank structure in
RNNs. However, the restricted setting on the ranks and the
restrained order of core tensors makes TT-RNN models sensitive to parameter selection. In detail, the optimal setting of
TT-ranks is that they are small in the border cores and large
in middle cores, e.g., like an olive (Zhao et al. 2016).
To address this issue, we propose to use the tensor ring
decomposition (TRD) (Zhao et al. 2016) to extract the
low-rank structure of the input-to-hidden matrix in RNNs.
Specifically, the input-to-hidden matrices are reshaped into
a high-dimensional tensor and then factorized using TRD.
Since this corresponding tensor ring layer automatically
models the inter-parameter correlations, the number of parameters can be much smaller than the original size of the
linear projection layer in standard RNNs. In this way, we
present a new TR-RNN model with a similar representation
power but with several orders of fewer parameters. In addition, since TRD can alleviate the strict constraints in tensor
train decomposition via interconnecting the first and the last
core tensors circularly (Zhao et al. 2016), we expect TRRNNs to have more expressive power. It is important to note
that the tensor ring layer can be optimized in an end-to-end
training, and can also be utilized as a building block into
current LSTM variants. For illustration, we implement an

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and their variants, such
as Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks, and Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) networks, have achieved promising
performance in sequential data modeling. The hidden layers
in RNNs can be regarded as the memory units, which are
helpful in storing information in sequential contexts. However, when dealing with high dimensional input data, such
as video and text, the input-to-hidden linear transformation
in RNNs brings high memory usage and huge computational
cost. This makes the training of RNNs very difficult. To address this challenge, we propose a novel compact LSTM
model, named as TR-LSTM, by utilizing the low-rank tensor
ring decomposition (TRD) to reformulate the input-to-hidden
transformation. Compared with other tensor decomposition
methods, TR-LSTM is more stable. In addition, TR-LSTM
can complete an end-to-end training and also provide a fundamental building block for RNNs in handling large input
data. Experiments on real-world action recognition datasets
have demonstrated the promising performance of the proposed TR-LSTM compared with the tensor-train LSTM and
other state-of-the-art competitors.

Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have achieved great
success in analyzing sequential data in various applications,
such as computer vision (Byeon et al. 2015; Liang et al.
2016; Theis and Bethge 2015), natural language processing, etc.. Thanks to the ability in capturing long-range dependencies from input sequences (Rumelhart, Hinton, and
Williams 1988; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014). To address
the gradient vanishing issue which often leads to the failure of long-term memory in vanilla RNNs, advanced variants such as Gate Recurrent Unit (GRU) and Long-Short
Term Memory (LSTM) have been proposed and applied in
many learning tasks (Byeon et al. 2015; Liang et al. 2016;
Theis and Bethge 2015).
Despite the success, LSTMs and GRUs suffer from the
huge number of parameters, which makes the training process notoriously difficult and easily over-fitting. In particular, in the task of action recognition from videos, a video
frame usually forms a high-dimensional input, which makes
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4683

