The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hypergraph Neural Networks
Yifan Feng,1 Haoxuan You,3 Zizhao Zhang,3 Rongrong Ji,1,2 Yue Gao3∗
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Department of Congnitive Science
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, 361005, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, 100084, China.
{evanfeng97, haoxuanyou}@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn, {zz-z14,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

In this paper, we present a hypergraph neural networks
(HGNN) framework for data representation learning, which
can encode high-order data correlation in a hypergraph structure. Confronting the challenges of learning representation
for complex data in real practice, we propose to incorporate such data structure in a hypergraph, which is more flexible on data modeling, especially when dealing with complex
data. In this method, a hyperedge convolution operation is
designed to handle the data correlation during representation
learning. In this way, traditional hypergraph learning procedure can be conducted using hyperedge convolution operations efficiently. HGNN is able to learn the hidden layer representation considering the high-order data structure, which
is a general framework considering the complex data correlations. We have conducted experiments on citation network
classification and visual object recognition tasks and compared HGNN with graph convolutional networks and other
traditional methods. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed HGNN method outperforms recent state-of-theart methods. We can also reveal from the results that the proposed HGNN is superior when dealing with multi-modal data
compared with existing methods.

Figure 1: Examples of complex connections on social media data. Each color point represents a tweet or microblog,
and there could be visual connections, text connections and
social connections among them.

Figure 1 provides examples of complex connections on social media data. On one hand, the data correlation can be
more complex than pairwise relationship, which is difficult
to be modeled by a graph structure. On the other hand, the
data representation tends to be multi-modal, such as the visual connections, text connections and social connections in
this example. Under such circumstances, traditional graph
structure has the limitation to formulate the data correlation,
which limits the application of graph convolutional neural
networks. Under such circumstance, it is important and urgent to further investigate better and more general data structure model to learn representation.
To tackle this challenging issue, in this paper, we propose
a hypergraph neural networks (HGNN) framework, which
uses the hypergraph structure for data modeling. Compared
with simple graph, on which the degree for all edges is
mandatory 2, a hypergraph can encode high-order data correlation (beyond pairwise connections) using its degree-free
hyperedges, as shown in Figure 2. In Figure 2, the graph is
represented using the adjacency matrix, in which each edge
connects just two vertices. On the contrary, a hypergraph
is easy to be expanded for multi-modal and heterogeneous

Introduction
Graph-based convolutional neural networks (Kipf and
Welling 2017), (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016) have attracted much attention in recent years. Different from traditional convolutional neural networks, graph
convolution is able to encode the graph structure of different
input data using a neural network model and it can be used
in the semi-supervised learning procedure. Graph convolutional neural networks have shown superiority on representation learning compared with traditional neural networks
due to its ability of using data graph structure.
In traditional graph convolutional neural network methods, the pairwise connections among data are employed. It
is noted that the data structure in real practice could be beyond pairwise connections and even far more complicated.
Confronting the scenarios with multi-modal data, the situation for data correlation modelling could be more complex.
∗
Corresponding author. This work was finished when Yifan
Feng visited Tsinghua University.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3558

