The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning to Adaptively Scale Recurrent Neural Networks
Hao Hu,1 Liqiang Wang,1 Guo-Jun Qi2
1

University of Central Florida
2
Huawei Cloud
{haohu, lwang}@cs.ucf.edu, Guojun.qi@huawei.com

Abstract

fit the temporal dynamics throughout the time. Although patterns in different scale levels require distinct frequencies to
update, they do not always stick to a certain scale and could
vary at different time steps. For example, in polyphonic music modeling, distinguishing different music styles demands
RNNs to model various emotion changes throughout music
pieces. While emotion changes are usually controlled by the
lasting time of notes, it is insufficient to model such patterns
using only fixed scales as the notes last differently at different time. Secondly, stacking multiple RNN layers greatly
increases the complexity of the entire model, which makes
RNNs even harder to train. Unlike this, another group of
multiscale RNNs models scale patterns through gate structures (Neil, Pfeiffer, and Liu 2016)(Campos et al. 2017)(Qi
2016). In such cases, additional control gates are learned to
optionally update hidden for each time step, resulting in a
more flexible sequential representations. Yet such modeling
strategy may not remember information which is more important for future outputs but less related to current states.

Recent advancements in recurrent neural network (RNN) research have demonstrated the superiority of utilizing multiscale structures in learning temporal representations of time
series. Currently, most of multiscale RNNs use fixed scales,
which do not comply with the nature of dynamical temporal
patterns among sequences. In this paper, we propose Adaptively Scaled Recurrent Neural Networks (ASRNN), a simple but efficient way to handle this problem. Instead of using
predefined scales, ASRNNs are able to learn and adjust scales
based on different temporal contexts, making them more flexible in modeling multiscale patterns. Compared with other
multiscale RNNs, ASRNNs are bestowed upon dynamical
scaling capabilities with much simpler structures, and are
easy to be integrated with various RNN cells. The experiments on multiple sequence modeling tasks indicate ASRNNs can efficiently adapt scales based on different sequence
contexts and yield better performances than baselines without
dynamical scaling abilities.

Introduction

In this paper, we aim to model the underlying multiscale temporal patterns for time sequences while avoiding
all the weaknesses mentioned above. To do so, we present
Adaptively Scaled Recurrent Neural Networks (ASRNNs),
a simple extension for existing RNN structures, which allows them to adaptively adjust the scale based on temporal contexts at different time steps. Using the causal convolution proposed by (Van Den Oord et al. 2016), ASRNNs
model scale patterns by firstly convolving input sequences
with wavelet kernels, resulting in scale-related inputs that
parameterized by the scale coefficients from kernels. After
that, scale coefficients are sampled from categorical distributions determined by different temporal contexts. This is
achieved by sampling Gumbel-Softmax (GM) distributions
instead, which are able to approximate true categorical distributions through the re-parameterization trick. Due to the
differentiable nature of GM, ASRNNs could learn to flexibly determine which scale is most important to target outputs
according to temporal contents at each time step. Compared
with other multiscale architectures, the proposed ASRNNs
have several advantages. First, there is no fixed scale in the
model. The subroutine for scale sampling can be trained to
select proper scales to dynamically model the temporal scale

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) play a critical role in
sequential modeling as they have achieved impressive performances in various tasks (Campos et al. 2017)(Chang
et al. 2017)(Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2016)(Neil, Pfeiffer,
and Liu 2016). Yet learning long-term dependencies from
long sequences still remains a very difficult task (Bengio,
Simard, and Frasconi 1994) (Hochreiter et al. 2001)(Ye et
al. 2017)(Hu et al. 2017). Among various ways that try to
handle this problem, modeling multiscale patterns seem to
be a promising strategy since many multiscale RNN structures perform better than other non-scale modeling RNNs
in multiple applications (Koutnik et al. 2014)(Neil, Pfeiffer, and Liu 2016)(Chung, Ahn, and Bengio 2016)(Chang
et al. 2017)(Campos et al. 2017)(Chang et al. 2014). Multiscale RNNs can be roughly divided into two groups based on
their design philosophies. The first group trends to modeling scale patterns with the hierarchical architectures and prefixed scales for different layers. This may lead to at least two
disadvantages. First, the prefixed scale can not be adjusted to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3822

