The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Label Learning
Chidubem Arachie

Bert Huang

Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
achid17@vt.edu

Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
bhuang@vt.edu

Abstract

ALL trains using weak supervision and aims to mitigate
these problems by adversarially labeling the data. The adversarial labeling can construct scenarios where dependencies
in the weak supervision are as confounding as possible while
preserving the partial correctness of the weak supervision.
The learner then trains a model that can perform well against
this adversarial labeling. ALL solves these two competing
optimizations using primal-dual subgradient descent. The
inner optimization finds a worst-case distribution of the labels for the current weight parameter of the model, while
the outer optimization finds the best weights for the model
for the current label distribution. The inner optimization’s
maximized error rate can also be viewed as an upper bound
on the true error rate, which the outer optimization aims to
minimize. By training to perform well on the worst-case labeling, ALL is robust against dependent and biased errors in
weak supervision signals.
The inputs to ALL are a set of unlabeled data examples,
a set of weak supervision signals that approximately label
the data, and a corresponding set of estimated error bounds
on these weak supervision signals. Domain experts can design the weak supervision signals—e.g., by defining approximate labeling rules—and they can use their knowledge to set
bounds on the errors of these signals. When designing weak
supervision signals, experts often have mental estimates of
how noisy the signals are, so this error estimate is an inexpensive yet valuable input for the learning algorithm.
We consider a binary classification setting where a parameterized model is trained to classify the data. We make use of
multiple weak signals that represent different approximations
of the true model. These weak signals can be interpreted
as having different views of the data. The estimated error
rates of these weak signals are passed as constraints to our
optimization. Importantly, we show that ALL works in cases
where these weak signals make dependent errors. Our experiments also show that ALL trains classifiers that are better
than the weak supervision signals, even when the error estimates are incorrect. The performance of ALL in this setting
is significant because domain experts will often imperfectly
estimate the noisiness of the weak supervision signals.

We consider the task of training classifiers without labels.
We propose a weakly supervised method—adversarial label
learning—that trains classifiers to perform well against an
adversary that chooses labels for training data. The weak supervision constrains what labels the adversary can choose. The
method therefore minimizes an upper bound of the classifier’s
error rate using projected primal-dual subgradient descent.
Minimizing this bound protects against bias and dependencies
in the weak supervision. Experiments on real datasets show
that our method can train without labels and outperforms other
approaches for weakly supervised learning.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces adversarial label learning (ALL), a
method for training classifiers without labels by making use
of weak supervision. ALL works by training classifiers to
perform well on adversarially labeled instances that are consistent with the weak supervision. Many machine learning
models require large amounts of labeled training data, which
is usually hand labeled or observed and recorded. In real
applications, large amounts of training data are often not
easily accessible or are expensive to acquire, making labeled
training data a critical bottleneck for machine learning.
An alternative for training machine learning models without labeled training data is weak supervision. Weak supervision uses domain knowledge about the specific problem, side
information, or heuristics to approximate the true labels. A
key challenge for weak supervision is the fact that there may
be bias in the errors made by the weak supervision signals.
Using multiple sources of weak supervision can somewhat
alleviate this concern, but dependencies among these weak
supervision functions can be misconstrued as independent
confirmation of erroneous labels. For example, in a classification task to identify diabetic patients, physicians know that
obesity can indicate diabetes, and they also know the rate at
which this indicator is wrong. However, since the indicator
is biased, models trained with this information will learn to
detect obesity, not the original goal of diabetes. To correct
this problem, one may also consider high blood pressure as
a second weak indicator. Unfortunately, these indicators are
correlated and may make dependent errors.

2

Related Work

Weak supervision has become an important topic in the context of data-hungry deep learning models. A new line of

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3183

