The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Recursively Learning Causal Structures
Using Regression-Based Conditional Independence Test
Hao Zhang,1 Shuigeng Zhou,1∗ Chuanxu Yan,1 Jihong Guan,2 Xin Wang3
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China.
2
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
3
University of Calgary, Canada, and Northwest University, China
1
{haoz15, sgzhou,17110240047}@fudan.edu.cn; 2 jhguan@tongji.edu.cn; 3 xcwang@ucalgary.ca
Abstract

check CIs between variables. For example, let X, Y and Z
denote sets of variables, if X and Y are independent given the
controlling set Z (i.e., X and Y are d-separated by Z), denoted
by X⊥Y|Z, then we can deduce that X and Y have no directed
causality. In practice, the CI relationship X⊥Y|Z allows us
to separate X − Y when constructing a probabilistic model
for P(X, Y, Z), which results in a parsimonious representation. Generally speaking, by using CI test, existing causal
discovery methods like the PC algorithm (Spirtes, Glymour,
and Scheines 2000) can determine a partially directed acyclic
graph (PDAG) representing the equivalence classes.
In the constraint-based methods, a tough problem for
causality discovery is the search for d-separators (Pearl 2009;
Cai, Zhang, and Hao 2013), which becomes exponentially
complicated with the number of variables (Bergsma 2004).
Specifically, we face two challenges: one is that the number
of candidate controlling sets grows exponentially with the
number of variables, and exhaustive search for d-separators
becomes prohibitively expensive; another challenge is that
CI tests tend to be unreliable when the size of conditional set Z gets large, and easily fall into Type II errors (Zhang et al. 2011; Doran et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2017;
Strobl, Zhang, and Visweswaran 2017), i.e., the CI hypothesis
is accepted even though it is not true.
To overcome the difficulties mentioned above, researchers
resorted to recursive approaches (Geng, Wang, and Zhao
2005; Xie, Geng, and Zhao 2006; Xie and Geng 2008;
Cai, Zhang, and Hao 2017; Liu et al. 2017). These methods aim to split a variable set recursively into two or more
subsets, such that each subset corresponds to a subproblem
that can be solved efficiently by using existing methods, finally the original problem is solved by merging all the results
of the subproblems. For example, as shown in Fig. 1(a), given
a set of variables V, generally we can reconstruct the corresponding causal graph by detecting the set CIV of all CIs
among V (here a CI indicates two variables that are conditional independent, and we do not care the controlling set).
Alternatively, we can first decompose V into m small subsets
V1 , ..., Vm by discovering a set of CIs (say CI0 ). The CIs of
each subset can be further discovered separately, denoted by
CI1 , ..., CIm , respectively. By combining theSm + 1 sets of
CIs, we can also recover the causal graph if m
i=0 CIi = CIV ,
i.e., the splitting process does not violate d-separation. In
contrast to learning causal graph by directly using constraint-

This paper addresses two important issues in causality inference. One is how to reduce redundant conditional independence (CI) tests, which heavily impact the efficiency and
accuracy of existing constraint-based methods. Another is
how to construct the true causal graph from a set of Markov
equivalence classes returned by these methods.
For the first issue, we design a recursive decomposition approach where the original data (a set of variables) is first
decomposed into three small subsets, each of which is then
recursively decomposed into three smaller subsets until none
of subsets can be decomposed further. Consequently, redundant CI tests can be reduced by inferring causality from these
subsets. Advantage of this decomposition scheme lies in two
aspects: 1) it requires only low-order CI tests, and 2) it does
not violate d-separation. Thus, the complete causality can be
reconstructed by merging all the partial results of the subsets.
For the second issue, we employ regression-based conditional
independence test to check CIs in linear non-Gaussian additive noise cases, which can identify more causal directions
by x−E(x|Z)⊥z (or y−E(y|Z)⊥z). Therefore, causal direction
learning is no longer limited by the number of returned Vstructures and the consistent propagation.
Extensive experiments show that the proposed method can not
only substantially reduce redundant CI tests but also effectively
distinguish the equivalence classes, thus is superior to the state
of the art constraint-based methods in causality inference.

Introduction
Inferring causal relationships between variables from observed data is a challenging task if no controlled experiment is available. From computational perspective, causal
discovery is usually formulated as a graphical probabilistic model on the variables, such that directed edges between variables indicate causal relationships. When it is
difficult to manipulate the samples in experiments, conditional independence (CI) tests (Fukumizu et al. 2007) are
commonly employed in constraint-based methods to detect local causalities among the variables (Edwards 2012;
Gao and Ji 2015), under the faithfulness assumption (Koller
and Friedman 2009). To recover causal graphs, we often
∗

Correspondence author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3108

