The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fairly Allocating Many Goods with Few Queries
Hoon Oh

Ariel D. Procaccia

Warut Suksompong

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

Abstract

person’s part. Even though envy-freeness can always be satisfied when the allocated resources are divisible (Stromquist
1980), this is not the case when we deal with indivisible resources. With two agents and a single indivisible good, we
already see that one of the agents will not receive the good
and envy the other agent.
Consequently, various relaxations of envy-freeness have
been considered, the most prominent one being envyfreeness up to one good (EF1). This means that some agent
may envy another agent under the given allocation, but that
envy can be eliminated by removing a single good from
the latter agent’s bundle. Lipton et al. (2004) showed that
EF1 can be guaranteed even when the agents have arbitrary
monotonic valuations. They achieved this by using an algorithm that we will refer to as the envy cycle elimination algorithm, which runs in time O(n3 m), where n is the number
of agents and m the number of goods.
Given that an EF1 allocation always exists and can be
found efficiently at this level of generality, a natural question
to ask is how much we need to know about the agents’ valuations to compute such an allocation. This issue is crucial for
combinatorial valuations, since merely writing down a complete valuation might already take exponential time. But the
question is equally important for additive valuations; while
expressing such a valuation only takes linear time, this may
already be prohibitive if the number of goods is very large.
In fact, the goods application on Spliddit elicits additive valuations and computes an EF1 allocation (Caragiannis et al.
2016); the largest instance that was encountered involved ten
siblings and roughly 1400 goods. In this case, the siblings
actually prepared a spreadsheet with their value for each of
the goods!

We investigate the query complexity of the fair allocation of
indivisible goods. For two agents with arbitrary monotonic
valuations, we design an algorithm that computes an allocation satisfying envy-freeness up to one good (EF1), a relaxation of envy-freeness, using a logarithmic number of queries.
We show that the logarithmic query complexity bound also
holds for three agents with additive valuations. These results
suggest that it is possible to fairly allocate goods in practice
even when the number of goods is extremely large. By contrast, we prove that computing an allocation satisfying envyfreeness and another of its relaxations, envy-freeness up to
any good (EFX), requires a linear number of queries even
when there are only two agents with identical additive valuations.

1

Introduction

Fair division is the study of how to allocate resources among
interested agents in such a way that all agents find the
resulting allocation to be fair (Brams and Taylor 1996;
Moulin 2003). One of the field’s paradigmatic applications is
the allocation of indivisible goods; this task typically arises
in inheritance cases, when, say, an art or jewelry collection
is divided between several heirs. Indeed, dividing goods is
one of five applications offered by Spliddit (Goldman and
Procaccia 2014), a not-for-profit fair division website; since
its launch in November 2014, the website has served more
than 130,000 users, and, in particular, has solved thousands
of goods-division instances submitted by users.
While Steinhaus (1948) was the first to study fairness
from a mathematical point of view, the history of fair division actually goes back much further: A simple fair division
mechanism called the cut-and-choose protocol is mentioned
in the Book of Genesis. After a dispute between Abraham
and Lot, Abraham suggests that the two go their separate
ways. He divides the land into two parts that—here we are
perhaps using artistic license—he likes equally, and lets Lot
choose the part that he prefers. The cut-and-choose protocol
ensures that the resulting allocation satisfy an important fairness property called envy-freeness—each of Abraham and
Lot finds his part to be worth at least as much as the other

1.1

Our Results

We allow algorithms to elicit the valuations of agents via
a standard interface, value queries, which ask an agent for
her value for a given subset of goods. The complexity of
algorithms is measured in terms of the worst-case number
of queries they require.
In Section 3 we consider the case of two agents. We
show that it is possible to compute an EF1 allocation for
agents with arbitrary monotonic valuations using a logarithmic number of queries (Theorem 3.1). This is asymptotically
tight, even for two agents with identical and very simple

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2141

