The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Semantic Proposal for Activity Localization in Videos via Sentence Query
Shaoxiang Chen, Yu-Gang Jiang∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Institute of Intelligent Electronics & Systems
{sxchen13, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents an efficient algorithm to tackle temporal
localization of activities in videos via sentence queries. The
task differs from traditional action localization in three aspects: (1) Activities are combinations of various kinds of actions and may span a long period of time. (2) Sentence queries
are not limited to a predefined list of classes. (3) The videos
usually contain multiple different activity instances. Traditional proposal-based approaches for action localization that
only consider the class-agnostic “actionness” of video snippets are insufficient to tackle this task. We propose a novel
Semantic Activity Proposal (SAP) which integrates the semantic information of sentence queries into the proposal generation process to get discriminative activity proposals. Visual and semantic information are jointly utilized for proposal
ranking and refinement. We evaluate our algorithm on the
TACoS dataset and the Charades-STA dataset. Experimental
results show that our algorithm outperforms existing methods
on both datasets, and at the same time reduces the number of
proposals by a factor of at least 10.

1

Figure 1: Sample of temporal activity localization via sentence query.

by several actions or interactions. The latter is more common and is the process of a subject interacting with an object. They may happen in order or co-occur. (2) Sentences
are not constrained to a predefined list. They are variable regarding both structure and content, thus can describe various
activities. (3) The videos usually contain multiple different
activity instances and each may span a long duration. Figure 1 shows an example in which the query sentence is “a
person opens a cabinet to place his hat inside ”, which describes an activity composed by two interactions involving
two objects: cabinet and hat.
Current approaches to localization problems in computer
vision, either spatial or temporal, are mostly based on “proposal and classification”: candidate regions are first generated by a separate method, and then fed to a classifier to
get the probabilities of containing the target classes. Stateof-the-art action proposal generation methods (Zhao et al.
2017; Yuan et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2018) make predictions
based on the “actionness” score of every short snippets in
the videos. The actionness of a snippet is class-agnostic, just
a quantification of the likelihood of containing a generic action instance (Wang et al. 2016). Moreover, the actionness
judgment will assign low score to relatively static scenes
which may contain objects. In our settings, static objects
are as important as actions for localizing activities. Thus
existing works of temporal activity localization via sentence queries choose not to use proposal generation methods, but use exhaustive enumeration of possible temporal regions (Hendricks et al. 2017) or naive sliding windows (Gao
et al. 2017a). Due to the long duration of videos and activ-

Introduction

Recognizing “what’s happening” in videos is a crucial task
of visual understanding. Recent success of deep learning and
computer vision has advanced this task from action classification (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Karpathy et al. 2014;
Ng et al. 2015; Tran et al. 2015) to detection (Zhao et al.
2017; Yuan et al. 2017; Lin et al. 2018) i.e. temporal localization of actions in videos. Traditional action detection
approaches makes one important assumption: the actions to
be detected are atomic and in a predefined list (Karpathy et
al. 2014; Heilbron et al. 2015; Monfort et al. 2018). Thus
these approaches are insufficient to describe and detect the
combination of a series of actions.
In this paper, we aim to tackle temporal localization of activities in videos via sentence queries, which is a more desirable setting. It has three major differences compared to traditional action localization: (1) Activities are more complex
than atomic actions like boxing or drinking. The definition
of activity we adopt here is actually the same as “high-level
event” defined in (Jiang et al. 2013): an activity is composed
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8199

