The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Graph Convolutional Networks for Text Classification
Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, Yuan Luo∗
Northwestern University
Chicago IL 60611
{liang.yao, chengsheng.mao, yuan.luo}@northwestern.edu

Abstract

capture semantic and syntactic information in local consecutive word sequences well, but may ignore global word cooccurrence in a corpus which carries non-consecutive and
long-distance semantics (Peng et al. 2018).
Recently, a new research direction called graph neural
networks or graph embeddings has attracted wide attention (Battaglia et al. 2018; Cai, Zheng, and Chang 2018).
Graph neural networks have been effective at tasks thought
to have rich relational structure and can preserve global
structure information of a graph in graph embeddings.
In this work, we propose a new graph neural networkbased method for text classification. We construct a single
large graph from an entire corpus, which contains words
and documents as nodes. We model the graph with a Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017),
a simple and effective graph neural network that captures
high order neighborhoods information. The edge between
two word nodes is built by word co-occurrence information
and the edge between a word node and document node is
built using word frequency and word’s document frequency.
We then turn text classification problem into a node classification problem. The method can achieve strong classification performances with a small proportion of labeled documents and learn interpretable word and document node embeddings. Our source code is available at https://github.com/
yao8839836/text gcn. To summarize, our contributions are
as follows:

Text classification is an important and classical problem in
natural language processing. There have been a number of
studies that applied convolutional neural networks (convolution on regular grid, e.g., sequence) to classification. However, only a limited number of studies have explored the more
flexible graph convolutional neural networks (convolution on
non-grid, e.g., arbitrary graph) for the task. In this work, we
propose to use graph convolutional networks for text classification. We build a single text graph for a corpus based on
word co-occurrence and document word relations, then learn
a Text Graph Convolutional Network (Text GCN) for the corpus. Our Text GCN is initialized with one-hot representation
for word and document, it then jointly learns the embeddings
for both words and documents, as supervised by the known
class labels for documents. Our experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that a vanilla Text GCN
without any external word embeddings or knowledge outperforms state-of-the-art methods for text classification. On the
other hand, Text GCN also learns predictive word and document embeddings. In addition, experimental results show that
the improvement of Text GCN over state-of-the-art comparison methods become more prominent as we lower the percentage of training data, suggesting the robustness of Text
GCN to less training data in text classification.

Introduction
Text classification is a fundamental problem in natural language processing (NLP). There are numerous applications
of text classification such as document organization, news
filtering, spam detection, opinion mining, and computational phenotyping (Aggarwal and Zhai 2012; Zeng et al.
2018). An essential intermediate step for text classification
is text representation. Traditional methods represent text
with hand-crafted features, such as sparse lexical features
(e.g., bag-of-words and n-grams). Recently, deep learning
models have been widely used to learn text representations, including convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Kim
2014) and recurrent neural networks (RNN) such as long
short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997). As CNN and RNN prioritize locality and sequentiality (Battaglia et al. 2018), these deep learning models can

• We propose a novel graph neural network method for text
classification. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study to model a whole corpus as a heterogeneous
graph and learn word and document embeddings with
graph neural networks jointly.
• Results on several benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art text classification
methods, without using pre-trained word embeddings or
external knowledge. Our method also learns predictive
word and document embeddings automatically.

Related Work
Traditional Text Classification

∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Traditional text classification studies mainly focus on feature engineering and classification algorithms. For feature
7370

