The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Modeling Coherence for Discourse Neural Machine Translation
Hao Xiong, Zhongjun He, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang
Baidu Inc. No. 10, Shangdi 10th Street, Beijing, 100085, China
{xionghao05, hezhongjun, wu hua, wanghaifeng} @baidu.com

Source

Abstract
Discourse coherence plays an important role in the translation of one text. However, the previous reported models
most focus on improving performance over individual sentence while ignoring cross-sentence links and dependencies,
which affects the coherence of the text. In this paper, we propose to use discourse context and reward to refine the translation quality from the discourse perspective. In particular, we
generate the translation of individual sentences at first. Next,
we deliberate the preliminary produced translations, and train
the model to learn the policy that produces discourse coherent text by a reward teacher. Practical results on multiple discourse test datasets indicate that our model significantly improves the translation quality over the state-of-the-art baseline system by +1.23 BLEU score. Moreover, our model generates more discourse coherent text and obtains +2.2 BLEU
improvements when evaluated by discourse metrics.

Ref

NMT

我们加入霓虹 我们加入柔和的粉蜡色 我们
使用新型材料。
人们爱死这样的建筑了。
我们不断地建造。
We add neon and we add pastels and we use new
materials.
And you love it.
And we can’t give you enough of it.
We add the neon, we add soft, flexible crayons,
and we use new materials.
[conj]miss People love architecture.
[conj]miss We keep building [coref ]miss .

Table 1: Instance of translation for one text consists of
three sentences, where [conj]miss indicates missing crosssentence conjunction, and [coref ]miss indicates missing
coreference. Although from the sentence perspective, the
translations of second and third sentences produced by NMT
system are acceptable, however the fluency of the entire text
is poor.

Introduction
Discourse coherence, such as relevant conjunction for adjacent sentences, plays an important role in the translation of the text. However, standard Neural Machine Translation (NMT) models (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) mainly focus on improving translation quality over individual sentence, and ignoring
cross-sentence links and dependencies. With this preference,
the translation of each sentence is independent of the other
sentences, thus there is no guarantee to generate discourse
coherent text.
Table 1 shows a concrete example from TED talks, where
each sentence is rationally translated from the sentence perspective, but the missing conjunction ‘And’, and the missing
coreference for the predicate ‘build’ cause the incoherence
and poor readability of the entire text.
Intuitively, to generate better translation of the entire text,
the model deserves considering the cross-sentence connections and dependencies, generating discourse coherent translations. Towards this demand, most previous work (Wang et
al. 2017; Voita et al. 2018) proposed to explore additional
context, generally is certain preceding adjacent sentences,
to reinforce the model. However, the major goal of these
models is still the quality of individual sentence while not

the entire text, thus it is hard for them to generate promising
discourse coherent translations.
To address this problem, we take an insight into human
translation behavior for one text, where we first translate
each sentence independently, and then take some modifications towards making the entire text coherently and fluently,
such as replacing conjunctions and keeping the translation
of terminologies consistently. Ideally, this procedure can be
divided into two processes: 1) generating preliminary translation of each sentence, 2) deliberating each translation with
the satisfaction of discourse coherence.
Motivated by the human translation behavior and the success of Deliberation Networks (Xia et al. 2017), we propose
a two-pass decoder translation model, aiming at improving
the coherence of the entire text. Specifically, we generate the
preliminary translation of each sentence using the canonical
NMT model, and then employ the Deliberation Networks to
refine the translations over the entire text. However, since
the standard NMT models focus on fine-tuning on local ngram patterns, training by maximum likelihood estimation,
the produced translations are generally locally coherent.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7338

