The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Successor Features Based Multi-Agent
RL for Event-Based Decentralized MDPs
Tarun Gupta,1,2 Akshat Kumar,1† Praveen Paruchuri2†
2

1
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
Machine Learning Lab, Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems, IIIT Hyderabad, India
{tarung, akshatkumar}@smu.edu.sg, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2011), event-driven interactions (Becker, Zilberstein, and Lesser 2004), collective
interactions among agents (Varakantham, Adulyasak, and
Jaillet 2014; Nguyen, Kumar, and Lau 2017a; 2017b) and
weakly coupled agents (Spaan and Melo 2008; Witwicki and
Durfee 2010).
We focus on multi-agent decision-making problems
where agents are primarily coupled with complex jointrewards which may depend upon the entire state-action
trajectory of multiple agents (Becker et al. 2004). Such
event-driven models better capture the asynchronous nature
of agents when executing their policies in the real-world,
and can encode the notion of agents accomplishing highlevel tasks which is crucial for modeling real-world problems such as multi-agent coverage (Yehoshua and Agmon
2016). Several previous approaches have been developed
for such transition independent decentralized MDP (TIDecMDP) model. Dibangoye et al. (2013) develop an occupancy
measure based approach over joint state-space of agents
to compute agent policies. However, they do not explicitly
address event-based rewards. Petrik and Zilberstein (2011)
develop a bilinear programming based approach that can
model event-based rewards, however, it is limited to two
agents only. Gupta, Kumar, and Paruchuri (2018) develop a
nonlinear math programming formulation for TIDec-MDPs
with event-based rewards which work well for problems
with small to medium state-space. For larger problems,
they developed a policy gradient-based multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) approach for this model. Policy gradient-based approaches have recently become popular for general Dec-POMDPs (Dibangoye and Buffet 2018;
Foerster et al. 2017), however, such formulations do not explicitly take into account event-based rewards which depend
on entire state-action trajectories of multiple agents. In addition, a key unaddressed problem is that of doing transfer
learning when some aspects of the model change.
In our work, we develop a new actor-critic (Konda and
Tsitsiklis 2003) based MARL method for event-based DecMDPs using successor features (SF) which is a value function representation that decouples the dynamics of the environment from the rewards. Previous SF-based approaches
are mainly for single agent problems (Dayan 1993; Kulkarni et al. 2016; Barreto et al. 2017); our work extends them
to event-based multi-agent models; (b) We then present

Decentralized MDPs (Dec-MDPs) provide a rigorous framework for collaborative multi-agent sequential decisionmaking under uncertainty. However, their computational
complexity limits the practical impact. To address this, we
focus on a class of Dec-MDPs consisting of independent collaborating agents that are tied together through a global reward function that depends upon their entire histories of states
and actions to accomplish joint tasks. To overcome scalability barrier, our main contributions are: (a) We propose a new
actor-critic based Reinforcement Learning (RL) approach for
event-based Dec-MDPs using successor features (SF) which
is a value function representation that decouples the dynamics of the environment from the rewards; (b) We then present
Dec-ESR (Decentralized Event based Successor Representation) which generalizes learning for event-based Dec-MDPs
using SF within an end-to-end deep RL framework; (c) We
also show that Dec-ESR allows useful transfer of information on related but different tasks, hence bootstraps the learning for faster convergence on new tasks; (d) For validation
purposes, we test our approach on a large multi-agent coverage problem which models schedule coordination of agents
in a real urban subway network and achieves better quality
solutions than previous best approaches.

1

Introduction

Sequential multi-agent decision-making allows multiple
agents operating in an uncertain and partially observable environment to take a coordinated decision towards a longterm goal (Durfee and Zilberstein 2013). Decentralized partially observable MDPs (Dec-POMDPs) have emerged as
a rich framework for multi-agent planning (Bernstein et al.
2002), and are applicable to several domains such as multiagent robotics (Amato et al. 2016) and urban system optimization (Varakantham, Adulyasak, and Jaillet 2014). However, scalability remains challenging due to NEXP-Hard
complexity even for two agents (Bernstein et al. 2002). To
address such complexity issues, various models are explored
where agent interactions are structured using various conditional and contextual independencies such as transition and
observation independence among agents (Becker et al. 2004;
†

Equal advising.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6054

