The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Robust Unsupervised Multi-Modal Network
Yang Yang,1 Yi-Feng Wu,1 De-Chuan Zhan,1 Zhi-Bin Liu,2 Yuan Jiang1
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, 2 Tecent
{yangy, wuyf, zhandc, jiangy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, lewiszbliu@tencent.com

Abstract

As a consequence, with the learned subspace, it is straightforward to conduct the subsequent tasks, such as clustering,
retrieval, etc. Recently, incorporated with the deep models,
the deep unsupervised multi-modal methods are also proposed, e.g., Ngiam et al. (2011) proposed the multi-modal
deep auto-encoder to learn a shared representation between
different modalities; Kan, Shan, and Chen (2016) used a
multi-modal deep network MvDN to seek a non-linear discriminant and modal-invariant representations. It is notable
that previous multi-modal learning methods mainly concentrate on utilizing the consistency principle between different
modalities, which can reduce the complexity of the learning
problem, therefore, it is necessary to ensure that all instances
have complete modal information and consistency between
different modalities.
While in real applications, note that there are many reasons for incompleteness, including data collection failures
caused by the damage of data sensors, data corruptions from
network communication, data privacy policies, etc, e.g., the
articles may miss the images or texts as shown in Fig. 1. Existing multi-modal learning approaches cannot directly apply on the incomplete modal situation unless removing the
incomplete instances, yet the model trained will clearly loses
information. Aiming at this issue, there are some preliminary investigations, Shao et al. (2016) learned the latent feature matrices for each incomplete modality and pushes them
towards a common consensus; Yang et al. (2018) utilized the
extrinsic information from unlabeled data against the insufficiencies brought by the incomplete modal issues. However,
these methods are mainly linear methods, which are difficult
to extend to non-linear situation, and rarely consider the inconsistent anomalies in the complete situation.
On the other hand, considering the noise effects, even
the complete instances are not necessarily consistent, which
can be defined as “inconsistent anomalies”. Note that different from standard single-modal anomalies, there are two
cases of inconsistent anomalies defined as (Zhao and Fu
2015), i.e., class-anomalies exhibit inconsistent characteristics across different modalities; feature-anomalies exhibit inconsistency on all modalities as shown in Fig. 5. Thus, Iwata
and Yamada (2016) proposed probabilistic latent variable
models for multi-modal anomaly detection; Fan et al. (2017)
considered the confidence levels of both modalities and instances. While these methods are always with many hyper-

In real-world applications, data are often with multiple
modalities, and many multi-modal learning approaches are
proposed for integrating the information from different
sources. Most of the previous multi-modal methods utilize
the modal consistency to reduce the complexity of the learning problem, therefore the modal completeness needs to be
guaranteed. However, due to the data collection failures,
self-deficiencies, and other various reasons, multi-modal instances are often incomplete in real applications, and have
the inconsistent anomalies even in the complete instances,
which jointly result in the inconsistent problem. These degenerate the multi-modal feature learning performance, and will
finally affect the generalization abilities in different tasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel Deep Robust Unsupervised Multi-modal Network structure (DRUMN) for solving this real problem within a unified framework. The proposed DRUMN can utilize the extrinsic heterogeneous information from unlabeled data against the insufficiency caused
by the incompleteness. On the other hand, the inconsistent anomaly issue is solved with an adaptive weighted estimation, rather than adjusting the complex thresholds. As
DRUMN can extract the discriminative feature representations for each modality, experiments on real-world multimodal datasets successfully validate the effectiveness of our
proposed method.

Introduction
With the development of data collection techniques, a huge
number of multi-modal data can be collected from different
channels, e.g., the articles are always with image and text information, the videos include the image, audio and text. And
multi-modal learning approaches aim to utilize these multiple information, in which different modalities can complement each other to improve the generalization abilities of the
whole learners, e.g., Yang et al. (2015) extracted informative
features of weak modality with the auxiliary strong modalities; Arora, Mianjy, and Marinov (2016) studied the partial
least square problem as a stochastic optimization problem.
Considering the labeling costs, subspace embedding
based unsupervised multi-modal methods, have been attracted many researches, which mainly aim to obtain a discriminative latent subspace shared by multiple modalities.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5652

