The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Adaptive Framework for Conversational Question Answering
Lixin Su,1,2 Jiafeng Guo,1,2 Yixing Fan,2 Yanyan Lan,1,2 Ruqing Zhang,1,2 Xueqi Cheng1,2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
sulixinict@gmail.com,{guojiafeng, fanyixing, lanyanyan, zhangruqing, cxq}@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract

to utilize reading comprehension model to locate answers,
which cannot answer the verification questions. The last one
is to combine both of the previous two models. However, it
is still inefficient in modeling the characteristic of different
type questions.
In this paper, we propose an adaptive framework to overcome the difficulty of the multiple types of questions. The
key is to extract rationale for the question from the passage,
then apply different answering components for each type of
questions correspondingly. The framework consists of four
stacked components. Firstly, a rationale extraction component is used to extract related evidences for all questions.
Then, a query gating component is applied to distinguish
each question and distribute it to the corresponding answering component. Finally, there are two answering components for verification question and knowledge-seeking question respectively, namely, MatchNet and DistillNet. Experimental results on CoQA dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.

In Conversational Question Answering (CoQA), humans propose a series of questions to satisfy their information needs.
Based on our preliminary analysis, there are two major types
of questions, namely verification questions and knowledgeseeking questions. The first one is to verify some existing
facts, while the latter is to obtain new knowledge about some
specific object. These two types of questions differ significantly in their answering ways. However, existing methods
usually treat them uniformly, which may easily be biased by
the dominant type of questions and obtain inferior overall performance. In this work, we propose an adaptive framework to
handle these two types of questions in different ways based
on their own characteristics. We conduct experiments on the
recently released CoQA benchmark dataset, and the results
demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art
baseline methods.

Introduction
Conversational Question Answering is an effective way for
humans to gather information. In CoQA, humans accomplish their information need through a series of questions
over a given passage. Without loss of generality, these questions can be divided into two categories , namely verification question and knowledge-seeking question. The verification question is to confirm some facts contained in the question based on the passage. Questions in this type often begin
with words such as did or is, and its answer is yes/no. The
knowledge-seeking question is to obtain some new knowledge which remains unknown to the questioner. For verification question, the answer is a boolean value indicating the
true or false of the question. For knowledge-seeking questions, the answer is often a meaningful text span extracted
from the original passage. Due to these differences, an ideal
model should be able to handle the two different types of
questions accordingly.
There is few work considered this problem in previous study on CoQA (Reddy, Chen, and Manning 2018).
In CoQA, the authors applied three different methods for
the task. The first one is to directly apply seq2seq model
to all questions. It performed poorly as verification questions would dominate the model learning. The second one is

Adaptive Framework
Given a passage p, the previous conversation history
{q1 , a1 , . . . , qi−1 , ai−1 } and current question qi , the CoQA
task is to predict the answer ai . In this section, we describe
the components of our framework in detail.
Rationale Extraction As the passage is usually long and
redundant for the current question, we first apply a reading
comprehension model to extract related text span in passage,
namely rationale. We combine the conversation history and
the current question as qcombine = qi−1 hqi ai−1 hai qi , and
feed it to the DrQA (Chen et al. 2017) model. Hence, the
rationale ri is extracted as
ri = DrQA(p, qcombine )

(1)

We train the model with the human annotated rationale in all
questions.
Query Gating The query gating component distinguishes
the type of the question and dispatches it to its suitable processing component. We apply a GBDT model acting as the
query gating component, which classifies a question as a verification or knowledge-seeking question based on the content of each query.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

gi = GBDT (qi )
10041

(2)

