The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MFPCA: Multiscale Functional Principal Component Analysis
Zhenhua Lin

Hongtu Zhu

University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616
linzh@ucdavis.edu

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
htzhu@email.unc.edu

Abstract

Lin, Wang, and Cao 2016), to name a few. All of these works
adopt the single-scale paradigm, which is briefly described
in the next section.
Such one-size-fits-all scheme, as we show in Section 2,
inevitably comes with a side effect that the leading principal
components prioritize producing good approximation quality for functions on the subdomain that holds large data variance. However, for heteroscedastic functional data, where
the variance of the data has substantially different scales
over the domain, single-scale FPCA approach often needs
a large number of principal components in order to characterize the behavior of the data on the subdomain with relatively small variance. However, it is notoriously difficult
to accurately estimate high-order principal components. For
example, for a fixed sample size, the estimation error for
the kth principal components is approximately of the order
k 2 (Mas and Ruymgaart 2015). This quadratic decay in estimation quality prohibits one from obtaining reliable estimates of principal components for a moderate sample size
except for the first few leading ones. Consequently, for heteroscedastic functional data, single-scale FPCA may not be
able to discover useful features in the area of low variance.
To address the issue of FPCA for heteroscedastic functional data, we consider a question, which states
“Could we modify standard FPCA to efficiently deal with
heteroscedastic functional data?”
Our solution to the above question is the development of a
novel multiscale FPCA framework. The key ideas of MFPCA are to partition the whole domain into several subdomains in the way that the variance of the data within a subdomain is approximately on the same scale, and then to conduct FPCA on each subdomain separately. Compared with
the existing methods in the literature, three major methodological contributions in this paper are as follows:
• Our MFPCA approach is simple and yet powerful. Specifically, compared to single-scale FPCA, the multiscale approach alleviates the issue of estimating high-order principal components and leads to overall improvement of data
representation, since fewer components are required for
sufficient approximation of the data within each subdomain.
• Our MFPCA is able to discover useful patterns in the area
of low variance, as demonstrated in the analysis of the

We consider the problem of performing dimension reduction on heteroscedastic functional data where the variance
is in different scales over entire domain. The aim of this
paper is to propose a novel multiscale functional principal
component analysis (MFPCA) approach to address such heteroscedastic issue. The key ideas of MFPCA are to partition
the whole domain into several subdomains according to the
scale of variance, and then to conduct the usual functional
principal component analysis (FPCA) on each individual subdomain. Both theoretically and numerically, we show that
MFPCA can capture features on areas of low variance without estimating high-order principal components, leading to
overall improvement of performance on dimension reduction
for heteroscedastic functional data. In contrast, traditional
FPCA prioritizes optimizing performance on the subdomain
of larger data variance and requires a practically prohibitive
number of components to characterize data in the region bearing relatively small variance.

1

Introduction

Functional principal component analysis (FPCA) is a key
tool for performing dimension reduction on functional data
that features infinite dimensionality and emerges in many
machine learning applications (Ghebreab, Smeulders, and
Adriaans 2008; Ramsay and Silverman 2005; Ferraty and
Vieu 2006; Hsing and Eubank 2015). In classic FPCA referred to as single-scale FPCA in this paper, a single eigenanalysis is conducted for observed functions on the entire
domain. Specifically, FPCA is built on eigen-analysis of the
covariance function of functional data, analogous to the covariance matrix, from which we derive functional principal components. For the purpose of dimension reduction,
only the principal components corresponding to the first few
largest eigenvalues are retained. Related works include early
development of FPCA (Rao 1958; Dauxois, Pousse, and Romain 1982; Besse and Ramsay 1986), and more recent advances such regularization techniques (Rice and Silverman
1991; Silverman 1996), estimation and theory (Yao, Müller,
and Wang 2005; Hall, Müller, and Wang 2006; Li and Hsing 2010; Zhang and Wang 2016) for functional data that are
sparsely observed, and interpretability (Chen and Lei 2015;
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4320

