The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Confidence Weighted Multitask Learning
Peng Yang,1 Peilin Zhao,2 Jiayu Zhou,3 Xin Gao1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
2
Tencent AI Lab, China, 3 Michigan State University, USA
{peng.yang.2, xin.gao}@kaust.edu.sa, masonzhao@tencent.com, jiayuz@msu.edu

Abstract

the true label is revealed and the learner updates the model as
necessary. Previous studies (Dekel, Long, and Singer 2007;
Yang and Zhao 2015; Murugesan et al. 2016) mostly utilized the first-order information of datastream. Few studies
worked on second-order algorithms. To remedy this issue,
we propose a confidence weighted MTL. The confidence
estimated through a local-global Gaussian distribution over
each task model can guide the direction and scale of parameter updates. Specifically, updates not only fix predicted errors but also increase confidence.
However, such method assumes that the true labels are
readily provided for all the tasks, which is impractical in
several settings where the tasks (e.g., minority languages,
new products) naturally have very few data labels. Online active learning (OAL) addresses this concern by letting the learner decide whether to request the true label
of the current instance or not. Most of OAL techniques
decide a query by estimating a confidence towards current prediction (Cesa-Bianchi, Gentile, and Zaniboni 2006;
Dekel, Gentile, and Sridharan 2012). In the multitask learning setting, one can further reduce the total number of required labels by interacting with related peer tasks. This paper proposes an active multitask learning, where the learner
determines a query by considering the confidence over label prediction from related peer tasks. The key idea is that
when a task model is uncertain about its prediction, it would
consult its peers. Theoretical results show the regret bounds
can be significantly reduced. Empirical results demonstrate
that the proposed technique in such setting minimizes the
learning errors and labeling cost simultaneously.

Traditional online multitask learning only utilizes the firstorder information of the datastream. To remedy this issue, we
propose a confidence weighted multitask learning algorithm,
which maintains a Gaussian distribution over each task model
to guide online learning process. The mean (covariance) of
the Gaussian Distribution is a sum of a local component and
a global component that is shared among all the tasks. In addition, this paper also addresses the challenge of active learning
on the online multitask setting. Instead of requiring labels of
all the instances, the proposed algorithm determines whether
the learner should acquire a label by considering the confidence from its related tasks over label prediction. Theoretical
results show the regret bounds can be significantly reduced.
Empirical results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm is
able to achieve promising learning efficacy, while simultaneously minimizing the labeling cost.

Introduction
Multitask learning (MTL) aims to enhance the overall generalization performance by learning the related knowledge
of multiple tasks. Most existing works in multitask learning focus on how to take advantage of the task relationship,
either by sharing model parameters via regularization techniques (Argyriou, Evgeniou, and Pontil 2008; Zhang and
Yeung 2010; Yang, Zhao, and Gao 2017) or learning crosstask data directly (Crammer and Mansour 2012). This paper
focuses on a specific multitask setting where tasks are allowed to query labels by interacting with other tasks for difficult cases, for example, recommending new products based
on customers’ preferences on old ones.
In a broad sense, there are two settings to learn multiple
tasks together: 1) batch learning, where an entire training
set is available to the learner before training; and 2) online
learning, where the model is trained over the data streams.
In contrast to batch learning, which often suffers from expensive re-training costs whenever new training data come,
online learning avoids re-training and learns incrementally
from sequential data, which is much more efficient (Hoi et
al. 2018; Zhao et al. 2011). Online MTL (OMTL) has been
intensively studied, where each task learner receives an instance on each round and then predicts its label. After that

Related Work
Existing works on OMTL focus on how to take advantage of
task relationship. To achieve this, Lugosi et al. (Lugosi, Papaspiliopoulos, and Stoltz 2009) imposed a hard constraint
across the task model parameters. Agarwal et al. (Agarwal,
Rakhlin, and Bartlett 2008) used a matrix regularization on
model weights, like the nuclear norm (Ding et al. 2018). And
Dekel et al. (Dekel, Long, and Singer 2007) learned the task
relationship via a global loss function. However, all these
works assume that the true label is provided to each instance.
OAL addresses this problem by making the decision on
whether to query the label over the data streams (CesaBianchi, Gentile, and Zaniboni 2006; Dekel, Gentile, and

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5636

