The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Point2Sequence: Learning the Shape Representation of 3D
Point Clouds with an Attention-Based Sequence to Sequence Network
Xinhai Liu,1 Zhizhong Han,1,2 Yu-Shen Liu,1∗ Matthias Zwicker2
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
lxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, h312h@umd.edu, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, zwicker@cs.umd.edu
Abstract

feature by a pooling layer. This leads to PointNet being limited by capturing contextual information of local regions.
Attempting to address this issue, several researches take
the aggregation of local regions into consideration. KC-Net
(Shen et al. 2018) employs a kernel correlation layer and a
graph-based pooling layer to capture the local information of
point clouds. SO-Net (Li, Chen, and Lee 2018) and DGCNN
(Wang et al. 2018) further explore the local structures by
building k-nearest neighbors (kNN) graphs and integrating
neighbors of a given point using learnable edge attributes
in the graph. PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017c) first extracts features for multi-scale local regions individually and aggregates these features by concatenation, where the two steps
are repeated to complete the hierarchical feature extraction.
Similarly, ShapeContextNet (Xie et al. 2018) segments the
local region of a given point into small bins, then extracts the
feature for each bin individually, and finally concatenates the
features of all bins as the updated feature for the point. However, most of these previous methods employ hand-crafted
or explicit ways for encoding contextual information in local regions, which makes it hard to fully capture fine-grained
contextual information, such as the correlation between different areas in the feature space. However, the correlation
between different areas in a local region is an important contextual information. Fully exploiting this information might
enhance the discriminability of learned features and improve
the performance in shape analysis tasks.
We address this issue by proposing a novel deep learning model for 3D point clouds, called Point2Sequence, to
encode fine-grained contextual information in local regions
in a novel implicit way. Point2Sequence employs a novel
RNN-based sequence model for local regions in point clouds
to capture the correlation by aggregating multi-scale areas with attention. Specifically, each local region is first
separated into multi-scale areas. Then, the feature of each
area scale is extracted by a shared Multi-Layer-Perceptron
(MLP) layer. Finally, our novel encoder-decoder based sequence model aggregates the features of all area scales,
where an attention mechanism is involved to highlight the
importance of different scale areas. Experimental results
show that Point2Sequence is able to learn more discriminative features from point clouds than existing methods in
shape classification and part segmentation tasks.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.

Exploring contextual information in the local region is important for shape understanding and analysis. Existing studies
often employ hand-crafted or explicit ways to encode contextual information of local regions. However, it is hard to
capture fine-grained contextual information in hand-crafted
or explicit manners, such as the correlation between different areas in a local region, which limits the discriminative ability of learned features. To resolve this issue, we
propose a novel deep learning model for 3D point clouds,
named Point2Sequence, to learn 3D shape features by capturing fine-grained contextual information in a novel implicit way. Point2Sequence employs a novel sequence learning model for point clouds to capture the correlations by
aggregating multi-scale areas of each local region with attention. Specifically, Point2Sequence first learns the feature
of each area scale in a local region. Then, it captures the
correlation between area scales in the process of aggregating all area scales using a recurrent neural network (RNN)
based encoder-decoder structure, where an attention mechanism is proposed to highlight the importance of different
area scales. Experimental results show that Point2Sequence
achieves state-of-the-art performance in shape classification
and segmentation tasks.

Introduction
3D point clouds, also called point sets, are considered as
one of the simplest 3D shape representations, since they
are composed of only raw coordinates in 3D space. A point
cloud can be acquired expediently by popular sensors such
as LiDAR, conventional cameras, or RGB-D cameras. Furthermore, this kind of 3D data is widely used in 3D modeling (Golovinskiy, Kim, and Funkhouser 2009), autonomous
driving (Qi et al. 2017a), indoor navigation (Zhu et al. 2017)
and robotics (Wang and Posner 2015). However, learning
features or shape representations based on point clouds by
deep learning models remains a challenging problem due to
the irregular nature of point clouds (Qi et al. 2017b).
As a pioneering approach, PointNet (Qi et al. 2017b) resolves this challenge by directly applying deep learning on
point sets. PointNet individually computes a feature of each
point and then aggregates all the point features into a global
∗

Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8778

