The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Spatiotemporal Multi-Graph
Convolution Network for Ride-Hailing Demand Forecasting
Xu Geng,∗1 Yaguang Li,∗2 Leye Wang,1,3 Lingyu Zhang,4 Qiang Yang,1 Jieping Ye,4 Yan Liu2,4
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 University of Southern California, 3 Peking University, 4 Didi AI Labs, Didi Chuxing
xgeng@connect.ust.hk, yaguang@usc.edu, wly@cse.ust.hk, zhanglingyu@didichuxing.com,
qyang@cse.ust.hk, yejieping@didichuxing.com, yanliu.cs@usc.edu

Abstract

demand of a region is usually affected by its spatially adjacent neighbors and at the same time correlated with distant regions with the similar contextual environment. On the
other hand, non-linear dependencies also exist among different temporal observations. The prediction of a certain time is
usually correlated with various historical observations, e.g.,
an hour ago, a day ago or even a week ago.

Region-level demand forecasting is an essential task in ridehailing services. Accurate ride-hailing demand forecasting
can guide vehicle dispatching, improve vehicle utilization, reduce the wait-time, and mitigate traffic congestion. This task
is challenging due to the complicated spatiotemporal dependencies among regions. Existing approaches mainly focus on
modeling the Euclidean correlations among spatially adjacent
regions while we observe that non-Euclidean pair-wise correlations among possibly distant regions are also critical for
accurate forecasting. In this paper, we propose the spatiotemporal multi-graph convolution network (ST-MGCN), a novel
deep learning model for ride-hailing demand forecasting. We
first encode the non-Euclidean pair-wise correlations among
regions into multiple graphs and then explicitly model these
correlations using multi-graph convolution. To utilize the
global contextual information in modeling the temporal correlation, we further propose contextual gated recurrent neural network which augments recurrent neural network with
a contextual-aware gating mechanism to re-weights different
historical observations. We evaluate the proposed model on
two real-world large scale ride-hailing demand datasets and
observe consistent improvement of more than 10% over stateof-the-art baselines.

R14

4

Highway 1

Park

3

2

1

R46
Hospital

Hospital

School

School

6
Amusement Park

Amusement Park

Park

5

Highway 2

Factory

Lake

Figure 1: An example of different correlations among regions. To predict the demand in region 1, spatially adjacent
region 2, functionality similar region 3 and transportation
connected region 4 are considered more important, while
distant and irrelevant regions 5 are less relevant.

Introduction
Spatiotemporal forecasting is a crucial task in urban computing. It has a wide range of applications from autonomous
vehicles operations, to energy and smart grid optimization,
to logistics and supply chain management. In this paper, we
study one important task: region-level ride-hailing demand
forecasting, which is one of the essential components of the
intelligent transportation systems. The goal of region-level
ride-hailing demand forecasting is to predict the future demand of regions in a city given historical observations. Accurate ride-hailing demand forecasting can help organize vehicle fleet, improve vehicle utilization, reduce the wait-time,
and mitigate traffic congestion (Yao et al. 2018b). This task
is challenging mainly due to the complex spatial and temporal correlations. On the one hand, complicated dependencies are observed among different regions. For example, the

Recent advances in deep learning enable promising results in modeling the complex spatiotemporal relationship
in region-based spatiotemporal forecasting. With convolutional neural network and recurrent neural network, stateof-the-art results are achieved in (Shi et al. 2015; Yu et
al. 2017; Shi et al. 2017; Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017;
Zhang et al. 2018a; Ma et al. 2017; Yao et al. 2018b;
2018a). Despite promising results, we argue that two important aspects are largely overlooked in modeling the spatiotemporal correlations. First, these methods mainly focus
on modeling the Euclidean correlations among different regions, however, we observe that non-Euclidean pair-wise
correlations are also critical for accurate forecasting. Figure 1 shows an example. For region 1, in addition to neighborhood region 2, it may also correlate to a distant region
3 that shares similar functionality, i.e., they are both near

∗
Equal contribution. Work done primarily while authors were
interns at Didi AI Labs, Didi Chuxing.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3656

