The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Interpretation of Neural Networks Is Fragile
Amirata Ghorbani,∗ Abubakar Abid,∗ James Zou
Stanford University
450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA, USA
{amiratag, a12d, jamesz}@stanford.edu

Abstract

Having an interpretation is not enough, however. The explanation itself must be robust in order to establish human
trust. Take the pathology predictor; an interpretation method
might suggest that a particular section in an image is important for the malignant classification (e.g. that section could
have high scores in saliency map). The clinician might then
focus on that section for investigation or treatment or even
look for similar features in other patients. It would be highly
disconcerting if in an extremely similar image, visually indistinguishable from the original and also classified as malignant, a very different section is interpreted as being salient
for the prediction. Thus, even if the predictor is robust (both
images are correctly labeled as malignant), that the interpretation is fragile would still be problematic in deployment.
Furthermore, if the interpretation is used to guide interventions (e.g. location of a biopsy) by the doctor, then an interpretation that is not robust against adversarial perturbations
may prove to be a security concern.

In order for machine learning to be trusted in many applications, it is critical to be able to reliably explain why the machine learning algorithm makes certain predictions. For this
reason, a variety of methods have been developed recently to
interpret neural network predictions by providing, for example, feature importance maps. For both scientific robustness
and security reasons, it is important to know to what extent
can the interpretations be altered by small systematic perturbations to the input data, which might be generated by adversaries or by measurement biases. In this paper, we demonstrate how to generate adversarial perturbations that produce
perceptively indistinguishable inputs that are assigned the
same predicted label, yet have very different interpretations.
We systematically characterize the robustness of interpretations generated by several widely-used feature importance
interpretation methods (feature importance maps, integrated
gradients, and DeepLIFT) on ImageNet and CIFAR-10. In all
cases, our experiments show that systematic perturbations can
lead to dramatically different interpretations without changing the label. We extend these results to show that interpretations based on exemplars (e.g. influence functions) are similarly susceptible to adversarial attack. Our analysis of the geometry of the Hessian matrix gives insight on why robustness
is a general challenge to current interpretation approaches.

Our contributions. It is well known that the predicted labels of deep neural networks are susceptible to adversarial attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Papernot et al. 2016;
Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and Frossard 2016). In this paper, we introduce the notion of adversarial perturbations to
neural network interpretation. More precisely, we define the
interpretation of neural network to be fragile if, for a given
image, it is possible to generate a perceptively indistinguishable image that has the same prediction label by the neural network, yet is given a substantially different interpretation. We systematically investigate two classes of interpretation methods: methods that assign importance scores
to each feature (this includes simple gradients (Simonyan,
Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013), DeepLift (Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017), and integrated gradients (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017)), as well as a method that assigns importances to each training example: influence functions (Koh and Liang 2017). For these interpretation methods, we show how to design targeted perturbations that can
lead to dramatically different interpretations across test images (Fig. 1). Our findings highlight the fragility of interpretations of neural networks, which has not been carefully
considered in the literature. Fragility limits how much we
can trust and learn from the interpretations. It also raises a

Introduction
Predictions made by machine learning algorithms play an
important role in our everyday lives and can affect decisions
in technology, medicine, and even the legal system (Rich
2015; Obermeyer and Emanuel 2016). As algorithms become increasingly complex, explanations for why an algorithm makes certain decisions are ever more crucial. For example, if an AI system predicts a given pathology image to
be malignant, then a doctor may need to know what features
in the image led the algorithm to this classification. Similarly, if an algorithm predicts an individual to be a credit risk,
then the lender (and the borrower) might want to know why.
Therefore having interpretations for why certain predictions
are made is critical for establishing trust and transparency
between users and the algorithm (Lipton 2016).
∗

Equal Contribution
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3681

