The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Exploring Knowledge Graphs in an
Interpretable Composite Approach for Text Entailment
Vivian S. Silva,1 André Freitas,2 Siegfried Handschuh1,3
1

Department of Computer Science and Mathematics, University of Passau, Innstraße 43, 94032, Passau, Germany
2
School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, M13 9PL, UK
3
Institute of Computer Science, University of St. Gallen, Müller-Friedberg-Strasse 8, 9000, St. Gallen, Switzerland
vivian.santossilva@uni-passau.de, andre.freitas@manchester.ac.uk, siegfried.handschuh@unisg.ch
Abstract

and H, demanding the use of external world knowledge to
solve the entailment.
Some approaches focus on exploring the syntactic structures of T and H to determine whether they are equivalent
and confirm the entailment, but can fall short of identifying more complex semantic variations. On the other hand,
techniques concentrating purely on finding semantic relations between T and H will struggle to deal with pairs where
only a syntactic variation holds. To overcome these issues,
we propose the use of different methods to tackle different
entailment scenarios, integrated as components into a composite approach that performs a routing, that is, it analyzes
the entailment pair and sends it to the most suitable component to solve it.
For solving syntactic entailments, we use a tree edit distance algorithm over a dependency tree representation of T
and H. For identifying semantic relationships, we employ a
distributional (word embedding-based) navigation algorithm
over graph knowledge bases composed of natural language
dictionary definitions. By finding paths is these graphs linking T and H, we can provide human-readable justifications
that shows explicitly what is the semantic relationship holding between them. Our contribution is twofold: besides providing a more flexible way to deal with different entailment
phenomena, we also analyze different knowledge sources,
showing how they compare quantitatively and qualitatively,
especially from the interpretability point of view.

Recognizing textual entailment is a key task for many semantic applications, such as Question Answering, Text Summarization, and Information Extraction, among others. Entailment scenarios can range from a simple syntactic variation
to more complex semantic relationships between pieces of
text, but most approaches try a one-size-fits-all solution that
usually favors some scenario to the detriment of another. We
propose a composite approach for recognizing text entailment
which analyzes the entailment pair to decide whether it must
be resolved syntactically or semantically. We also make the
answer interpretable: whenever an entailment is solved semantically, we explore a knowledge base composed of structured lexical definitions to generate natural language humanlike justifications, explaining the semantic relationship holding between the pieces of text. Besides outperforming wellestablished entailment algorithms, our composite approach
gives an important step towards Explainable AI, using world
knowledge to make the semantic reasoning process explicit
and understandable.

Introduction
Text entailment is formally defined as a directional relationship between a pair of text expressions, denoted by T – the
entailing text, and H – the entailed hypothesis. We say that
T entails H if, typically, a human reading T would infer that
H is most likely true (Dagan, Glickman, and Magnini 2006).
It is an important input for a number of other natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as Question Answering,
Text Summarization, Information Retrieval, Machine Translation, etc., which need to deal with natural language variability to determine whether inputs and/or outputs expressed
in different forms are equivalent.
Text entailment encompasses three different scenarios: (1)
T and H are equivalent statements but expressed in slightly
different ways; (2) H generalizes information from T; and
(3) H present new information derived from T. While (1)
can usually be resolved syntactically, given that only the sentence structure is altered, and (2) requires only shallow semantic information, such as synonyms and hypernyms, (3)
requires knowledge that goes beyond what is expressed in T

Related Work
Early text entailment systems relied only on word overlap
and statistical lexical relations (Glickman and Dagan 2005;
Pérez and Alfonseca 2005; Newman et al. 2005), while
more recent approaches combine the analysis of the sentence
structure with linguistic resources like WordNet, Framenet
and Verbnet, which can add some shallow semantic information to the syntactic data. Edit distance (Kouylekov and
Magnini 2005), alignment (Wang and Neumann 2008) and
transformation (Zanoli and Colombo 2016) are some examples of such approaches. Machine learning techniques are
also employed (Zhang et al. 2017), where T and H are represented as feature vectors, and multiple similarity measures
(computed over lexical, syntactic and shallow semantic representations) are used to train a supervised machine learning
model. Going further on the use of world knowledge, Silva

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7023

