The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning (from) Deep Hierarchical Structure among Features
Yu Zhang,1 Lei Han2
1

HKUST, 2 Tencent AI Lab
yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com, leihan.cs@gmail.com

Abstract

root to each leaf node are summed to 1, the proposed objective function can be proved to be convex no matter what
the height of the hierarchical structure is. Moreover, when
all the exponents take the same value, we can show that
the proposed objective function is equivalent to a problem
with a hierarchical group lasso regularization term. In order
to optimize the objective function of the DHS method, we
adopt the FISTA algorithm (Beck and Teboulle 2009) each
of whose subproblems has an efficiently analytical solution.
Moreover, in the proposed DHS method, the exponents of
the edge weights need to be set based on a priori information. When this information is not available, by default we
just set them to be identical. Usually this strategy works but
it may be suboptimal. In order to alleviate this problem, we
propose a variant of the DHS method to learn the exponents
from data.

Data features usually can be organized in a hierarchical structure to reflect the relations among them. Most of previous
studies that utilize the hierarchical structure to help improve
the performance of supervised learning tasks can only handle the structure of a limited height such as 2. In this paper,
we propose a Deep Hierarchical Structure (DHS) method to
handle the hierarchical structure of an arbitrary height with a
convex objective function. The DHS method relies on the exponents of the edge weights in the hierarchical structure but
the exponents need to be given by users or set to be identical by default, which may be suboptimal. Based on the DHS
method, we propose a variant to learn the exponents from
data. Moreover, we consider a case where even the hierarchical structure is not available. Based on the DHS method,
we propose a Learning Deep Hierarchical Structure (LDHS)
method which can learn the hierarchical structure via a generalized fused-Lasso regularizer and a proposed sequential
constraint. All the optimization problems are solved by proximal methods where each subproblem has an efficient solution. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets show
the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

Moreover, we consider a more general case where the hierarchical structure is not available. A hierarchical structure
can give us more insight about the relations among features
but learning it from data is a difficult problem. To the best
of our knowledge, there is no work to directly learn the hierarchical structure among features. Here we give the first try
based on the DHS method by proposing a Learning Deep
Hierarchical Structure (LDHS) method. Given the height of
the hierarchical structure, the LDHS method assumes that
each path from the root to a leaf node corresponding to a
data feature does not share any node between each other,
then uses a generalized fused-Lasso regularizer to enforce
nodes to fuse at each height, and finally designs a sequential constraint to make the learned structure form a hierarchical structure. For optimization, we use the GIST algorithm (Gong et al. 2013) to solve the objective function of
the LDHS method. By comparing with several state-of-theart baseline methods, experiments on several synthetic and
real-world datasets show the effectiveness of the proposed
models.
Related Work The Composite Absolute Penalties (CAP)
method (Zhao, Rocha, and Yu 2009) learns from the hierarchical structure but via the group sparsity and its objective function is different from those of the proposed methods. Moreover, the proposed LDHS method can learn the
hierarchical structure but the CAP method cannot. The treeguided group Lasso proposed in (Kim and Xing 2010) can
learn from the hierarchical structure for multi-output regres-

Introduction
Most of previous studies to utilize the hierarchical structure among features, including the group Lasso (Yuan and
Lin 2006) and the Hierarchical Penalization (HP) method
(Szafranski, Grandvalet, and Morizet-Mahoudeaux 2007),
can only handle the hierarchical structure of a limited height
up to 2. In this paper, we aim to break this assumption by
utilizing the available hierarchical structure with an arbitrary
height to help learn an accurate model. Moreover, in some
case where the hierarchical structure is unavailable, we aim
to learn such hierarchical structure among features to improve the interpretability of the resultant learner.
Specifically, given a hierarchical structure to describe relations among features, we propose a Deep Hierarchical
Structure (DHS) method to utilize it. In the DHS method,
each model parameter corresponding to a data feature is penalized by the product of edge weights along the path from
the root to the leaf node for that feature. Interestingly, when
the exponents of the edge weights along the path from the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5837

