The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Path-Specific Counterfactual Fairness
Silvia Chiappa
csilvia@google.com
DeepMind London

Abstract

for scenarios in which the sensitive attribute might affect the
decision along both fair and unfair pathways.
For example, in the case of Berkeley’s alleged sex bias
in graduate admission (Pearl 2000), female applicants were
rejected more often than male applicants as they were more
often applying to departments with lower admission rates.
Such an effect of gender through department choice is not

We consider the problem of learning fair decision systems
from data in which a sensitive attribute might affect the decision along both fair and unfair pathways. We introduce a
counterfactual approach to disregard effects along unfair pathways that does not incur in the same loss of individual-specific
information as previous approaches. Our method corrects observations adversely affected by the sensitive attribute, and
uses these to form a decision. We leverage recent developments in deep learning and approximate inference to develop
a VAE-type method that is widely applicable to complex nonlinear models.

A
fair
D

Introduction

un
fai
r

Q

Y

unfair as far as the college is concerned. What would be inadmissible is if the college treated male and female applicants
with the same qualifications and applying to the same departments differently because of gender. This complex scenario
can be represented by the graphical causal model depicted
above. In this model, A, Q, D, and Y are random variables
representing respectively gender, qualification, department
choice, and admission decision, A → D → Y is a causal
path representing the influence of gender A on admission
decision Y through department choice D, and A → Y is a
causal path representing the direct influence of A on Y .
To deal with such scenarios, we propose a novel definition of fairness called path-specific counterfactual fairness,
which states that a decision is fair toward an individual if
it coincides with the one that would have been taken in a
counterfactual world in which the sensitive attribute along
the unfair pathways were different. In the Berkeley example,
this would mean that an admission decision would be fair
toward a female candidate if it would remain the same when
pretending that the candidate were male along A → Y .
We propose an approach that implements path-specific
counterfactual fairness by correcting the observations corresponding to variables that are descendants of the sensitive attribute along unfair causal pathways. The correction aims at eliminating the unfair information contained
in the observations while retaining fair information. Furthermore, we introduce a latent-variable method that, by
leveraging recent developments in deep learning and approximate inference, allows to apply this correction approach to complex non-linear models. Our correction procedure allows to retain more individual-specific information

Machine learning is increasingly being used to take decisions
that can severely affect people’s lives, e.g. in policing, education, hiring, lending, and criminal risk assessment (Hoffman,
Kahn, and Li 2015; Dieterich, Mendoza, and Brennan 2016).
This phenomenon has been accompanied by an increase in
concern about disparate treatment caused by model errors
and bias in the data.
In response to calls from governments and institutions,
researchers have started to study how to ensure that learned
models do no take decisions that are unfair with respect to
sensitive attributes (e.g. race and gender) using different approaches. Among them, the causal framework (Pearl 2000;
Dawid 2007; Pearl, Glymour, and Jewell 2016; Peters, Janzing, and Schölkopf 2017) offers an intuitive and powerful
way of reasoning about fairness, by viewing unfairness as the
presence of an unfair causal effect of the sensitive attribute
on the decision (Qureshi et al. 2016; Bonchi et al. 2017;
Kilbertus et al. 2017; Kusner et al. 2017; Russell et al. 2017;
Zhang and Wu 2017; Zhang, Wu, and Wu 2017; Nabi and
Shpitser 2018; Zhang and Bareinboim 2018).
Kusner et al. recently introduced a causal, individual-level,
definition of fairness, called counterfactual fairness, which
states that a decision is fair toward an individual if it coincides
with the one that would have been taken in a counterfactual
world in which the sensitive attribute were different. Counterfactual fairness assumes that the entire effect of the sensitive
attribute on the decision is problematic. This is restrictive
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7801

