The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Feature Selection by Pareto Optimization∗
Chao Feng,1 Chao Qian,1 Ke Tang2
1

Anhui Province Key Lab of Big Data Analysis and Application, School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
2
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computational Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
chaofeng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chaoqian@ustc.edu.cn, tangk3@sustc.edu.cn
Abstract

the subset of selected features. Formally, given a matrix
A ∈ Rm×n (where m is the number of instances and n is
the number of features) and a positive integer k, the goal is to
select at most k columns of A (forming a matrix S) minimizing f (S) = kA−SS+ Ak2F , where S+ is the Moore-Penrose
inverse matrix of S. That is, it is to find at most k columns of
A that captures as much of A as possible w.r.t. the Frobenius
norm. Note that SS+ denotes the projection matrix onto the
span of the set S of columns. This problem is known to be
UG-Hard (Çivril 2014), and its NP-completeness has been
proved only recently (Shitov 2017). Many algorithms with
bounded approximation guarantees have been proposed, as
briefly reviewed in the following.

Dimensionality reduction is often employed to deal with the
data with a huge number of features, which can be generally divided into two categories: feature transformation and
feature selection. Due to the interpretability, the efficiency
during inference and the abundance of unlabeled data, unsupervised feature selection has attracted much attention. In
this paper, we consider its natural formulation, column subset selection (CSS), which is to minimize the reconstruction
error of a data matrix by selecting a subset of features. We
propose an anytime randomized iterative approach POCSS,
which minimizes the reconstruction error and the number of
selected features simultaneously. Its approximation guarantee
is well bounded. Empirical results exhibit the superior performance of POCSS over the state-of-the-art algorithms.

Related Work
The CSS problem was first studied within the numerical linear algebra community. Many algorithms based on
rank-revealing QR (RRQR) factorization (Chan and Hansen
1992) were proposed, e.g., (Gu and Eisenstat 1996; Pan and
Tang 1999; Hoog and Mattheij 2007). It has been proved
that any algorithm for computing RRQR factorization of a
matrix A can provide solutions of the CSS problem with
approximation guarantees. Let Ak denote the best rank-k
approximation to A obtained via SVD, and let Sopt denote
an optimal solution of the CSS problem. Note that the approximation guarantee obtained by this kind of algorithms
is w.r.t. kA − Ak kF , which is obviously a lower bound on
the truly optimal function value, i.e., kA − Sopt S+
opt AkF .
Several randomized sampling algorithms were also proposed for solving the CSS problem, including subspace sampling (Drineas, Mahoney, and Muthukrishnan 2008), volume sampling (Guruswami and Sinop 2012) and leverage
sampling (Cohen et al. 2015). Their idea is to randomly select columns with probability proportional to some statistic.
The theoretical results on these algorithms mainly showed
a trade-off between the number of columns chosen, the approximation bound w.r.t. kA − Ak kF and the success probability of the algorithm.
In (Boutsidis, Mahoney, and Drineas 2009), the authors
proposed a two-stage algorithm by combining the above two
techniques. In the randomized stage, the algorithm selects
O(k log k) columns according to some probability distribution that depends on the top k right singular vectors of A. In
the deterministic stage, it returns exactly k columns from the

Introduction
In machine learning and data mining applications, we often encounter the input data with very high dimensionality,
bringing certain challenges. Many feature transformation
techniques have been proposed for dimensionality reduction, e.g., principal component analysis (Jolliffe 2011), singular value decomposition (SVD) (Golub and Reinsch 1971)
and autoencoders (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006), to name
a few. By combining existing features, these methods transform the data into a low dimensional subspace, which can
capture the cardinal information of the original data. However, the new feature representation is difficult to interpret,
and projecting the input features into the reduced space often
requires matrix multiplication, which reduces the inference
efficiency. When keeping the semantic meaning of the features is important, feature selection, which selects a subset
of features instead of transforming them, is more appealing.
Since unlabeled data is often very abundant, much attention
has been drawn to the unsupervised case.
Unsupervised feature selection can be explored from different perspectives. In this paper, we focus on a natural formulation, column subset selection (CSS), which is to minimize the reconstruction error of a data matrix based on
∗

This work was supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (2017YFC0804002), the NSFC
(61603367, 61672478) and the YESS (2016QNRC001).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3534

