The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Academic Reader: An Interactive
Question Answering System on Academic Literatures
Yining Hong, Jialu Wang, Yuting Jia, Weinan Zhang, Xinbing Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{evelinehong, faldict, hnxxjyt, wnzhang, xwang8}@sjtu.edu.cn

Context

Abstract

Match Score
Embedding

MLP
Bidirectional
Attention Flow

We present Academic Reader, a system which can read academic literatures and answer the relevant questions for researchers. Academic Reader leverages machine reading comprehension technique, which has been successfully applied in
many fields but has not been involved in academic literature
reading. An interactive platform is established to demonstrate
the functions of Academic Reader. Pieces of academic literature and relevant questions are input to our system, which
then outputs answers. The system can also gather users’ revised answers and perform active learning to continuously
improve its performance. A case study is provided presenting the performance of our system on all papers accepted in
KDD 2018, which demonstrates how our system facilitates
massive academic literature reading.

Embedding

biLSTM-CRF

Query

Word Sequence
User
Input

Answer

Figure 1: The overview of Academic Reader
answering system which automatically extracts essential information from academic literatures to answer given questions. An online platform1 is established to demonstrate the
results of our system. Researchers can upload academic literatures, such as paper abstracts, along with several questions, and review the answers provided by our system.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an astounding growth in the
number of academic papers, which requires researchers to
make much effort on surveys and investigations. In another
word, researchers have to look through papers to find out
their concerned questions, e.g., What is the aim of this paper?, What method does the authors propose?, What is
the advantage of the proposed model compared to previous
works? etc. Machine reading comprehension (MRC) system
can assist researchers in browsing through academic literatures, extracting valuable information, filtering and sorting
works according to their specific needs and interests.
Teaching machines to accomplish reading comprehension
tasks has made remarkable progress these years, focusing on
corpus including news (Hermann et al. 2015), Wikipedia articles (Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018) and web documents
(Nguyen et al. 2016). A variety of MRC models have been
investigated to solve such tasks, including QANet (Yu et al.
2018) and RNet (Wang et al. 2017). Similarly, MRC could
also be applied into the domain of academic literatures, serving as an alternative to human efforts in reading and summarizing massive papers and making significant convenience
for the researchers.
However, currently there are no such systems concerning
reading comprehension tasks on academic literatures. In this
paper, we build Academic Reader, an interactive question

System Overview
Academic Reader aims to build an interactive question answering system on academic literatures. As is shown in Fig
1, users provide pieces of academic literature as contexts,
as well as any number of questions concerning the contexts,
and then Academic Reader will run our model and immediately generate answers to these questions. Users can revise
the answers which fail to satisfy them, thus further optimizing our system through active learning.

User Input Interface
Since our system is mainly trained on academic abstracts
in the field of computer science, it will be best for users to
input texts of this kind. There are three ways for input. 1)
Users can enter a single academic abstract followed by several questions about the abstract, as is shown in Fig 2a. 2)
Users can enter an arXiv ID followed by several questions.
Our system will generate the abstract by itself and provide
answers. 3) Academic Reader also provides batch processing option for users who need to process a large number of
papers. To do this, users should upload a text file in required
format, which includes all the abstracts and for each abstract,
a set of questions. Our system will return a result page providing answers, as is shown in Fig 2b.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9855

http://bit.ly/AcademicReader

