The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Latent Dirichlet Allocation for Internet Price War ∗
‡,♯

Chenchen Li,† ‡,♯ Xiang Yan,† ♮ Xiaotie Deng, ♯ Yuan Qi, ♯ Wei Chu,
♯
Le Song, ♯ Junlong Qiao, ♯ Jianshan He, ♯ Junwu Xiong

‡

Shanghai Jiao Tong University ‡ , ♯ AI Department, Ant Financial Services Group
‡ ♮
, School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
lcc1992@sjtu.edu.cn, xyansjtu@163.com, xiaotie@pku.edu.cn,
{yuan.qi, weichu.cw, le.song, junlong.qjl, yebai.hjs, junwu.xjw}@antfin.com
Abstract

gifts) according to customers’ preference. Internet market
makers, especially for single product or service commonly
referred to as unicorns, are willing to compete in an Internet
price war to recruit participants, boost up membership, venture into new frontiers, and ultimately, eliminate competitors. For the sake of convenience, we make it the objective
of each of them to maximize the total number of customers
who would take the offer and enjoy the goods and services
provided, under their given fixed budgets.
In recent years, we have witnessed a significant number of
price wars in both traditional industries such as the airlines,
retails, crude oil, and emerging markets such as p2p financing, ride-hailing, bicycle sharing, online (and offline) cash
back shopping , there has been few studies on how to design
the optimal strategy to win any price war. From one company’s perspective, simply setting lower prices or providing worthier coupons to customers may not always lead to
more consumptions. This is because customers have limited
demand for consumption and may have inherent preference
for specific company’s products. And its opponents may also
increase their investments at the same time, resulting in an
equal attraction for customers. This means on behalf of a
company, providing coupons seems to have no effect on attracting customers, but in fact it will loss some customers if
providing nothing to them.
Indeed, entrepreneurs’ fighting in an Internet price war
can be viewed as playing an imperfect and incomplete information game, to gain an advantage over opponents via
financial investment. One may distinguish between games
with imperfect and perfect information through whether the
opponents’ potential strategies are accessible to a player. For
example, in chess or go game, each player knows all possible
plays his opponent can do at any step, meaning it is a perfection information game. On contrast, in card games each
player’s cards are often hidden from others, thus it is an imperfect information game, and so is the Internet price war
since participant companies have no information about how
their competitors provide personalized price reduction. On
the other hand, the win/loss outcome of chess, go game and
card games, formally the structure of these games is known
to all players after their plays, which means they are complete information games. However, in an Internet price war,
companies do not know how customers make their choice
after receiving awards, thus not able to calculate their util-

Current Internet market makers are facing an intense competitive environment, where personalized price reductions or
discounted coupons are provided by their peers to attract
more customers. Much investment is spent to catch up with
each other’s competitors but participants in such a price cut
war are often incapable of winning due to their lack of information about others’ strategies or customers’ preference.
We formalize the problem as a stochastic game with imperfect and incomplete information and develop a variant of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to infer latent variables under the current market environment, which represents preferences of customers and strategies of competitors. Tests on
simulated experiments and an open dataset for real data show
that, by subsuming all available market information of the
market maker’s competitors, our model exhibits a significant
improvement for understanding the market environment and
finding the best response strategies in the Internet price war.
Our work marks the first successful learning method to infer latent information in the environment of price war by the
LDA modeling, and sets an example for related competitive
applications to follow.

Introduction
Price war commonly refers to a scenario where companies reduce the prices of their products, sometimes even
below cost, to attract more customers in market competitions (Krämer, Jung, and Burgartz 2016). It is a classic tactic
for traditional entrepreneurs where competitors in the market sell similar products. It has recently become overwhelmingly popular for Internet platform competitions, especially
after Uber’s great success of conquering the world’s ridehailing market through price reduction in different cities one
by one (Ellen Huet 2015).
With the help of big data, Internet companies are able to
provide personalized price reductions, for example, they decide bonuses of different values for different cities, or different types of awards (discount coupons, cash back, or free
∗
This work was partially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 61632017, 61761146005), and by
Ant Financial. Thanks Zhengyang Liu and Kai Li for the advices.
†
Equal contributions.
‡
Both are the first institutions.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

639

