The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Zero-Shot Object Detection with Textual Descriptions
Zhihui Li,1 Lina Yao,1 Xiaoqin Zhang,2 Xianzhi Wang,3 Salil Kanhere,1 Huaxiang Zhang4∗
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
2
College of Mathematics and Information Science, Wenzhou University
3
School of Software, University of Technology Sydney
4
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University

Abstract

learning benchmark datasets Welinder et al. (2010); Nilsback and Zisserman (2008); Russakovsky et al. (2015), each
image has only one dominant object, while in real-world
applications, multiple objects may appear in a single image.
Secondly, most of the zero-shot classification methods are
based on attributes and semantic descriptions, which cannot
be directly applied to zero-shot detection in the entire scene
image. Thirdly, the setting of zero-shot learning does not consider occlusions and clutter, which commonly exist in realworld applications. To close this gap, Rahman, Khan, and
Porikli (2018) introduced a new “zero-shot object detection”
(ZSD) problem setting method, which aims at concurrently
detecting and recognizing novel instance in the absence of
any training examples.
Although the data-scarcity challenge exists for a large number of categories in real-world applications, there is a massive
amount of textual data for these categories. These data arrive
in the form of dictionary entries, online encyclopedias and
other online resources. For example, English Wikipedia has
5,645,010 articles on its site, which provides a rich knowledge base for different topics.
The major problem we focus on in this paper is how to
simultaneously recognize and locate novel object instances
using purely unstructured textual descriptions with no training samples. In other words, our goal is to concurrently link
visual image features with the semantic label information
where the descriptions of novel concepts are presented in the
form of natural languages, i.e. online encyclopedias. We design a novel deep learning framework for zero-shot object detection with textual description. The proposed network takes
a description and an image as input and outputs the affinities
between the description and the object proposals in the image. We process the textual description in a word-by-word
fashion with word-LSTM. For each word in the description,
we achieve unit-level attentions for different units using the
LSTM. Each unit determines whether a specific object pattern
exists in the object proposal. The contributions of different
units are weighted by the visual-unit attention mechanism. To
step further, we also study word-level attention which learns
the importance of different words for adaptive word-level
weighting. We achieve the final affinity by averaging over all
units’ responses for all words. We conduct experiments to
confirm that both visual unit-level attention and word-level
attention contribute to the good performance of the proposed

Object detection is important in real-world applications. Existing methods mainly focus on object detection with sufficient
labelled training data or zero-shot object detection with only
concept names. In this paper, we address the challenging problem of zero-shot object detection with natural language description, which aims to simultaneously detect and recognize
novel concept instances with textual descriptions. We propose
a novel deep learning framework to jointly learn visual units,
visual-unit attention and word-level attention, which are combined to achieve word-proposal affinity by an element-wise
multiplication. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work on zero-shot object detection with textual descriptions.
Since there is no directly related work in the literature, we
investigate plausible solutions based on existing zero-shot object detection for a fair comparison. We conduct extensive
experiments on three challenging benchmark datasets. The
extensive experimental results confirm the superiority of the
proposed model.

Introduction
In the last decade, researchers have made promising progress
in object detection Girshick (2015); Ren et al. (2015, 2017);
Lin et al. (2017). Most of these achievements rely on the
collection of large-scale labeled training data. Although researchers have struggled to acquire larger datasets with a
broader set of categories, the processing procedure is timeconsuming and tedious. Furthermore, it is impossible to collect enough training data for rare concepts, i.e. Okapia. Therefore, a challenging problem is how to simultaneously recognize and locate these novel object instances with no training
samples.
Zero-shot learning has been widely used to tackle the problem of data scarcity Akata et al. (2016); Frome et al. (2013);
Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling (2009); Zhang, Xiang,
and Gong (2017); Zhang and Saligrama (2015); Rahman,
Khan, and Porikli (2018); Mikolov et al. (2013). Most of
these works focus on the concept classification problem. Although it remains a challenging and unsolved problem, there
is still a large gap between the problem setting and real-world
scenarios in the following aspects. Firstly, in most zero-shot
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8690

