The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Deep Reinforcement Learning Based Multi-Step
Coarse to Fine Question Answering (MSCQA) System
Yu Wang, Hongxia Jin
Samsung Research America
{yu.wang1, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com

Abstract

sentences, which helps reduce the computational workload.
The fast model can be implemented using bag-of-words
(BoW) or convolutional neural network and the slow model
uses an RNN based model. The model gives decent performance on long documents in WIKIREADING dataset, and
shows significant speed-up compared to earlier models. This
coarse to fine model, however, still have several disadvantages:
1.The model doesn’t perform as good as baseline models
on the full WIKIREADING dataset including both short and
long documents (Hewlett et al. 2016). One reason is because
that the conventional RNN based models perform better on
generating answers from the first few sentences of a document, hence can obtain the correct results on short documents more accurately than a coarse-to-fine model .
2. Many wrong answers are actually from the same sentence containing the correct answer. By using a coarse-tofine model on sentence level, it may still extract wrong answer by ignoring the correct one in the same sentence.
3. Some of the contextual information in document is still
useful and necessary in order to find the correct answers.
However, by only selecting the related sentence(s), the system may ignore some important information to make the
correct judgment.
On the other hand, compared to the coarse-to-fine model
which gives decent results on long documents, more question answering models focus on improving performance on
relatively short documents. QANet (Yu et al. 2018) uses
the convolutions and self-attentions to boost the training
speed and gives one of the state-of-the-art results on the
SQuAD1.1 dataset (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), which contains
mainly short documents (average 122 tokens/document).
Due to these reasons, in this paper, we would like to introduce a novel mult-step coarse to fine question answering (MSCQA) system which can handle both long and
short documents. This new structure takes the advantages
from both coarse-to-fine and QANet structures depending
the lengths of documents. Furthermore, a false-positive detection mechanism is also designed to further improve the
model performance.
In order to guide the model to learn what is the best action
to perform at each step, three types of states are defined as:
1. Generate answers directly from the answer generation
module (Terminal State).

In this paper, we present a multi-step coarse to fine question answering (MSCQA) system which can efficiently processes documents with different lengths by choosing appropriate actions. The system is designed using an actor-critic
based deep reinforcement learning model to achieve multistep question answering. Compared to previous QA models
targeting on datasets mainly containing either short or long
documents, our multi-step coarse to fine model takes the merits from multiple system modules, which can handle both
short and long documents. The system hence obtains a much
better accuracy and faster trainings speed compared to the
current state-of-the-art models. We test our model on four QA
datasets, WIKEREADING, WIKIREADING LONG, CNN
and SQuAD, and demonstrate 1.3%-1.7% accuracy improvements with 1.5x-3.4x training speed-ups in comparison to the
baselines using state-of-the-art models.

Introduction
Machine comprehension based question answering (QA)
tasks have drawn lots of interests from the natural language understanding research community. During the past
several years, lots of progresses have been made on building deep learning based QA models to answer questions
from large scale datasets including unstructured documents
(Hermann et al. 2015; Hill et al. 2015; Onishi et al. 2016;
Trischler et al. 2016; Nguyen et al. 2016). Currently, most
of the state-of-the-art models for different QA datasets
are based on recurrent neural networks which can process
the sequential inputs, and with a (co-)attention structure
to deal with the long term interactions between questions
and document context (Xiong, Zhong, and Socher 2016;
Chen, Bolton, and Manning 2016; Hermann et al. 2015;
Kadlec et al. 2016). One disadvantage of these models is that
their training and inference speeds are relatively slow due to
their recurrent nature, and the other weakness is that they
are still not good at dealing with very long documents and
model of the models use the truncated documents as their
inputs (Miller et al. 2016; Hewlett et al. 2016).
In (Choi et al. 2017), it introduces a coarse-to-fine question answering model to select the related sentences in the
long document first, then find the answers from the selected
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7224

