The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Distributional Semantics Meets Multi-Label Learning
Vivek Gupta,1,3 Rahul Wadbude,2 Nagarajan Natarajan,3
Harish Karnick,2 Prateek Jain,3 Piyush Rai2
1

School of Computing, University of Utah, 2 Computer Science Department, IIT Kanpur
3
Microsoft Research Lab, Bangalore
vgupta@cs.utah.edu, rahulwadbude2@gmail.com, nagarajn@microsoft.com, hk@cse.iitk.ac.in
prajain@microsoft.com, piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in
Abstract

two classes: 1) embedding based methods, e.g., L EML (Yu
et al. 2014), W SABIE (Weston, Bengio, and Usunier 2010),
S LEEC (Bhatia et al. 2015), P D -S PARSE (Yen et al. 2016),
PPD SPARSE (Yen et al. 2017), and 2) tree-based methods, e.g., FAST XML (Prabhu and Varma 2014) , P FAS TRE XML (Jain, Prabhu, and Varma 2016), LEM (Tagami
2017b). The first class of approaches are generally scalable and work by embedding the high-dimensional label
vectors to a lower-dimensional space and learning a regressor in that space. In most cases, these methods rely on a
key assumption that the binary label matrix is low rank
and consequently the label vectors can be embedded into
a lower-dimensional space. At the time of prediction, a decompression matrix is used to retrieve the original label
vector from the low-dimensional embeddings. As corroborated by recent empirical evidence (Bhatia et al. 2015;
Jain, Prabhu, and Varma 2016), approaches based on standard structural assumptions such as low-rank label matrix
fail and perform poorly on the tail. The second class of methods (tree-based) for multi-label learning try to move away
from rigid structural assumptions (Prabhu and Varma 2014;
Jain, Prabhu, and Varma 2016), and have been demonstrated
to work very well especially on the tail labels.

We present a label embedding based approach to large-scale
multi-label learning, drawing inspiration from ideas rooted
in distributional semantics, specifically the Skip Gram Negative Sampling (SGNS) approach, widely used to learn word
embeddings. Besides leading to a highly scalable model for
multi-label learning, our approach highlights interesting connections between label embedding methods commonly used
for multi-label learning and paragraph embedding methods
commonly used for learning representations of text data. The
framework easily extends to incorporating auxiliary information such as label-label correlations; this is crucial especially
when many training instances are only partially annotated. To
facilitate end-to-end learning, we develop a joint learning algorithm that can learn the embeddings as well as a regression
model that predicts these embeddings for the new input to be
annotated, via efficient gradient based methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through an extensive
set of experiments on a variety of benchmark datasets, and
show that the proposed models perform favorably as compared
to state-of-the-art methods for large-scale multi-label learning.

Introduction
Data generated in various domains are increasingly multilabel in nature; images (e.g. Instagram) and documents (e.g.
Wikipedia) are often identified with multiple tags, online advertisers often associate multiple search keywords with ads,
and so on. Multi-label learning is the problem of learning to
annotate each instance using a subset of labels from a potentially very large label vocabulary. Nowadays, multi-label
learning problems can even have label vocabulary consisting
of millions of labels, popularly known as extreme multi-label
learning (Jain, Prabhu, and Varma 2016; Bhatia et al. 2015;
Babbar and Schölkopf 2017; Prabhu and Varma 2014).
The key challenges in multi-label learning, especially extreme multi-label learning, include: a) training instances
may have a large fraction of labels missing, and b) the labels are often heavy-tailed (Bhatia et al. 2015; Jain, Prabhu,
and Varma 2016) and predicting labels in the tail becomes
significantly hard due to the lack of training data. For
these reasons, and the sheer scale of data, traditional multilabel classifiers are rendered impractical. State-of-the-art approaches to extreme multi-label learning fall broadly under

In this paper, we propose a label embedding based approach for multi-label learning, leveraging word embedding techniques (Mikolov et al. 2013), which have found
resounding success in NLP tasks. We show that by learning rich word2vec style embedding for instances (and
labels), we can: a) achieve competitive multi-label prediction accuracies which are comparable to state-of-the-art label embedding approaches, such as S LEEC (Bhatia et al.
2015); b) cope with missing labels, by incorporating auxiliary information in the form of label-label co-occurrences, c)
can jointly learn embedding and perform regression, and
d) learn faster than label embedding methods (S LEEC).
We also extend our model to joint learning of label embeddings and input-to-embedding regressors, which performs comparatively to the state-of-the-art in multi-label
learning algorithms like A NNEX ML (Tagami 2017a), D I SMEC (Babbar and Schölkopf 2017) and PPD SPARSE (Yen
et al. 2017) on most of the datasets. Our learning algorithms admit significantly faster implementation as compared to other embedding based approaches. The distinguishing aspect of our work is that it draws inspiration from

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3747

