The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Densely Supervised Grasp Detector (DSGD)
Umar Asif

Jianbin Tang

Stefan Harrer

IBM Research Australia
umarasif@au1.ibm.com

IBM Research Australia
jbtang@au1.ibm.com

IBM Research Australia
sharrer@au1.ibm.com

Abstract

predicting a grasp for each patch. Recently, methods such as
(Morrison, Corke, and Leitner 2018; Zeng et al. 2017) used
auto-encoders to learn grasp parameters at each pixel in the
image. They showed that one-to-one mapping (of image data
to ground truth grasps) at the pixel-level can effectively be
learnt using small CNN structures to achieve fast inference
speed. These studies show that grasp detection performance
is strongly influenced by three main factors: i) The choice
of the CNN structure used for feature learning, ii) the objective function used to learn grasp representations, and iii) the
image hierarchical context at which grasps are learnt (e.g.,
global or local). In this work, we explore the advantages of
combining multiple global and local grasp detectors and a
mechanism to select the best grasp out of the ensemble. We
also explore the benefits of learning grasp parameters using a combination of regression and classification objective
functions. Finally, we explore different CNN structures as
base networks to identify the best performing architecture in
terms of grasp detection accuracy. The main contributions of
this paper are summarized below:

This paper presents Densely Supervised Grasp Detector
(DSGD), a deep learning framework which combines CNN
structures with layer-wise feature fusion and produces grasps
and their confidence scores at different levels of the image hierarchy (i.e., global-, region-, and pixel-levels). Specifically,
at the global-level, DSGD uses the entire image information
to predict a grasp. At the region-level, DSGD uses a region
proposal network to identify salient regions in the image and
uses a grasp prediction network to generate segmentations
and their corresponding grasp poses of the salient regions.
At the pixel-level, DSGD uses a fully convolutional network
and predicts a grasp and its confidence at every pixel. During inference, DSGD selects the most confident grasp as the
output. This selection from hierarchically generated grasp
candidates overcomes limitations of the individual models.
DSGD outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the Cornell
grasp dataset in terms of grasp accuracy. Evaluation on a
multi-object dataset and real-world robotic grasping experiments show that DSGD produces highly stable grasps on a
set of unseen objects in new environments. It achieves 97%
grasp detection accuracy and 90% robotic grasping success
rate with real-time inference speed.

1) We present Densely Supervised Grasp Detector
(DSGD), an ensemble of multiple CNN structures
which generate grasps and their confidence scores at
different levels of image hierarchy (i.e., global-level,
region-level, and pixel-level).

Introduction
Grasp detection is a crucial task in robotic grasping because errors in this stage affect grasp planning and execution. A major challenge in grasp detection is generalization
to unseen objects in the real-world. Recent advancements in
deep learning have produced Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) based grasp detection methods which achieve higher
grasp detection accuracy compared to hand-crafted features.
Methods such as (Lenz, Lee, and Saxena 2015; Redmon
and Angelova 2015; Asif, Bennamoun, and Sohel 2017b;
Asif, Tang, and Harrer 2018a) focused on learning grasps
in a global-context (i.e., the model predicts one grasp considering the whole input image), through regression-based
approaches (which directly regress the grasp parameters defined by the location, width, height, and orientation of a 2D
rectangle in image space). Other methods such as (Pinto and
Gupta 2016) focused on learning grasps at patch-level by
extracting patches (of different sizes) from the image and

2) We propose a region-based grasp network, which learns
to segment salient parts (e.g., handles or extrusions)
from the input image, and uses the information about
these parts to learn class-specific grasps (i.e., each grasp
is associated with a probability with respect to a graspable class and a non-graspable class).
3) We perform an ablation study of our DSGD by varying
its critical parameters and present a grasp detector that
achieves real-time speed and high grasp accuracy.
4) We demonstrate the robustness of DSGD for producing stable grasps for unseen objects in real-world environments using a multi-object dataset and robotic
grasping experiments. See our experiment videos
at: https://youtu.be/Bn dQ8vcNzs and https://youtu.be/
tA2qgtbTT98

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8085

