The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hybrid Reinforcement Learning with Expert State Sequences
Xiaoxiao Guo, Shiyu Chang, Mo Yu, Gerald Tesauro, Murray Campbell
IBM Research AI
{xiaoxiao.guo, shiyu.chang}@ibm.com, {yum, gtesauro, mcam}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Environment

Existing imitation learning approaches often require that the
complete demonstration data, including sequences of actions
and states, are available. In this paper, we consider a more
realistic and difficult scenario where a reinforcement learning agent only has access to the state sequences of an expert,
while the expert actions are unobserved. We propose a novel
tensor-based model to infer the unobserved actions of the expert state sequences. The policy of the agent is then optimized
via a hybrid objective combining reinforcement learning and
imitation learning. We evaluated our hybrid approach on an
illustrative domain and Atari games. The empirical results
show that (1) the agents are able to leverage state expert sequences to learn faster than pure reinforcement learning baselines, (2) our tensor-based action inference model is advantageous compared to standard deep neural networks in inferring
expert actions, and (3) the hybrid policy optimization objective is robust against noise in expert state sequences.

Execute
policy π(𝑠# )

Update the agent
policy based on the
hybrid loss

Batch experience
tuples (𝑠# , 𝑎# , 𝑠# & ')

Expert State
Sequences 𝐷

Update the action
inference model 𝑀

Sample state pairs
(𝑠̂ , ,
𝑠′ ) from 𝐷

Inferr expert actions from
model 𝑀: 𝑎- = 𝑀(𝑠̂ , ,
𝑠′ ); obtain
expert state action pair (𝑠̂ , 𝑎- )
Expert Action Inference

Policy Learning

Figure 1: The proposed hybrid reinforcement learning with
expert state sequences framework.

the latter state. Then, upon observation of demonstration
without actions, the learned dynamics is used to infer the
missing actions. Finally, we improve the learning policy by
jointly considering the imitation performance and rewards
from environment interaction via Advantage Actor-Critic
(A2C) (Dhariwal et al. 2017).
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed iterative learning process, we conduct experiments on the Taxi
domain as well as eight commonly used Atari games.
The experimental results confirm a faster convergence rate
of the proposed framework compared to advantage actorcritic alone, and a better policy compared to behavioral
cloning from observations (BCO) (Torabi, Warnell, and
Stone 2018a), which only considers a similar action inference approach for behavioral cloning but ignores potential
reward signals. We additionally show that our framework is
robust against noisy expert state trajectories, and works well
even when the number of demonstrations is limited.

Introduction
Human expert behavioral data are widely used for policy
learning in sequential decision-making tasks (Schaal 1999;
Argall et al. 2009). One of the most effective paradigms
is imitation learning, where a policy is trained via direct
supervision to clone expert behaviors (Pomerleau 1989;
Ross, Gordon, and Bagnell 2011). Imitation learning generally requires both observable states and actions as input.
However, expert actions are often unavailable or not directly
usable. Literature has considered scenarios where the expert
and the imitation learner may have different viewpoints (Liu
et al. 2017), temporal resolution or action sets (Yu et al.
2018). In such cases, cloning behavior directly is not an option. How to leverage such data to facilitate learning is a
realistic and challenging problem.
In this paper, we investigate a novel learning scenario
where an agent learns from both its own experience and
state-trajectory-only expert demonstrations. We propose an
iterative learning framework as follows, illustrated in Figure 1. We first learn a novel tensor-based action inference
model as the learning agent interacts with the environment.
Our model enforces a duality for consistent learning as
the inferred action from two consecutive states reconstructs

Related Work
Imitation Learning The tasks of learning from demonstrations and imitation learning have attracted considerable
research attention from many fields in machine learning.
The approaches are roughly divided into two groups, behavioral cloning and Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL).
Survey articles include (Schaal 1999; Billard et al. 2008;
Argall et al. 2009). Behavioral Cloning (BC) uses supervised
learning, where the learner directly regresses onto the pol-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3739

