The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ClusterGAN: Latent Space
Clustering in Generative Adversarial Networks
Sudipto Mukherjee, Himanshu Asnani, Eugene Lin, Sreeram Kannan
{sudipm, asnani, lines, ksreeram}@uw.edu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA-98195.

Abstract

In recent times, much of unsupervised learning is driven
by deep generative approaches, the two most prominent being Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling
2013) and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014). The popularity of generative models
themselves is hinged upon the ability of these models to capture high dimensional probability distributions, imputation
of missing data and dealing with multimodal outputs. Both
GAN and VAE aim to match the real data distribution (VAE
using an explicit approximation of maximum likelihood and
GAN through implicit sampling), and simulataneously provide a mapping from a latent space Z to the input space X .
The latent space of GANs not only provides dimensionality
reduction, but also gives rise to novel applications. Perturbations in the latent space could be used to determine adversarial examples that further help build robust classifiers
(Ilyas et al. 2017). Compressed sensing using GANs (Bora
et al. 2017) relies on finding a latent vector that minimizes
the reconstruction error for the measurements. Generative
compression is yet another application involving Z (Santurkar, Budden, and Shavit 2017). One of the most fascinating outcomes of the GAN training is the interpolation in
the latent space. Simple vector arithmetic properties emerge
which when manipulated lead to changes in the semantic
qualities of the generated images (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015). This differentiates GANs from traditional dimensionality reduction techniques (Mika et al. 1999) (Maaten
and Hinton 2008) which lack interpretability. One potential
application that demands such a property is clustering of cell
types in genomics. GANs provide a means to understand the
change in high-dimensional gene expression as one traverses
from one cell type (i.e., cluster) to another in the latent space.
Here, it is critical to have both clustering as well as good interpretability and interpolation ability. This brings us to the
principal motivation of this work: Can we design a GAN
training methodology that clusters in the latent space?

Generative Adversarial networks (GANs) have obtained remarkable success in many unsupervised learning tasks and
unarguably, clustering is an important unsupervised learning
problem. While one can potentially exploit the latent-space
back-projection in GANs to cluster, we demonstrate that the
cluster structure is not retained in the GAN latent space. In
this paper, we propose ClusterGAN as a new mechanism for
clustering using GANs. By sampling latent variables from a
mixture of one-hot encoded variables and continuous latent
variables, coupled with an inverse network (which projects
the data to the latent space) trained jointly with a clustering specific loss, we are able to achieve clustering in the latent space. Our results show a remarkable phenomenon that
GANs can preserve latent space interpolation across categories, even though the discriminator is never exposed to such
vectors. We compare our results with various clustering baselines and demonstrate superior performance on both synthetic
and real datasets.

1
1.1

Introduction

Motivation

Representation learning enables machine learning models
to decipher underlying semantics in data and disentangle
hidden factors of variation. These powerful representations
have made it possible to transfer knowledge across various
tasks. But what makes one representation better than another
? (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013) mentioned several
general-purpose priors that are not dependent on the downstream task, but appear as commonalities in good representations. One of the general-purpose priors of representation
learning that is ubiquitous across data intensive domains is
clustering. Clustering has been extensively studied in unsupervised learning with multifarious approaches seeking efficient algorithms (Ng, Jordan, and Weiss 2002), problem
specific distance metrics (Xiang, Nie, and Zhang 2008), validation (Halkidi, Batistakis, and Vazirgiannis 2001) and the
like. Even though the main focus of clustering has been to
separate out the original data into classes, it would be even
nicer if such clustering was obtained along with dimensionality reduction where the real data actually seems to come
from a lower dimensional manifold.

1.2

Related Works

Deep learning approaches have been used for dimensionality reduction starting with variants of the autoencoder such
as the stacked denoising autoencoders (Vincent et al. 2010),
sparse autoencoder (Coates, Ng, and Lee 2011) and deep
CCA (Andrew et al. 2013). Architectures for deep unsupervised subspace clustering have also been built on the

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4610

