The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TallyQA: Answering Complex Counting Questions
Manoj Acharya, Kushal Kafle, Christopher Kanan
Chester F. Carlson Center for Imaging Science
Rochester Institute of Technology
{ma7583, kk6055, kanan}@rit.edu

Abstract
Most counting questions in visual question answering (VQA)
datasets are simple and require no more than object detection.
Here, we study algorithms for complex counting questions
that involve relationships between objects, attribute identification, reasoning, and more. To do this, we created TallyQA,
the world’s largest dataset for open-ended counting. We propose a new algorithm for counting that uses relation networks
with region proposals. Our method lets relation networks be
efficiently used with high-resolution imagery. It yields stateof-the-art results compared to baseline and recent systems on
both TallyQA and the HowMany-QA benchmark.

Introduction
Open-ended counting systems take in a counting question and an image to predict a whole number that answers the question. While object recognition systems now
rival humans (He et al. 2016), today’s best open-ended
counting systems perform poorly (Kafle and Kanan 2017b;
Chattopadhyay et al. 2017). This could be due to an inability
to detect the correct objects or due to an inability to reason
about them. To address this, we distinguish between simple
and complex counting questions (see Fig. 1). Simple counting questions only require object detection, e.g., “How many
dogs are there?” Complex questions require deeper analysis,
e.g., “How many dogs are eating?”
Open-ended counting is a special case of visual question answering (VQA) (Antol et al. 2015; Malinowski and
Fritz 2014), in which the goal is to answer open-ended
questions about images. The best VQA systems pose it
as a classification problem where the answer is predicted
from convolutional visual features and the question (Kafle
and Kanan 2017a). While this succeeds for many question
types, it works poorly for counting (Kafle and Kanan 2017b;
Chattopadhyay et al. 2017). Recently, better results were
achieved by using region proposals generated by object detection algorithms (Trott, Xiong, and Socher 2018; Zhang,
Hare, and Prügel-Bennett 2018). However, datasets mostly
contain simple counting questions, as shown in Table 1. Due
to their rarity, complex questions need to be analyzed separately to determine if a model is capable of answering them.
This paper makes three major contributions:

Figure 1: Counting datasets consist mostly of simple questions (top) that can be answered solely using object detection.
We study complex counting questions (bottom) that require
more than object detection using our new TallyQA dataset.

1. We describe TallyQA, the largest open-ended counting
dataset. TallyQA is designed to study both simple questions that require only object detection and complex questions that demand more. It is now publicly available.
2. We propose the relational counting network (RCN), a new
algorithm for counting that infers relationships between
objects and background image regions. It is inspired by
relation networks, with modifications to handle a dynamic
number of image regions and to explicitly incorporate
background information.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8076

