The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

CycleEmotionGAN: Emotional Semantic
Consistency Preserved CycleGAN for Adapting Image Emotions
Sicheng Zhao,† Chuang Lin,‡] Pengfei Xu,] Sendong Zhao,§
Yuchen Guo,♦ Ravi Krishna,† Guiguang Ding,♦ Kurt Keutzer†
†

University of California, Berkeley, USA, ‡ Harbin Institute of Technology, China
]
Didi Chuxing, China, § Cornell University, USA, ♦ Tsinghua University, China
schzhao@gmail.com, chuanglin.hit@outlook.com, xupengfeipf@didichuxing.com, zhaosendong@gmail.com,
yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com, ravi.krishna@berkeley.edu, dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn, keutzer@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Deep neural networks excel at learning from large-scale labeled training data, but cannot well generalize the learned
knowledge to new domains or datasets. Domain adaptation
studies how to transfer models trained on one labeled source
domain to another sparsely labeled or unlabeled target domain. In this paper, we investigate the unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) problem in image emotion classification.
Specifically, we develop a novel cycle-consistent adversarial model, termed CycleEmotionGAN, by enforcing emotional semantic consistency while adapting images cycleconsistently. By alternately optimizing the CycleGAN loss,
the emotional semantic consistency loss, and the target classification loss, CycleEmotionGAN can adapt source domain
images to have similar distributions to the target domain without using aligned image pairs. Simultaneously, the annotation
information of the source images is preserved. Extensive experiments are conducted on the ArtPhoto and FI datasets, and
the results demonstrate that CycleEmotionGAN significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art UDA approaches.

Target image (FI)
Source image (ArtPhoto)
Adapted source image
Classification accuracy (%) of the model tested on the target
Trained on the target: 66.81, Trained on the source: 20.17
Trained on the target after adaptation using CycleEmotionGAN: 25.20

Figure 1: An example of domain shift. The overall accuracy
of a state-of-the-art image emotion classification model (He
et al. 2016) drops from 66.81% (trained on the target FI) to
20.17% (if trained only on the source ArtPhoto). We propose CycleEmotionGAN, a novel cycle-consistent adversarial model, to perform unsupervised domain adaptation. Our
model achieves significant performance improvements over
the source-trained model baselines.

Introduction

to bridge the affective gap. These methods mainly classified
the images into one dominant emotion category, or regressed
the images with average dimension values. To tackle the subjectivity issue, we can predict personalized emotion perceptions for each viewer (Zhao et al. 2016), or learn the emotion distributions for each image (Yang, She, and Sun 2017;
Zhao et al. 2017a; 2017b).
With the advent of deep neural networks, several end-toend approaches have been proposed to classify image emotions (Rao, Xu, and Xu 2016; You et al. 2016; Zhu et al.
2017b; Yang et al. 2018a) or learn emotion distributions
(Peng et al. 2015; Yang, She, and Sun 2017). Current IER
methods, especially ones based on deep neural networks,
perform well with large-scale labelled training data. However, due to domain shift or dataset bias (Torralba and Efros
2011), they cannot well generalize their learned knowledge
to new domains or datasets, as shown in Figure 1. Even a
slight departure from a network’s training domain can cause
it to make incorrect predictions and significantly reduce its
performance (Tzeng et al. 2017). Domain adaptation (DA) is
a machine learning paradigm that seeks to train a model on
a source domain that can, in turn, perform well on a differ-

Psychological studies have revealed that visual content (e.g.
images and videos) can evoke rich emotions for human
viewers (Detenber, Simons, and Bennett Jr 1998). Nowadays, humans have become used to using images and videos
appearing alongside text in social networks to record their
activities, share their experiences, and express their opinions
(Zhao et al. 2018b). Analyzing the implied emotions of this
large volume of multimedia data can help us to understand
humans’ behaviors, which can benefit wide applications,
such as blog recommendation (Borth et al. 2013).
Recognizing emotions induced by image content, referred
to as image emotion recognition (IER) (Zhao et al. 2014a),
is a non-trivial problem, because of two challenges: affective
gap (Zhao et al. 2014a) and perception subjectivity (Peng et
al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2016). Inspired by psychology and art
theory, different hand-crafted features (e.g. color and texture (Machajdik and Hanbury 2010), shape (Lu et al. 2012),
and principles of art (Zhao et al. 2014a)) have been designed
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2620

