The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Online Learning from Data Streams with Varying Feature Spaces
Ege Beyazit

Jeevithan Alagurajah

Xindong Wu

University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Lafayette, LA, USA
exb6143@louisiana.edu

University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Lafayette, LA, USA
jxa4540@louisiana.edu

University of Louisiana at Lafayette
Lafayette, LA, USA
xwu@louisiana.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of online learning with varying feature spaces. The problem is challenging because, unlike traditional online learning problems, varying feature spaces can
introduce new features or stop having some features without
following a pattern. Other existing methods such as online
streaming feature selection (Wu et al. 2013), online learning
from trapezoidal data streams (Zhang et al. 2016), and learning with feature evolvable streams (Hou, Zhang, and Zhou
2017) are not capable to learn from arbitrarily varying feature spaces because they make assumptions about the feature space dynamics. In this paper, we propose a novel online
learning algorithm OLVF to learn from data with arbitrarily
varying feature spaces. The OLVF algorithm learns to classify the feature spaces and the instances from feature spaces
simultaneously. To classify an instance, the algorithm dynamically projects the instance classifier and the training instance
onto their shared feature subspace. The feature space classifier predicts the projection confidences for a given feature
space. The instance classifier will be updated by following
the empirical risk minimization principle and the strength of
the constraints will be scaled by the projection confidences.
Afterwards, a feature sparsity method is applied to reduce the
model complexity. Experiments on 10 datasets with varying
feature spaces have been conducted to demonstrate the performance of the proposed OLVF algorithm. Moreover, experiments with trapezoidal data streams on the same datasets
have been conducted to show that OLVF performs better than
the state-of-the-art learning algorithm (Zhang et al. 2016).

remains constant. On the other hand, in a wide range of applications, feature spaces dynamically change over time. For
example in a spam e-mail classification task, each e-mail can
have a different set of words and words that are being used
in spam e-mails can change over time. In social networks,
the features provided by each user can be different than each
other. In these scenarios, absence of a feature can also convey information and should not be treated as missing data.
When the feature space in a data stream keeps changing, we
refer the feature space as a varying feature space.
To enable learning from data with varying feature spaces,
we propose the Online Learning from Varying Features
(OLVF) algorithm, which will also be referred to as ‘the algorithm’ in this paper. To learn an instance classifier, the
OLVF algorithm projects the existing classifier and the current instance onto their shared feature subspace, and makes
a prediction. Based on the prediction, a loss will be suffered
and the classifier will be updated according to an empirical
risk minimization principle with adaptive constraints. The
algorithm re-weights the constraints based on the confidence
of the classifier and the training instance’s projection given
the feature space. To learn a feature space classifier, the algorithm follows a maximum likelihood principle, using the
current feature space information and the output of the instance classifier. After each update, a sparsity step is applied
to decrease the classifier size. The contributions of this paper
can be listed as follows:

Introduction

• The problem of real-time learning from data where the
feature space arbitrarily changes has been studied.

The goal of learning a classifier in an online setup, where
the training instances arrive one by one, has been studied
extensively and a wide variety of algorithms have been developed for online learning (Leite, Costa, and Gomide 2010;
Yu, Neely, and Wei 2017; Agarwal, Saradhi, and Karnick
2008). These algorithms have made it possible to learn in
applications where it is computationally not feasible to train
over the entire dataset. Additionally, online learning algorithms have been used in applications where the data continuously grow over time and new patterns need to be extracted
(Shalev-Shwartz and others 2012). However, online learning algorithms assume that the feature space they learn from

• A new learning algorithm, Online Learning from Varying
Features (OLVF), that is capable of learning from varying
feature spaces on a single pass is proposed.
• Performance of the OLVF algorithm is empirically validated on 10 datasets in two different scenarios: data with
varying feature spaces and trapezoidal data streams.

Related Work
Because of the dynamic nature of its feature space and the
streaming instances, learning from data with varying feature
spaces can be related to online learning, online learning from
trapezoidal data streams and learning with feature evolvable
streams.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3232

