The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Modelling of Bi-Directional Spatio-Temporal Dependence and
Users’ Dynamic Preferences for Missing POI Check-In Identification
Dongbo Xi,1,2 Fuzhen Zhuang,1,2,∗ Yanchi Liu,3 Jingjing Gu,4 Hui Xiong,5 Qing He1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Management Science & Information Systems, Rutgers University, USA
4
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
5
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{xidongbo17s, zhuangfuzhen, heqing}@ict.ac.cn, yanchi.liu@rutgers.edu, gujingjing@nuaa.edu.cn, xionghui@gmail.com

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on missing POI check-in identification, which is to identify where a user has visited at a
specific time in the past, while existing POI-oriented studies
mainly focus on recommending or predicting a POI where a
user may go in the future. This missing POI check-in identification task is non-trivial due to the following reasons.
First, geolocation information missing, which causes trouble for user understanding, frequently occurs in raw reallife check-ins. For example, if a user visits a location without GPS signal, the geolocation information may be missing. And missing POI check-in identification helps to identify where a user has visited at given time. Second, there
are many obvious unreal check-ins in raw real-life check-in
data. For example, two check-in records of the same users
are far apart in geographical distance, but the time interval
is very short. The unreal data maybe recorded due to device failure or user cheating. Missing POI check-in identification can give a reference list and preliminarily filter the
data. Third, almost all kinds of POI recommendation and
location prediction tasks suffer from data sparsity problem,
which is much worse than other human activity data such
as online purchase and browsing. And missing POI checkin identification is able to alleviate the sparsity problem for
user understanding. Moreover, the task can be used for social good, such as identifying traces of criminal activity or
missing population analysis.

Human mobility data accumulated from Point-of-Interest
(POI) check-ins provides great opportunity for user behavior
understanding. However, data quality issues (e.g., geolocation information missing, unreal check-ins, data sparsity) in
real-life mobility data limit the effectiveness of existing POIoriented studies, e.g., POI recommendation and location prediction, when applied to real applications. To this end, in this
paper, we develop a model, named Bi-STDDP, which can integrate bi-directional spatio-temporal dependence and users’
dynamic preferences, to identify the missing POI check-in
where a user has visited at a specific time. Specifically, we
first utilize bi-directional global spatial and local temporal information of POIs to capture the complex dependence relationships. Then, target temporal pattern in combination with
user and POI information are fed into a multi-layer network to
capture users’ dynamic preferences. Moreover, the dynamic
preferences are transformed into the same space as the dependence relationships to form the final model. Finally, the
proposed model is evaluated on three large-scale real-world
datasets and the results demonstrate significant improvements
of our model compared with state-of-the-art methods. Also,
it is worth noting that the proposed model can be naturally
extended to address POI recommendation and location prediction tasks with competitive performances.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development and
popularity of location-based social networks (LBSNs) and
location-based services (LBS). These services have attracted
many users to post their life experiences in the form of a
check-in which contains a POI (a physical location, such as
museum or restaurant), a timestamp, and sometimes comments. Data collected by LBS has been effectively leveraged
for POI-oriented applications like POI recommendation and
location prediction for potential users to improve user experiences and quality of services.

Recently, efforts have been made to solve the POI
recommendation and location prediction problems, which
are most related to our problem. Factorizing Personalized Markov Chain (FPMC) (Rendle, Freudenthaler, and
Schmidt-Thieme 2010) is one widely used method for sequential prediction, and has been applied to embed the personalized Markov chains and the localized regions (FPMCLR) (Cheng et al. 2013) for next-basket recommendation.
Personalized Ranking Metric Embedding (PRME) (Feng et
al. 2015) integrated sequence, preference and geographical influence to improve the recommendation performance.
An unsupervised approach (Bao et al. 2012) has also been
adopted to model personalized contexts of mobile users.

∗

Corresponding author: Fuzhen Zhuang
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5458

