The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Non-Local Context Encoder: Robust
Biomedical Image Segmentation against Adversarial Attacks
Xiang He,1 Sibei Yang,2 Guanbin Li,1∗ Haofeng Li,2 Huiyou Chang,1 Yizhou Yu3
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Deepwise AI Lab, China
hexiang7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, sbyang9@hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
lhaof@foxmail.com, isschy@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org
2

Input

Abstract
Recent progress in biomedical image segmentation based on
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has drawn much
attention. However, its vulnerability towards adversarial samples cannot be overlooked. This paper is the first one that
discovers that all the CNN-based state-of-the-art biomedical
image segmentation models are sensitive to adversarial perturbations. This limits the deployment of these methods in
safety-critical biomedical fields. In this paper, we discover
that global spatial dependencies and global contextual information in a biomedical image can be exploited to defend against adversarial attacks. To this end, non-local context encoder (NLCE) is proposed to model short- and longrange spatial dependencies and encode global contexts for
strengthening feature activations by channel-wise attention.
The NLCE modules enhance the robustness and accuracy
of the non-local context encoding network (NLCEN), which
learns robust enhanced pyramid feature representations with
NLCE modules, and then integrates the information across
different levels. Experiments on both lung and skin lesion
segmentation datasets have demonstrated that NLCEN outperforms any other state-of-the-art biomedical image segmentation methods against adversarial attacks. In addition,
NLCE modules can be applied to improve the robustness of
other CNN-based biomedical image segmentation methods.

SLSDeep

NWCN

GT

CDNN

Ours

Perturbation

Adversarial
Image
Adversarial
Segmentation

Segmentation

Figure 1: Sample adversarial attacks on SLSDeep (Sarker
et al. 2018), NWCN (Hwang and Park 2017), CDNN (Yuan
2017) and our NLCEN. The input chest radiograph and its
ground-truth segmentation are shown in the first row. Adversarial perturbations and images generated for models by
the Iterative FGSM attack method (Kurakin, Goodfellow,
and Bengio 2016) with adversarial intensity set to 16 are
shown in the second and third rows respectively. Segmentation results on the adversarial images and the input image
are shown in the fourth and fifth rows respectively.

Introduction
Biomedical image analysis catches people’s eyes due to its
popular application in computer-aided diagnosis and medical plan recommendation. Biomedical image segmentation
is fundamental in biomedical image analysis, which performs pixel-level annotation for regions of interest (e.g.
organs, substructures, and lesions) on biomedical images
(e.g. X-ray, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Computerized
Tomography). However, it is challenging to obtain accurate segmentation because of the large shape and size variations of regions of interest, and the diversity of images produced by different biomedical imaging equipments (Hwang

and Park 2017; Sarker et al. 2018). State-of-the-art biomedical image segmentation methods are based on fully convolutional networks (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell
2015), which is a type of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) designed for semantic segmentation in computer vision. The accuracy of CNN-based biomedical image
segmentation has been beyond that of traditional ones (Litjens et al. 2017; Sarker et al. 2018; Hwang and Park 2017;
Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015; Novikov et al. 2018;
Yuan 2017). In addition to the accuracy of biomedical image
segmentation, its stability and robustness are also essential
for the fault-free clinical practice.
Although CNN-based methods excel in solving many visual recognition tasks (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015;
Ren et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017; Li and Yu 2018; Li et al.

∗
Xiang He and Sibei Yang contributed equally to this
work. Corresponding author is Guanbin Li (Email: liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn). This work was partially supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
No.61702565 and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No.18lgpy63.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8417

