The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Satisfiability in Strategy Logic Can Be Easier than Model Checking
Erman Acar,1 Massimo Benerecetti,2 Fabio Mogavero2
1

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Università di Napoli “Federico II”, Italy
1
erman.acar@vu.nl, 2 {massimo.benerecetti, fabio.mogavero}@unina.it

φ. On the other hand, satisfiability corresponds to a solution
problem, where a correct solution, some witness structure M
satisfying φ, has to be produced.
From a complexity-theoretical standpoint, satisfiability
is almost always at least as complex as model checking.
For instance, SAT, the satisfiability problem for propositional logic, is NPT IME-COMPLETE, while the corresponding model-checking problem is in PT IME. Similarly, satisfiability is PS PACE for plain modal logic, while model
checking can be solved in linear time. In the context of
temporal logics, the CTL and CTL? satisfiability problems are E XP T IME-COMPLETE (Kupferman, Vardi, and
Wolper 2000) and 2E XP T IME-COMPLETE (Vardi and Stockmeyer 1985), respectively, while their model-checking problems are PT IME-COMPLETE and PS PACE-COMPLETE, respectively (Emerson and Clarke 1982) and (Clarke, Emerson, and Sistla 1983). Both model checking and satisfiability for LTL are PS PACE-COMPLETE (Pnueli 1977;
Gabbay et al. 1980; Sistla and Clarke 1985; Vardi and Wolper
1986). Similarly, the two problems have the same complexity, namely 2E XP T IME-COMPLETE, also for more expressive logics suitable for strategic reasoning in multi-agent settings, such as ATL? (Alur, Henzinger, and Kupferman 2002;
Schewe 2008) and the One-Binding fragment of Strategy
Logic (Mogavero et al. 2012; 2014; 2017), while both problems are non-elementary for STL (Benerecetti, Mogavero,
and Murano 2013; 2015). These results seem to support the
common sense intuition that solving a problem (finding a
satisfying model) is not easier than verifying the correctness
of a proposed solution (checking that a given model is indeed
satisfying).
The picture is, however, not as simple, since examples
of fragments of known logics whose satisfiability is simpler
than model checking do exist. In (Markey 2002), two fragments are identified for which model checking is PS PACECOMPLETE, while satisfiability is NPT IME : the fragment
only allowing for the temporal operators F (eventually) and
X (next); and the one allowing only the operators G (globally) and S (since). In both fragments no temporal operators
are allowed in the scope of a negation, hence they are not
closed under negation. Therefore, the result holds for very
weak fragments of LTL and the complexity gap rests on the
assumption that NPT IME 6= PS PACE. For branching-time
logics, the only known results are those in (Goranko and

Abstract
In the design of complex systems, model-checking and satisfiability arise as two prominent decision problems. While
model-checking requires the designed system to be provided
in advance, satisfiability allows to check if such a system even
exists. With very few exceptions, the second problem turns
out to be harder than the first one from a complexity-theoretic
standpoint. In this paper, we investigate the connection between the two problems for a non-trivial fragment of Strategy
Logic (SL, for short). SL extends LTL with first-order quantifications over strategies, thus allowing to explicitly reason
about the strategic abilities of agents in a multi-agent system.
Satisfiability for the full logic is known to be highly undecidable, while model-checking is non-elementary.
The SL fragment we consider is obtained by preventing strategic quantifications within the scope of temporal operators.
The resulting logic is quite powerful, still allowing to express
important game-theoretic properties of multi-agent systems,
such as existence of Nash and immune equilibria, as well as to
formalize the rational synthesis problem. We show that satisfiability for such a fragment is PS PACE-COMPLETE, while its
model-checking complexity is 2E XP T IME-HARD. The result
is obtained by means of an elegant encoding of the problem
into the satisfiability of conjunctive-binding first-order logic,
a recently discovered decidable fragment of first-order logic.

Introduction
Model checking and satisfiability are two of the most prominent decision problems in logic. Many questions in various
branches of Computer Science, from Formal Verification, to
Database Theory and Artificial Intelligence, can be solved by
encoding them as instances of these problems for a suitable
logic. Some examples are verification of hardware and software, planning and scheduling, query containment, reactive
and controller synthesis.
In general, given a logic L, a class of structures C over
which L is interpreted, and a formula φ ∈ L, the first problem
asks whether a given structure M ∈ C makes the formula φ
true, while the second one requires deciding whether such a
structure exists. The model-checking problem is, then, a typical verification problem, where a proposed solution, namely
the structure M, is checked for correctness w.r.t. the formula
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2638

