The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Gradient-Based Inference for
Networks with Output Constraints
Jay Yoon Lee,1∗ Sanket Vaibhav Mehta,1 Michael Wick,2∗
Jean-Baptiste Tristan,2 Jaime Carbonell1
1

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
2
Oracle Labs, Burlington, MA
1
{jaylee, svmehta, jgc}@cs.cmu.edu
2
{michael.wick, jean.baptiste.tristan}@oracle.com

Abstract

prediction for one subset of the outputs to beneficially influence another.
Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that the neural network will learn these constraints from the training data
alone, especially if the training data volume is limited. Although in some cases, the outputs of state-of-the-art systems
mostly obey the constraints for the test-set of the data on
which they are tuned, in other cases they do not. In practice,
the quality of neural networks are much lower when run on
data in the wild (e.g., because small shifts in domain or genre
change the underlying data distribution). In such cases, the
problem of constraint violations becomes more significant.
This raises the question: how should we enforce hard constraints on the outputs of a neural network? We could perform expensive combinatorial discrete search over a large
output space, or manually construct a list of post-processing
rules for the particular problem domain of interest. Though,
we might do even better if we continue to “train” the neural
network at test-time to learn how to satisfy the constraints on
each input. Such a learning procedure is applicable at testtime because learning constraints requires no labeled data:
rather, we only require a function that measures the extent
to which a predicted output violates a constraint.
In this paper, we present gradient-based inference (GBI),
an inference method for neural networks that strongly favors respecting output constraints by adjusting the network’s
weights at test-time, for each input. Given an appropriate function that measures the extent of a constraint violation, we can express the hard constraints as an optimization problem over the continuous weights and apply backpropagation to tune them. That is, by iteratively adjusting
the weights so that the neural network becomes increasingly
likely to produce an output configuration that obeys the desired constraints. Much like scoped-learning, the algorithm
customizes the weights for each example at test-time (Blei,
Bagnell, and McCallum 2002), but does so in a way to satisfy the constraints.
We study GBI on three tasks: semantic role labeling
(SRL), syntactic constituency parsing and a synthetic sequence transduction problem and find that the algorithm performs favorably on all three tasks. In summary, our contributions are that we:

Practitioners apply neural networks to increasingly complex
problems in natural language processing, such as syntactic
parsing and semantic role labeling that have rich output structures. Many such structured-prediction problems require deterministic constraints on the output values; for example, in
sequence-to-sequence syntactic parsing, we require that the
sequential outputs encode valid trees. While hidden units
might capture such properties, the network is not always
able to learn such constraints from the training data alone,
and practitioners must then resort to post-processing. In this
paper, we present an inference method for neural networks
that enforces deterministic constraints on outputs without
performing rule-based post-processing or expensive discrete
search. Instead, in the spirit of gradient-based training, we
enforce constraints with gradient-based inference (GBI): for
each input at test-time, we nudge continuous model weights
until the network’s unconstrained inference procedure generates an output that satisfies the constraints. We study the efficacy of GBI on three tasks with hard constraints: semantic
role labeling, syntactic parsing, and sequence transduction. In
each case, the algorithm not only satisfies constraints, but improves accuracy, even when the underlying network is stateof-the-art.

1

Introduction

Suppose we have trained a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq)
network (Cho et al. 2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Kumar et al. 2016) to perform a structured prediction task
such as syntactic constituency parsing (Vinyals et al. 2015).
We would like to apply this trained network to novel, unseen examples, but still require that the network’s outputs
obey an appropriate set of problem specific hard-constraints;
for example, that the output sequence encodes a valid parse
tree. Enforcing these constraints is important because downstream tasks, such as relation extraction or coreference resolution typically assume that the constraints hold. Moreover, the constraints impart informative hypothesis-limiting
restrictions about joint assignments to multiple output units,
and thus enforcing them holistically might cause a correct
∗

corresponding authors
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4147

