The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Resolution-Invariant Deep
Representations for Person Re-Identification
Yun-Chun Chen,1∗ Yu-Jhe Li,1,2∗ Xiaofei Du,3 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
3
Umbo Computer Vision
Email: {b03901148, r06942074, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw, xiaofei.du@umbocv.com
2

Abstract

HR
LR

Person re-identification (re-ID) solves the task of matching images across cameras and is among the research topics in vision community. Since query images in real-world
scenarios might suffer from resolution loss, how to solve
the resolution mismatch problem during person re-ID becomes a practical problem. Instead of applying separate image super-resolution models, we propose a novel network architecture of Resolution Adaptation and re-Identification Network (RAIN) to solve cross-resolution person re-ID. Advancing the strategy of adversarial learning, we aim at extracting
resolution-invariant representations for re-ID, while the proposed model is learned in an end-to-end training fashion. Our
experiments confirm that the use of our model can recognize
low-resolution query images, even if the resolution is not seen
during training. Moreover, the extension of our model for
semi-supervised re-ID further confirms the scalability of our
proposed method for real-world scenarios and applications.

Feature Space
HR
HR

Different Cameras

Different Identities

Figure 1: Illustration and challenges of cross-resolution person re-identification (re-ID). In addition to recognizing images across different camera views, one also needs to match
cross-resolution images.

Introduction
Aiming at matching images of the same person across different camera views, person re-identification (re-ID) (Zheng,
Yang, and Hauptmann 2016) is among the active research
topics in computer vision and machine learning. With a wide
range of applications ranging from video surveillance to
computational forensics, person re-ID has received substantial attention of communities from both academia and industry. Nevertheless, with the presence of background clutters,
viewpoint and pose changes, and even occlusion, person reID remains a very challenging task.
While a number of methods (Lin et al. 2017; Hermans,
Beyer, and Leibe 2017; Zhong et al. 2018; Si et al. 2018)
have been proposed to address the aforementioned issues in
person re-ID, these methods typically assume that the images (both gallery and query) are of similar or sufficient
resolution. However, this assumption may not hold in realworld scenarios, since image resolution may vary drastically
due to the distance between the camera and the person of
interest. For instance, images captured by surveillance cameras (i.e., the queries to be recognized) are often of low resolution (LR) whereas the gallery ones typically have high

resolution (HR). However, directly matching an LR query
image against the HR gallery ones would entail a non-trivial
resolution mismatch problem, as illustrated in Figure 1.
To address cross-resolution person re-ID, one can simply up-sample the LR images by leveraging super-resolution
(SR) approaches like (Jiao et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b) to
synthesize HR images. However, since these two tasks are
addressed separately, there is no guarantee that synthesized
HR outputs would result in satisfactory re-ID performances.
Moreover, if the input image resolution is not seen by the
SR model, then one cannot properly recover the HR outputs.
Later in the experiments, we will verify the above issues.
In this paper, we propose a novel Resolution Adaptation
and re-Identification Network (RAIN) for cross-resolution
person re-ID. Based on the generative adversarial network
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) with an end-to-end learning
strategy, our RAIN is trained to extract resolution-invariant
image representations, without the limitation (or assumption) of the use of LR inputs with pre-determined resolutions. More specifically, our RAIN is able to handle unseen
LR images with satisfactory re-ID performances. For example, given training LR images with 128 × 128 pixels and 256
× 256 pixels, our model is able to recognize query images

∗

indicates equal contributions.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8215

