The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Recurrent Stacking of Layers for Compact Neural Machine Translation Models
Raj Dabre, Atsushi Fujita
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
3-5 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun, Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
firstname.lastname@nict.go.jp

Abstract

counterparts has led to the development of knowledge
distillation approaches (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015;
Freitag, Al-Onaizan, and Sankaran 2017). In this approach,
teacher models with a large number of parameters are first
trained and then a child model with significantly fewer
parameters is trained to mimic the teachers. As a result, a
single child model has been shown to perform as well as the
ensemble of many parent models.
We propose an alternative solution where we attempt to
reduce the sizes of the parent models themselves without an
appreciable loss of performance. We thus argue the following research question:

In encoder-decoder based sequence-to-sequence modeling,
the most common practice is to stack a number of recurrent,
convolutional, or feed-forward layers in the encoder and decoder. While the addition of each new layer improves the sequence generation quality, this also leads to a significant increase in the number of parameters. In this paper, we propose
to share parameters across all layers thereby leading to a recurrently stacked sequence-to-sequence model. We report on
an extensive case study on neural machine translation (NMT)
using our proposed method, experimenting with a variety of
datasets. We empirically show that the translation quality of
a model that recurrently stacks a single-layer 6 times, despite
its significantly fewer parameters, approaches that of a model
that stacks 6 different layers. We also show how our method
can benefit from a prevalent way for improving NMT, i.e.,
extending training data with pseudo-parallel corpora generated by back-translation. We then analyze the effects of recurrently stacked layers by visualizing the attentions of models that use recurrently stacked layers and models that do not.
Finally, we explore the limits of parameter sharing where we
share even the parameters between the encoder and decoder
in addition to recurrent stacking of layers.

Is it really necessary to introduce new parameters when
stacking layers in an sequence-to-sequence model?
In this paper, we try to answer this question by proposing
to reduce the number of model parameters via parameter
sharing across stacked layers. To this end, we take up a case
study of neural machine translation (NMT) (Cho et al. 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), which is one of the most
popular applications of seq2seq modeling. NMT allows for
end-to-end training of a translation system without needing
to deal with word alignments, translation rules, and complicated decoding algorithms, that are integral to statistical
machine translation (SMT) (Koehn et al. 2007).
We modify the original NMT architecture so that the same
parameters are used across all stacked layers, i.e., recurrently stacking (RS)2 of layers, as illustrated in Figure 1.
As a result, our recurrently stacked NMT (RS-NMT) model
has the same size of a single-layer NMT model. This paper reports on our extensive study on our RS-NMT model.
To show the effectiveness of RS-NMT, we conducted translation experiments using five different datasets, including
four for the Japanese–English (ALT, KFTT, GCP, and ASPEC) and one for the Turkish–English (WMT) language
pairs, and have observed, for example, that our RS-NMT
model with 6 times of recurrence gives results approaching that of a 6-layer vanilla NMT model which does not
use any recurrences. We expand our experimental settings
to include back-translated corpora (Sennrich, Haddow, and
Birch 2016a) and show that our method further benefits from
such additional data, demonstrating the potential capacity

Introduction
Sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) learning (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014) allows for end-to-end training of a
single neural model that can transform an input sequence to
another. A typical seq2seq model consists of an encoder and
a decoder where the encoder converts the input sequence
into a sequence of continuous space vectors and the decoder
converts these vectors into a target sequence. One of the
most commonly followed practices in sequence-to-sequence
modeling is the stacking of multiple recurrent,1 convolutional, or self-attentional feed-forward layers in the encoders
and decoders with each layer having its own parameters.
It has been empirically shown that such stacking leads to
an improvement in performance, especially in resource-rich
scenarios. However, it also increases the size of the model
by a significant amount. The search for compact seq2seq
models with performance comparable to their bulkier
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Recurrent across time-steps.

2
RS can mean Recurrently Stacked or Recurrent Stacking both
of which have the same implication.

6292

