The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Improving Optimization Bounds Using Machine
Learning: Decision Diagrams Meet Deep Reinforcement Learning
Quentin Cappart,1 Emmanuel Goutierre,2 David Bergman,3 Louis-Martin Rousseau1
1

Ecole Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
2
Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, France
3
University of Connecticut, Stamford, CT 06901, USA
{quentin.cappart, louis-martin.rousseau}@polymtl.ca
emmanuel.goutierre@polytechnique.edu
david.bergman@uconn.edu
Abstract

the quality of the bound. For example, given an IP model,
the LP relaxation will report the same bound independent of
what method is used to solve the relaxation and any other
decision employed during the solution algorithm.
Contrastingly, approximate decision diagrams (DDs)
(Bergman, van Hoeve, and Hooker 2011), a recently introduced optimization technology, provide a flexible bounding
method, in that decisions employed in the execution of the
algorithms used to build the DDs directly affect the quality
of the bound. This is true for both relaxed DDs, that prove
relaxation bounds, and restricted DDs, that identify primal
solutions. This opens the door for potential integration with
machine learning.
Initially introduced for representing switching circuits
(Lee 1959) and for formal verification (Bryant 1986), DDs
in discrete optimization are used to encode the feasible solutions of a problem while preserving its combinatorial structure. A common application is to provide bounds, both upper and lower, for discrete optimization problems (Bergman,
van Hoeve, and Hooker 2011; Bergman et al. 2013). However, the quality of the bounds is known to be tightly related
to the variable ordering considered during the construction
of the DD (Bergman et al. 2012). It has been shown that finding an optimal ordering for general DDs is NP-hard and is
often challenging to even model. Besides, improving a given
variable ordering is known to be NP-complete (Bollig and
Wegener 1996). Thus, designing methods for finding a good
ordering is a hot topic in the community and continues as a
challenge. The idea suggested in this paper is to use machine
learning to identify good variable orderings that therefore result in tighter objective function bounds.
In another field of research, reinforcement learning (RL)
(Sutton and Barto 1998) is an area of machine learning focusing on how an agent can learn from its interactions with
an environment. The agent moves from state to state by performing a sequence of actions, each of them giving a specific reward. The behavior of an agent is characterized by a
policy, determining which action should be taken from each
state. Given this context, the goal is to learn a policy maximizing the sum of rewards of each action done by the agent.
However, traditional methods for RL suffer from a lack
of scalability and are limited to low-dimensional problems.

Finding tight bounds on the optimal solution is a critical element of practical solution methods for discrete optimization problems. In the last decade, decision diagrams (DDs)
have brought a new perspective on obtaining upper and lower
bounds that can be significantly better than classical bounding mechanisms, such as linear relaxations. It is well known
that the quality of the bounds achieved through this flexible
bounding method is highly reliant on the ordering of variables
chosen for building the diagram, and finding an ordering that
optimizes standard metrics is an NP-hard problem. In this paper, we propose an innovative and generic approach based
on deep reinforcement learning for obtaining an ordering for
tightening the bounds obtained with relaxed and restricted
DDs. We apply the approach to both the Maximum Independent Set Problem and the Maximum Cut Problem. Experimental results on synthetic instances show that the deep
reinforcement learning approach, by achieving tighter objective function bounds, generally outperforms ordering methods commonly used in the literature when the distribution of
instances is known. To the best knowledge of the authors, this
is the first paper to apply machine learning to directly improve relaxation bounds obtained by general-purpose bounding mechanisms for combinatorial optimization problems.

Introduction
Relaxation bounds, and mechanisms by which those bounds
can be improved, are perhaps the most critical element of
scalable generic algorithms for discrete optimization problems. As machine learning popularizes, a natural question
arises: how can machine learning be used for improving optimization bounds ? Finding a way to utilize the power of
machine learning to prove tighter relaxation bounds may
be a key for unlocking significant performance improvements in optimization solvers. This paper provides, to the
best knowledge of the authors, a first effective approach in
the literature towards achieving this goal.
The challenge one faces in using machine learning to
tighten relaxation bounds is that the bound provided by classical methods (e.g., LP or SDP relaxations) are inflexible;
the algorithm used to solve the relaxation has no effect on
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1443

