The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Regularized Evolution for Image Classifier Architecture Search
Esteban Real,∗ Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, Quoc V. Le
Google Brain, Mountain View, California, USA
Correspondence to E. Real at ereal@google.com

Abstract

To do this, we make two additions to the standard evolutionary process. First, we propose a change to the wellestablished tournament selection evolutionary algorithm
(Goldberg and Deb 1991) that we refer to as aging evolution or regularized evolution. Whereas in tournament selection, the best genotypes (architectures) are kept, we propose to associate each genotype with an age, and bias the
tournament selection to choose the younger genotypes. We
will show that this change turns out to make a difference.
The connection to regularization will be clarified in the Discussion section. Second, we implement the simplest set of
mutations that would allow evolving in the NASNet search
space (Zoph et al. 2018). This search space associates convolutional neural network architectures with small directed
graphs in which vertices represent hidden states and labeled
edges represent common network operations (such as convolutions or pooling layers). Our mutation rules only alter
architectures by randomly reconnecting the origin of edges
to different vertices and by randomly relabeling the edges,
covering the full search space.
Searching in the NASNet space allows a controlled comparison between evolution and the original method for
which the space was designed, reinforcement learning (RL).
Thus, this paper presents the first comparative case study
of architecture-search algorithms for the image classification task. Within this case study, we will demonstrate that
evolution can attain similar results with a simpler method,
as will be shown in the Discussion section. In particular, we
will highlight that in all our experiments evolution searched
faster than RL and random search, especially at the earlier
stages, which is important when experiments cannot be run
for long times due to compute resource limitations.
Despite its simplicity, our approach works well in our
benchmark against RL. It also evolved a high-quality model,
which we name AmoebaNet-A. This model is competitive
with the best image classifiers obtained by any other algorithm today at similar sizes (82.8% top-1 / 96.1% top-5 ImageNet accuracy). When scaled up, it sets a new state-ofthe-art accuracy (83.9% top-1 / 96.6% top-5 ImageNet accuracy).

The effort devoted to hand-crafting neural network image
classifiers has motivated the use of architecture search to discover them automatically. Although evolutionary algorithms
have been repeatedly applied to neural network topologies,
the image classifiers thus discovered have remained inferior
to human-crafted ones. Here, we evolve an image classifier—
AmoebaNet-A—that surpasses hand-designs for the first time.
To do this, we modify the tournament selection evolutionary algorithm by introducing an age property to favor the
younger genotypes. Matching size, AmoebaNet-A has comparable accuracy to current state-of-the-art ImageNet models
discovered with more complex architecture-search methods.
Scaled to larger size, AmoebaNet-A sets a new state-of-theart 83.9% top-1 / 96.6% top-5 ImageNet accuracy. In a controlled comparison against a well known reinforcement learning algorithm, we give evidence that evolution can obtain results faster with the same hardware, especially at the earlier
stages of the search. This is relevant when fewer compute resources are available. Evolution is, thus, a simple method to
effectively discover high-quality architectures.

Introduction
Until recently, most state-of-the-art image classifier architectures have been manually designed by human experts
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Szegedy et al.
2015; He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017; Hu, Shen, and Sun
2018). To speed up the process, researchers have looked into
automated methods (Baker et al. 2017a; Zoph and Le 2016;
Miikkulainen et al. 2017; Real et al. 2017; Xie and Yuille
2017; Suganuma, Shirakawa, and Nagao 2017; Liu et al.
2018a; Pham et al. 2018). These methods are now collectively known as architecture-search algorithms. A traditional approach is neuro-evolution of topologies (Miller,
Todd, and Hegde 1989; Angeline, Saunders, and Pollack
1994; Stanley and Miikkulainen 2002). Improved hardware
now allows scaling up evolution to produce high-quality
image classifiers (Real et al. 2017; Xie and Yuille 2017;
Liu et al. 2018b). Yet, the architectures produced by evolutionary algorithms / genetic programming have not reached
the accuracy of those directly designed by human experts.
Here we evolve image classifiers that surpass hand-designs.

Related Work

∗

E. Real, A. Aggarwal, and Y. Huang contributed equally.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Review papers provide informative surveys of earlier (Yao
1999; Floreano, Dürr, and Mattiussi 2008) and more recent
4780

