The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Weisfeiler and Leman Go Neural: Higher-Order Graph Neural Networks
Christopher Morris,1 Martin Ritzert,2 Matthias Fey,1 William L. Hamilton,3
Jan Eric Lenssen,1 Gaurav Rattan,2 Martin Grohe2
1

TU Dortmund University
RWTH Aachen University
3
McGill University and MILA
{christopher.morris, matthias.fey, janeric.lenssen}@tu-dortmund.de,
{ritzert, rattan, grohe}@informatik.rwth-aachen.de,
wlh@cs.mcgill.ca
2

kernel (Shervashidze et al. 2011), which is based on the 1dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman graph isomorphism heuristic
(Grohe 2017, pp. 79 ff.), generates node features through an
iterative relabeling, or coloring, scheme: First, all nodes are
assigned a common initial color; the algorithm then iteratively
recolors a node by aggregating over the multiset of colors
in its neighborhood, and the final feature representation of
a graph is the histogram of the resulting node colors. By
iteratively aggregating over local node neighborhoods in this
way, the WL subtree kernel is able to effectively summarize the
neighborhood substructures present in a graph. However, while
powerful, the WL subtree kernel—like other kernel methods—
is limited because this feature construction scheme is fixed (i.e.,
it does not adapt to the given data distribution). Moreover, this
approach—like the majority of kernel methods—focuses only
on the graph structure and cannot interpret continuous node and
edge labels, such as real-valued vectors which play an important
role in applications such as bio- and chemoinformatics.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a machine learning framework addressing the above challenges.
Standard GNNs can be viewed as a neural version of the
1-WL algorithm, where colors are replaced by continuous feature vectors and neural networks are used to aggregate over
node neighborhoods (Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017a;
Kipf and Welling 2017). In effect, the GNN framework can
be viewed as implementing a continuous form of graph-based
“message passing”, where local neighborhood information is
aggregated and passed on to the neighbors (Gilmer et al. 2017).
By deploying a trainable neural network to aggregate information in local node neighborhoods, GNNs can be trained
in an end-to-end fashion together with the parameters of the
classification or regression algorithm, possibly allowing for
greater adaptability and better generalization compared to the
kernel counterpart of the classical 1-WL algorithm.
Up to now, the evaluation and analysis of GNNs has been
largely empirical, showing promising results compared to
kernel approaches, see, e.g., (Ying et al. 2018b). However,
it remains unclear how GNNs are actually encoding graph
structure information into their vector representations, and

Abstract
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as
a powerful neural architecture to learn vector representations
of nodes and graphs in a supervised, end-to-end fashion. Up to
now, GNNs have only been evaluated empirically—showing
promising results. The following work investigates GNNs from
a theoretical point of view and relates them to the 1-dimensional
Weisfeiler-Leman graph isomorphism heuristic (1-WL). We
show that GNNs have the same expressiveness as the 1-WL in
terms of distinguishing non-isomorphic (sub-)graphs. Hence,
both algorithms also have the same shortcomings. Based on this,
we propose a generalization of GNNs, so-called k-dimensional
GNNs (k-GNNs), which can take higher-order graph structures
at multiple scales into account. These higher-order structures
play an essential role in the characterization of social networks
and molecule graphs. Our experimental evaluation confirms
our theoretical findings as well as confirms that higher-order
information is useful in the task of graph classification and
regression.

Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous across application domains
ranging from chemo- and bioinformatics to image and social
network analysis. To develop successful machine learning
models in these domains, we need techniques that can exploit
the rich information inherent in graph structure, as well as the
feature information contained within a graph’s nodes and edges.
In recent years, numerous approaches have been proposed for
machine learning graphs—most notably, approaches based
on graph kernels (Vishwanathan et al. 2010) or, alternatively,
using graph neural network algorithms (Hamilton, Ying, and
Leskovec 2017b).
Kernel approaches typically fix a set of features in advance—
e.g., indicator features over subgraph structures or features
of local node neighborhoods. For example, one of the most
successful kernel approaches, the Weisfeiler-Lehman subtree
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4602

