The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

RobustSTL: A Robust Seasonal-Trend
Decomposition Algorithm for Long Time Series
Qingsong Wen, Jingkun Gao, Xiaomin Song, Liang Sun, Huan Xu, Shenghuo Zhu
Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group
Bellevue, Washington 98004, USA
{qingsong.wen, jingkun.g, xiaomin.song, liang.sun, huan.xu, shenghuo.zhu}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

abrupt change of trend. Similarly, revealing the trend of time
series can help to build more robust forecasting models.
As the seasonal adjustment is a crucial step for time series where seasonal variation is observed, many seasonaltrend decomposition methods have been proposed. The most
classical and widely used decomposition method is the STL
(Seasonal-Trend decomposition using Loess) (Cleveland et
al. 1990). STL estimates the trend and the seasonality in an
iterative way. However, STL still suffers from less flexibility when seasonality period is long and high noises are observed. In practice, it often fails to extract the seasonality
component accurately when seasonality shift and fluctuation
exist. Another direction of decomposition is X-13-ARIMASEATS (Bell and Hillmer 1984) and its variants such as
X-11-ARIMA, X-12-ARIMA (Hylleberg 1998), which are
popular in statistics and economics. These methods incorporate more features such as calendar effects, external regressors, and ARIMA extensions to make them more applicable and robust in real-world applications, especially in economics. However, these algorithms can only scale to small or
medium size data. Specifically, they can handle monthly and
quarterly data, which limits their usage in many areas where
long seasonality period is observed. Recently, more decomposition algorithms have been proposed (Dokumentov, Hyndman, and others 2015; Livera, Hyndman, and Snyder 2011;
Verbesselt et al. 2010). For example, in (Dokumentov, Hyndman, and others 2015), a two-dimensional representation
of the seasonality component is utilized to learn the slowly
changing seasonality component. Unfortunately, it cannot
scale to time series with long seasonality period due to the
cost to learn the huge two-dimensional structure.
Although numerous methods have been proposed, there
are still many time series characteristics exhibiting in realworld data which are not addressed properly. First of all, seasonality fluctuation and shift are quite common in real-world
time series data. We take a time series data whose seasonality period is one day as an example. The seasonality component at 1:00 pm today may correspond to 12:30 pm yesterday, or 1:30 pm the day before yesterday. Secondly, most
algorithms cannot handle the abrupt change of trend and remainder, which is crucial in anomaly detection for time series data where the abrupt change of trend corresponds to
the change of mean anomaly and the abrupt change of residual corresponds to the spike & dip anomaly. Thirdly, most

Decomposing complex time series into trend, seasonality, and
remainder components is an important task to facilitate time
series anomaly detection and forecasting. Although numerous methods have been proposed, there are still many time
series characteristics exhibiting in real-world data which are
not addressed properly, including 1) ability to handle seasonality fluctuation and shift, and abrupt change in trend and reminder; 2) robustness on data with anomalies; 3) applicability on time series with long seasonality period. In the paper,
we propose a novel and generic time series decomposition algorithm to address these challenges. Specifically, we extract
the trend component robustly by solving a regression problem using the least absolute deviations loss with sparse regularization. Based on the extracted trend, we apply the the
non-local seasonal filtering to extract the seasonality component. This process is repeated until accurate decomposition is
obtained. Experiments on different synthetic and real-world
time series datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms
existing solutions.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of the Internet of Things (IoT) network and many other connected data sources, there is an
enormous increase of time series data. Compared with traditional time series data, it comes in big volume and typically has a long seasonality period. One of the fundamental problems in managing and utilizing these time series
data is the seasonal-trend decomposition. A good seasonaltrend decomposition can reveal the underlying insights of
a time series, and can be useful in further analysis such
as anomaly detection and forecasting (Hochenbaum, Vallis, and Kejariwal 2017; Laptev, Amizadeh, and Flint 2015;
Hyndman and Khandakar 2008; Wu et al. 2016). For example, in anomaly detection a local anomaly could be a spike
during an idle period. Without seasonal-trend decomposition, it would be missed as its value is still much lower than
the unusually high values during a busy period. In addition,
different types of anomalies correspond to different patterns
in different components after decomposition. Specifically,
the spike & dip anomalies correspond to abrupt change of
remainder, and the change of mean anomaly corresponds to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5409

