The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

IPOMDP-Net: A Deep Neural Network for Partially
Observable Multi-Agent Planning Using Interactive POMDPs
Yanlin Han, Piotr Gmytrasiewicz
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607

Abstract

ment learning methods, in which the rewards are usually assumed obtainable. While the model-free policy learning can
be end-to-end, it lacks the model information for effective
generalization (Karkus, Hsu, and Lee 2017). Particularly, in
the multi-agent domain, other agents’ actions impact the environment, which indirectly impact our policies. Therefore,
we prefer a model-based approach, since having a model of
other agents helps our reasoning about their actions and consequently benefits our decision making.
The unprecedented success of deep neural networks
(DNNs) in supervised learning (Ciregan, Meier, and
Schmidhuber ; Farabet et al. 2013; Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012) provides new approaches to decision
making under uncertainty. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been
applied to tasks like Atari games (Mnih et al. 2015), robotics
(Levine et al. 2016), and 2D path planning (Karkus, Hsu, and
Lee 2017). In these tasks, a DNN is trained to approximate
a policy function that maps an agent’s observations to optimal actions. The deep Q-network (DQN), which consists of
convolutional layers for feature extraction and a fully connected layer for mapping features to actions, tackles many
Atari games with the same network architecture (Mnih et al.
2015). DQN is inherently reactive and lacks explicit planning computation (Tamar et al. 2016). The deep recurrent
Q-network (DRQN) extends DQN to the partially observable domain by replacing the fully connected layer with a
recurrent long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) layer to integrate temporal information
(Hausknecht and Stone 2015). Furthermore, the value iteration network (VIN) started to embed specific computation
structures (Tamar et al. 2016), particularly the value iteration
algorithm, in the network architecture and solves fully observable Markov decision processes (MDPs). The QMDPnet further embeds a POMDP model and a QMDP planning
algorithm that solves the model in a RNN (Karkus, Hsu,
and Lee 2017). However, all the discussed neural networks
are either model-free or for single-agent settings. Unless we
model other agents’ impact as noise and embed it into the
world dynamic, which often leads to inferior solution quality, it is not feasible to directly apply these networks into a
multi-agent partially observable domain.
In this work, we propose a neural network architecture, the IPOMDP-net, for multi-agent planning under par-

This paper introduces the IPOMDP-net, a neural network
architecture for multi-agent planning under partial observability. It embeds an interactive partially observable Markov
decision process (I-POMDP) model and a QMDP planning
algorithm that solves the model in a neural network architecture. The IPOMDP-net is fully differentiable and allows
for end-to-end training. In the learning phase, we train an
IPOMDP-net on various fixed and randomly generated environments in a reinforcement learning setting, assuming observable reinforcements and unknown (randomly initialized)
model functions. In the planning phase, we test the trained
network on new, unseen variants of the environments under
the planning setting, using the trained model to plan without
reinforcements. Empirical results show that our model-based
IPOMDP-net outperforms the other state-of-the-art modelfree network and generalizes better to larger, unseen environments. Our approach provides a general neural computing architecture for multi-agent planning using I-POMDPs. It suggests that, in a multi-agent setting, having a model of other
agents benefits our decision-making, resulting in a policy of
higher quality and better generalizability.

Introduction
Decision-making under partial observability is fundamentally important but computationally hard, especially in
multi-agent settings. In partially observable multi-agent environments, an agent needs to deal with uncertainties from
its own models as well as impacts from other agents actions caused by their models. To learn policies in such
settings, one approach is to learn models and solve them
through planning. If the models are known, it reduces to a
planning problem and can be formulated as an interactive
partially observable Markov decision process (I-POMDP)
(Gmytrasiewicz and Doshi 2005). Although approximate algorithms have made progress on mitigating the computing
complexity (Doshi and Gmytrasiewicz 2009; Han and Gmytrasiewicz 2018), solving I-POMDPs exactly is still computationally intractable for the worst case. Moreover, constructing I-POMDP models manually or learning them from
observations remains difficult. An alternative approach is to
learn policies directly, such as using model-free reinforceCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6062

