The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

An Integral Tag Recommendation Model for Textual Content
Shijie Tang,1 Yuan Yao,1 Suwei Zhang,1 Feng Xu,1
Tianxiao Gu,2 Hanghang Tong,3 Xiaohui Yan,4 Jian Lu1
2

1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
University of California, Davis, USA, 3 Arizona State University, USA, 4 Poisson Lab, Huawei Technologies, China
{tsj, zsw}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {y.yao, xf, lj}@nju.edu.cn,
tianxiao.gu@gmail.com, hanghang.tong@asu.edu, yanxiaohui2@huawei.com

Abstract
Recommending suitable tags for online textual content is a
key building block for better content organization and consumption. In this paper, we identify three pillars that impact
the accuracy of tag recommendation: (1) sequential text modeling meaning that the intrinsic sequential ordering as well
as different areas of text might have an important implication
on the corresponding tag(s) , (2) tag correlation meaning that
the tags for a certain piece of textual content are often semantically correlated with each other, and (3) content-tag overlapping meaning that the vocabularies of content and tags are
overlapped. However, none of the existing methods consider
all these three aspects, leading to a suboptimal tag recommendation. In this paper, we propose an integral model to encode
all the three aspects in a coherent encoder-decoder framework. In particular, (1) the encoder models the semantics of
the textual content via Recurrent Neural Networks with the
attention mechanism, (2) the decoder tackles the tag correlation with a prediction path, and (3) a shared embedding layer
and an indicator function across encoder-decoder address the
content-tag overlapping. Experimental results on three realworld datasets demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms the existing methods in terms of recommendation accuracy.

Figure 1: An illustrative example of content-tag overlapping
and tag correlation. The word ‘tensorflow’ appears in both
the content and tags (circled with red rectangles); the three
tags (circled with blue rectangles) are semantically related
to each other (i.e., both ‘python’ and ‘machine-learning’ are
closely related to ‘tensorflow’).

ing task. In this work, we tackle the tag recommendation
task for textual content. Let us first identify the following
three key pillars underlying this task (Please see Fig. 1 for
an illustrative example).

Introduction
Tagging has been widely viewed as a very successful practice of associating metadata with online content, because online content can be better organized and consumed with the
help of tags (Belém, Almeida, and Gonçalves 2017). Consequently, recommending suitable tags for online content
becomes an important task. From the perspective of content creators, tag recommendation allows them to select tags
from a ranking list, which in turn improves not only the user
experience but also the quality of the chosen tags. From
the perspective of content consumers, tag recommendation
helps provide better services for the consumers’ search and
retrieval requests. For example, tags have been shown to be
effective in a variety of tasks including user interest discovery (Li, Guo, and Zhao 2008) and content recommendation (Guy et al. 2010).
Despite its importance and extensive effort, recommending suitable tags for online content remains a very challeng-

• (C1) Sequential Text Modeling. Capturing the semantics
of textual content is an essential step towards recommending better tags. Existing tag recommendation methods (e.g., (Krestel, Fankhauser, and Nejdl 2009; Ramage
et al. 2009; Wu et al. 2016)) mainly adopt topic models
to understand the textual content. However, topic models
treat textual content as a bag of words, and thus ignore the
sequential nature of sentences.
• (C2) Tag Correlation. Intuitively, the tags for a certain
piece of content are often semantically correlated, which,
if modelled appropriately, can be harnessed to improve
the tag recommendation performance. For the example
in Fig. 1, the three tags (‘python’, ‘tensorflow’, and
‘machine-learning’) are strongly correlated as they are all
closely related to the tensorflow framework. Nonetheless,
it has largely remained unknown on how to model tag correlation in the context of tag recommendation, with the
only exception of (Wang et al. 2016).

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5109

