The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Fast Incremental SVDD Learning Algorithm with the Gaussian Kernel
Hansi Jiang, Haoyu Wang, Wenhao Hu, Deovrat Kakde, Arin Chaudhuri
SAS Institute Inc.
100 SAS Campus Drive
Cary, North Carolina 27513
{Hansi.Jiang; Haoyu.Wang; Wenhao.Hu; Dev.Kakde; Arin.Chaudhuri}@sas.com

Abstract

shape of the target class without prior knowledge of the specific data distribution and can flag observations that fall outside the data boundary as potential outliers. In the case of
machine monitoring, data on the normal working conditions
of a machine are in abundance, whereas information from
outlier system failures are few. By using SVDD on the wellsampled target class, one can obtain a boundary around the
distribution of normal working data, and subsequently capture the outlier points where the machine is faulty.
Traditional batch methods of SVDD typically pursue a
global optimal solution of the SVDD problem; they suffer
from low efficiency by considering all available data points.
Moreover, these methods are usually ineffective when handling streaming data because the entire algorithm must be rerun with each incoming data point. In contrast, incremental
methods deal with large or streaming data efficiently by focusing on smaller portions of the original optimization problem, as in Syed et al. (1999). Online variants of SVDD concentrate only on the current support vector set with incoming
data.
Cauwenberghs and Poggio (2001) give an incremental
and decremental training algorithm for SVM. Their method,
also called the C&P algorithm, provides an exact solution for
training data and one new data point. Tax and Laskov (2003)
use a numerical method to solve incremental SVM, and they
describe the relationship between incremental SVM and online SVDD. Their research was extended in Laskov et al.
(2006), which provides complete learning algorithms for incremental SVM and SVDD.
The algorithm given in Laskov et al. (2006) updates
weights of each support vector based on the fact that KarushKuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions must be satisfied before and
after a new data point comes in. Consequently, all data points
must be kept to pursue an objective value closer to the global
optimal value. Furthermore, a kernel matrix must be calculated every update, which can be memory-consuming and
slow for large data.
These issues are handled by the algorithm that we
propose: fast incremental support vector data description
(FISVDD). One of the most important properties of support
vectors is that in the most simplified form of SVDD they all
have the same distance to the center of a sphere. A similar
property remains even when the problem is generalized to
flexible boundaries. This property is at the core of FISVDD.

Support vector data description (SVDD) is a machine learning technique that is used for single-class classification and
outlier detection. The idea of SVDD is to find a set of support vectors that defines a boundary around data. When dealing with online or large data, existing batch SVDD methods
have to be rerun in each iteration. We propose an incremental learning algorithm for SVDD that uses the Gaussian kernel. This algorithm builds on the observation that all support
vectors on the boundary have the same distance to the center
of sphere in a higher-dimensional feature space as mapped
by the Gaussian kernel function. Each iteration involves only
the existing support vectors and the new data point. Moreover, the algorithm is based solely on matrix manipulations;
the support vectors and their corresponding Lagrange multiplier αi ’s are automatically selected and determined in each
iteration. It can be seen that the complexity of our algorithm
in each iteration is only O(k2 ), where k is the number of
support vectors. Experimental results on some real data sets
indicate that FISVDD demonstrates significant gains in efficiency with almost no loss in either outlier detection accuracy
or objective function value.

1

Introduction

Much effort has been made to detect faults and state shifts in
industrial machines through monitoring data sensors. Successful fault diagnosis reduces cost of maintenance and
improves both worker and machine efficiency. In machine
learning, fault diagnosis can be viewed as an outlier detection problem. Support vector data description (SVDD),
a machine learning technique that is used for single-class
classification and outlier detection, is similar to support vector machine (SVM). SVDD was first introduced in Tax and
Duin (2004), although the concept of using SVM to detect
novelty was introduced in Schölkopf et al. (2000). SVDD is
used in domains where the majority of data belongs to a single class, or when one of the classes is significantly undersampled. The SVDD algorithm builds a flexible boundary
around the target class data; this data boundary is characterized by observations that are designated as support vectors.
Having the advantage that no assumptions about the distribution of outliers need to be made, SVDD can describe the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3991

