The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Interpretable Preference Learning: A Game Theoretic
Framework for Large Margin On-Line Feature and Rule Learning
Mirko Polato,1 Fabio Aiolli1
1

Department of Mathematics, University of Padova, Italy
mpolato@math.unipd.it, aiolli@math.unipd.it

Abstract

two-players zero-sum game, in which the considered hypotheses spaces consist in a set of preference prototypes
along with (possibly non-linear) features. Moreover, we
show how feature selection naturally comes as a side effect of the algorithm. One of the biggest challenges in feature selection is dealing with large scale data in particular
with (infinitely) many input features. This is a typical scenario in real-world applications when data instances are of
high dimensionality or it is expensive/inconvenient to acquire all attributes. In these contexts, batch approaches are
simply not applicable for computational reasons. Thus, there
is the need to move towards online feature selection (OFS)
approaches (Wang et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2013), which are allowed to work with a small and limited number of features.
Following this direction, we discuss how the on-line feature
generation plays a key role in the algorithm, especially when
it comes to interpret the solution of the model, which is very
useful for producing explanations. Differently from post-hoc
methods which explain black box models (Guidotti et al.
2018; Polato and Aiolli in press 2019), our model is intrinsically explainable when features are easy to interpret. There
are plenty of applications in which explanation plays a key
role, such as bioinformatic applications, recommender systems, and support systems for physicians, just to mention a
few. The notion of explanation is also one of the most controversial subject of the recently introduced GDPR (General
Data Protection Regulation).
To summarize, the main contributions of this work are the
following:

A large body of research is currently investigating on the
connection between machine learning and game theory. In
this work, game theory notions are injected into a preference
learning framework. Specifically, a preference learning problem is seen as a two-players zero-sum game. An algorithm
is proposed to incrementally include new useful features into
the hypothesis. This can be particularly important when dealing with a very large number of potential features like, for
instance, in relational learning and rule extraction. A game
theoretical analysis is used to demonstrate the convergence
of the algorithm. Furthermore, leveraging on the natural analogy between features and rules, the resulting models can be
easily interpreted by humans. An extensive set of experiments
on classification tasks shows the effectiveness of the proposed
method in terms of interpretability and feature selection quality, with accuracy at the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Nowadays, the connection between game theory (GT) and
machine learning (ML) is heavily studied in the field of ML
for security in which security challenges are faced using integration frameworks between GT and ML (Yufei Liu 2017;
Xu et al. 2017). Many of these approaches can also be considered part of the more general literature concering Adversarial Learning (Goodfellow et al. 2014) that is now a hot
topic in ML. Less recently, the GT-ML duo has been also investigated in the mainstream ML literature. For instance, it
is well known that hard margin SVM can be cast into a twoplayers zero-sum game (Aiolli, Da San Martino, and Sperduti 2008). Another famous example is the seminal work
that introduced Adaboost (Freund and Schapire 1997), in
which GT is applied to on-line learning. Many others ML
concepts have been also related to GT, e.g., as showed by
Ionnadis et al. (Ioannidis and Loiseau 2013), linear regression problems can be seen as a non-cooperative game, while
in (Rezek et al. 2008) authors elucidate the equivalence between inference in ML and GT.
In this paper we present a principled algorithm inspired
by GT and preference learning (Fürnkranz and Hüllermeier
2010) for classification. The learning problem is seen as a

• a new large margin preference learning method based on
game theoretical concepts that naturally offers feature and
rule selection capability. The proposed framework is general enough to deal with different kinds of features and
rules that are very useful when interpretability is desired;
• an efficient approximated algorithm for large scale game
matrices with potentially infinite number of columns, allowing the application of the method to online scenarios (OFS). Empirical evidence shows that the number
of selected columns by the algorithm is typically orders of magnitude less than the total number of available
columns;
• an extensive set of experiments is reported to assess both
the effectiveness and the quality of the feature/rule selec-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4723

