The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Collaboration Based Multi-Label Learning
Lei Feng,1,2 Bo An,1 Shuo He3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Singapore
3
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China
{feng0093, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, hs8207083890@email.swu.edu.cn

Abstract

the ignorance of correlations among labels. To compensate for this deficiency, the exploitation of label correlations
has been widely accepted as a key component of effective
multi-label learning approaches (Gibaja and Ventura 2015;
Zhang and Zhou 2014).
So far, many methods have been developed to improve
the performance of multi-label learning by exploring various
types of label correlations (Tsoumakas et al. 2009; CesaBianchi, Gentile, and Zaniboni 2006; Petterson and Caetano 2011; Huang, Zhou, and Zhou 2012; Huang, Yu, and
Zhou 2012; Zhu, Kwok, and Zhou 2018). There has been increasing interest in exploiting the label correlations by taking the label correlation matrix as prior knowledge (Hariharan et al. 2010; Cai et al. 2013; Huang et al. 2016;
2018). Concretely, these methods directly calculate the label correlation matrix by the similarity between label vectors using common similarity measures, and then incorporate the label correlation matrix into model training for further enhancing the predictions of multiple label assignments.
However, the label correlations are simply obtained by common similarity measures, which may not be able to reflect
complex relationships among labels. Besides, these methods exploit label correlations by manipulating the hypothesis space, while the final predictions are not explicitly correlated.
To address the above limitations, we make a key assumption that for each individual label, the final prediction involves the collaboration between its own prediction
and the predictions of other labels. Based on this assumption, a novel multi-label learning approach named CAMEL,
i.e., CollAboration based Multi-labEl Learning, is proposed.
Different from most of the existing approaches that calculate the label correlation matrix simply by common similarity measures, CAMEL presents a novel method to learn such
matrix and show that it is equivalent to sparse reconstruction
in the label space. The learned label correlation matrix is capable of reflecting the collaborative relationships among labels regarding the final predictions. Subsequently, CAMEL
seamlessly incorporates the learned label correlations into
the desired multi-label predictive model. Specifically, labelindependent embedding is introduced, which aims to fit the
final predictions with the learned label correlations while
guiding the estimation of the model parameters simultaneously. The effectiveness of CAMEL is clearly demonstrated

It is well-known that exploiting label correlations is crucially
important to multi-label learning. Most of the existing approaches take label correlations as prior knowledge, which
may not correctly characterize the real relationships among
labels. Besides, label correlations are normally used to regularize the hypothesis space, while the final predictions are not
explicitly correlated. In this paper, we suggest that for each
individual label, the final prediction involves the collaboration between its own prediction and the predictions of other
labels. Based on this assumption, we first propose a novel
method to learn the label correlations via sparse reconstruction in the label space. Then, by seamlessly integrating the
learned label correlations into model training, we propose a
novel multi-label learning approach that aims to explicitly account for the correlated predictions of labels while training
the desired model simultaneously. Extensive experimental results show that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
counterparts.

Introduction
Multi-label learning deals with the problem where an instance can be associated with multiple labels simultaneously. Formally speaking, let X ∈ Rd be d-dimensional feature space and Y = {y1 , y2 , · · · , yq } be the label space with
q labels. Given the multi-label training set D = {xi , yi }ni=1
where xi ∈ X is a feature vector and yi ∈ {−1, 1}q is
the label vector, the goal of multi-label learning is to learn
a model f : Rd → {−1, 1}q , which maps from the space
of feature vectors to the space of label vectors. As a learning framework that handles objects with multiple semantics, multi-label learning has been widely applied in many
real-world applications, such as image annotation (Yang et
al. 2016), document categorization (Li, Ouyang, and Zhou
2015), bioinformatics (Zhang and Zhou 2006), and information retrieval (Gopal and Yang 2010).
The most straightforward multi-label learning approach (Boutell et al. 2004) is to decompose the problem into a set of independent binary classification tasks,
one for each label. Although this strategy is easy to implement, it may result in degraded performance, due to
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3550

