The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Joint Representation Learning for Multi-Modal Transportation Recommendation
Hao Liu,1 Ting Li,2 Renjun Hu,3 Yanjie Fu,4 Jingjing Gu,5 Hui Xiong1∗
1

The Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research, National Engineering Laboratory of
Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China, 2 National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
SKLSDE Lab, Beihang University, Beijing, China, 4 Missouri University of Science and Technology, Missouri, USA
5
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
liuhao30@baidu.com, liting6259@gmail.com, hurenjun@buaa.edu.cn
fuyan@mst.edu, gujingjing@nuaa.edu.cn, xionghui@gmail.com
Abstract

et al. 2014) optimizes bus routing strategies based on human mobility patterns. However, in fact, a large number of
transport planning requests involve the decision process of
choosing an appropriate one from multiple available transport modes. According to statistics from Baidu Map1 , one
of the world’s largest navigation Apps, over ten million of
users request the route planning information of at least two
transport modes (e.g., driving and bus) for same OD pair
every day. Intuitively, the transport mode preferences vary
over different users and spatiotemporal contexts. For example, metros are more cost-effective than taxis for most urban
commuters; economically disadvantaged people may prefer
cycling and walking to others for local travel, if the transport options are inadequate. Such socio-economic personalized effects in choosing transport modes present a unique
challenge, but, meanwhile, a great potential for improving
transportation route planning: if we can decide an appropriate transport mode for a trip, it is easier to plan an optimized route in the following. Unfortunately, there are limited studies that intend to systematically address the multimodal transportation recommendation problem: given a user
and an OD pair, how to effectively identify the most appropriate transport mode?
Smart transport mode recommendations have a number
of advantages, including but not limited to reducing transport times, balancing traffic flows, reducing traffic congestion, and, ultimately, promoting the development of intelligent transportation systems. However, it is a non-trivial task
to infer the most appropriate transport mode. Specifically,
there are three major challenges.
The first challenge comes from the transport heterogeneity. In particular, transport modes are heterogeneous in terms
of the means of conveyance. For example, cycling and walking are human-powered while bus and taxi are gasolinepowered. In addition, transport modes are heterogeneous
in terms of infrastructures, e.g., walking require pedestrian
lanes, and cycling require bike lanes. Moreover, transport
modes are heterogeneous in terms of time-efficiency, cost,
and comfortableness. Consequently, users choose different
transport modes for different OD pairs. Then, one research
issue is: how to incorporate the transport heterogeneity for
multi-modal transportation recommendation? The second

Multi-modal transportation recommendation has a goal of
recommending a travel plan which considers various transportation modes, such as walking, cycling, automobile, and
public transit, and how to connect among these modes. The
successful development of multi-modal transportation recommendation systems can help to satisfy the diversified needs
of travelers and improve the efficiency of transport networks.
However, existing transport recommender systems mainly
focus on unimodal transport planning. To this end, in this
paper, we propose a joint representation learning framework for multi-modal transportation recommendation based
on a carefully-constructed multi-modal transportation graph.
Specifically, we first extract a multi-modal transportation
graph from large-scale map query data to describe the concurrency of users, Origin-Destination (OD) pairs, and transport
modes. Then, we provide effective solutions for the optimization problem and develop an anchor embedding for transport
modes to initialize the embeddings of transport modes. Moreover, we infer user relevance and OD pair relevance, and incorporate them to regularize the representation learning. Finally, we exploit the learned representations for online multimodal transportation recommendations. Indeed, our method
has been deployed into one of the largest navigation Apps
to serve hundreds of millions of users, and extensive experimental results with real-world map query data demonstrate
the enhanced performance of the proposed method for multimodal transportation recommendations.

Introduction
Transport modes, such as walking, cycling, automobile, public transit, are means for traveling from an origin to a destination. Transportation mode recommendation refers to the
effort of finding the most appropriate transport tools with
awareness of user preferences (e.g., costs, times) and trip
characteristics (e.g., purpose, distance). In this study, we investigate this problem with large-scale navigation App data.
In prior literature, a majority of work focuses on improving unimodal transport planning. For example, the studies in (Dai et al. 2015; Rogers and Langley 1998; Chen,
Shen, and Zhou 2011; Luo et al. 2013) aim at recommending the most cost-effective driving routes. The study in (Liu
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

1036

https://map.baidu.com/

