The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Weighted Abstract Dialectical Frameworks
through the Lens of Approximation Fixpoint Theory
Bart Bogaerts
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, Celestijnenlaan 200A, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Department of Computer Science, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
bart.bogaerts@vub.be

Example 1.1. Consider three arguments a, b and c and assume acceptance values in the unit interval. Partial interpretations assign to each argument either a value in the unit
interval, or u (unknown). Assume that the strength of the
acceptance value of a is 0.25, independently of b and c. Furthermore, assume a and b support c and that a and c support
b where the strength of the acceptance for b is max{a, c}
and the strength of the acceptance for c is max{a, b}. This
situation can be represented as a weighted ADF (depicted
below) and various semantics are defined for it (see below).

Abstract
Weighted abstract dialectical frameworks (wADFs) were recently introduced, extending abstract dialectical frameworks
to incorporate degrees of acceptance. In this paper, we propose a different view on wADFs: we develop semantics for
wADFs based on approximation fixpoint theory, an abstract
algebraic theory designed to capture semantics of various
non-monotonic reasoning formalisms. Our formalism deviates from the original definition on some basic assumptions,
the most fundamental is that we assume an ordering on acceptance degrees. We discuss the impact of the differences, the
relationship between the two versions of the formalism, and
the advantages each of the approaches offers. We furthermore
study complexity of various semantics.

1

a

b

c

0.25

max{a, c}

max{a, b}

• The models of this wADF are all assignments I such that
I(a) = 0.25 and I(b) = I(c) ∈ [0.25, 1].
• The grounded (partial) interpretation of this wADF assigns 0.25 to a and u to b and c.
• Stable models are defined with respect to a subset W ⊆
V . In this case, a model I is stable if I(b) ∈ W .
N
This example highlights two issues with the semantics of
wADFs. First of all, intuitively, the grounded interpretation
collects all information that is beyond any doubt. In this example, however, that is not the case. It is beyond any doubt
that a is assigned 0.25 and thus, since the value of b is defined as the maximum of the values of a and c, it is also
beyond any doubt that b takes at least acceptance value 0.25.
The reason why this is not discovered is that partial interpretations are used as approximations of interpretations, but
these are not refined enough to represent this kind of information. Brewka et al. already noticed this: in their conclusion, they propose (as a topic for future work) to research
generalized partial interpretations to tackle this problem.
A second issue in Example 1.1 is that stable interpretations are unnatural. In AFs and ADFs, stable interpretations
are (as in logic programming and other nonmonotonic logics) used to express some (constructive) form of minimality,
where no arguments are accepted without reason. Intuitively,
if acceptance values are in the unit interval and higher numbers mean “more accepted”, we would expect the only stable
interpretation to be the one that assigns 0.25 to all three arguments. In the definitions of Brewka et al. (2018a), this is not
the case. There, stability is determined by a set of values for

Introduction

Abstract argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995) are
simple and abstract systems to deal with contentious information and draw conclusions from it. An AF is a directed
graph whose nodes are arguments and edges encode a notion of attack between arguments. In spite of their conceptual simplicity, there exist many different semantics of AFs.
Abstract dialectical frameworks (ADFs) (Brewka and
Woltran 2010; Brewka et al. 2013) constitute a generalization of AFs in which not only attack, but also support, joint
attack and joint support can be expressed. One limitation of
ADFs is that they are Boolean: each argument is either accepted, rejected or unknown.1 However, in some application
it is more natural to assign each argument a strength of acceptance. With this in mind, ADFs were further generalized
into weighted abstract dialectical frameworks (Brewka et al.
2018a). These frameworks allow for a fine-grained distinction between degrees of acceptance of arguments: one associates with each argument a value from an arbitrary set of
acceptance values. For instance, arguments can take values
from the unit interval, where 1 means acceptance, 0 rejection
and numbers in between mean it partially is accepted with a
certain strength.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Instead of unknown, sometimes also the terminology undefined or undecided is used.

2686

