The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Task Learning with Multi-View Attention for
Answer Selection and Knowledge Base Question Answering
Yang Deng,1 Yuexiang Xie,1 Yaliang Li,2 Min Yang,3 Nan Du,2 Wei Fan,2 Kai Lei,1* Ying Shen1*
*

Corresponding Author
Shenzhen Key Lab for Information Centric Networking & Blockchain Technology (ICNLAB),
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
2
Tencent Medical AI Lab 3 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
{ydeng,xieyx}@pku.edu.cn, yaliangli@tencent.com, min.yang@siat.ac.cn,
{ndu,davidwfan}@tencent.com, {leik,shenying}@pkusz.edu.cn
1

Abstract

task learning has been extensively studied to learn multiple
related tasks simultaneously. The applications of MTL are
extensive in NLP domain, such as text classification (Zheng,
Chen, and Qiu 2018), sequence labeling (Chen et al. 2018)
and text summarization (Guo, Pasunuru, and Bansal 2018),
etc. However, applying MTL on QA has received little attention.
In this work, we explore multi-task learning approaches
to tackle answer selection and knowledge base question answering at the same time, with the intuition that these tasks
both can be regarded as a ranking problem, but one in textlevel and the other in knowledge-level. Specifically, the task
of answer selection aims to pick out the correct answers
for the given question from a set of candidate answer sentences, while the task of KBQA focuses on extracting the
corresponding facts from KB, such as Freebase (Bollacker
et al. 2008), to answer the given question. Besides, previous works prove that answer selection task can be benefited
from external knowledge (Savenkov and Agichtein 2017;
Deng et al. 2018; Ying et al. 2018), while incorporating
text information also enhances the performance of KBQA
task (Yu et al. 2017; Sorokin and Gurevych 2018).
Most existing multi-task learning schemes divide the layers of a model into task-specific and shared layers (Abhishek
and Hal 2012; Guo, Pasunuru, and Bansal 2018). The shared
layers are shared across all tasks, while the task-specific layers are separate for each task. However, these methods neglect the interrelation between the task-specific layers and
the shared layers, and the interaction among different tasks.
Thus, we present a novel multi-task learning scheme to learn
multi-view attentions from different aspects, which enables
different tasks to interact with each other. Concretely, we assemble the attentive information from the task-specific layers to learn more comprehensive sentence representations
in the shared layers. In addition, the multi-view attention
mechanism enhances the sentence representational learning
by combining word-level and knowledge-level information.
That is to say, the attentive information in both word-level
and knowledge-level are shared and transferred among different tasks by using the multi-view attention scheme.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method,
we conduct experiments on both answer selection and
KBQA datasets. Empirically, joint learning of answer selection and KBQA tasks significantly improves the perfor-

Answer selection and knowledge base question answering
(KBQA) are two important tasks of question answering (QA)
systems. Existing methods solve these two tasks separately,
which requires large number of repetitive work and neglects
the rich correlation information between tasks. In this paper,
we tackle answer selection and KBQA tasks simultaneously
via multi-task learning (MTL), motivated by the following
motivations. First, both answer selection and KBQA can be
regarded as a ranking problem, with one at text-level while
the other at knowledge-level. Second, these two tasks can
benefit each other: answer selection can incorporate the external knowledge from knowledge base (KB), while KBQA
can be improved by learning contextual information from answer selection. To fulfill the goal of jointly learning these two
tasks, we propose a novel multi-task learning scheme that utilizes multi-view attention learned from various perspectives
to enable these tasks to interact with each other as well as
learn more comprehensive sentence representations. The experiments conducted on several real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, and the performance of answer selection and KBQA is improved. Also,
the multi-view attention scheme is proved to be effective in
assembling attentive information from different representational perspectives.

Introduction
Question answering (QA) is an important but challenging NLP application. Nowadays, there are many possible
sources of data for the QA systems, such as web documents, QA communities, knowledge bases and so on. According to these data sources, question answering can be divided into several different tasks, including machine reading comprehension (Rajpurkar et al. 2016), answer selection (Wang, Smith, and Mitamura 2007), knowledge base
question answering (Bordes et al. 2015) and more. Recent
years have witnessed many successes in applying deep neural networks on these QA tasks (dos Santos et al. 2016;
Wenpeng et al. 2016; Hao et al. 2017).
Despite the advancement of these models, different QA
tasks are still solved separately. Designing and training various models for specific tasks are time-consuming and expensive. Recently, as seen in many other NLP tasks, multiCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6318

