The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

MeshNet: Mesh Neural Network for 3D Shape Representation
Yutong Feng,1 Yifan Feng,2 Haoxuan You,1 Xibin Zhao,1∗ Yue Gao1∗
1

BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China.
School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University
{feng-yt15, zxb, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {evanfeng97, haoxuanyou}@gmail.com
2

Acc

Abstract

Mesh

View
Point Cloud

Volume

Mesh is an important and powerful type of data for 3D shapes
and widely studied in the field of computer vision and computer graphics. Regarding the task of 3D shape representation, there have been extensive research efforts concentrating
on how to represent 3D shapes well using volumetric grid,
multi-view and point cloud. However, there is little effort on
using mesh data in recent years, due to the complexity and
irregularity of mesh data. In this paper, we propose a mesh
neural network, named MeshNet, to learn 3D shape representation from mesh data. In this method, face-unit and feature
splitting are introduced, and a general architecture with available and effective blocks are proposed. In this way, MeshNet
is able to solve the complexity and irregularity problem of
mesh and conduct 3D shape representation well. We have applied the proposed MeshNet method in the applications of 3D
shape classification and retrieval. Experimental results and
comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods demonstrate
that the proposed MeshNet can achieve satisfying 3D shape
classification and retrieval performance, which indicates the
effectiveness of the proposed method on 3D shape representation.

MVCNN

90

80

Pointnet++
Kd-Net
Pairwise
Pointnet
FPNN

SO-Net
GVCNN

ShapeNet
LFD

70

SPH

60
2003

2015

2016

2017

2018

Year

Figure 1: The developing history of 3D shape representation using different types of data. The X-axis indicates the
proposed time of each method, and the Y-axis indicates the
classification accuracy.

Figure 1, although there have been recent successful methods using the types of volumetric grid, multi-view and point
cloud, for the mesh data, there are only early methods using
handcraft features directly, such as the Spherical Harmonic
descriptor (SPH) (Kazhdan, Funkhouser, and Rusinkiewicz
2003), which limits the applications of mesh data.
Mesh data of 3D shapes is a collection of vertices, edges
and faces, which is dominantly used in computer graphics
for rendering and storing 3D models. Mesh data has the
properties of complexity and irregularity. The complexity
problem is that mesh consists of multiple elements, and different types of connections may be defined among them.
The irregularity is another challenge for mesh data processing, which indicates that the number of elements in mesh
may vary dramatically among 3D shapes, and permutations
of them are arbitrary. In spite of these problems, mesh has
stronger ability for 3D shape description than other types of
data. Under such circumstances, how to effectively represent
3D shapes using mesh data is an urgent and challenging task.
In this paper, we present a mesh neural network, named
MeshNet, that learns on mesh data directly for 3D shape
representation. To deal with the challenges in mesh data processing, the faces are regarded as the unit and connections
between faces sharing common edges are defined, which
enables us to solve the complexity and irregularity problem

Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) shape representation is one of the
most fundamental topics in the field of computer vision and
computer graphics. In recent years, with the increasing applications in 3D shapes, extensive efforts (Wu et al. 2015;
Chang et al. 2015) have been concentrated on 3D shape representation and proposed methods are successfully applied
for different tasks, such as classification and retrieval.
For 3D shapes, there are several popular types of data, including volumetric grid, multi-view, point cloud and mesh.
With the success of deep learning methods in computer vision, many neural network methods have been introduced
to conduct 3D shape representation using volumetric grid
(Wu et al. 2015; Maturana and Scherer 2015), multi-view
(Su et al. 2015) and point cloud (Qi et al. 2017a). PointNet
(Qi et al. 2017a) proposes to learn on point cloud directly
and solves the disorder problem with per-point Multi-LayerPerceptron (MLP) and a symmetry function. As shown in
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8279

