The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ReAl-LiFE: Accelerating the Discovery of Individualized
Brain Connectomes on GPUs
Sawan Kumar,*1 Varsha Sreenivasan,*2 Partha Talukdar,1,3
Franco Pestilli,4 Devarajan Sridharan2,3
1

Computational and Data Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India,
2
Centre for Neuroscience, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India,
3
Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India,
4
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, USA
*
contributed equally
{sawankumar,varshas,sridhar}@iisc.ac.in
Abstract

through the brain’s white matter, tractography is a computational tool that involves tracing contiguous white matter
streamlines, utilizing local information about fiber orientation, to reconstruct white matter connections in three dimensions. The non-invasive nature and ability to acquire dMRI
scans at high spatial resolutions, with relatively short scan
times, has led to the rising popularity of this approach for
measuring individual-specific brain connectomes in large
databanks, comprising healthy subjects (Van Essen et al.
2012; Sudlow et al. 2015) and patient populations (Mueller
et al. 2005).
A key challenge with connectome generation algorithms
is the lack of access to ground truth: structural connectome
estimates can differ significantly depending on the experimenter’s choice of algorithmic parameters (e.g. minimum
radius of curvature or maximum fiber length). Post-hoc evaluation (or pruning) of whole-brain connectomes has, therefore, become an essential post-processing step in measuring
structural connectivity in the human brain. Typically, connectome evaluation is achieved by estimating a large number of structural connections, including potentially redundant connections, and pruning these down to a subset of connections that best fit the measured diffusion data (Pestilli et
al. 2014; Smith et al. 2013; Smith et al. 2015).
One popular algorithm for evaluating connectomes is Linear Fascicle Evaluation (LiFE) (Caiafa et al. 2017; Pestilli
et al. 2014). LiFE models the diffusion signal in each
voxel as arising from a weighted contribution of all fibers
traversing that voxel. Estimating the streamline weights is
achieved by minimizing the error between the actual and
the connectome-predicted diffusion signal, subject to a nonnegativity constraint on the weights. Streamlines with nonzero weights constitute the pruned connectome.
In its original formulation, the LiFE algorithm suffered
from constraints on memory as well as execution time,
which limited its use with large-scale connectome data
(Pestilli et al. 2014). These memory constraints have been
recently addressed by encoding brain connectomes in multidimensional arrays (Caiafa and Pestilli 2017; Caiafa et
al. 2017). Despite its more efficient memory management,
LiFE converges very slowly on desktop CPUs. Convergence,
even for a single subject’s connectome (1 million stream-

Diffusion imaging and tractography enable mapping structural connections in the human brain, in-vivo. Linear Fascicle Evaluation (LiFE) is a state-of-the-art approach for pruning spurious connections in the estimated structural connectome, by optimizing its fit to the measured diffusion data.
Yet, LiFE imposes heavy demands on computing time, precluding its use in analyses of large connectome databases.
Here, we introduce a GPU-based implementation of LiFE that
achieves 50-100x speedups over conventional CPU-based implementations for connectome sizes of up to several million fibers. Briefly, the algorithm accelerates generalized matrix multiplications on a compressed tensor through efficient
GPU kernels, while ensuring favorable memory access patterns. Leveraging these speedups, we advance LiFE’s algorithm by imposing a regularization constraint on estimated
fiber weights during connectome pruning. Our regularized,
accelerated, LiFE algorithm (“ReAl-LiFE”) estimates sparser
connectomes that also provide more accurate fits to the underlying diffusion signal. We demonstrate the utility of our
approach by classifying pathological signatures of structural
connectivity in patients with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). We
estimated million fiber whole-brain connectomes, followed
by pruning with ReAl-LiFE, for 90 individuals (45 AD patients and 45 healthy controls). Linear classifiers, based on
support vector machines, achieved over 80% accuracy in classifying AD patients from healthy controls based on their
ReAl-LiFE pruned structural connectomes alone. Moreover,
classification based on the ReAl-LiFE pruned connectome
outperformed both the unpruned connectome, as well as the
LiFE pruned connectome, in terms of accuracy. We propose our GPU-accelerated approach as a widely relevant tool
for non-negative least squares optimization, across many domains.

1

Introduction

Mapping anatomical connections between brain regions is
essential for understanding how the brain produces behavior.
At present, diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) and tractography are among the only techniques
for estimating structural connectivity in the human brain in
vivo. While dMRI measures the diffusion of water molecules
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

630

