The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

What Is One Grain of Sand in the Desert?
Analyzing Individual Neurons in Deep NLP Models
Fahim Dalvi,∗1 Nadir Durrani,∗1 Hassan Sajjad,∗1
Yonatan Belinkov,2 Anthony Bau,2 James Glass2
1

2

Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU Research Complex, Doha 5825, Qatar
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{faimaduddin,ndurrani,hsajjad}@qf.org.qa
{belinkov,abau,glass}@mit.edu
Abstract

Qiu, and Huang 2016b; Adi et al. 2016), and hidden states
in NMT models (Shi, Padhi, and Knight 2016; Belinkov et
al. 2017a). The analyses reveal that neural vector representations often contain substantial amount of linguistic information. Most of this work, however, targets the whole vector representation, neglecting the individual dimensions in
the embeddings. In contrast, much work in computer vision
investigates properties encoded in individual neurons or filters (Zeiler and Fergus 2014; Zhou et al. 2016).
We address this gap by studying individual dimensions
(neurons) in the vector representations learned by end-toend neural models. We aim to increase model transparency
by identifying specific dimensions that are responsible for
particular properties. We thus strive for post-hoc decomposibility, in the sense of (Lipton 2016). That is, we analyze models after they have been trained, in order to uncover the importance of their individual parameters. This
kind of analysis is important for improving understanding of
the inner workings of neural networks. It also has potential
applications in model distillation (e.g., by removing unimportant neurons), neural architecture search (by guiding the
search with important neurons), and mitigating model bias
(by identifying neurons responsible for sensitive attributes
like gender, race or politeness1 ). In this work we lay out a
methodology for identifying and analyzing individual neurons, and open the call to explore such use cases to the research community.
To this end, we propose two methods to facilitate neuron analysis. First, we perform an extrinsic correlation analysis through supervised classification on a number of linguistic properties that are deemed important for the task
(for example, learning word morphology lies at the heart
of modeling various NLP problems). Our classifier extracts
important individual (or groups of) neurons that capture certain properties. We call this method Linguistic Correlation
Analysis. Second, we propose an alternative methodology
to search for neurons that share similar patterns in independently trained networks, based on the assumption that important properties are captured in multiple networks by individual neurons. We call this method Cross-model Correlation Analysis. Such an analysis is more intrinsic and help-

Despite the remarkable evolution of deep neural networks in
natural language processing (NLP), their interpretability remains a challenge. Previous work largely focused on what
these models learn at the representation level. We break this
analysis down further and study individual dimensions (neurons) in the vector representation learned by end-to-end neural models in NLP tasks. We propose two methods: Linguistic Correlation Analysis, based on a supervised method to
extract the most relevant neurons with respect to an extrinsic task, and Cross-model Correlation Analysis, an unsupervised method to extract salient neurons w.r.t. the model itself.
We evaluate the effectiveness of our techniques by ablating
the identified neurons and reevaluating the network’s performance for two tasks: neural machine translation (NMT) and
neural language modeling (NLM). We further present a comprehensive analysis of neurons with the aim to address the
following questions: i) how localized or distributed are different linguistic properties in the models? ii) are certain neurons exclusive to some properties and not others? iii) is the
information more or less distributed in NMT vs. NLM? and
iv) how important are the neurons identified through the linguistic correlation method to the overall task? Our code is
publicly available as part of the NeuroX toolkit (Dalvi et al.
2019a). This paper is a non-archived version of the paper published at AAAI (Dalvi et al. 2019b).

Introduction
While neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in NLP and other spheres of Artificial Intelligence
(AI), their opaqueness remains a cause of concern (DoshiVelez and Kim 2017). Interpreting the behavior of neural
networks is considered important for increasing trust in AI
systems, providing additional information to decision makers, and assisting ethical decision making (Lipton 2016).
Recent work attempted to analyze what linguistic information is captured in such models when they are trained on a
downstream task like neural machine translation (NMT). A
typical framework is to generate vector representations for
some linguistic unit and predict a property of interest such
as morphological features. This approach has also been applied for analyzing word and sentence embeddings (Qian,
∗

Authors contributed equally
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
E.g., controlling the system to generate outputs with the right
honorifics (“Sie” vs. “du”) in German.

6309

