The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Evolutionarily Learning Multi-Aspect Interactions and Influences
from Network Structure and Node Content
Songlei Jian,1,2 Liang Hu,2,3 Longbing Cao,2 Kai Lu,1 Hang Gao4
1

College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
Advanced Analytics Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
3
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, 4 Alibaba Group, China
jiansonglei@163.com, rainmilk@gmail.com, longbing.cao@uts.edu.au,
kailu@nudt.edu.cn, allen.gh@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract
The formation of a complex network is highly driven by
multi-aspect node influences and interactions, reflected on
network structures and the content embodied in network
nodes. Limited work has jointly modeled all these aspects,
which typically focuses on topological structures but overlooks the heterogeneous interactions behind node linkage
and contributions of node content to the interactive heterogeneities. Here, we propose a multi-aspect interaction and
influence-unified evolutionary coupled system (MAI-ECS)
for network representation by involving node content and
linkage-based network structure. MAI-ECS jointly and iteratively learns two systems: a multi-aspect interaction learning
system to capture heterogeneous hidden interactions between
nodes and an influence propagation system to capture multiaspect node influences and their propagation between nodes.
MAI-ECS couples, unifies and optimizes the two systems toward an effective representation of explicit node content and
network structure, and implicit node interactions and influences. MAI-ECS shows superior performance in node classification and link prediction in comparison with the stateof-the-art methods on two real-world datasets. Further, we
demonstrate the semantic interpretability of the results generated by MAI-ECS.

target
node

pt

p1

pt

p1

p3

p2

p3

p2

network
structure

context
node

node
content

Legend

multi-aspect interactions
behind network structure

Citation network scenario (a)

multi-aspect
interactions

network
structure

multi-aspect
influences

multi-aspect interactions
behind network structure

Citation network scenario (b)

Figure 1: Two scenarios in citation networks: different network structures driving by different node influences and interactions between nodes.

roles of node information in influencing node interactions,
which are hidden behind each network structure. For example, the influences of each paper and the multi-aspect interactions between context papers and between the target paper and context papers in scenario (a) may be quite different
from that in scenario (b), even though both scenarios share
the same node content of each paper. It is important for us to
understand the multi-aspect node influences and the multiaspect interactions between nodes that drive the formation
of connections.
The above example illustrates a critical perspective in
complex networks and systems, i.e., representing multiaspect and heterogeneous interactions and influences between nodes (objects), in order to understand some intrinsic
characteristics and fundamental complexities: explicit and
implicit heterogeneities and coupling relations in complex
networks and systems (Cao 2014; 2015; Zhang et al. 2018a).
This requires to involve, model and integrate (1) explicit and
heterogeneous sources of node content information (e.g., paper’s title and/or abstract) and network topological structure
(e.g., paper citations), and (2) implicit and heterogeneous aspects of node influences (e.g., a paper’s topic uniqueness and
design novelty) and node interactions (e.g., a paper cites the
algorithm introduced in another paper). However, the above
significantly challenges existing research on network embedding and representation. To the best of our knowledge, no
work has been reported to jointly disclose and model these

Introduction
Complex networks are ubiquitous; precisely representing a
complex network is critical for understanding and developing networking applications yet challenging due to intricate
network structures, node information and influence, and interactions between nodes (Cui et al. 2018; Cai, Zheng, and
Chang 2018). As the citation network in Figure 1 illustrates,
each paper p owns its content information, including title,
abstract and other information, and plays various influences
on other papers w.r.t. such aspects as research topic uniqueness, method novelty, and experimental advantage. Accordingly, different citation network structures are formed under
different scenarios, as shown in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b).
While the network structures reflect different node connections (citations) between three context papers p1 , p2 and p3
and the target paper pt in scenarios (a) and (b), it is important to understand the underlying node interactions and the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

598

