The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Migration as Submodular Optimization
Paul Gölz, Ariel D. Procaccia
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

“Refugee relocation is what economists call a matching problem, in the sense that different refugees will
thrive differently in different countries. Determining
who should go where, and not just how many go to each
country, should be a major goal of relocation policy.”

Migration presents sweeping societal challenges that have
recently attracted significant attention from the scientific community. One of the prominent approaches that have been suggested employs optimization and machine learning to match
migrants to localities in a way that maximizes the expected
number of migrants who find employment. However, it relies
on a strong additivity assumption that, we argue, does not hold
in practice, due to competition effects; we propose to enhance
the data-driven approach by explicitly optimizing for these
effects. Specifically, we cast our problem as the maximization
of an approximately submodular function subject to matroid
constraints, and prove that the worst-case guarantees given by
the classic greedy algorithm extend to this setting. We then
present three different models for competition effects, and
show that they all give rise to submodular objectives. Finally,
we demonstrate via simulations that our approach leads to
significant gains across the board.

1

This observation underlies work in market design, which
draws on the extensive literature on matching problems such
as school choice. It focuses on refugee resettlement mechanisms that elicit refugees’ preferences over localities, and
output a matching that is desirable with respect to these preferences (Moraga and Rapoport 2014; Jones and Teytelboym
2018; Delacrétaz, Kominers, and Teytelboym 2016).
By contrast, a recent paper by Bansak et al. (2018), published in Science, takes a markedly different, data-driven
approach to refugee resettlement, which employs machine
learning and optimization. Their goal is to maximize the
expected number of refugees who find employment.1 Using historical data from the United States and Switzerland,
they train predictors that estimate the probability piℓ that a
given refugee i would find employment in a given locality
ℓ. The optimal solution is then an assignment of refugees to
localities that maximizes the sum of probabilities, subject to
capacity constraints. Assuming their predictions of employment probabilities are accurate, Bansak et al. demonstrate
that their approach leads to a 40%–70% increase in the number of employed refugees, compared to the actual outcomes
in the United States and Switzerland.
On a high level, we subscribe to the data-driven approach,
and believe that the assumptions made by Bansak et al. (2018)
are quite reasonable in the context of refugee resettlement —
most notably, the implicit assumption that the probability piℓ
can be estimated based only on information about the refugee
i and the locality ℓ, and does not depend on where other
refugees are assigned. But as this approach gains traction, we
envision it being deployed on a larger scale, and ultimately
informing international migration policy more broadly, especially in the context of labor migration.
The key observation behind our work is that, at that scale,
competition effects would invalidate the foregoing assump-

Introduction

Migration is one of the greatest societal challenges facing
humanity in the 21st Century. In 2015 there were 244 million international migrants in the world, suggesting a larger
increase in the rate of international migration than was previously anticipated (McAuliffe and Ruhs 2018). A key reason
behind this increase is the widely understood fact that migration often has significant benefits to the migrants and their
families, as well as the host country and the country of origin.
For example, migrants working in the United States earn
wages that are higher by a median factor of 4.11 than those
they would have earned in their home countries (Clemens,
Montenegro, and Prichett 2008); and the money they send
back to their countries of origin is a reliable source of foreign currency. But the increase in the rate of migration is
also driven by globalization, social disparities, and, in no
small part, by a vast number of refugees — including, most
recently, millions who have fled war in Syria, persecution in
Myanmar, and economic calamity in Venezuela.
These events have fueled a surge of attempts to put migration, and, especially, refugee resettlement, on scientific
footing. Alvin Roth, a Nobel laureate in economics, nicely
summarizes the problem in a 2015 opinion piece (Roth 2015):

1
To be precise, they consider families and maximize the expected
number of families such that at least one member is employed, but
this does not make a significant technical difference, so we focus on
individuals for ease of exposition.

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

549

