The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Attacking Data Transforming Learners at Training Time
Scott Alfeld,1 Ara Vartanian,2 Lucas Newman-Johnson,1 Benjamin I.P. Rubinstein3
1

Department of Computer Science, Amherst College
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin – Madison
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne
1
{salfeld, lnewmanjohnson18}@amherst.edu
2
aravart@cs.wisc.edu
3
brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au
2

Abstract

Szegedy et al. 2013), little is known about something as
prevalent to practical scenarios as feature transformation
and its effects on optimal attack strategies (Huang et al.
2011). This paper delivers a systematic treatment of optimal best-response attacks against a defender employing data
pre-processing.
A common approach to computing data manipulation attacks is with a so-called gradient-based attack (Biggio et al.
2013), where Alice performs gradient-descent on her loss
function to optimize her data perturbation. To compute the
gradient we employ the theory of matrix differential calculus
(MDC) (Magnus and Neudecker 1988). Manipulating differentials is more hospitable to compact calculation, though
from a theoretical point of view the concepts of (matrix) differentials and (matrix) derivatives are equivalent. Through
the chain rule, one can compute the gradient of Alice’s loss
for any transform-learner combination via matrix (or tensor)
multiplication. One need only compute the (matrix) derivative of the learner and the derivative of the transform, separately. In this way, MDC yields a “plug and play” framework
for generating adversarial perturbations.
A consequence is that much prior work — which focuses
on settings where Alice directly affects the features or target
values fed into the learner — can be leveraged to compute
attacks against defenders which first transform the data. We
illustrate this phenomenon by computing the derivative of
ordinary least squares (OLS) regression for arbitrary additive perturbations and three different transforms within the
MDC framework. We further demonstrate the flexibility of
our framework by discussing the case when Bob performs
a series of transforms prior to learning. Where prior work
has often considered an attacker bound to specific types of
alterations (e.g., affecting only target values or a single data
point), we allow for an attacker to simultaneously alter both
features and target values1 . It is through algebraic manipulations of matrix differentials that we are able to compute the
derivative of Alice’s loss.
A driving motivation for our work is autoregressive (AR)
modeling. Here one models a value of a time series as some

While machine learning systems are known to be vulnerable to data-manipulation attacks at both training and deployment time, little is known about how to adapt attacks when
the defender transforms data prior to model estimation. We
consider the setting where the defender Bob first transforms
the data then learns a model from the result; Alice, the attacker, perturbs Bob’s input data prior to him transforming it.
We develop a general-purpose “plug and play” framework for
gradient-based attacks based on matrix differentials, focusing on ordinary least-squares linear regression. This allows
learning algorithms and data transformations to be paired and
composed arbitrarily: attacks can be adapted through the use
of the chain rule—analogous to backpropagation on neural
network parameters—to compositional learning maps. Bestresponse attacks can be computed through matrix multiplications from a library of attack matrices for transformations and
learners. Our treatment of linear regression extends state-ofthe-art attacks at training time, by permitting the attacker to
affect both features and targets optimally and simultaneously.
We explore several transformations broadly used across machine learning with a driving motivation for our work being
autogressive modeling. There, Bob transforms a univariate
time series into a matrix of observations and vector of target
values which can then be fed into standard learners. Under
this learning reduction, a perturbation from Alice to a single
value of the time series affects features of several data points
along with target values.

Introduction
While outside the traditional focus of security, attacks on
machine learning systems are inevitable: the very adaptability that learners deliver to valuable applications and industries is also an attack surface to be exploited. A key security
goal in adversarial machine learning research is model integrity/availability (Barreno et al. 2006) or prediction correctness more broadly. There, a defender Bob wishes to
learn and then deploy a model after the adversary Alice
has perturbed train or test data. While numerous positive
results demonstrate the potential power Alice might wield
in lab settings (Rubinstein et al. 2009; Biggio et al. 2013;

1

Note that this does not mean our attack is unbounded in their
capability. As discussed in more detail, we consider an attacker
with a defined budget limiting their perturbation.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3167

