The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Predicting Concrete and Abstract Entities in Modern Poetry
Fiammetta Caccavale, Anders Søgaard
University of Copenhagen
Universitetsparken 1
DK-2100 Copenhagen

Abstract

the context align along some dimensions, suggesting several, possible readings. In effect, form becomes visible - no
longer a simple means to convey content. This is in sharp
contrast with prose or scientific writing, of course, in which
form is always a slave of content.
We believe entities (or common nouns), and how they are
introduced, constitute a key dimension of modern poetry.
Part of this is a willingness of modern poets to introduce
entities in unusual contexts (odd pairings); part of it is the
use of entities in novel metaphor schemes. The word sea,
for example, usually refers to a vast extension of water, but
in Van Jordan’s poem ”Vestiges”, sea is a metaphor of time,
introducing characteristics of coldness and depth, as well as
the notion of voyage.

One dimension of modernist poetry is introducing entities in
surprising contexts, such as wheelbarrow in Bob Dylan’s feel
like falling in love with the first woman I meet/ putting her
in a wheelbarrow. This paper considers the problem of teaching a neural language model to select poetic entities, based on
local context windows. We do so by fine-tuning and evaluating language models on the poetry of American modernists,
both on seen and unseen poets, and across a range of experimental designs. We also compare the performance of our poetic language model to human, professional poets. Our main
finding is that, perhaps surprisingly, modernist poetry differs
most from ordinary language when entities are concrete, like
wheelbarrow, and while our fine-tuning strategy successfully
adapts to poetic language in general, outperforming professional poets, the biggest error reduction is observed with concrete entities.

A wind breathes across the sea,
joining gently the edges of time.

Introduction
Paul Valéry defines the ”language of poetry” as a ”language
within a language” (Valéry 1957), alluding to the fact that
poetic language does not necessary reflect the conventions of
every-day language. For the same reason, it is relatively easy
for most people to detect poetic language, even in the absence of rhyme and unconventional word order. At the same
time, poetic language is considered mysterious and impenetrable by many, and often also idiosyncratic.
Poets often spend most of their energy on labor limae, deciding which words are more poetical, expressive and successful in conveying the intended idea. Poets are able to
find the most poetically interesting word for a given context based on their subtle and nuanced grasp of the slight
variations in meaning that each word bears upon the text.
Several poets have tried to define what they mean by ’poetically interesting’; and to mention just one example, the
American poet Charles Bernstein has described the poetically interesting as anti-absorptive (Bernstein 1987). Antiabsorption means that a poetically interesting word or entity
suggests ways of interacting with its context, but does not
simply blend in. As a reader you stumble – the entity feels
misplaced, somehow – but at the same time, the entity and

This paper asks whether a neural network is capable of learning such poetic decisions in ways that generalize across different poets? Specifically, we investigate whether neural language models can learn to predict entities in modern poetry
based on the preceding context, and successfully do so on
texts by previously unseen poets.
Specifically, we consider the task of reconstructing the
original verse of a poem, extracted from a corpus of American modern poetry, and evaluate models for this task
across different poets. Our baseline model is a state-of-theart neural language model, trained on ordinary language
(Wikipedia). Note that it is an open question whether modeling poetic choices is at all learnable or not. If poetic choices
are entirely idiosyncratic (Java 2015), predicting the choices
of unseen authors beyond chance should be impossible.
Predicting the exact word used by a poet out of a vocabulary of hundreds of thousands of words is extremely hard,
but we consider the task of selecting the right candidate from
a set of related words, e.g., a set of synonyms or words of the
same high-level semantic class. We evaluate our models on
held-out sentences, possibly from held-out poets. Finally, we
compare the performance of our models to human, professional poets. 1

c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Note the idea of evaluating poetry, in part, by how
much it departs from our internal language models (conven-

858

