The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning How to Ground a Plan – Partial Grounding in Classical Planning
Daniel Gnad, Álvaro Torralba Martı́n Domı́nguez, Carlos Areces, Facundo Bustos
Saarland University
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
{gnad,torralba}@cs.uni-saarland.de

Universidad Nacional de Córdoba
Córdoba, Argentina
{mardom75, carlos.areces, facundojosebustos}@gmail.com

Abstract

task, they fail without even starting the search for a plan
whenever an instance cannot be grounded, making grounding a bottleneck for the success of satisficing planners.
Grounding is particularly challenging in open multi-task
environments, where the planning task is automatically generated with all available objects even if only a few of them
are relevant to achieve the goals. For example, in robotics,
the planning task may contain all objects with which the
robot may interact even if they are not needed (Lang and
Toussaint 2009). In network-security environments, like the
one modeled in the Caldera domain (Miller et al. 2018),
the planning task may contain all details about the network.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no method exists that
attempts to focus the grounding on relevant parts of the task.
We propose partial grounding, where, instead of instantiating the full planning task, we focus on the parts that are
required to find a plan. The approach is sound – if a plan
is found for the partially grounded task then it is a valid
plan for the original task – but incomplete – the partially
grounded task will only be solvable if the operators in at
least one plan have been grounded. To do so, we give priority to operators that we deem more relevant to achieve the
goal. Inspired by relational learning approaches to domain
control knowledge (e.g., Yoon, Fern, and Givan (2008), de la
Rosa et al. (2011), Krajnansky et al. (2014)), we use machine
learning methods to predict the probability that a given operator belongs to a plan. We learn from small training instances, and generalize to larger ones by using relational
features in standard classification and regression algorithms
(e.g., Kramer, Lavrač, and Flach (2001)). As an alternative
model, we also experiment with relational trees to learn the
probabilities (Muggleton and Raedt 1994).
Empirical results show that our learning models can predict which operators are relevant with high accuracy in several domains, leading to a very strong reduction of task size
when grounding and solving huge tasks.

Current classical planners are very successful in finding (nonoptimal) plans, even for large planning instances. To do so,
most planners rely on a preprocessing stage that computes a
grounded representation of the task. Whenever the grounded
task is too big to be generated (i.e., whenever this preprocess
fails) the instance cannot even be tackled by the actual planner. To address this issue, we introduce a partial grounding
approach that grounds only a projection of the task, when
complete grounding is not feasible. We propose a guiding
mechanism that, for a given domain, identifies the parts of a
task that are relevant to find a plan by using off-the-shelf machine learning methods. Our empirical evaluation attests that
the approach is capable of solving planning instances that are
too big to be fully grounded.

Introduction
Given a model of the environment, classical planning attempts to find a sequence of actions that lead from an initial
state to a state that satisfies a set of goals. Planning models are typically described in the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) (McDermott et al. 1998) in terms of
predicates and action schemas with arguments that can be
instantiated with a set of objects. However, most planners
work on a grounded representation without free variables,
like STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson 1971) or FDR (Bäckström
and Nebel 1995). Grounding is the process of translating a
task in the lifted (PDDL) representation to a grounded representation. It requires to compute all valid instantiations that
assign objects to the arguments of predicates and action parameters, even though only a small fraction of these instantiations might be necessary to solve the task.
The size of the grounded task is exponential in the number of arguments in predicates and action schemas. Although
this is constant for all tasks of a given domain, and grounding can be done in polynomial time, it may still be prohibitive when the number of objects is large and/or some
predicates or actions have many parameters.
The success of planners like FF (Hoffmann and Nebel
2001a) or LAMA (Richter, Westphal, and Helmert 2011) in
finding plans for large planning tasks is undeniable. However, since most planners rely on grounding for solving a

Background
Throughout the paper, we assume for simplicity that tasks
are specified in the STRIPS subset of PDDL (Fikes and Nilsson 1971). Our algorithms and implementation, however, are
directly applicable to a larger subset of PDDL containing
ADL expressions (Pednault 1989).
A lifted (PDDL) task ΠPDDL is a tuple

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7602

