The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Human Motion Prediction via Learning Local
Structure Representations and Temporal Dependencies
Xiao Guo, Jongmoo Choi
University of Southern California, Department of Computer Science
xiaoguo@usc.edu, jongmooc@usc.edu

Abstract
Human motion prediction from motion capture data is a classical problem in the computer vision, and conventional methods take the holistic human body as input. These methods ignore the fact that, in various human activities, different body
components (limbs and the torso) have distinctive characteristics in terms of the moving pattern. In this paper, we argue
local representations on different body components should be
learned separately and, based on such idea, propose a network, Skeleton Network (SkelNet), for long-term human motion prediction. Specifically, at each time-step, local structure
representations of input (human body) are obtained via SkelNet’s branches of component-specific layers, then the shared
layer uses local spatial representations to predict the future
human pose. Our SkelNet is the first to use local structure
representations for predicting the human motion. Then, for
short-term human motion prediction, we propose the second
network, named as Skeleton Temporal Network (Skel-TNet).
Skel-TNet consists of three components: SkelNet and a Recurrent Neural Network, they have advantages in learning
spatial and temporal dependencies for predicting human motion, respectively; a feed-forward network that outputs the final estimation. Our methods achieve promising results on the
Human3.6M dataset and the CMU motion capture dataset,
and the code is publicly available 1 .

Figure 1: Left: An illustrative sketch of proposed SkelNet.
The human pose is divided into five non-overlapping parts
depicted in different colors, which are fed accordingly into
five branches of component-specific layers for learning local structure representations. z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , z5 respectively
denote representations for different body components. The
shared layer uses representations of local structure to predict
the future human pose. Right: During both training and testing, SkelNet is fed with one seed mocap vector, then predicts
the mocap sequence by always sampling its own generated
samples.

Introduction

fact, our prediction task can be divided into two subtasks:
long-term and short-term predictions. In long-term scenario,
errors can accumulate severely with long time horizons; in
short-term, motions are more certain and constrained by the
temporal coherence. Many previous methods (Taylor, Hinton, and Roweis 2007; Taylor et al. 2010; Fragkiadaki et al.
2015; Jain et al. 2016; Martinez, Black, and Romero 2017;
Butepage et al. 2017) have achieved promising results on
these two subtasks by using deep learning approaches. However, we observe that different physical components (limbs
and the torso) of the human body participate into actions to
varying degrees. These components have different moving
dynamics and should be processed separately, but the previous work is fed with the human pose that is never fully
partitioned in a component-specific way, this violates the
kinematics principle of the human body, and may bring in
intra-pose interventions in generating future human poses.
In this paper, we propose a novel network at first for
long-term human motion prediction, named as Skeleton Net-

Human motion prediction from motion capture (mocap) data
is attracting a significant attention in recent years, which
has been applied in a variety of fields: human pose tracking
(Taylor et al. 2010; Tekin et al. 2016), Physics-Based Motion synthesis (Liu, Hertzmann, and Popović 2005; Arikan,
Forsyth, and O’Brien 2003) and human-computer interaction (Koppula and Saxena 2016). However, estimating physical parameters, like skeleton joint angles, used to represent
human poses from mocap data is still a challenging issue, as
the realistic human motion is involved with complexities in
kinematics and variations of the dynamic pattern, which are
difficult to predict.
Our goal is to forecast future human poses from mocap
data via proposed networks, in which each mocap feature
vector is a set of skeleton joint angles of the human pose. In
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/CHELSEA234/SkelNet motion prediction

2580

