The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A New Ensemble Learning Framework for 3D Biomedical Image Segmentation
Hao Zheng,∗ Yizhe Zhang,∗ Lin Yang,∗
Peixian Liang, Zhuo Zhao, Chaoli Wang, Danny Z. Chen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
{hzheng3, yzhang29, lyang5, pliang, zzhao3, cwang11, dchen}@nd.edu

Abstract

age information but only have a limited field of view (e.g.,
64 × 64 × 64 (Yu et al. 2017)), while 2D CNNs can have
a much larger field of view (e.g., 572 × 572 (Ronneberger,
Fischer, and Brox 2015)) but are not able to fully explore
inter-slice information.
Many methods have been proposed to circumvent this
trade-off by carefully designing the structures of 2D and
3D CNNs. Their main ideas can be broadly classified into
two categories. The models in the first category selectively
choose the input data. For example, the tri-planar schemes
(Wolterink et al. 2017; Prasoon et al. 2013) use only three
orthogonal planes (i.e., the xy, yz, and xz planes) instead of
the whole 3D image, aiming to utilize inter-slice information
without sacrificing the field of view. The models in the second category first summarize intra-slice information using
2D CNNs and then use the distilled information as an (extra)
input to their 3D network component. For example, in (Lee
et al. 2015), intra-slice information is first extracted using
a 2D CNN (VD2D) and then passed to the 3D component
(VD2D3D) via recursive training. In (Chen et al. 2016b), its
recurrent neural network (RNN) component directly uses the
results of 2D CNNs as input to compute 3D segmentation.
However, these methods still have considerable drawbacks. Tri-planar schemes (Wolterink et al. 2017; Prasoon
et al. 2013) use only a small fraction of 3D image information and the computation cost is not reduced but shifted
to the inference stage (a tri-planar scheme can only predict
one voxel at a time, which is very slow when predicting new
3D images). For models that first summarize intra-slice information, the asymmetry nature of the network design (first
2D, then 3D) may hinder a full utilization of 3D image information (2D results may dominate since they are much easier
to be interpreted than raw images in the 3D stage).
In this paper, we explore a different perspective. Instead
of designing new network structures to circumvent the tradeoff between field of view and inter-slice information, we address this difficulty by developing a new ensemble learning
framework for 3D biomedical image segmentation which
aims to retain and combine the merits of 2D/3D models.
Fig. 1 gives an overview of our framework.
Due to the heterogeneous nature of our 2D and 3D models (base-learners), we use the idea of stacking (Wolpert
1992) (i.e., training a meta-learner to combine the results of multiple base-learners). Given a set of im-

3D image segmentation plays an important role in biomedical image analysis. Many 2D and 3D deep learning models
have achieved state-of-the-art segmentation performance on
3D biomedical image datasets. Yet, 2D and 3D models have
their own strengths and weaknesses, and by unifying them together, one may be able to achieve more accurate results. In
this paper, we propose a new ensemble learning framework
for 3D biomedical image segmentation that combines the
merits of 2D and 3D models. First, we develop a fully convolutional network based meta-learner to learn how to improve
the results from 2D and 3D models (base-learners). Then, to
minimize over-fitting for our sophisticated meta-learner, we
devise a new training method that uses the results of the baselearners as multiple versions of “ground truths”. Furthermore,
since our new meta-learner training scheme does not depend on manual annotation, it can utilize abundant unlabeled
3D image data to further improve the model. Extensive experiments on two public datasets (the HVSMR 2016 Challenge dataset and the mouse piriform cortex dataset) show
that our approach is effective under fully-supervised, semisupervised, and transductive settings, and attains superior performance over state-of-the-art image segmentation methods.

1

Introduction

3D image segmentation plays an important role in biomedical image analysis (e.g., segmenting the whole heart to diagnose cardiac diseases (Pace et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2017)
and segmenting neuronal structures to identify cortical connectivity (Lee et al. 2015; Shen et al. 2017)). With recent
rapid advances in deep learning, many 2D (Shen et al. 2017;
Wolterink et al. 2017) and 3D (Yu et al. 2017; Çiçek et
al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017) convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have been developed to attain state-of-the-art segmentation results on various 3D biomedical image datasets
(Pace et al. 2015; Shen et al. 2017). However, due to the limitations of both GPU memory and computing power, when
designing 2D/3D CNNs for 3D biomedical image segmentation, the trade-off between the field of view and utilization
of inter-slice information in 3D images remains a major concern. For example, 3D CNNs attempt to fully utilize 3D im∗
Equal contribution (Co-first authors). Author ordering determined by dice rolling over a Google Hangout.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5909

