The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

ATOMIC: An Atlas of Machine Commonsense for If-Then Reasoning
Maarten Sap,†? Ronan Le Bras,† Emily Allaway,? Chandra Bhagavatula,† Nicholas Lourie,†
Hannah Rashkin,? Brendan Roof,† Noah A. Smith,†? Yejin Choi†?
?

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
†
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, USA
msap@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
X needs
to enlist

X w anted to serve
their country

We present ATOMIC, an atlas of everyday commonsense reasoning, organized through 877k textual descriptions of inferential knowledge. Compared to existing resources that center
around taxonomic knowledge, ATOMIC focuses on inferential
knowledge organized as typed if-then relations with variables
(e.g., “if X pays Y a compliment, then Y will likely return
the compliment”). We propose nine if-then relation types to
distinguish causes vs. effects, agents vs. themes, voluntary
vs. involuntary events, and actions vs. mental states. By generatively training on the rich inferential knowledge described
in ATOMIC, we show that neural models can acquire simple
commonsense capabilities and reason about previously unseen events. Experimental results demonstrate that multitask
models that incorporate the hierarchical structure of if-then
relation types lead to more accurate inference compared to
models trained in isolation, as measured by both automatic
and human evaluation.

Attributes of X

X needs to
train hard

X is skilled
X is brave

X w anted to
protect others

X needs to know
self- defense

X joins the
military

X w anted to
save themselves

because X
w anted to

X is strong

X is
seen as

before, X
needed to

bossy

Causes for X

as a result,
X w ants

X w ants to file a
police report
X w ants to leave
the scene

X feels
tired

Introduction

as a result,
Y feels

as a result,
X feels

X feels
angry

has an
effect on X

Y feels
w eak
Y feels
ashamed

has an
effect on Y

X's heart
races

Given a snapshot observation of an event, people can easily
anticipate and reason about unobserved causes and effects
in relation to the observed event: what might have happened
just before, what might happen next as a result, and how
different events are chained through causes and effects. For
instance, if we observe an event “X repels Y’s attack” (Figure 1), we can immediately infer various plausible facts surrounding that event. In terms of the plausible motivations
behind the event, X probably wants to protect herself. As for
the plausible pre-conditions prior to the event, X may have
been trained in self-defense to successfully fend off Y’s attack. We can also infer the plausible characteristics of X;
she might be strong, skilled, and brave. As a result of the
event, X probably feels angry and might want to file a police report. Y, on the other hand, might feel scared of getting
caught and want to run away.
The examples above illustrate how day-to-day commonsense reasoning can be operationalized through a densely
connected collection of inferential knowledge. It is through
this knowledge that we can watch a two-hour movie and understand a story that spans over several months, as we can
reason about a great number of events, causes, and effects,

X pushes Y
around

X repels
Y's attack

as a result,
Y w ants

X gains an
enemy

Y w ants to
yell at X

Y w ants to
run home

Y w ants to
attack X again

X gets dizzy
Y gets hurt
Y falls back

X makes a fool
of themselves

Effects on X
Effects on Y

Figure 1: A tiny subset of ATOMIC, an atlas of machine commonsense for everyday events, causes, and effects.

while observing only on a small fraction of them. It also enables us to develop Theories of Mind about others (Moore
2013). However, this ability, while common and trivial for
humans, is lacking in today’s AI systems. This is in part because the vast majority of AI systems are trained for taskspecific datasets and objectives, which lead to models that
are effective at finding task-specific correlations but lack
simple and explainable commonsense reasoning (Davis and
Marcus 2015; Lake et al. 2017; Marcus 2018).
In this paper, we introduce ATOMIC,1 an atlas of machine
1
An ATlas Of MachIne Commonsense, available to download
or browse at https://homes.cs.washington.edu/∼msap/atomic/.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3027

