The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Precision-Recall versus Accuracy and the Role of Large Data Sets
Brendan Juba, Hai S. Le
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130
bjuba@wustl.edu, hsle@wustl.edu

Abstract

Ehrenfeucht et al. 1989; Anthony and Bartlett 1999; Hanneke 2016). Thus, the central message of statistical learning theory is that this notion of model size controls the
amount of data inherently needed for learning. In particular, the same quantity suffices regardless of the distribution
of the actual data, and thus regardless of the degree of class
imbalance (“rarity” of positive examples) and so on.
In spite of the seemingly complete theoretical picture that
these theorems paint, practitioners in data mining in particular have been long concerned with the effects of class
imbalance or rarity of classes in training data (Weiss 2004;
He and Garcia 2009). These concerns led to much work on
attempts to reduce the class imbalance by either dropping
examples or synthesizing new ones. A crucial clue to the nature of the problem was provided by a substantial empirical
study by Weiss and Provost (2003): In a study of a fixed decision tree learning algorithm on twenty-six data sets, they
determined that indeed, the use of the natural class distribution provided close to the optimal accuracy (error rate)
across almost all of the data sets, as standard learning theory suggests. But, on the other hand, they also found that
for another metric – the area under the ROC curve (AUC)
– the quality of the learned decision tree was significantly
affected by the class imbalance of the data. Thus, their findings suggested that the sample complexity of some metrics
of classifier quality, such as AUC, might depend on class
imbalance, while others such as accuracy do not. And indeed, Agarwal and Roth (2005) established that the sample
complexity of learning under the AUC metric does depend
on the class imbalance. More recently, Raeder et al. (2012)
evaluated a variety of metrics and found empirically that every metric they considered except for accuracy had a dependence on the class imbalance. While the empirical studies
leave open the question of whether these observations are
artifacts of the particular algorithms used, we establish here
that such a dependence is also inherent for the precision and
recall of the learned classifier.
Our main technical contribution is actually a simple observation: We note that a simultaneous bound on the precision and recall when precision is greater than 50% is equivalent to a bound on the accuracy that is scaled by the base
positive rate. As a corollary, we obtain tight bounds on the
sample complexity of precision-recall bounds. In particular,
we find that the base positive rate (i.e., the class imbalance)

Practitioners of data mining and machine learning have long
observed that the imbalance of classes in a data set negatively
impacts the quality of classifiers trained on that data. Numerous techniques for coping with such imbalances have been
proposed, but nearly all lack any theoretical grounding. By
contrast, the standard theoretical analysis of machine learning admits no dependence on the imbalance of classes at all.
The basic theorems of statistical learning establish the number of examples needed to estimate the accuracy of a classifier as a function of its complexity (VC-dimension) and the
confidence desired; the class imbalance does not enter these
formulas anywhere. In this work, we consider the measures
of classifier performance in terms of precision and recall, a
measure that is widely suggested as more appropriate to the
classification of imbalanced data. We observe that whenever
the precision is moderately large, the worse of the precision
and recall is within a small constant factor of the accuracy
weighted by the class imbalance. A corollary of this observation is that a larger number of examples is necessary and
sufficient to address class imbalance, a finding we also illustrate empirically.

1

Introduction

One of the primary concerns of statistical learning theory is
to quantify the amount of data needed to reliably and accurately learn an unknown function that belongs to a given
family, such as halfspaces, decision trees, neural networks,
and so on. This quantity is often referred to as the sample
complexity of learning the family of functions. The foundational results of statistical learning theory, first established
by Vapnik and Chervonenkis (1971), assert that accurate
learning of functions is possible using an amount of training data that depends only on a parameter of the family of
functions known as the VC-dimension. In particular, for discrete functions, this VC-dimension parameter is no larger
than the number of bits needed to specify a member of the
family in a given domain; often, it is proportional to this
“description size” or the “number of parameters.” Moreover, it is known that (up to the leading constant) the same
number of examples is also necessary to reliably identify
a function that fits the data accurately (Blumer et al. 1989;
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4039

