The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-19)

Computational Intractability and
Solvability for the Birds of a Feather Game
Richard Hoshino, Max Notarangelo
Quest University Canada
Squamish, British Columbia, Canada

Abstract

Definition and Rules

In this paper, we analyze Birds of a Feather (BoaF), a perfectinformation one-player card game that is the subject of the
2019 EAAI Undergraduate Research Challenge. We prove
that the generalized N × N BoaF game is NP-complete, and
then explore the one million deals in the 4 × 4 BoaF testbed.
We present several graph-theoretic algorithms to prove that
1880 of these million deals are unsolvable, and conclude the
paper with two search algorithms that efficiently show that all
of the remaining 998,120 deals are in fact solvable.

Birds of a Feather is played with a standard 52-card deck,
with 4 suits and 13 ranks of each suit from Ace to King. The
deck is shuffled and 16 cards are dealt, forming 4 rows and
4 columns. The remaining cards are not used.
Each card initially consists of a 1-card “stack.” Any stack
of cards can be picked up and placed on top of another stack
in the same row or column, as long as the top card of each
stack is either the same suit or their ranks differ by at most
one. A move denotes the process of joining two stacks.
Two cards in the same row or column are defined as a
match by position, and two cards that share a suit, rank,
or are of adjacent rank, are a match by card. In any legal
move, we must have a match by position and by card. In this
game, Aces and Kings are not considered adjacent, so the
Ace of Diamonds (AD) cannot be placed on top of the King
of Clubs (KC), even if they share the same row or column.
For any initial state (i.e., a deal), the game is won if we
can determine a sequence of 15 moves that creates a single
stack of 16 cards. We say that such a deal is solvable. If no
such sequence exists, then we say that the deal is unsolvable.
Consider the random deal given in Table 1.

Games are the ideal platform for Artificial Intelligence research, as games are accessible to a general audience while
providing highly constrained contexts that enable computer
scientists to determine optimal decision-making strategies.
A recent textbook (Yannakakis and Togelius 2018) explores
the applications of games to AI, including procedural content generation and computational creativity.
There is a large body of work on one-player combinatorial
games, also known as puzzles (Demaine 2018). Popular examples of puzzles include Tetris, Sudoku, and Minesweeper,
which are among a collection of puzzles that are known to
be NP-complete (Kendall, Parkes, and Spoerer 2008).
An active research area is the analysis of open solitaire
card games, due to its application to classical planning problems (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). In these perfectinformation puzzles, all the cards are dealt face-up. By eliminating the element of chance, we can determine the effect
of any sequence of moves, and generate powerful algorithms
for efficiently solving deals without exhaustive search.
FreeCell is an example of an open solitaire NP-complete
game, where there exist sophisticated methods to solve random deals. One team of researchers has examined 108 FreeCell deals, showing that only 1282 are unsolvable, corresponding to one loss every 78,000 deals (Keller 2018).
The 2019 EAAI Undergraduate Research Challenge was
to analyze Birds of a Feather (BoaF), a recently invented
open solitaire card game (Neller 2016). After defining this
game, we prove that the N × N version of BoaF is computationally intractable, i.e., NP-complete. We then present
various algorithms for determining the solvability of a deal,
and fully analyze the million deals in the 4×4 BoaF testbed.

JD
5D
KD
AD

2D
7H
KC
QC

9H
6C
9S
KH

JC
5H
5S
3H

Table 1: The initial board state of a BoaF deal
For instance, 7H can be moved on top of 6C, since
|6 − 7| = 1. This move results in Table 2, with 6C being
“eliminated” from the board.
JD
5D
KD
AD

2D
KC
QC

9H
7H
9S
KH

JC
5H
5S
3H

Table 2: The board state after the move 7H → 6C
We now make the following move sequence: 9H → 9S,
5H → 5S, 7H → 9H, KH → 7H, KH → 5H, KH → 3H, QC
→ KH, QC → JC. This results in Table 3.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9648

