The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Sliding Window Temporal Graph Coloring∗
George B. Mertzios

Hendrik Molter

Viktor Zamaraev

Department of Computer Science
Durham University
Durham, UK
george.mertzios@durham.ac.uk

Algorithmics and Computational
Complexity, Fakultät IV, TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
h.molter@tu-berlin.de

Department of Computer Science
Durham University
Durham, UK
viktor.zamaraev@durham.ac.uk

Abstract

of Kempe, Kleinberg, and Kumar (2002), we adopt a simple and natural model for time-varying networks, given by
a graph with time-labels on its edges, while the vertex set is
fixed.
Definition 1.1 (Temporal Graph). A temporal graph is a pair
(G, λ), where G = (V, E) is an underlying (static) graph
and λ : E → 2N is a time-labeling function which assigns
to every edge of G a set of discrete-time labels.
For every edge e ∈ E in the underlying graph G of a
temporal graph (G, λ), λ(e) denotes the set of time slots
at which e is active. Due to their relevance and applicability in many areas, temporal graphs have been studied from various perspectives and under different names
such as time-varying (Flocchini, Mans, and Santoro 2009;
Tang et al. 2010; Aaron, Krizanc, and Meyerson 2014),
dynamic (Casteigts et al. 2012; Giakkoupis, Sauerwald,
and Stauffer 2014), evolving (Bui-Xuan, Ferreira, and Jarry
2003; Ferreira 2004; Clementi et al. 2010), and graphs over
time (Leskovec, Kleinberg, and Faloutsos 2007). For a comprehensive overview on the existing models and results on
temporal graphs from a (distributed) computing perspective
see the surveys (Michail 2016; Latapy, Viard, and Magnien
2018; Casteigts et al. 2012; Casteigts and Flocchini 2013a;
2013b).
The conceptual shift from static to temporal graphs imposes new challenges in algorithmic computation and complexity. Now the classical computational problems have to
be appropriately redefined in the temporal setting in order
to properly capture the notion of time. Motivated by the
fact that, due to causality, information in temporal graphs
can “flow” only along sequences of edges whose timelabels are increasing, most temporal graph parameters and
optimization problems that have been studied so far are
based on the notion of temporal paths and other “pathrelated” notions, such as temporal analogues of distance,
reachability, separators, diameter, exploration, and centrality (Akrida et al. 2016; Erlebach, Hoffmann, and Kammer 2015; Mertzios et al. 2013; Michail and Spirakis 2016;
Akrida et al. 2017; Enright et al. 2018; Zschoche et al. 2018;
Fluschnik et al. 2018).
Recently only few attempts have been made to define
and study “non-path” temporal graph problems. Motivated
by the contact patterns among high-school students, Viard,
Latapy, and Magnien (2016), introduced ∆-cliques, an ex-

Graph coloring is one of the most famous computational
problems with applications in a wide range of areas such
as planning and scheduling, resource allocation, and pattern
matching. So far coloring problems are mostly studied on
static graphs, which often stand in stark contrast to practice where data is inherently dynamic and subject to discrete
changes over time. A temporal graph is a graph whose edges
are assigned a set of integer time labels, indicating at which
discrete time steps the edge is active. In this paper we present
a natural temporal extension of the classical graph coloring
problem. Given a temporal graph and a natural number ∆,
we ask for a coloring sequence for each vertex such that (i) in
every sliding time window of ∆ consecutive time steps, in
which an edge is active, this edge is properly colored (i.e. its
endpoints are assigned two different colors) at least once during that time window, and (ii) the total number of different
colors is minimized. This sliding window temporal coloring problem abstractly captures many realistic graph coloring scenarios in which the underlying network changes over
time, such as dynamically assigning communication channels to moving agents. We present a thorough investigation of
the computational complexity of this temporal coloring problem. More specifically, we prove strong computational hardness results, complemented by efficient exact and approximation algorithms. Some of our algorithms are linear-time
fixed-parameter tractable with respect to appropriate parameters, while others are asymptotically almost optimal under the
Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH).

1

Introduction

A great variety of modern, as well as of traditional networks
are dynamic in nature as their link availability changes over
time. Just a few indicative examples of such inherently dynamic networks are information and communication networks, social networks, transportation networks, and several
physical systems (Holme and Saramäki 2013; Michail and
Spirakis 2018). All these application areas share the common characteristic that the network structure, i.e. the underlying graph topology, is subject to discrete changes over
time. In this paper, embarking from the foundational work
∗
GM and VZ are supported by the EPSRC grant EP/P020372/1.
HM is supported by the DFG project MATE (NI 369/17).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7667

