The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Reactive Policies for Planning in Stochastic Nonlinear Domains
Thiago P. Bueno,1 Leliane N. de Barros,1 Denis D. Mauá,1 Scott Sanner2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of São Paulo, Brazil
2
Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Canada
tbueno@ime.usp.br, leliane@ime.usp.br, ddm@ime.usp.br, ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract

based methods (Yoon et al. 2008; Keller and Helmert 2013;
Raghavan et al. 2017) that can require non-trivial computational time per decision step. However, an important limitation of current approaches to learning DRPs is either the
need of optimal planners to be used as supervisors, or the
sample complexity of methods based on high-variance policy gradients. Both issues can be troublesome for planning
in continuous spaces, especially for domains exhibiting nonlinear dynamics and costs. In the case of training DRPs by
supervised learning, no efficient domain-independent optimal planner is currently available to be used as ground truth
for the class of stochastic nonlinear domains. On the other
hand, policy gradient methods for continuous action spaces
can considerably exacerbate the need of huge amounts of
data and processing power, which can be prohibitively expensive for common users in most applications.
So, in order to overcome those limitations, we propose a
general framework of planning as optimization in continuous spaces. The basic idea is to leverage automatic differentiation in stochastic computation graphs to estimate gradients used to optimize the parameters of DRPs. We exploit
the fact that several distributions used in model-known planning are amenable to the re-parameterization trick, which
allows for optimizing a surrogate cost function by the application of adaptive stochastic gradient descent methods commonly used in DL. We compare our approach to a stochastic
online extension of the recently proposed approach Planning
through Backpropagation (Wu, Say, and Sanner 2017).
We are particularly interested in shedding light on the
following questions. Is it possible to efficiently train DRPs
for stochastic nonlinear domains without supervision or policy gradients? How do offline learned DRPs compare in
terms of quality of solution and computational time to online gradient-based planning? How do different DRP architectures (i.e., in terms of number of layers, number of
units) compare amongst themselves? Our experiments on
stochastic nonlinear domains (e.g., Navigation (Faulwasser
and Findeisen 2009), HVAC (Heating, Ventilation, and Air
Conditioning) (Agarwal et al. 2010), and Reservoir Control
(Yeh 1985)) highlight the flexibility of our approach over
diverse differentiable transition and cost functions.
The results show that DRPs trained by gradient-based optimization in stochastic computation graphs can be evaluated within a fraction of the time needed by state-of-the-

Recent advances in applying deep learning to planning have
shown that Deep Reactive Policies (DRPs) can be powerful
for fast decision-making in complex environments. However,
an important limitation of current DRP-based approaches is
either the need of optimal planners to be used as ground truth
in a supervised learning setting or the sample complexity
of high-variance policy gradient estimators, which are particularly troublesome in continuous state-action domains. In
order to overcome those limitations, we introduce a framework for training DRPs in continuous stochastic spaces via
gradient-based policy search. The general approach is to explicitly encode a parametric policy as a deep neural network,
and to formulate the probabilistic planning problem as an optimization task in a stochastic computation graph by exploiting the re-parameterization of the transition probability densities; the optimization is then solved by leveraging gradient
descent algorithms that are able to handle non-convex objective functions. We benchmark our approach against stochastic planning domains exhibiting arbitrary differentiable nonlinear transition and cost functions (e.g., Reservoir Control,
HVAC and Navigation). Results show that DRPs with more
than 125,000 continuous action parameters can be optimized
by our approach for problems with 30 state fluents and 30 action fluents on inexpensive hardware under 6 minutes. Also,
we observed a speedup of 5 orders of magnitude in the average inference time per decision step of DRPs when compared
to other state-of-the-art online gradient-based planners when
the same level of solution quality is required.

Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) methods have achieved remarkable
success over the past few years in a large variety of complex
tasks, ranging from perception problems (Hinton et al. 2012;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Sutskever, Vinyals,
and Le 2014) to control systems (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver
et al. 2016). Inspired by these successful applications, recent advances in Deep Reactive Policies (DRPs) have shown
promising results in applying DL to model-known planning.
A distinguished feature of DRPs concerning applications
involving autonomous agents is that these policies are particularly suited to fast decision making, in contrast to stateof-the-art planners typically based on online simulationCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7530

