The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Online Convex Optimization for Sequential
Decision Processes and Extensive-Form Games
Gabriele Farina, Christian Kroer, Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{gfarina,ckroer,sandholm}@cs.cmu.edu

that beat professional poker players at the larger game of
heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em.
We can view the CFR approach more generally as a
methodology for setting up regret minimization for sequential
decision problems (whether single- or multi-agent), where
each decision point requires selecting either an action or a
point from the probability distribution over actions. The crux
of CFR is counterfactual regret, which leads to a definition of
regret local to each decision point. CFR can then be viewed
as the observation, and proof, that bounds on counterfactual
regret, which can be minimized locally, lead to bounds on the
overall regret. To minimize local regret, the framework relies
on regret minimizers that operate on a simplex (typically of
probabilities over the available actions), such as regret matching (RM) (Hart and Mas-Colell 2000) or the newer variant
regret matching+ (RM+ ) (Tammelin et al. 2015).
In this paper we consider the more general problem of
how to minimize regret over a sequential decision-making
(SDM) polytope, where we allow arbitrary compact convex
subsets of simplexes at each decision point (as opposed to
only simplexes in CFR), and general convex loss functions
(as opposed to only linear losses in CFR). This allows us
to model a form of online convex optimization over SDM
polytopes. We derive a decomposition of the polytope regret
into local regret at each decision point. This allows us to
minimize regret locally as with CFR, but for general compact convex decision points and convex losses. We call our
decomposition laminar regret decomposition (LRD). We call
our overall framework for convex losses and compact convex
decision points laminar regret minimization (LRM). As a special case, our framework provides an alternate view of why
CFR works—one that may be more intuitive for those with a
background in online convex optimization.
Our generalization to compact convex sets allows us to
model entities such as -perturbed simplexes (Farina and
Gatti 2017; Farina, Kroer, and Sandholm 2017; Kroer, Farina,
and Sandholm 2017), and thus yields new algorithms for
computing approximate equilibrium refinements for EFGs.
General convex losses in SDM and EFG contexts have, to our
knowledge, not been considered before. This generalization
enables fast algorithms for many new settings.
One is to compute regularized zero-sum equilibria. If we
apply a convex regularization function at each simplex, we
can apply our framework to solve the resulting game. For

Abstract
Regret minimization is a powerful tool for solving large-scale
extensive-form games. State-of-the-art methods rely on minimizing regret locally at each decision point. In this work we
derive a new framework for regret minimization on sequential decision problems and extensive-form games with general
compact convex sets at each decision point and general convex
losses, as opposed to prior work which has been for simplex
decision points and linear losses. We call our framework laminar regret decomposition. It generalizes the CFR algorithm
to this more general setting. Furthermore, our framework enables a new proof of CFR even in the known setting, which
is derived from a perspective of decomposing polytope regret,
thereby leading to an arguably simpler interpretation of the
algorithm. Our generalization to convex compact sets and convex losses allows us to develop new algorithms for several
problems: regularized sequential decision making, regularized Nash equilibria in zero-sum extensive-form games, and
computing approximate extensive-form perfect equilibria. Our
generalization also leads to the first regret-minimization algorithm for computing reduced-normal-form quantal response
equilibria based on minimizing local regrets. Experiments
show that our framework leads to algorithms that scale at a
rate comparable to the fastest variants of counterfactual regret
minimization for computing Nash equilibrium, and therefore
our approach leads to the first algorithm for computing quantal
response equilibria in extremely large games. Our algorithms
for (quadratically) regularized equilibrium finding are orders
of magnitude faster than the fastest algorithms for Nash equilibrium finding; this suggests regret-minimization algorithms
based on decreasing regularization for Nash equilibrium finding as future work. Finally we show that our framework enables a new kind of scalable opponent exploitation approach.

Introduction
Counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) (Zinkevich et al.
2007), and the newest variant CFR+ (Tammelin et al. 2015),
have been a central component in several recent milestones in
solving imperfect-information extensive-form games (EFGs).
Bowling et al. (2015) used CFR+ to near-optimally solve
heads-up limit Texas hold’em. Brown and Sandholm (2017b)
and Moravčı́k et al. (2017) used CFR variants, along with
other techniques (Brown and Sandholm 2017a), to create AIs
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1917

