The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Object Detection Based on Region Decomposition and Assembly
Seung-Hwan Bae
Computer Vision Lab., Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Incheon National University, 119 Academy-ro, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon, 22012, Korea
shbae@inu.ac.kr

Abstract

The modern convolutional detectors usually simplify feature extraction and object detection processes with a fixed
input scale. But even with the robustness of the CNNs to
the scale variance, the region proposal accuracy is frequently
degraded by the mismatches of produced proposals and object regions. Also, the mismatch tends to be increased for
the small object detection (Lin et al. 2017a). To improve
the proposal accuracy, multi-scale feature representation using feature pyramid is used for generating stronger synthetic
feature maps. However, featurizing each level of an image
pyramid increases the inference time significantly. In an attempt to reduce the detection complexity, (Lin et al. 2017a)
leverage the feature pyramid of CNNs.
In general, detections failures are frequently caused for
occluded objects. In this case, the CNN feature discriminatbility for the occluded one can be reduced considerably since
the some part details of the object are missing in the occluded regions. It implies that exploiting global appearance
features for an entire object region could be insufficient to
classify and localize objects accurately.
In this paper, we propose a novel region decomposition
and assembly detector (R-DAD) to resolve the limitations
of the previous methods. The proposed method is based on
(1) multi-scale-based region proposal to improve region proposal accuracy of the region proposal network (RPN) and (2)
multi-region-based appearance model to describe the global
and part appearances of an object jointly.
In a multi-scale region proposal layer, we first generate
region proposals using RPN and re-scale the proposals with
different scaling factors to cover the variability of the object
size. We then select the region proposals suitable for training and testing in considerations of the ratios of object and
non-object samples to handle the data imbalanced problem.
The main benefits of our method is that we can deal with the
variability of the object size using the region scaling without expensive image or feature pyramids while maintaining
the appropriate number of region proposals using the region
sampling. In addition, we can capture local and global context cues by rescaling the region proposals. To be more concrete, we can capture the local details with smaller proposals
than its original region and the global context between object
and surround regions with larger proposals.
In order to improve the feature discriminability, we further perform multi-region based appearance learning by

Region-based object detection infers object regions for one
or more categories in an image. Due to the recent advances
in deep learning and region proposal methods, object detectors based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been flourishing and provided the promising detection results.
However, the detection accuracy is degraded often because of
the low discriminability of object CNN features caused by
occlusions and inaccurate region proposals. In this paper, we
therefore propose a region decomposition and assembly detector (R-DAD) for more accurate object detection.
In the proposed R-DAD, we first decompose an object region into multiple small regions. To capture an entire appearance and part details of the object jointly, we extract CNN
features within the whole object region and decomposed regions. We then learn the semantic relations between the object
and its parts by combining the multi-region features stage by
stage with region assembly blocks, and use the combined and
high-level semantic features for the object classification and
localization. In addition, for more accurate region proposals,
we propose a multi-scale proposal layer that can generate object proposals of various scales. We integrate the R-DAD into
several feature extractors, and prove the distinct performance
improvement on PASCAL07/12 and MSCOCO18 compared
to the recent convolutional detectors.

Introduction
Object detection is to find all the instances of one or more
classes of objects given an image. In the recent years, the
great progress of object detection have been also made by
combining the region proposal algorithms and CNNs. The
most notable work is the R-CNN (Girshick et al. 2014)
framework. They first generate object region proposals using the selective search (Uijlings et al. 2013), extract CNN
features (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) of the regions, and classify them with class-specific SVMs. Then,
Fast RCNN (Girshick 2015) improve the R-CNN speed using feature sharing and RoI pooling. The recent detectors
(Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016) integrate the external region proposal modules into a CNN for
boosting the training and detection speed further. As a result, the detection accuracy can be also enhanced by joint
learning of region proposal and classification modules.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8094

