The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Optimization of Hierarchical Regression Model with
Application to Optimizing Multi-Response Regression K-ary Trees
Pooya Tavallali

Peyman Tavallali

Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of California, Merced
{ptavallali@ucmerced.edu}

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
{peyman.tavallali@jpl.caltech.edu}

Mukesh Singhal
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Merced
{corresponding author:msinghal@ucmerced.edu}

Abstract

response regression k-ary tree while keeping the training
complexity linear for univariate and multivariate trees.
Conventionally, the goal is to minimize the following objective function
Lα (T ) = L(T ) + α|T |,
α > 0.
Here L(T ) is the loss function of a tree T . |T | is the number
of leaf nodes, and α > 0 is a complexity cost. Pruning is
performed in order to achieve a minimum of this cost function Lα (T ) over the validation set. Finding the optimum of
this objective function is an NP-complete problem (Laurent
and Rivest 1976). Therefore, traditionally, it is not surprising
that standard algorithms to train a tree are applied greedily.
A decision tree is trained by recursively partitioning the
feature space into two (or several) parts, optimally with respect to some criteria (Breiman et al. 1984). The criteria are
usually mean squared error for regression and purity cost
functions for classification. the induction algorithm stops as
soon as some stopping criteria are triggered, e.g., maximum
depth and minimum number of samples at nodes. At test
time, an input sample follows a path from the root to a leaf
based on the hierarchy of decisions made at the split nodes.
Finally, the prediction happens at a leaf node. In regression
trees, the model at a leaf is a constant function in the space
of target values.
There are two common split functions at nodes of a decision tree. The first type is called a univariate, a.k.a axisaligned, node that consists of a single feature and a threshold to drive data to left or right. Finding optimal feature and
threshold with respect to a criterion can be done by exhaustive search over all possible feature and threshold combinations. At node j consisting of Nj samples with a dimensionality of p, optimal combination is found in O(Nj p) using
an incremental algorithm (Breiman et al. 1984). We have
to mention that this complexity is based on assuming samples are sorted along each feature dimension before training. The second type of split function is termed multivariate
node which consists of linear combination of features and a
threshold. The complexity of finding an optimal linear combination is NP-complete (Heath, Kasif, and Salzberg 1993).

A fast, convenient and well-known way toward regression is
to induce and prune a binary tree. However, there has been little attempt toward improving the performance of an induced
regression tree. This paper presents a meta-algorithm capable of minimizing the regression loss function, thus, improving the accuracy of any given hierarchical model, such as
k-ary regression trees. Our proposed method minimizes the
loss function of each node one by one. At split nodes, this
leads to solving an instance-based cost-sensitive classification
problem over the node’s data points. At the leaf nodes, the
method leads to a simple regression problem. In the case of
binary univariate and multivariate regression trees, the computational complexity of training is linear over the samples.
Hence, our method is scalable to large trees and datasets.
We also briefly explore possibilities of applying proposed
method to classification tasks. We show that our algorithm
has significantly better test error compared to other state-ofthe-art tree algorithms. At the end, accuracy, memory usage
and query time of our method are compared to recently introduced forest models. We depict that, most of the time, our
proposed method is able to achieve better or similar accuracy
while having tangibly faster query time and smaller number
of nonzero weights.

RETRACTED
Tree structured models are among the oldest ones in the supervised learning literature. Decision trees are popular in the
scientific community due to their simple deployment, training and interpretation. In (Breiman et al. 1984), authors describe the fundamentals of binary decision trees and their
applications, in both classification and regression. While decision trees can operate on problems with any number of
labeled classes, other popular models, such as support vector machine, do not extend to multi-class problems naturally
(Criminisi and Shotton 2013).
Despite mentioned advantages, tree training is a greedy
algorithm that leads to sub-optimal structure and parameters. In this paper, we tackle this issue by providing a metaalgorithm that improves the performance of a given multiCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5133

