The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

PCGAN: Partition-Controlled Human Image Generation
Dong Liang,∗ Rui Wang,∗† Xiaowei Tian, Cong Zou
SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liangdong, wangrui, tianxiaowei, zoucong}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Human image generation is a very challenging task since
it is affected by many factors. Many human image generation methods focus on generating human images conditioned
on a given pose, while the generated backgrounds are often
blurred. In this paper, we propose a novel Partition-Controlled
GAN to generate human images according to target pose and
background. Firstly, human poses in the given images are extracted, and foreground/background are partitioned for further use. Secondly, we extract and fuse appearance features,
pose features and background features to generate the desired images. Experiments on Market-1501 and DeepFashion datasets show that our model not only generates realistic
human images but also produce the human pose and background as we want. Extensive experiments on COCO and LIP
datasets indicate the potential of our method.

𝑥𝑠𝑟𝑐

foreground

mask
Body sub-parts

𝑥ො

Partition-controlled
Generation
𝑥𝑡𝑔𝑡

background
Tier-I

pose
Tier-II

Figure 1: The partition-controlled human image generation
(test phase). The proposed algorithm is two-tier: (1) Partition
the foreground human body and the background and extracting the landmark of the human body pose; (2) Partition the
body sub-parts of the foreground person. We use the partition information to extract latent representations of different
parts. And they are further fused in the generator by skip
connections in its U-Net structure.

Introduction
Photo-realistic image editing via computer programs is an
attracting idea in the computer vision field. Human image
editing or generation is one of the most challenging topics.
This is because our visual system is too familiar with human
figures and surrounding backgrounds, which leads to a low
tolerance rate for flaws in the generated images.
Recent researches on similar image generation tasks have
produced fruitful results. Works based on Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) achieve the
task by adapting image translation between two domains.
By training the GAN model on two image domains of face,
AttGAN (He et al. 2017b) can change the foreground face
in the source image according to the target face attributes.
In a more general sense, the CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017)
translates domains with more complex changes, such as
horse and zebra, photo and painting. However, these methods generate images with appearance changes only or sometimes with tiny shape changes according to the differences
between domains rather than instances. The human image
generation task requires image translations with non-trivial
movement and even challenging changes with only semantic
similarity between images.

In this paper, we aim to generate a human image using the
appearance of a person in a source image, and the pose as
well as background information in the target image. Specifically, we turn this task into image generation by synthesizing
two parts: (1) the appearance of the foreground in the source
image and (2) the specific pose and background in the target
image. This appearance of person is mainly related to the
color and style of the clothes. While, in order to fit the pose
and background of the target image, the non-rigid transformation should be applied to the source image.
Driven by the task requirements, we focus on the human image generation by changing the appearance, pose and
background. Some algorithms have achieved pose changing
in human image generation (Siarohin et al. 2018), but the
background is not taken into account, causing blurred and
random background which harms the quality of the whole
image. (Ma et al. 2018) introduces a two-staged disentangled architecture to extract the features of body appearance,
pose and background respectively. However, it projects the
images to latent space with a black box encoder, which is
difficult to adapt to more general applications like further
editing body sub-parts.

∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

8698

