The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Multi-Source Neural Variational Inference
Richard Kurle

Stephan Günnemann

Patrick van der Smagt

Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich,
Data:Lab, Volkswagen Group
80805 Munich, Germany
richard.kurle@tum.de

Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
guennemann@in.tum.de

Data:Lab, Volkswagen Group
80805 Munich, Germany

Abstract

one modality to another. We make no assumptions about
the nature of the data (i.e. multimodal or multi-view) and
therefore adopt a more general problem formulation, namely
learning from multiple information sources.
Probabilistic graphical models are a common choice to
address the difficulties of learning from multiple sources
by modelling relationships between information sources—
i.e., observed random variables—via unobserved, random
variables. Inferring the hidden variables is usually only
tractable for simple linear models. For nonlinear models,
one has to resort to approximate Bayesian methods. The
variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2013;
Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) is one such method,
combining neural networks and variational inference for
latent-variable models (LVM).
We build on the VAE framework, jointly learning the
generative and inference models from multiple information
sources. In contrast to the VAE, we encapsulate individual
inference models into separate “modules”. As a result, we
obtain multiple posterior approximations, each informed by
a different source. These posteriors represent the belief over
the same latent variables of the LVM, conditioned on the
available information in the respective source.
Modelling beliefs individually—but coupled by the generative model—enables computing meaningful quantities
such as measures of surprise, redundancy, or conflict between beliefs. Exploiting these measures can in turn increase
the robustness of the inference models. Furthermore, we explore different methods to integrate arbitrary subsets of these
beliefs, to approximate the posterior for the respective subset of observations. We essentially modularise neural variational inference in the sense that information sources and
their associated encoders can be flexibly interchanged and
combined after training.

Learning from multiple sources of information is an important problem in machine-learning research. The key challenges are learning representations and formulating inference
methods that take into account the complementarity and redundancy of various information sources. In this paper we
formulate a variational autoencoder based multi-source learning framework in which each encoder is conditioned on a different information source. This allows us to relate the sources
via the shared latent variables by computing divergence measures between individual source’s posterior approximations.
We explore a variety of options to learn these encoders and to
integrate the beliefs they compute into a consistent posterior
approximation. We visualise learned beliefs on a toy dataset
and evaluate our methods for learning shared representations
and structured output prediction, showing trade-offs of learning separate encoders for each information source. Furthermore, we demonstrate how conflict detection and redundancy
can increase robustness of inference in a multi-source setting.

1

Introduction

An essential feature of most living organisms is the ability to
process, relate, and integrate information coming from a vast
number of sensors and eventually from memories and predictions (Stein and Meredith 1993). While integrating information from complementary sources enables a coherent and
unified description of the environment, redundant sources
are beneficial for reducing uncertainty and ambiguity. Furthermore, when sources provide conflicting information, it
can be inferred that some sources must be unreliable.
Replicating this feature is an important goal of multimodal machine learning (Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency
2017). Learning joint representations of multiple modalities
has been attempted using various methods, including neural
networks (Ngiam et al. 2011), probabilistic graphical models
(Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2014), and canonical correlation analysis (Andrew et al. 2013). These methods focus on
learning joint representations and multimodal sensor fusion.
However, it is challenging to relate information extracted
from different modalities. In this work, we aim at learning
probabilistic representations that can be related to each other
by statistical divergence measures as well as translated from

2

Background—Neural variational inference

Consider a dataset X = {x(n) }N
n=1 of N i.i.d. samples of
some random variable x and the following generative model:
Z
pθ (x(n) ) = pθ (x(n) | z(n) ) p(z(n) ) dz(n) ,
where θ are the parameters of a neural network, defining the
conditional distribution between latent and observable random variables z and x respectively. The variational autoen-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4114

