The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Robust Estimation of Similarity Transformation for Visual Object Tracking
Yang Li,1 Jianke Zhu,* 1,3 Steven C.H. Hoi,2 Wenjie Song,1 Zhefeng Wang,1 Hantang Liu1
1

Colleage of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
{liyang89,jkzhu,seeyou,wangzhefeng,liuhantang}@zju.edu.cn, chhoi@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Most of existing correlation filter-based tracking approaches
only estimate simple axis-aligned bounding boxes, and very
few of them is capable of recovering the underlying similarity transformation. To tackle this challenging problem, in this
paper, we propose a new correlation filter-based tracker with
a novel robust estimation of similarity transformation on the
large displacements. In order to efficiently search in such a
large 4-DoF space in real-time, we formulate the problem
into two 2-DoF sub-problems and apply an efficient Block
Coordinates Descent solver to optimize the estimation result.
Specifically, we employ an efficient phase correlation scheme
to deal with both scale and rotation changes simultaneously in
log-polar coordinates. Moreover, a variant of correlation filter
is used to predict the translational motion individually. Our
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed tracker
achieves very promising prediction performance compared
with the state-of-the-art visual object tracking methods while
still retaining the advantages of high efficiency and simplicity
in conventional correlation filter-based tracking methods.

176

431

42

197

OURS

DSST

SAMF

Staple

Figure 1: The similarity geometric transformation representation achieves more accurate and robust tracking results.

appearance by introducing a pyramid-like scale sampling
ensemble. Unfortunately, all these methods have to intensively resample the image in order to estimate the geometric transformation, which incurs huge amounts of computational costs. In addition, their accuracy is limited to the
pre-defined dense sampling of the scale pool. This makes
them unable to handle the large displacement that is out of
the pre-defined range in the status space. Thus, none of these
methods is guaranteed to the optimum of the scale estimation. On the other hand, rotation estimation for the correlation filter-based methods has not been fully exploited yet,
since it is very easy to drift away from the inaccurate rotation
predictions. This greatly limits their scope of applications in
various wide situations. Table 1 summarizes the properties
of several typical trackers.
To address the above limitations, in this paper, we propose a novel visual object tracker to estimate the similarity
transformation of the target efficiently and robustly. Unlike
existing correlation filter-based trackers, we formulate the
visual object tracking into a status space searching problem
in a 4-DoF status space, which gives a more appropriate geometric transformation parameterization for the target. As
shown in Fig. 1, the representation in similarity transformation describes the object more correctly and helps to track
the visual object more accurately. To yield real-time tracking

Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental problems in
computer vision with a variety of real-world applications,
such as video surveillance and robotics. Although having
achieved substantial progress during past decade, it is still
difficult to deal with the challenging unconstraint environmental variations, such as illumination changes, partial occlusions, motion blur, fast motion and scale variations.
Recently, correlation filter-based methods have attracted
continuous research attention (Mueller, Smith, and Ghanem
2017; Ma et al. 2015a; 2015b; Zhang et al. 2017; Li, Xu, and
Zhu 2017) due to its superior performance and robustness in
contrast to traditional tracking approaches. However, with
correlation filters, little attention has been paid on how to efficiently and precisely estimate scale and rotation changes,
which are typically represented in a 4-Degree of Freedom
(DoF) similarity transformation. To deal with scale changes
of the conventional correlation filter-based trackers, (Danelljan et al. 2017b) and (Li and Zhu 2014) extended the 2DoF representation of original correlation filter-based methods to 3-DoF space, which handles scale changes in object
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8666

