The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Trainable Undersampling for Class-Imbalance Learning
Minlong Peng,1 Qi Zhang,1 Xiaoyu Xing,1 Tao Gui,1 Xuanjing Huang,1
Yu-Gang Jiang,1 Keyu Ding,2 Zhigang Chen2
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Fudan University, Shanghai Insitute of Intelligent Electroics & Systems, Shanghai, China
1
{mlpeng16, qz, xyxing14, tgui16, xjhuang, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn
2
{kyding, zgcheng}@iflytek.com
Abstract

the supervised classifier and the task object revealed by the
evaluation metric.
Undersampling has been widely used to narrow this
gap in the class-imbalance learning area. The prevailing
undersampling strategies undersample instances of majority
classes using different heuristics (Cieslak and Chawla 2008;
Wilson 1972; Mani and Zhang 2003; Tomek 1976b; 1976a),
with the hope of arriving at a more robust and fair
decision boundary for the evaluation metric. The sampling
probability of each example is usually decided by the global
or local imbalance ratio (Cieslak and Chawla 2008) and
the hyper-parameters, which are adjusted to obtain better
performance over the evaluation metric. However, these
undersampling strategies are usually heuristic-based. They
do not take into account the form of the used classifier
and evaluation metric. Thus, even using fine-tuned hyperparameters, these strategies do not guarantee to obtain an
appropriate subset matching the task object (Batista, Prati,
and Monard 2004; He and Garcia 2009). A typical problem
of these strategies is that they may throw away potentially
useful data (Liu, Wu, and Zhou 2009).
In this work, we propose a meta-learning method built
on the undersampling to address the above issues. We
parametrize the data sampler and train it to optimize
the classification performance over the evaluation metric.
Therefore, different from previous undersampling strategies
that sample instances heuristically, the parametrized data
sampler is trained to distinguish which instances should
be discard and which instances should be preserved. We
approach the non-differentiable optimization problem for
training the data sampler via reinforcement learning. Specifically, we formulate the data sampling procedure as a
Markov decision process (MDP), which takes the sampling
operation of each example as the action, the chosen subset
as the state, and the performance of the classifier trained
using the chosen subset over the evaluation metric as the
reward. We show that the convergence of this algorithm is
guaranteed by that of the policy search algorithm (Williams
1992). For evaluating the proposed method, we performed
experiments on both synthetic and realistic imbalanced
datasets. The experimental results show that the proposed
method can consistently outperform different heuristicbased data sampling methods, including undersampling
and oversampling, and it can also achieve comparable

Undersampling has been widely used in the class-imbalance
learning area. The main deficiency of most existing undersampling methods is that their data sampling strategies
are heuristic-based and independent of the used classifier
and evaluation metric. Thus, they may discard informative
instances for the classifier during the data sampling. In
this work, we propose a meta-learning method built on the
undersampling to address this issue. The key idea of this
method is to parametrize the data sampler and train it to
optimize the classification performance over the evaluation
metric. We solve the non-differentiable optimization problem
for training the data sampler via reinforcement learning. By
incorporating evaluation metric optimization into the data
sampling process, the proposed method can learn which
instance should be discarded for the given classifier and
evaluation metric. In addition, as a data level operation,
this method can be easily applied to arbitrary evaluation
metric and classifier, including non-parametric ones (e.g.,
C4.5 and KNN). Experimental results on both synthetic
and realistic datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

Introduction
In many application areas of data mining and machine
learning, the problem of class-imbalance is ubiquitous and
tasks in these areas are commonly to distinguish the minority
classes or achieve a balanced classification performance
(Van Hulse, Khoshgoftaar, and Napolitano 2007). In this
situation, conventional accuracy-based measurements are
usually misleading because they are highly dependent on the
classification accuracy of the majority classes. Therefore,
many more appropriate and domain interest measurements
such as the F-measures, area under the curve (AUC)
(Hanley and McNeil 1982), and geometric mean (GM), were
developed. In general, it is assumed that a classifier works
well for the class-imbalanced task if it can achieve a good
performance over the given evaluation metric. However,
most of the existing learning algorithms were designed to
improve the accuracy (Ganganwar 2012), instead of the
given evaluation metric, by minimizing the training loss.
Thus there is actually a gap between the training object of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4707

