The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Clairvoyant Restarts in
Branch-and-Bound Search Using Online Tree-Size Estimation
Daniel Anderson,1∗ Gregor Hendel,2 Pierre Le Bodic,3 Merlin Viernickel2
1

Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
Mathematical Optimization Department, Zuse Institute Berlin, Berlin, Germany
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
dlanders@cs.cmu.edu, hendel@zib.de, pierre.lebodic@monash.edu, viernickel@zib.de
2

Abstract

can generally be made after a restart, as more information is
available then.
Thus we started this study with a simple experiment: in
SCIP, we forced a restart after 1000 nodes. On the MMMc
benchmark, defined below, this strategy yielded an average
4.7% slow down. However, by only selecting instances for
which default SCIP requires at least 50k (resp. 100k, 200k,
500k) nodes, then this forced restart produces a speed-up of
7% (resp. 9, 17, 18%) on the 106 (resp. 88, 72, 48) remaining
instances. Indeed, for instances that require relatively small
trees, poor decisions at the top of the tree have a smaller impact, and thus restarts are generally not beneficial, but this
trade-off becomes interesting for large instances. Hence it
appears that if the final tree size of the current B&B tree
could be known during the search, it would be a good criterion for restarts. In this paper we will show how estimates
of the tree size can be obtained and used as a criterion for
deciding restarts, improving the overall performance of the
MIP solver SCIP.

We propose a simple and general online method to measure
the search progress within the Branch-and-Bound algorithm,
from which we estimate the size of the remaining search tree.
We then show how this information can help solvers algorithmically at runtime by designing a restart strategy for MixedInteger Programming (MIP) solvers that decides whether to
restart the search based on the current estimate of the number of remaining nodes in the tree. We refer to this type of
algorithm as clairvoyant. Our clairvoyant restart strategy outperforms a state-of-the-art solver on a large set of publicly
available MIP benchmark instances. It is implemented in the
MIP solver SCIP and will be available in future releases.

Introduction
A standard technique in backtracking search consists in
restarting the search at the root node, retaining as much
information about the previous tree as efficiently possible.
This is common practice in Constraint Programming (CP)
and Satisfiability (SAT) solvers, for instance. In contrast,
restarts are rarely used in modern Mixed-Integer Programming (MIP) solvers. Instead, the entire search is usually performed within a single Branch-and-Bound (B&B) tree without restarting. In the MIP solver SCIP, for instance, restarts
may only be performed at the root node.
As far as we are aware of, restarts in MIP have only been
studied by (Achterberg 2007b), using as a criterion the number of globally fixed variables. This criterion therefore ensures that presolvers would fix some variables after a restart,
which would have a positive cascading effect on the rest of
the search. Hence, restarts were then classified as a type of
presolving technique. However, using this criterion, restarts
appeared to be detrimental to performance. The author concluded that “in order to make good use of delayed restarts,
one has to invent different criteria for their application”.
However, besides presolving, restarts may also be beneficial to branching strategies. Indeed, the branching decisions
taken at the start of the B&B search have a significant impact
on the efficiency of the entire search. Unfortunately, without
restarts, these decisions are quite uninformed, as little search
has been performed yet. Better decisions at the top of the tree

Related Work and Discussion
Knuth was the first to attempt to measure the time taken by
backtracking searches (Knuth 1975). Knuth’s model assigns
probabilities to each potential branch of the backtracking
procedure that estimate the relative sizes of the child subtrees in each branch. The method then computes an estimate
of the total tree size by sampling root-to-leaf paths subject
to these probabilities. Knuth showed that even when naively
using uniform probabilities, this sampling procedure produced reasonable results, but the high variance of the method
makes it unreliable, especially when the tree is unbalanced
(Kilby et al. 2006). Many improvements have been proposed, notably in (Purdom 1978), (Chen 1992) and (Lelis,
Otten, and Dechter 2013).
Kullman extended Knuth’s ideas by augmenting the estimation with additional information about the progress of the
search (Kullmann 2009). Provided that one has a measure of
how much progress is made by a particular decision, a quantity called the τ -value can be derived that can be used to estimate the relative sizes of the child subtrees of a particular
search node. Kullman studied this problem in the context of
SAT, where for example, the number of satisfied clauses can
be used as a sufficient progress measure. Kullman showed
that this method could be used to derive probabilities that

∗

Authors are ordered alphabetically
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1427

