The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cross-Domain Recommendation via Coupled Factorization Machines
Lile Li, Quan Do, Wei Liu
Advanced Analytics Institute, School of Software, Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology
Univeristy of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
Lile.Li@student.uts.edu.au, Quan.Do@student.uts.edu.au, Wei.Liu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Data across many business domains can be represented by
two or more coupled data sets. Correlations among these
coupled datasets have been studied in the literature for making more accurate cross-domain recommender systems. However, in existing methods, cross-domain recommendations
mostly assume the coupled mode of data sets share identical latent factors, which limits the discovery of potentially
useful domain-specific properties of the original data. In this
paper, we proposed a novel cross-domain recommendation
method called Coupled Factorization Machine (CoFM) that
addresses this limitation. Compared to existing models, our
research is the first model that uses factorization machines
to capture both common characteristics of coupled domains
while simultaneously preserving the differences among them.
Our experiments with real-world datasets confirm the advantages of our method in making across-domain recommendations.

Figure 1: Ratings extracted as feature vectors from MovieLens and Netflix. Note that the target variables f and f 0 are
not of the same incremental scale.

Introduction
Recent innovations in the Web have enabled many coupled
datasets to co-describe cross-domain businesses. For example, MovieLens and Netflix websites each published their
data of their users’ ratings on movies. Although users on
MovieLens and Netflix are not identical, they may rate the
same movies. In other words, these datasets are coupled in
their movie field. Joint analysis of the coupled datasets can
provide a deeper understanding of their true nature, improving the recommendation performance (Gao et al. 2013).
Coupled datasets have strong correlations on their coupled field. For instance, the same action movies in MovieLens and Netflix websites are highly rated by action movie
fans in both sites. However, MovieLens allows ratings from
0.5 to 5 with 0.5 increments whereas Netflix only allows 1
to 5 ratings with 1 increases. Thus, there are scenarios where
action movie fans in MovieLens rate action movies with 3.5
or 4.5 stars while those in Netflix rate them with 4 or 5 stars.
Due to this scale difference across sites, existing models that
assume coupled datasets to share the same coupled factor or
the same parameters on their coupled field are unlikely to
capture the differences.

Developing from this observation, we hypothesize that the
coupled movie field across MovieLens and Netflix have two
essential properties needed to be considered in recommendation models: they share similar movie genres’ characteristics, and at the same time they differ in rating scales. From
this perspective, in this research our main contribution is the
design of Coupled Factorization Machines (CoFM), which
allows the latent vectors of the coupled field to have two
critical parts. The first part captures the shared characteristics crossed datasets to exploit their correlations and the second one preserves their domain-specific uniqueness to maintain the scale differences. We test the effectiveness of CoFM
on real-world across-domains datasets, and our experiments
demonstrate clear superiority of CoFM over other existing
methods.

Our approach
Suppose two cross-domain datasets are coupled as illustrated in Fig. 1: one with feature vectors x and targets f (x)
and the other with feature vectors y and targets f 0 (y). Both
x and y have the same movie field of size p but differ in all
other fields (e.g., different users). Moreover, f (x) and f 0 (y)

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9965

