The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Deviation Payoffs in Simulation-Based Games
Samuel Sokota

Caleb Ho

Bryce Wiedenbeck

Swarthmore College
sokota@ualberta.ca

Swarthmore College
caleb.yh.ho@gmail.com

Swarthmore College
bwieden1@swarthmore.edu

Abstract

algorithms requiring each of these computations include, respectively, fictitious play (Brown 1951), replicator dynamics (Taylor and Jonker 1978), and the global Newton method
(Govindan and Wilson 2003). Computing any of these quantities naively involves summing over all entries in the fullyexpanded payoff matrix.
This means that analyzing large games typically requires
carefully selecting a compact representation of the utility function that supports efficient computation of mixedstrategy deviation payoffs. For certain classes, like actiongraph games (Jiang, Leyton-Brown, and Bhat 2011), these
representations are known, but in other cases, no such representation is available. Moreover, identifying such a compact
structure can be challenging, even when it does exist.
In this paper, we explore a machine learning approach to
efficiently approximating deviation payoffs and their derivatives, under the hypothesis that sufficiently close approximation of these quantities will tend to yield -Nash equilibria. At the core of the approach is the idea that the expected payoffs of a mixed-strategy profile can be estimated
by the payoffs of pure-strategy profiles sampled from that
mixed-strategy profile. Such sampling is extremely noisy,
but by sampling from many different mixed-strategy profiles
and employing machine learning algorithms that generalize
across related mixed strategies, we can estimate a deviation
payoff function for the entire game.
Our methods are applicable in settings where a specific
compact structure is not known in advance, but where payoff estimates for arbitrary pure-strategy profiles can be acquired. This setting is common in simulation-based games
(also known as empirical games (Wellman 2006; Tuyls et al.
2018)), where game-theoretic models are constructed from
payoffs observed in multi-agent simulations. Simulationbased games were initially used to study trading agent competitions (Wellman et al. 2006; Jordan, Kiekintveld, and
Wellman 2007) and continuous double auctions (Phelps,
Marcinkiewicz, and Parsons 2006; Vytelingum, Cliff, and
Jennings 2008) and have since been employed in numerous applications, including designing network routing protocols (Wellman, Kim, and Duong 2013) and understanding
the impacts of high-frequency trading (Wah and Wellman
2017). Recently, simulation-based games have arisen in the
analysis of the meta game among AlphaGo variants (Lanctot et al. 2017) and other multi-agent reinforcement learning

We present a novel approach for identifying approximate
role-symmetric Nash equilibria in large simulation-based
games. Our method uses neural networks to learn a mapping
from mixed-strategy profiles to deviation payoffs—the expected values of playing pure-strategy deviations from those
profiles. This learning can generalize from data about a tiny
fraction of a game’s outcomes, permitting tractable analysis
of exponentially large normal-form games. We give a procedure for iteratively refining the learned model with new data
produced by sampling in the neighborhood of each candidate Nash equilibrium. Relative to the existing state of the
art, deviation payoff learning dramatically simplifies the task
of computing equilibria and more effectively addresses player
asymmetries. We demonstrate empirically that deviation payoff learning identifies better approximate equilibria than previous methods and can handle more difficult settings, including games with many more players, strategies, and roles.

Simultaneous-move games are among the most general tools
for reasoning about incentives in multi-agent systems. The
standard mathematical representation of a simultaneousmove game is the normal-form payoff matrix. It describes
incentives in a multi-agent system by listing the strategies
available to each agent and storing, for every combination
of strategies the agents may jointly select, the resulting utility for each agent. This tabular representation grows exponentially: the payoff matrix for a normal form game with n
players and m strategies per player stores utilities for each of
mn pure-strategy profiles. As a result, explicit normal-form
representations are typically employed only for games with
a very small number of players and strategies.
To study larger games, it is common to replace the explicit
payoff table with a more compact representation of the utility function, from which payoff values can be computed on
demand. However, pure-strategy utility functions are generally not sufficient for computing Nash equilibria. Instead,
Nash-finding algorithms typically depend on one or more of
the following quantities being efficiently computable: best
responses to profiles of mixed strategies, deviation payoffs of
mixed-strategy profiles (the expected utility of deviating to a
pure-strategy, holding other agents’ mixed strategies fixed),
or the derivatives of these deviation payoffs. Examples of
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2173

