The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

When Do Envy-Free Allocations Exist?
Pasin Manurangsi

Warut Suksompong

Department of EECS
UC Berkeley

Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

Abstract

Given that the existence of envy-free allocations cannot
be guaranteed in general for indivisible goods, an important
question is therefore when such allocations exist. Dickerson
et al. (2014) investigated this question under a simple model
where the agents have additive utilities and their utilities for
individual items are drawn at random from probability distributions. If the number of items, m, is less than the number of
agents, n, no envy-free allocation exists since any allocation
necessarily leaves some agent empty-handed and envious.
Dickerson et al. showed that even when the number of items
slightly exceeds the number of agents—m = n + o(n)—
an envy-free allocation is still unlikely to exist. However, as
soon as the number of items is larger than the number of
agents by a logarithmic factor—m = Ω(n log n)—an envyfree allocation exists with high probability, and can furthermore be obtained by simply giving each item to the agent
with the highest utility for it. Dickerson et al. also found the
phase transition from non-existence to existence to be quite
sharp in computer experiments, and left open the question of
determining where this transition occurs. Is the logarithmic
factor in the upper bound necessary, or do we already have
existence when, say, m = 1.001n?
In this paper, we show that, surprisingly, there is in fact no
universal point of transition between non-existence and existence. Instead, the transition is governed by the divisibility
relation between m and n. On the one hand, if m is divisible
by n, we show that an envy-free allocation exists with high
probability as long as m ≥ 2n (Theorem 3.1). Our result
improves upon the aforementioned m = Ω(n log n) upper
bound and moreover completely closes the gap for the case
of divisibility, since Dickerson et al.’s lower bound already
implies that the same result does not hold when m = n.1
On the other hand, if m is not “almost” divisible by n, in
the sense that the remainder of the division is between n
and n − n for some constant  ∈ (0, 1), we show that
an envy-free allocation is unlikely to exist as long as m =
O(n log n/ log log n) (Theorem 4.1). This comes to within a
Θ(log log n) factor of matching their upper bound. Both our
existence and non-existence results rely on several new key
ideas. In particular, for the existence result we need a com-

We consider a fair division setting in which m indivisible
items are to be allocated among n agents, where the agents
have additive utilities and the agents’ utilities for individual
items are independently sampled from a distribution. Previous work has shown that an envy-free allocation is likely to
exist when m = Ω(n log n) but not when m = n+o(n), and
left open the question of determining where the phase transition from non-existence to existence occurs. We show that,
surprisingly, there is in fact no universal point of transition—
instead, the transition is governed by the divisibility relation
between m and n. On the one hand, if m is divisible by n,
an envy-free allocation exists with high probability as long as
m ≥ 2n. On the other hand, if m is not “almost” divisible
by n, an envy-free allocation is unlikely to exist even when
m = Θ(n log n/ log log n).

1

Introduction

Resource allocation is a fundamental task that occurs in a
great number of everyday situations, from allocating school
supplies to children and course slots in universities to students, to allocating machine processing time to users and
kidneys to kidney transplant patients. One of the principal
concerns when allocating resources to interested agents is
fairness: we want all agents to feel that they receive a fair
share of the resources. There is a rich and beautiful theory
of fair division that goes back several decades and has been
studied in mathematics, economics, and more recently in
computer science (Brams and Taylor, 1996; Moulin, 2003).
In order to reason about fairness, we must define when an
allocation is considered to be “fair”. One of the most prominent fairness notions is envy-freeness, which means that every agent likes her allocated portion at least as much as that
of any other agent (Foley, 1967; Varian, 1974). While an
envy-free allocation can always be obtained when we allocate divisible goods such as land or machine processing time
(Stromquist, 1980), this is not the case when it comes to allocating indivisible goods like jewelry and artworks. Indeed,
if a single bracelet or painting is to be divided between two
agents, then no matter how the division is performed, the
agent who does not receive the item will be left envying the
other agent.

1
We do note, however, that Dickerson et al.’s upper bound holds
under a weaker assumption on the distributions. For example, it
does not assume that the utilities are drawn from the same distribution for all agents and items.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2109

