The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Gradient Harmonized Single-Stage Detector
Buyu Li,∗ Yu Liu,∗ Xiaogang Wang
{byli, yuliu, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Gradient statistics

Abstract
Despite the great success of two-stage detectors, single-stage
detector is still a more elegant and efficient way, yet suffers
from the two well-known disharmonies during training, i.e.
the huge difference in quantity between positive and negative examples as well as between easy and hard examples. In
this work, we first point out that the essential effect of the
two disharmonies can be summarized in term of the gradient.
Further, we propose a novel gradient harmonizing mechanism
(GHM) to be a hedging for the disharmonies. The philosophy behind GHM can be easily embedded into both classification loss function like cross-entropy (CE) and regression
loss function like smooth-L1 (SL1 ) loss. To this end, two
novel loss functions called GHM-C and GHM-R are designed
to balancing the gradient flow for anchor classification and
bounding box refinement, respectively. Ablation study on MS
COCO demonstrates that without laborious hyper-parameter
tuning, both GHM-C and GHM-R can bring substantial improvement for single-stage detector. Without any whistles and
bells, the proposed model achieves 41.6 mAP on COCO testdev set which surpass the state-of-the-art method, Focal Loss
(FL) + SL1 , by 0.8. The code1 is released to facilitate future
research.

1

Gradient regularization

Overall gradient

Figure 1: An illustration of gradient harmonizing mechanism. The figure in the left displays the distribution of relative gradient norm in a converged model in log scale respectively. The middle figure displays the new gradient norms
after the rectification of Focal Loss (FL) and GHM-C loss,
compared with the original cross-entropy (CE) loss. The
right figure shows the total gradient contribution of examples w.r.t gradient norm.

elaborately designed form. However, Focal Loss adopts two
hyper-parameters which should be tuned with a lot of efforts. And it is a static loss which is not adaptive for the
changing of data distribution, which varies along with the
training process.
In this work, we first point out that the class imbalance
can be summarized to the imbalance in difficulty and the
imbalance in difficulty can be summarized to the imbalance
in gradient norm distribution. If a positive example is wellclassified, it is an easy example and the model benefit little
from it, i.e. a little magnitude of gradient will be produced
by this sample. And a misclassified example should attract
attention of the model no matter which class it belongs to.
So if viewed globally, the large amount of negative examples
tends to be easy to classify and the hard examples are usually positive. So the two kind of imbalance can be roughly
summed up as attribute imbalance.
Moreover, we claim that the imbalance of examples with
different attributes (hard/easy and pos/neg) can be implied
by the distribution of gradient norm. The density of examples w.r.t. gradient norm, which we call as gradient density
for convenient, varies largely as showed in the left of Fig.1.
The examples with very small gradient norm have a quite
large density which is corresponding to the large amount of
easy negative examples. Although one easy example has less

Introduction

One-stage approach is the most efficient and elegant framework for object detection. But for a long time, the performance of one-stage detectors has a large gap from that of
two-stage detectors. The most challenging problem for the
training of one-stage detector is the serious imbalance between easy and hard examples as well as that between positive and negative examples. The huge number of easy and
background examples tend to overwhelm the training. But
these problems are not existed for two-stage detectors, owing to the proposal-driven mechanism. To handle the former
imbalance problem, example mining based methods such
as OHEM (Shrivastava, Gupta, and Girshick 2016) are in
common use, but they directly abandon most examples and
the training is inefficient. For the latter imbalance, the recent work, Focal Loss (Lin et al. 2017b), has tried to address it by rectifying the cross-entropy loss function to a
∗
They contributed equally to this work
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/libuyu/GHM Detection

8577

