The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Collective Online Learning of Gaussian Processes in Massive Multi-Agent Systems
Trong Nghia Hoang,1,∗ Quang Minh Hoang,2,∗ Kian Hsiang Low,3 Jonathan How4
1

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 2 Carnegie Mellon University
National University of Singapore, 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
nghiaht@ibm.com, qhoang@cs.cmu.edu, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg, jhow@mit.edu
3

Abstract

perparameter settings and inducing inputs and communicate
them to some “server” agent(s) to be fused into globally consistent summary statistics that are sent back to the “client”
agents for GP predictive inference. These distributed GP fusion algorithms inherit the advantage of being adjustably
lightweight by restricting the number of inducing inputs
(hence the size of the local and global summary statistics)
to fit the agents’ limited computational and communication
capabilities at the expense of predictive accuracy.

This paper presents a novel Collective Online Learning of
Gaussian Processes (COOL-GP) framework for enabling a
massive number of GP inference agents to simultaneously
perform (a) efficient online updates of their GP models using
their local streaming data with varying correlation structures
and (b) decentralized fusion of their resulting online GP models with different learned hyperparameter settings and inducing inputs. To realize this, we exploit the notion of a common
encoding structure to encapsulate the local streaming data
gathered by any GP inference agent into summary statistics
based on our proposed representation, which is amenable to
both an efficient online update via an importance sampling
trick as well as multi-agent model fusion via decentralized
message passing that can exploit sparse connectivity among
agents for improving efficiency and enhance the robustness
of our framework against transmission loss. We provide a
rigorous theoretical analysis of the approximation loss arising from our proposed representation to achieve efficient online updates and model fusion. Empirical evaluations show
that COOL-GP is highly effective in model fusion, resilient
to information disparity between agents, robust to transmission loss, and can scale to thousands of agents.

1

However, such algorithms fall short of achieving the truly
decentralized GP fusion necessary for scaling up to a massive number of agents grounded in the real world (e.g., traffic sensing, modeling, and prediction by autonomous vehicles cruising in urban road networks (Chen et al. 2015;
Low et al. 2015a; Hoang et al. 2014; Min and Wynter 2011;
Ouyang et al. 2014; Wang and Papageorgiou 2005; Work
et al. 2010), distributed inference on a network of IoTs,
surveillance cameras and mobile devices/robots (Kang and
Larkin 2016; Natarajan et al. 2014; Hoang et al. 2018b;
Zhang et al. 2016)) due to the following critical issues: (a)
An obvious limitation is the single point(s) of failure with
the server agent(s) whose computational and communication capabilities must be superior and robust (e.g., against
transmission loss); (b) different GP inference agents are
likely to gather data of varying behaviors and correlation
structure from possibly separate localities of the input domain (e.g., spatiotemporal) and would therefore incur considerable information loss due to summarization based on a
common set of fixed/known GP hyperparameter settings and
inducing inputs, especially when the inducing inputs are few
and far from the data (in the correlation sense); and (c) like
distributed GP models, distributed GP fusion algorithms implicitly assume a one-time processing of a fixed set of data
and would hence repeat the entire fusion process involving
all local data gathered by the agents whenever new batches
of streaming data arrive, which is prohibitively expensive.
To overcome these limitations, this paper presents a novel
Collective Online Learning of GPs (COOL-GP) framework
for enabling a massive number of agents to simultaneously
perform (a) efficient online updates of their GP models using their local streaming data with varying correlation structures and (b) decentralized fusion of their resulting online
GP models with different learned hyperparameter settings
and inducing inputs residing in the original input domain. A

Introduction

Distributed Gaussian process (GP) models (Chen et al.
2013; Deisenroth and Ng 2015; Gal, van der Wilk, and Rasmussen 2014; Hoang, Hoang, and Low 2016; Liu et al. 2018;
Low et al. 2015b) are conventionally designed with a serverclient paradigm where a server distributes the computational
load among parallel machines (i.e., client nodes) to achieve
scalability to big data. This paradigm can potentially allow
the richness and expressive power of GP models (Rasmussen
and Williams 2006) (Section 2) to be exploited by multiple predictive inference agents for distributed inference of
the complex latent behavior underlying all their local data.
Such a prospect has inspired the recent development of distributed GP fusion algorithms (Allamraju and Chowdhary
2017; Chen, Low, and Tan 2013; Chen et al. 2012; 2015;
Ouyang and Low 2018): Essentially, the “client” agents encapsulate their own local data into memory-efficient summary statistics based on a common set of fixed/known GP hy∗

T. N. Hoang and Q. M. Hoang contribute equally.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7850

