The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Enhanced Random Forest Algorithms
for Partially Monotone Ordinal Classification
Christopher Bartley, Wei Liu, Mark Reynolds
Computer Science and Software Engineering
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia
christopher.bartley@research.uwa.edu.au,{wei.liu,mark.reynolds}@uwa.edu.au

Abstract

where it was the highest ranked model family. We note that
this comparison omitted deep learning approaches, to which
monotonicity has recently been extended (You et al. 2017).
However, there remains a significant use case for RF for
smaller datasets, users with less expertise, where computational power is limited and where solution time is critical.
However, despite its popularity, for sensitive domains like
finance and medicine where users want to know how the
model works, RF’s lack of comprehensibility is a problem.
As a result the ability to define monotone features is popularly requested and implemented in many libraries such as
R’s GBM and Arborist and XGBoost. This helps achieve
quality control (ensuring a model behaves ‘sensibly’), satisfaction of user requirements (e.g. known medical risk factors) and improved comprehensibility. Although still not
fully comprehensible, features may now be categorised as
increasing or decreasing, with magnitude estimated by variable importance measures. This latter is particularly compelling given the recently enacted GDPR legislation 1 , which
confers on data subjects the right to ‘meaningful information
about the logic involved’ in ‘automated decision making’.
This paper therefore pursues the twin goals of comprehensibility and accuracy. We first review the state-of-the-art
in monotone random forest, with extensions where necessary to multi-class. This review for the first time combines
both previous literature and approaches in popular statistical
libraries that are absent from the literature.
A key limitation of some approaches is that monotonicity
is increased locally, but not guaranteed globally. There is a
big difference between being able to claim that an algorithm
usually complies, and that it categorically always complies.
The latter is surely preferable. Of the techniques that do
achieve global monotonicity, we show their mechanisms can
result in sub-optimal monotonisation (high loss/bias). Since
RF primarily improves accuracy by variance reduction, this
introduced bias cannot be corrected and accuracy suffers.
We thus propose a method with global monotonicity
and minimal monotonisation loss. Examples and simulation
demonstrate lower monotonisation loss, and experiments on
17 real datasets show a compelling increase in accuracy. The
algorithm is available at github2 .

One of the factors hindering the use of classification models
in decision making is that their predictions may contradict
expectations. In domains such as finance and medicine, the
ability to include knowledge of monotone (nondecreasing)
relationships is sought after to increase accuracy and user satisfaction. As one of the most successful classifiers, attempts
have been made to do so for Random Forest. Ideally a solution would (a) maximise accuracy; (b) have low complexity and scale well; (c) guarantee global monotonicity; and (d)
cater for multi-class. This paper first reviews the state-of-theart from both the literature and statistical libraries, and identifies opportunities for improvement. A new rule-based method
is then proposed, with a maximal accuracy variant and a
faster approximate variant. Simulated and real datasets are
then used to perform the most comprehensive ordinal classification benchmarking in the monotone forest literature. The
proposed approaches are shown to reduce the bias induced by
monotonisation and thereby improve accuracy.

Introduction
This paper concerns monotone prior knowledge. A monotone (or non-decreasing) relationship between X and Y
means that an increase in X should not lead to a decrease
in Y. For example, a house with three bedrooms should not
be cheaper than one with two bedrooms (all other factors
constant). Monotonicity between input variable (feature) xj
and output variable y may thus be defined:
For an increase in xj , response variable y should not
decrease (all other variables held constant).
Monotonicity can be defined when the model output is ordered, including ordinal classification, which seeks to assign objects to two or more ordered classes (but where the
distances between classes are irrelevant). Examples include
credit ratings (AA, A, BB, ...), or cancer diagnosis (No/Yes).
This paper focuses on Random Forest (RF) style tree ensembles with independent large (unpruned) trees (Breiman
2001). RF is one of the most popular classifiers, achieving
both high accuracy and ease of use. It’s competitive accuracy was somewhat surprisingly reasserted in the comprehensive 2015 comparison by Fernandez et al. of 179 classifiers against 121 datasets (Fernandez-Delgado et al. 2014),

1

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

3224

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
https://github.com/chriswbartley/monoensemble

