The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

SADIH: Semantic-Aware DIscrete Hashing
Zheng Zhang,1 Guo-sen Xie,2 Yang Li,1 Sheng Li,3 Zi Huang1
1

The University of Queensland, Australia
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
University of Georgia, USA
{darrenzz219, gsxiehm}@gmail.com; y.li9@uq.net.au; sheng.li@uga.edu; huang@itee.uq.edu.au
2

Abstract

dependent hash encoding strategy, which has shown better
retrieval performance than data-independent (or learningfree) hashing schemes, such as locality-sensitive hashing
(LSH) (Gionis et al. 1999) and its variants (Kulis and Grauman 2009; Jiang, Que, and Kulis 2015).
A common problem of learning-based hashing methods
is to construct similarity-preserving hash functions, which
generate similar binary codes for nearby data items. Many
such hashing learning methods have been proposed to enable
efficient similarity search and can be broadly grouped into
two categories: unsupervised and supervised hashing.
Unsupervised methods typically encode samples as binary codes by exploring data distribution without label or
relevances (Zhang et al. 2018b; 2018a). They learn hash
codes/functions based on the semantic gap principle (Smeulders et al. 2000), i.e., the difference in structures formed
within the high- and low-level descriptors. Representative
unsupervised hashing methods include manifold learning
based hashing and quantization based hashing. Manifold
learning based hashing tries to discover the neighborhood
relationship of data points in the learned binary codes, such
as spectral hashing (SH) (Weiss, Torralba, and Fergus 2009),
multiple feature hashing (MFH) (Song et al. 2011), scalable graph hashing (SGH) (Jiang and Li 2015) and ordinal constraint hashing (OCH) (Liu et al. 2018). Quantization based hashing aims to achieve the minimal quantization error, such as iterative quantization (ITQ) (Gong et al.
2013) and quantization-based hashing (Song et al. 2018).
Due to the absence of semantic label information, unsupervised hashing is usually inferior to supervised hashing,
which can produce state-of-the-art retrieval results.
Supervised hashing generates discriminative and compact
hash codes/functions by leveraging the supervised semantic
information from data such as pairwise similarity or relevant feedback. Many supervised hashing methods have been
proposed to enable efficient similarity search. Representative methods in this group include semi-supervised hashing (SSH) (Wang, Kumar, and Chang 2012), latent factor
hashing (LFH) (Zhang, Zhang, and Li 2014), fast supervised hashing (FastH) (Lin et al. 2014), column sampling
based discrete supervised hashing (COSDISH) (Kang, Li,
and Zhou 2016), etc. It has been studied to construct encoding functions in a designed kernel space, such as binary
reconstructive embedding (BRE) (Kulis and Darrell 2009),

Due to its low storage cost and fast query speed, hashing
has been recognized to accomplish similarity search in largescale multimedia retrieval applications. Particularly, supervised hashing has recently received considerable research attention by leveraging the label information to preserve the
pairwise similarities of data points in the Hamming space.
However, there still remain two crucial bottlenecks: 1) the
learning process of the full pairwise similarity preservation
is computationally unaffordable and unscalable to deal with
big data; 2) the available category information of data are
not well-explored to learn discriminative hash functions. To
overcome these challenges, we propose a unified SemanticAware DIscrete Hashing (SADIH) framework, which aims
to directly embed the transformed semantic information into
the asymmetric similarity approximation and discriminative
hashing function learning. Specifically, a semantic-aware latent embedding is introduced to asymmetrically preserve the
full pairwise similarities while skillfully handle the cumbersome n × n pairwise similarity matrix. Meanwhile, a
semantic-aware autoencoder is developed to jointly preserve
the data structures in the discriminative latent semantic space
and perform data reconstruction. Moreover, an efficient alternating optimization algorithm is proposed to solve the resulting discrete optimization problem. Extensive experimental results on multiple large-scale datasets demonstrate that
our SADIH can clearly outperform the state-of-the-art baselines with the additional benefit of lower computational costs.

Introduction
In the big data era, recent years have witnessed the evergrowing volume of multimedia data with high dimensionality. This is made possible by the emergence of large-scale
similarity measurement technique with high computational
efficiency. Different from the traditional indexing technique
(Lew et al. 2006), hashing yields a scalable similarity search
mechanism with acceptable accuracies in the fast Hamming
space (Wang et al. 2018). Technically, hashing generally
compresses the high-dimensional data instances into compact binary codes (typically ≤ 128-dim), in which the similarity and structural information are preserved from the original data. In this paper, we will mainly focus on the learningbased hashing methods that are formulated by the dataCopyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5853

