The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Hierarchical Attention Networks for Sentence Ordering
Tianming Wang, Xiaojun Wan
Institute of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
{wangtm,wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Entity-Grid model captures local coherence by modeling entities transitions between adjacent sentences (Barzilay and
Lapata 2008). Most recent works focus on addressing the
sentence ordering task. Chen, Qiu, and Huang (2016) and
Agrawal et al. (2016) propose pair-wise models and use
beam search to seek the ground truth order. Li and Jurafsky (2017) employ the graph-based model to address this
problem. The end-to-end approach using RNN based pointer
network outperforms prior methods and achieves a great
success (Gong et al. 2016; Logeswaran, Lee, and Radev
2018). But the vanilla pointer network has an obvious disadvantage that it treats the out-of-order set of sentences as a
sequential input, which is contrary to intuition.
In this paper, we propose a novel hierarchical attention
network which captures word clues and dependencies between sentences to address the sentence ordering task. Prior
neural approaches rarely take the advantage of word clues in
sentence encoding and usually encode each sentence individually, which ignores that the semantic of the sentence in
a coherent text is dependent on the context. We design two
levels of attentions in our model to tackle these problems one at the word level and one at the sentence level. We first
use a LSTM-based word encoder to get an initial representation of each sentence and a word attention is employed
over it, which lets the model to pay more attention to word
clues when encoding sentences. Then we use a sentence encoder to capture the global dependencies between sentences
and adjust their representations by a sentence self-attention
mechanism. The sentence encoder is RNN-free and composed of stacked attention networks, which is well adapted
to the situation where input sentences are unordered. Finally
we use a sentence decoder utilizing the information of ordered subsequence to select the next sentence one by one by
pointer mechanism.
Our model strongly outperforms prior methods and
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several datasets in
different domains. We further evaluate the robustness and
effectiveness of our model by adding unrelated noisy sentences to the given sentences set. Both noise discrimination and sentence ordering on noisy data are studied. The
results show that our model can discriminate unrelated sentence with a very high accuracy and achieves excellent performance on the sentence ordering task. Finally, through visualization analysis and case study, we show that our model

Modeling discourse coherence is an important problem in
natural language generation and understanding. Sentence ordering, the goal of which is to organize a set of sentences into
a coherent text, is a commonly used task to learn and evaluate the model. In this paper, we propose a novel hierarchical
attention network that captures word clues and dependencies
between sentences to address this problem. Our model outperforms prior methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance on several datasets in different domains. Furthermore,
our experiments demonstrate that the model performs very
well even though adding noisy sentences into the set, which
shows the robustness and effectiveness of the model. Visualization analysis and case study show that our model captures
the structure and pattern of coherent texts not only by simple
word clues but also by consecution in context.

Introduction
Modeling discourse coherence is an essential problem in
NLP as evidenced by its importance on many downstream
tasks like summarization, question answering and text planning. Sentence ordering is a commonly used task to build
and evaluate such models. The goal of it is to organize a
given set of sentences into a coherent text in a clear and consistent manner.
The task requires models to learn which ordering of sentences is likely to enhance understanding and avoid confusion. By learning to order sentences, models can characterize the properties which make text coherent, such as
topical relevancy, chronological sequence and cause-effect.
Thus ordering models can help to generate a coherent text
in other tasks like multi-document summarization since the
relative ordering of the sentences extracted from different
documents might be unclear.
A variety of researches tackling coherence have been
done. Lexical cohesion focuses on chains of related words
that contribute to the continuity of lexical meaning (Morris and Hirst 1991). Mann and Thompson (1988) define relations called RST that are used in linking successive sentences. Lapata (2003) represents sentences by vectors and
learns the transition probabilities of adjacent sentences. The
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7184

