The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Generation of Policy-Level Explanations for Reinforcement Learning
Nicholay Topin, Manuela Veloso
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{ntopin, veloso}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

Existing techniques for explaining Deep Reinforcement
Learning agents borrow techniques used for explaining neural network predictions, so they focus on explaining one
state at a time. These techniques pinpoint the features of the
state that influence the agent’s decision, but do not provide
an explanation incorporating expected future actions. Therefore, the explanation is insufficient for a human supervisor
to decide whether to trust the system. Likewise, no wholepolicy view is available, so evaluating the agent’s overall
competency (as opposed to single-state evaluation) is impossible. For these reasons, we are interested in explaining
policies as a whole: giving the context for action explanations and providing an abstraction of an entire policy.
To address the aforementioned issues, we propose the creation of a full-policy abstraction, which is then used as the
basis for generating local explanations. We introduce Abstract Policy Graphs (APGs) as such a full-policy abstraction. Each APG is effectively a graph where each node is an
abstract state and each edge is an action with associated transition probability between two abstract states. Using a mapping from states to abstract states, one can identify which
groups of states the agent treats similarly, as well as predict
the sequence of actions the agent will take. This explanation
provides local explanations along with a global context.
Additionally, we propose an algorithm, APG Gen, for
creating an APG given a policy, a learned value function,
and a set of transitions. Starting with a single abstract state
which encompasses the full state-space, APG Gen uses a
feature importance measure to repeatedly divide abstract
states along important features. These abstract states are then
used to create an APG. The splitting procedure additionally
identifies which features are important within each abstract
state. Notably, this general procedure is compatible with existing methods for learning a policy and value function.
The main contributions of this work are as follows: (1)
we introduce a novel representation, Abstract Policy Graphs,
for summarizing policies to enable explanations of individual decisions in the context of future transitions, (2) we propose a process, APG Gen, for creating an APG from a policy and learned value function, (3) we prove that APG Gen’s
runtime is favorable (O(|F |2 |tr samples|), where F is the
set of features and tr samples is the set of provided transitions), and (4) we empirically evaluate APG Gen’s capability
to create the desired explanations.

Though reinforcement learning has greatly benefited from the
incorporation of neural networks, the inability to verify the
correctness of such systems limits their use. Current work in
explainable deep learning focuses on explaining only a single decision in terms of input features, making it unsuitable
for explaining a sequence of decisions. To address this need,
we introduce Abstracted Policy Graphs, which are Markov
chains of abstract states. This representation concisely summarizes a policy so that individual decisions can be explained
in the context of expected future transitions. Additionally, we
propose a method to generate these Abstracted Policy Graphs
for deterministic policies given a learned value function and
a set of observed transitions, potentially off-policy transitions used during training. Since no restrictions are placed
on how the value function is generated, our method is compatible with many existing reinforcement learning methods.
We prove that the worst-case time complexity of our method
is quadratic in the number of features and linear in the number of provided transitions, O(|F |2 |tr samples|). By applying our method to a family of domains, we show that our
method scales well in practice and produces Abstracted Policy Graphs which reliably capture relationships within these
domains.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in neural networks have led to powerful
function approximators, which have been successfully used
to support Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques to solve
difficult problems. However, the deployment of RL systems
in real-world use cases is hampered by the difficulty to verify and predict the behavior of RL agents. In the context of
RL, autonomous agents learn to operate in an environment
through repeated interaction. After training, the agent is able
to make decisions in any given state, but is unable to provide
a plan nor rule-based system for determining which action to
take. Generally, a policy which selects actions (π(s) = a) is
available along with its value function (Vπ (s) ∈ R), which
predicts future reward from a state. However, neither the outcome of the actions nor the sequence of future actions taken
is available. Without these, a human operator must blindly
trust an RL agent’s evaluation.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2514

