The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Rotational Diversity in Multi-Cycle Assignment Problems
Morten Mossige

Helge Spieker, Arnaud Gotlieb

University of Stavanger
Stavanger, Norway
ABB Robotics
Bryne, Norway
morten.mossige@uis.no

Simula Research Laboratory
P.O. Box 134
1325 Lysaker, Norway
{helge,arnaud}@simula.no

or short-term planning horizons for other reasons. Therefore,
it is necessary to include rotation mechanisms for iterative,
recurring planning scenarios.
The presented approach addresses multi-cycle assignment
problems with varying availability of tasks and agents under
the additional goal to rotate assignments from tasks to agents
over multiple cycles. Tasks and agents can be unavailable for
one or several cycles without previous notice or information
about their next availability. We refer to the subsequent diverse assignments as rotational diversity. A full example of
the problem and our solution is given in Section 4.1.
This work defines the term rotational diversity in a temporal manner. That is, the solution to multiple subsequent
instances of a problem has to differ in the assignments made.
This is different from the notion of solution diversity, where
it is desirable to find multiple distinctly diverse solutions
to one instance of a problem (Glover, Løkketangen, and
Woodruff 2000; Hebrard et al. 2005; Trapp and Konrad 2015;
Petit and Trapp 2015).
We present an optimization model that combines profits and affinities, a metric to describe the state of rotation,
into a single optimization criterion. Solving this model incrementally, that is, at each cycle, allows to control rotational
diversity. A central component for this control is the strategy,
that defines how profits and affinities are combined.
We discuss five strategies for this combination of values
and evaluate them on two case studies. A first case study is a
multi-cycle extension of the multiple knapsack problem, and
the second is a real-world case study of test case selection and
assignment problem (TCSA), originating from the problem
of testing software for robotic systems. Our results show that
rotation is achieved while sacrificing less than 4 % of the
original goal of profit maximization in TCSA.

Abstract
In multi-cycle assignment problems with rotational diversity,
a set of tasks has to be repeatedly assigned to a set of agents.
Over multiple cycles, the goal is to achieve a high diversity
of assignments from tasks to agents. At the same time, the
assignments’ profit has to be maximized in each cycle. Due
to changing availability of tasks and agents, planning ahead
is infeasible and each cycle is an independent assignment
problem but influenced by previous choices. We approach the
multi-cycle assignment problem as a two-part problem: Profit
maximization and rotation are combined into one objective
value, and then solved as a General Assignment Problem.
Rotational diversity is maintained with a single execution
of the costly assignment model. Our simple, yet effective
method is applicable to different domains and applications.
Experiments show the applicability on a multi-cycle variant of
the multiple knapsack problem and a real-world case study on
the test case selection and assignment problem, an example
from the software engineering domain, where test cases have
to be distributed over compatible test machines.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we address the problem where multiple cycles
of assignment problems have to be solved, with the additional
goal to assign each task to different agents in subsequent
cycles and eventually to all compatible agents.
In general, assignment problems are well-studied in artificial intelligence and can be solved efficiently. Their goal
is to assign a set of weighted tasks to a set of agents,
such that capacity constraints are satisfied and a profit function is maximized. These problems are relevant in a broad
context, of which many consider rotation aspects, too. In
nurse rostering (Chiaramonte 2008; Azizi, Zolfaghari, and
Liang 2010) and workforce scheduling (Ernst et al. 2004;
Musliu, Schutt, and Stuckey 2018), rotation is relevant to
avoid boredom and fatigue or to cover a constrained shift
system. In aircraft rotation (Clarke et al. 1996) or machine
scheduling (Ma, Chu, and Zuo 2010), rotation mechanisms allow to keep maintenance schedules or optimize usage patterns
of machinery. Not always can such scheduling requirements
and needs be addressed upfront, albeit for changing demand
patterns, personnel availability due to vacations and sickness,

2

Related Work

The general multi-cycle assignment problem is a variant of
the General Assignment Problem (GAP) (Pentico 2007). A
set of tasks, each associated with a profit and a weight, has
to be assigned to a set of agents with limited capacity. The
goal is to maximize (or minimize) the summed profits of the
assigned tasks, while the weights do not exceed the agent
capacities. Not all tasks have to be assigned, and profits and
weights can vary between agents. The classical assignment
problem formulates a cost minimization objective, although

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7724

