The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Generalized Idiom Usage Recognition Model Based on Semantic Compatibility
Changsheng Liu, Rebecca Hwa
Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
{changsheng, hwa}@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract

A particular challenge for automatic idiom usage recognition is that idioms, by their very nature, are idiosyncratic
in their usages. For example, the proposition “of” following
“get wind” often indicates the idiom is used figuratively (as
in instance #4), while for idiom “play with fire”, one might
need more complicated linguistic clues to infer its usage,
such as a violation of selectional preference (as in instance
# 2). Therefore, the majority of previous work on idiom
usage detection adopted a “per idiom” classifier approach;
i.e., a classifier needs to be trained separately for each idiomatic expression of interest, often with the aid of annotated training examples (Rajani, Salinas, and Mooney 2014;
Peng, Feldman, and Vylomova 2014; Liu and Hwa 2017).
Since there are a large number of idioms in the text, we
aim to build an efficient generalized idiom usage recognizer
without supervision.
The insight underlying the method we propose is that
when the literal interpretation of a potential idiomatic expression is not compatible with the context, it typically indicates that the idiom is used figuratively. For instance, in example #4 above, the word “wind” is semantically far away
from most surrounding words; the literal sense of “get wind”
does not fit well with the context. In general, this semantic incompatibility is a strong indicator that the idiom has a
non-literal interpretation in the context. This paper presents
a method for building a general idiom usage recognizer by
determining the semantic compatibility between the literal
meanings of idioms and their contexts.
This notion of semantic compatibility is reminiscent of
the training objective of negative sampling in word2vec,
which is originally used for learning low dimensional word
embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013b; 2013a). Its Continuous
Bag-of-Words (CBOW) variant internally tries to maximize
the probability of positive (compatible) context-word pairs
and minimize the probability of randomly sampled negative (incompatible) pairs. Thus, if CBOW can successfully
capture the semantic compatibility feature in text, it is also
possible that we can apply it to determine the semantic compatibility between an idiom and its context.
However, the CBOW model mainly uses semantic compatibility as a roundabout way to learn useful vectors for
words. The post-hoc evaluations of the model concentrate
on the learned embeddings of words (Mikolov et al. 2013a;
Levy, Goldberg, and Dagan 2015); whether the learned

Many idiomatic expressions can be used figuratively or literally depending on the context. A particular challenge of
automatic idiom usage recognition is that idioms, by their
very nature, are idiosyncratic in their usages; therefore, most
previous work on idiom usage recognition mainly adopted a
“per idiom” classifier approach, i.e., a classifier needs to be
trained separately for each idiomatic expression of interest,
often with the aid of annotated training examples. This paper presents a transferred learning approach for developing
a generalized model to recognize whether an idiom is used
figuratively or literally. Our work is based on the observation
that most idioms, when taken literally, would be somehow
semantically at odds with their context. Therefore, a quantified notion of semantic compatibility may help to discern the
intended usage for any arbitrary idiom. We propose a novel
semantic compatibility model by adapting the training of a
Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW) model for the purpose of
idiom usage recognition. There is no need to annotate idiom
usage examples for training. We perform evaluative experiments on two corpora; results show that the proposed generalized model achieves competitive results compared to stateof-the-art per-idiom models.

1

Introduction

Idioms appear frequently in languages. Many idioms can be
interpreted figuratively or literally depending on the context
(Fazly, Cook, and Stevenson 2009). For example, the idioms
“play with fire” and “get wind” are used differently in the
instances below:
#1 [lit.]Kids playing with fire: experts warn parents to look
out for danger signs.
#2[fig.]The UN is playing with fire over North Korea crisis.
#3[lit.]Here in Portland we’re just gonna get rain, the coast
is gonna get wind. Stay safe!
#4[fig.]FAA will get wind of that crooked airways’ shady
dealings.
The ability to automatically distinguish whether a potential idiomatic phrase is used literally or figuratively is beneficial to many natural language processing (NLP) applications such as machine translation and sentiment analysis (Salton, Ross, and Kelleher 2014; Williams et al. 2015).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6738

