The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Popularity Prediction on Online Articles with Deep Fusion of Temporal Process
and Content Features
Dongliang Liao,1 Jin Xu,1∗ Gongfu Li,1 Weijie Huang,1 Weiqing Liu,2 Jing Li2
1
WeChat, Tencent Inc.
{brightliao, jinxxu, gongfuli,wainhuang}@tencent.com;
2
University of Science and Technology of China,
cslwqxx@mail.ustc.edu.cn,lj@ustc.edu.cn

Predicting the popularity of online article sheds light to many
applications such as recommendation, advertising and information retrieval. However, there are several technical challenges to be addressed for developing the best of predictive
capability. (1) The popularity fluctuates under impacts of external factors, which are unpredictable and hard to capture.
(2) Content and meta-data features, largely determining the
online content popularity, are usually multi-modal and nontrivial to model. (3) Besides, it also needs to figure out how
to integrate temporal process and content features modeling
for popularity prediction in different lifecycle stages of online
articles. In this paper, we propose a Deep Fusion of Temporal
process and Content features (DFTC) method to tackle them.
For modeling the temporal popularity process, we adopt the
recurrent neural network and convolutional neural network.
For multi-modal content features, we exploit the hierarchical
attention network and embedding technique. Finally, a temporal attention fusion is employed for dynamically integrating all these parts. Using datasets collected from WeChat, we
show that the proposed model significantly outperforms stateof-the-art approaches on popularity prediction.

1.0

Hourly Views Amount

Normalized Total Views

Abstract

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Time (days)

8

9

10

(a) Long term growth trend.

External
impact

July 1

July 2
July 3
Time (date)

July 4

(b) Short term fluctuation.

Figure 1: These two sub-figures show temporal dynamic
of articles popularity in WeChat1 . (a) The normalized total
views accumulative process of all articles. (b) The hourly
views amount variation of an example article.

approaches: temporal process modeling and content feature modeling. Temporal process modeling predicts popularity based on temporal evolution processes of aggregated
view volumes in time slots. The accumulative popularity increases over time while shows unexpected outbreaks under
impacts of external factors, shown in Fig. 1. Most existing works capture short term fluctuations based on the specific assumption about external impact (Zhao et al. 2015;
Cao et al. 2017; Rizoiu et al. 2017). However, many external
factors are unpredictable. Specific assumptions restrict these
models’ predictive power. Yu et al. tried to extract popularity fluctuations from temporal process itself, based on handcrafted “phases” (Yu et al. 2015). However, influences of
external factors may cover different ranges and durations. It
is hard to assume the amount and shapes of fluctuations artificially. How to extract short term fluctuations automatically
is still a unsolved problem in this branch of methods.
On the other hand, recent works have proved the effectiveness of content features in the popularity prediction, such as
short text descriptions, titles and images (Zhang et al. 2018;
Piotrkowicz et al. 2017; Sanjo and Katsurai 2017). However,
online articles are usually long texts which are non-trivial to
model, and diverse forms of meta-data features further complicate the content feature modeling. None of existing works
has taken fully advantages of the long text and meta-data
features for popularity prediction of online articles.

Introduction
Online articles, such as news in portal websites and blogs
in social networks, have become the most important source
of information. The popularity of online article describes
how much attention it receives, which could be measured
by the amount of total views. Popularity is a measure of
content quality for content providers, and a way to filter information for content consumers. Unfortunately, we
can only acquire the overall popularity after the lifecyle of
the online article. Predicting the overall popularity in early
stage sheds light to many applications, such as recommendation, advertising and information retrieval (Gao et al. 2018;
Liu et al. 2016). Besides, it is also academic valuable and
industrial applicable to properly answer the question like
“How to predict the overall popularity of online content at
any time?”
Recently, popularity prediction has drawn great attentions. Scholars handle this task with two-broad-category
∗
Corresponding author: Jin Xu <jinxxu@tencent.com>; the
first two authors contributed equally
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

200

http://www.wechat.com

