The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Cooperation Enforcement and Collusion
Resistance in Repeated Public Goods Games
Kai Li

Dong Hao∗

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
kai.li@sjtu.edu.cn

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
haodong@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

form a colluding group and tactically adjust the group strategy to get a higher average utility than that of the cooperative equilibrium (Telser 2017; Hilbe et al. 2014). Decades of
research from different disciplines including behavioral economics and artificial intelligence has sought to conquer the
multi-agent social dilemma (Leibo et al. 2017; Nowak 2006;
Dietz, Ostrom, and Stern 2003; Dawes 1980). It remains
equally critical today.
One of the most representative models for social dilemmas is the repeated Public Goods Games (PGG), which is
a dynamic extension of the abstract public goods games
(Ledyard 1994). A repeated PGG could consist of a series of stage games (either finitely or infinitely many). In
each stage t, the same group of n agents privately decide
how many of their tokens e to put into a public pot. At
the end of each stage, the tokens in the pot are multiplied
by a factor r, representing the ‘public good’ and is equally
distributed to all the agents. With r smaller than the group
size n, non-contributing free-riders gain more than contributors. In literature, experimental economic studies suggest
a common interval for r is greater than 0.3n and less than
0.75n (Isaac, Walker, and Thomas 1984). Although this
multi-player game system can yield a maximum total utility when all agents decide to fully contribute their tokens,
the Nash equilibrium of a single stage PGG is no contribution to the public good for every agent. In such a standard model of the repeated social dilemma, according to
the Folk Theorem, the long-run interaction allows for the
emergency of many equilibria within which the social optimum can be directed. But the problem is, without proper
strategy design for the repeated PGG, the individually rational agents will lead to an inferior outcome for all or some
agents, than the decisions of ‘socially rational’ agents. The
problem is how to select out good equilibria, which can be
considered loosely equivalent to a social norm (Santos 2017;
Young 2015; Epstein 2001).
In this work, we propose a new theory to solve the social
dilemma under the framework of the repeated PGG. We first
set up the model of the n-player repeated PGG. Via analysis
of the joint Markov Decision Process (MDP) of this game,
we introduce a compelling relation between a single player’s
strategy and the resulting state of the repeated game. We
then accordingly propose a theoretical method to offer one
(or some) of the players a delicately designed Markov strat-

Enforcing cooperation among substantial agents is one of the
main objectives for multi-agent systems. However, due to the
existence of inherent social dilemmas in many scenarios, the
free-rider problem may arise during agents’ long-run interactions and things become even severer when self-interested
agents work in collusion with each other to get extra benefits. It is commonly accepted that in such social dilemmas,
there exists no simple strategy for an agent whereby she can
simultaneously manipulate on the utility of each of her opponents and further promote mutual cooperation among all
agents. Here, we show that such strategies do exist. Under the
conventional repeated public goods game, we novelly identify them and find that, when confronted with such strategies,
a single opponent can maximize his utility only via global
cooperation and any colluding alliance cannot get the upper
hand. Since a full cooperation is individually optimal for any
single opponent, a stable cooperation among all players can
be achieved. Moreover, we experimentally show that these
strategies can still promote cooperation even when the opponents are both self-learning and collusive.

Introduction
The emergence of substantial real-world multi-agent systems becomes an irreversible tendency in artificial intelligence. Enforcing cooperation on the agents to achieve good
outcomes is a long-standing challenge in multi-agent systems, especially when the agents are involved in a longrun interaction or when there are a large number of agents
(Santos, Pacheco, and Santos 2018; Wooldridge 2009; Kraus
1997). One of the underlying reasons for such a challenge
is that there is a social dilemma in many multi-agent systems (Panait and Luke 2005; Turner 1993). Although the
agents can bilaterally share costs to give benefits to others and achieve a positive social equilibrium whereby each
agent’s utility is much improved, without a proper incentive or strategy design, the free-rider problem will occur
and self-interested agents will settle to competitive equilibria that are most likely sub-optimal. This well-known phenomenon is called the tragedy of the commons (Olson 2009;
Hardin 1968). It becomes even severer when some agents
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2085

