The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unified Embedding Alignment with Missing
Views Inferring for Incomplete Multi-View Clustering
Jie Wen,†,1 Zheng Zhang,†,2 Yong Xu,∗,1 Bob Zhang,3 Lunke Fei,4 Hong Liu5
1

Bio-Computing Research Center, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
2
The University of Queensland, Australia
3
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, PR China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
5
Engineering Lab on Intelligent Perception for Internet of Things, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
jiewen pr@126.com, darrenzz219@gmail.com, yongxu@ymail.com, bobzhang@umac.mo,
flksxm@126.com, hongliu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Recently, many researchers focused on learning a common
indicator matrix or shared similarity graph of different views
for multi-view clustering. For instance, based on the spectral
clustering, the diversity-induced multi-view subspace clustering accumulates multiple graphs of all views into a common graph for clustering (Cao et al. 2015). Multi-view subspace clustering directly learns a common and consistent
representation from the representation graphs of all views
(Gao et al. 2015). Xia et al. proposed to learn a common
low-rank graph from multiple similarity graphs constructed
from all views independently (Xia et al. 2014). Moreover,
the kernel based multi-view clustering (Tzortzis and Likas
2012) and deep multi-view clustering (Zhao, Ding, and Fu
2017) have been developed to handle nonlinear features and
achieve a very promising performance. It is worth noting
that these multi-view clustering methods commonly require
that all views of data should be complete. However, it is very
common that the available multi-view data tends to be incomplete, which means features of some views are missing. For example, in document clustering, different translated languages of documents can be regarded as the features
of multiple views. However, some documents may do not
have all translated versions (Hu and Chen 2018). Another
typical example is in the audio-visual appearance, where the
audio and visual represent the two views of a speaker, while
we may only have the samples of the audio or the visual
view for some speakers in some cases (Li, Jiang, and Zhou
2014).

Multi-view clustering aims to partition data collected from
diverse sources based on the assumption that all views are
complete. However, such prior assumption is hardly satisfied
in many real-world applications, resulting in the incomplete
multi-view learning problem. The existing attempts on this
problem still have the following limitations: 1) the underlying semantic information of the missing views is commonly
ignored; 2) The local structure of data is not well explored;
3) The importance of different views is not effectively evaluated. To address these issues, this paper proposes a Unified
Embedding Alignment Framework (UEAF) for robust incomplete multi-view clustering. In particular, a locality-preserved
reconstruction term is introduced to infer the missing views
such that all views can be naturally aligned. A consensus
graph is adaptively learned and embedded via the reverse
graph regularization to guarantee the common local structure
of multiple views and in turn can further align the incomplete
views and inferred views. Moreover, an adaptive weighting
strategy is designed to capture the importance of different
views. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed
method can significantly improve the clustering performance
in comparison with some state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Multi-view clustering has attracted much attention in the
communities of computer vision and data mining in recent
years. Compared with the single-view clustering, multi-view
clustering generally can achieve a better performance due to
the complementary properties of the heterogeneous features
collected from diverse sources or described by multiple features (Xu, Tao, and Xu 2013; Qian and Zhai 2014).
Notably, the conventional single-view clustering methods
are not suitable to group multi-view data, because they ignore the diversity and complementary characteristics of multiple features from different views (Chao, Sun, and Bi 2017).

It is clear that the existing multi-view clustering methods
fail to cluster the multi-view data with incomplete views, because it is impossible to learn the common similarity graph
or low-dimensional representation for all views. Moreover,
the available complementary information among multiple
views is very limited due to the unpaired missing views.
These factors make the incomplete views a challenging clustering problem. Some attempts have been made to adapt
such incomplete learning problem. For example, a kernel
canonical correlation analysis based method is proposed to
complete the incomplete kernel matrices of the incomplete

∗
‘†’ indicates co-first authors with equal contributions; ‘∗’ indicates the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5393

