The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Discrete Social Recommendation
Chenghao Liu,1,2∗ Xin Wang,3∗ Tao Lu,2,4 Wenwu Zhu,3 Jianling Sun,2,4 Steven C.H. Hoi1
1

School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
4
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, China
{twinsken, 3140102441, sunjl}@zju.edu.cn, {xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn, chhoi@smu.edu.sg,
Abstract

to social recommendation (Ma et al. 2011; Ma et al. 2008;
Tang, Hu, and Liu 2013; Wang et al. 2016) that aims at improving the accuracy of traditional recommendation methods through mitigating the data sparsity issue.
However, the ever-growing scales of various web services bring social recommendation a serious concern on the
computational efficiency in terms of time and space. More
concretely, matrix factorization based collaborative filtering
(CF), one of the most widely adopted techniques in realworld applications, factorizes an n × m user-item rating matrix and maps both users and items into a r-dimensional
(r ≪ min(n, m)) real-value latent space. A user’s preference for an item can be approximated by the inner product of their real-valued latent vectors. As a result, the number of parameters to be stored grows linearly with the number of users or items. This becomes very challenging when
the recommender systems have millions or even billions of
users/items, which prevents the model from being deployed
to mobile devices. Moreover, to further generate the top-K
preferred items for each user, it’s necessary to first compute
users’ preferences for all items, and then sort the preference
scores by a descending order, whose computation complexity, i.e., O(mnr + mn log K), becomes a critical bottleneck
in terms of efficiency especially when m or n is quite large.
Both issues become even more severe on social recommendation tasks which need extra storage and computation to
aggregate social information from social ties.
One simple solution is to distribute the calculations with
parallel computation techniques (Zhou et al. 2008), which is
not our focus in this work. Another promising option is to
encode real-valued latent vectors into compact binary codes
as they cost less memory than real-valued vectors and it is
much more efficient to compute the inner product by bitwise operations such as Hamming distance. Furthermore,
by exploiting special data structures for indexing all items,
the computational complexity of generating top-K preferred
items is sub-linear or even constant (Wang, Kumar, and
Chang 2010; Muja and Lowe 2009). This triggers us to propose a novel framework of Discrete Social Recommendation
(DSR) which learns binary codes by taking social information into consideration. However, learning the binary codes
is generally NP-hard (Håstad 2001) due to its discrete constraints. Given this NP-hardness, a two-stage optimization
procedure, which first solves a relaxed optimization problem

Social recommendation, which aims at improving the performance of traditional recommender systems by considering social information, has attracted broad range of interests.
As one of the most widely used methods, matrix factorization typically uses continuous vectors to represent user/item
latent features. However, the large volume of user/item latent
features results in expensive storage and computation cost,
particularly on terminal user devices where the computation
resource to operate model is very limited. Thus when taking
extra social information into account, precisely extracting K
most relevant items for a given user from massive candidates
tends to consume even more time and memory, which imposes formidable challenges for efficient and accurate recommendations. A promising way is to simply binarize the latent
features (obtained in the training phase) and then compute the
relevance score through Hamming distance. However, such a
two-stage hashing based learning procedure is not capable of
preserving the original data geometry in the real-value space
and may result in a severe quantization loss. To address these
issues, this work proposes a novel discrete social recommendation (DSR) method which learns binary codes in a unified
framework for users and items, considering social information. We further put the balanced and uncorrelated constraints
on the objective to ensure the learned binary codes can be
informative yet compact, and finally develop an efficient optimization algorithm to estimate the model parameters. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets demonstrate
that DSR runs nearly 5 times faster and consumes only with
1/37 of its real-value competitor’s memory usage at the cost
of almost no loss in accuracy.

Introduction
Online social networks have become an important source to
provide a huge amount of timely and valuable information
for understanding social behaviors and inferring personal
preferences. Recommender systems, though are designed to
help users discover interesting products or services, always
suffer from the lack of useful information for understanding
user preferences. Therefore, when recommender systems
(which urge for data) meet online social networks (which
offer useful data), their combination naturally gives birth
∗

equal contribution
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

208

