The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TopicEq: A Joint Topic and Mathematical Equation Model for Scientific Texts
Michihiro Yasunaga, John D. Lafferty
Yale University
michihiro.yasunaga@yale.edu
For paper. Context-eq pair examples.
Black holes in Einstein gravity. As a warm-up exercise, in this section, we
will briefly review the observation made by Padmanabhan [14] by generalizing his
discussion to a more general spherically symmetric case. In Einstein’s general
relativity , the gravitational field equations are

Abstract
Scientific documents rely on both mathematics and text to
communicate ideas. Inspired by the topical correspondence
between mathematical equations and word contexts observed
in scientific texts, we propose a novel topic model that jointly
generates mathematical equations and their surrounding text
(TopicEq). Using an extension of the correlated topic model,
the context is generated from a mixture of latent topics, and
the equation is generated by an RNN that depends on the latent topic activations. To experiment with this model, we create a corpus of 400K equation-context pairs extracted from a
range of scientific articles from arXiv, and fit the model using a variational autoencoder approach. Experimental results
show that this joint model significantly outperforms existing
topic models and equation models for scientific texts. Moreover, we qualitatively show that the model effectively captures the relationship between topics and mathematics, enabling novel applications such as topic-aware equation generation, equation topic inference, and topic-aware alignment
of mathematical symbols and words.

Gµν = Rµν − 12 Rgµν = 8πGTµν
where Gµν is Einstein tensor and Tµν is the energy-momentum tensor of matter
field. On the other hand, for a general static, spherically symmetric spacetime , its
metric can be written down as ......
(snippet from Cai and Ohta (2010))
We give the derivation for the primal-dual subgradient update, as composite
mirror- descent is entirely similar. We need to solve update (3), which amounts to
minx ηhḡt , xi + 2t1 δkxk22 + 2t1 hx, diag(st )xi + ηλkxk1
Let x̂ denote the optimal solution of the above optimization problem . Standard
subgradient calculus implies that when |ḡt,i | ≤ λ the solution is x̂ = 0. Similarly,
when ḡt,i ≤ −λ, then x̂ > 0, the objective is differentiable, and the solution is
obtained by setting the gradient to zero. ......
(snippet from Duchi et al. (2011))

Figure 1: The words in a given technical context often characterize the distinctive types of equations used, and vice
Point
make: topic:
equations may
look weird, but
actually
reflect the topic.
versa.to Top
Relativity;
bottom
topic:
Optimization.

Introduction

Topic

Technical scientific articles, such as those from physics
and computer science, rely on both mathematics and text
to communicate ideas. Most existing work in natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning studies these
two components separately. For instance, text-based topic
models have been used widely on scientific articles to uncover their semantic structure (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003;
Blei and Lafferty 2006; Newman et al. 2010a). For mathematics, recent work (Lan et al. 2015; Zanibbi et al. 2016;
Deng et al. 2017) has studied methods to model and generate mathematical equations, for example using RNNs. However, ultimately these two components should be processed
together in a seamless manner. Algorithms for automated
understanding of scientific documents should extract the information encoded by not only words but also mathematical equations. At the same time, equations should ideally be
modeled with the help of the surrounding text, as the meaning of an equation depends not only on its constituent symbols and syntax, but also on the context in which it appears
(Wang et al. 2015; Krstovski and Blei 2018).
To this end, this paper proposes a topic-equation model
that jointly generates equations and their surrounding text

Generated Equations

in scientific documents
(TopicEq),
and(t demonstrates
that the
• E = ~ ∂∂tS ( ∂ϕ
) − ~k ∂B
+ ∂t δ).
∂c
∂t
Quantum
physics
model can
effectively
the
aforementioned
two goals.
ergs−1 )/5; 1.13 neV].
•achieve
ρdeg ∝ 11 eV
[1.8V (10−32
The intuition behind •the
is(dϕillustrated
the
νν
dF µνmodel
≡ lcµν(1−f )
− ξ µνin
dxν d5
Q). sample
µν − αϕ
Relativity
(1+δ)
passages in
Figure 1, • gµν
which
shows
how
topic of the word
= T − 12
h(0)λ00 =
h(g)the .
x
context is often indicative
ofsubject
the to kp
distinctive
types of equa• min p(x)
− yk2 ≤ mp .
p
Optimization
+
∗ 2
tions used,
and vice versa.
For
instance,
• w = wt + gt kut − ∇u k2 . equations appearing in the topic of relativity
(with context words like “back
• P(rτ < t) = Eτ (Nτ ).
hole”, “Einstein”)
tend
to = lim
involve
series
tensors like
• T ∗ (t)
(t − t)
+ E[ϕtof
(x)]∗ |]
Probability
t→∞ E[|Na
R
1 t
= limsup
h(x)dt −
af (x).
t→∞ tin0 the
Gµν and Tµν , while equations
used
topic
of optimization (context Table
words
“gradient”,
“optimal”)
may use norms,
1: Generated
equations
from given topics.
the min operator, and often their combinations. Ideally, the
strings of mathematical symbols in the equations should aid
the training of topic models, and the context words should
1
aid the modeling and understanding of the equations.
Our model formalizes this intuition for scientific texts by
generating each equation and its context passage using a
shared latent topic. Specifically, we apply a topic model to
the context passage, and use the same latent topic proportion
vector in a recurrent neural network (RNN) to generate the
equation as a sequence of symbols. To develop and experiment with this model, we construct a large corpus of contextequation pairs, extracted from the LATEX source of arXiv articles across a range of scientific domains (ContextEq-400K).
We fit the model on this corpus using approximate inference
2

2

2

√v
π

wist

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7394

