The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Joint Semi-Supervised Feature Selection
and Classification through Bayesian Approach
Bingbing Jiang,1 Xingyu Wu,1 Kui Yu,2 Huanhuan Chen1∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
2
School of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China.
{jiangbb, xingyuwu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yukui@hfut.edu.cn, hchen@ustc.edu.cn.

Abstract

(Sheikhpour et al. 2017). Without the guidance of class label information, unsupervised algorithms cannot select the
features that effectively distinguish different classes. On the
other hand, supervised algorithms can select discriminative features with sufficient labeled data. However, the labeled data is usually scarce since it is expensive and timeconsuming to collect them. Therefore, it is of great practical significance to design the feature selection algorithm
that can exploit both labeled and unlabeled data simultaneously. Inspired by the semi-supervised learning (Chapelle,
Schölkopf, and Zien 2006; Sakai et al. 2017; Chen, Jiang,
and Yao 2018), semi-supervised feature selection has been
proposed, which can select features with the help of the label information of labeled data and the structure information
of unlabeled data.
To learn the relevant features in the case of abundant unlabeled data with few labeled data, many state-of-the-art semisupervised feature selection algorithms have been proposed.
Most semi-supervised feature selection algorithms are filterbased, which are implemented by ranking the features based
on their capability of maintaining the specific data structure or some information criterion. For example, Zhao et al
proposed a locality sensitive discriminant algorithm (Zhao,
Lu, and He 2008), which selects the features that can maximize the margin between different classes and simultaneously preserve the similarity between data. Based on the
trace ratio criterion in supervised learning (Nie et al. 2008),
Liu et al designed a semi-supervised feature selection algorithm that can avoid selecting the features with very small
variance (Liu et al. 2013). However, the filter-based semisupervised feature selection algorithms ignore the interaction between the selection of feature and the learning tasks.
Therefore, it is difficult for them to select the features that
are particularly effective for a given learning algorithm (Xu
et al. 2010).
More recently, the sparsity constraint combining with
the manifold regularization framework (Belkin, Niyogi, and
Sindhwani 2006) has been applied to design the embedded
algorithms. The embedded semi-supervised feature selection algorithms formulate an objective function to exploit the
discriminative information and the local geometric structure
of training data to learn a feature projection matrix. For example, Ma et al. incorporated l21 -norm constraint into manifold regularization and proposed a structural feature selec-

With the increasing data dimensionality, feature selection has
become a fundamental task to deal with high-dimensional
data. Semi-supervised feature selection focuses on the problem of how to learn a relevant feature subset in the case
of abundant unlabeled data with few labeled data. In recent years, many semi-supervised feature selection algorithms have been proposed. However, these algorithms are
implemented by separating the processes of feature selection
and classifier training, such that they cannot simultaneously
select features and learn a classifier with the selected features. Moreover, they ignore the difference of reliability inside unlabeled samples and directly use them in the training stage, which might cause performance degradation. In
this paper, we propose a joint semi-supervised feature selection and classification algorithm (JSFS) which adopts a
Bayesian approach to automatically select the relevant features and simultaneously learn a classifier. Instead of using all
unlabeled samples indiscriminately, JSFS associates each unlabeled sample with a self-adjusting weight to distinguish the
difference between them, which can effectively eliminate the
irrelevant unlabeled samples via introducing a left-truncated
Gaussian prior. Experiments on various datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of JSFS.

Introduction
In many real-world applications, such as scene classification, text categorization, gene expression data analysis, the
data dimensionality becomes larger and larger. Directly using these high-dimensional data might lead to lower time efficiency and performance deterioration due to the existence
of noisy or irrelevant features. As a dimensionality reduction
technique, feature selection tries to find a lower-dimensional
representation of data via removing irrelevant features without altering the original feature space (Chandrashekar and
Sahin 2014). Due to its effective representation and better interpretability for data, various feature selection algorithms have been proposed (He, Cai, and Niyogi 2006;
Zhao and Liu 2007; Nie et al. 2010; Jiang et al. 2016).
According to the availability of class label, the existing
feature selection algorithms can be divided into three different groups: unsupervised, supervised and semi-supervised
∗

Corresponding author: Huanhuan Chen.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3983

