The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Dynamically Identifying Deep Multimodal Features for Image Privacy Prediction
Ashwini Tonge,1 Cornelia Caragea2
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Kansas State University
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
atonge@ksu.edu, cornelia@uic.edu

bed, studio
dining table
music, speakers

Abstract
With millions of images shared online, privacy concerns are
on the rise. In this paper, we propose an approach to image
privacy prediction by dynamically identifying powerful features corresponding to objects, scene context, and image tags
derived from Convolutional Neural Networks for each test
image. Specifically, our approach identifies the set of most
“competent” features on the fly, according to each test image
whose privacy has to be predicted. Experimental results on
thousands of Flickr images show that our approach predicts
the sensitive (or private) content more accurately than the
models trained on each individual feature set (object, scene,
and tags alone) or their combination.

object: 0.5, scene: 0.62
tags: 0.29, all: 0.21

Figure 1: Anecdotal evidence of a private image and its tags.
context given in the image (bedroom) proved to be sufficient
to capture the sensitive content of the image and obtains a
high probability of 0.62 for the private class. We believe
that for a specific image, a certain type of feature (e.g., only
scene) or a combination of features (e.g., object and scene)
may be sufficient to accurately identify its sensitive content.
Thus, in this paper, we propose to dynamically identify the
smallest set of features derived from various Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) for target images that can adequately predict the class of an image as private or public.
Our results show that the proposed approach identifies images’ sensitive content more accurately than the individual
feature sets (object, scene, and tags) or their combination.
Our major contribution is to dynamically identify the most
relevant semantic features by taking into account the type of
features to be used for a specific type of input image.

Introduction
Technology today offers innovative ways to share photos
with people all around the world, making online photo sharing incredibly popular among Internet users. These users
document daily details about their whereabouts through images and post pictures of their significant milestones and
private events, e.g., family photos and cocktail parties. Privacy concerns are on the rise, and mostly emerge due to
users’ lack of understanding that semantically rich images
may reveal sensitive information (Zerr et al. 2012). For example, a seemingly harmless photo of a birthday party may
unintentionally reveal sensitive information about a person’s location, personal habits, and friends. Thus, recently,
researchers started to explore machine learning and deep
learning models to predict images as either public or private (Tran et al. 2016; Tonge and Caragea 2016; Tonge,
Caragea, and Squicciarini 2018; Tonge and Caragea 2018;
Squicciarini, Caragea, and Balakavi 2014; Zerr et al. 2012).
These studies mainly rely on objects, scenes, and user tag
features as well as the combination of these features to
achieve better performance than using individual features.
We conjecture that combining the object, scene and user
tag features does not always help to identify sensitive content for images that are shared online. Consider the image
given in Figure 1, which contains private content (someone’s
bedroom). A learning model trained on the combination of
all features (object, scene and user tags) yields a very low
probability (0.21) for the private class. However, the scene

Proposed Approach
We propose an approach for image privacy prediction that
effectively identifies the most powerful or “competent” object, scene, and tag features for a target image whose privacy
has to be predicted. Our features are derived from ObjectCNN, Scene-CNN, and Tag-CNN, respectively. To predict
the privacy of an image, we consider three stages:
(1) Identify two neighborhoods for a target image: Our
approach assumes the existence of three datasets, denoted as
DS1, DS2, and Test. DS1 and DS2 contain images that are
labeled as public or private, with DS1 being used for model
training and DS2 being used for neighborhoods’ estimation.
The Test dataset contains target images for which we aim
to predict privacy. Given a target image I, we estimate two
neighborhoods for I: Visual similarity based (NS I ) and privacy profile based (NP I ) neighborhoods. For NS I , we use
visual content features to calculate the similarity between
the images. Specifically, we concatenate object & scene features and use them to identify the top kv nearest neighbors
from DS2. For NP I , we consider kp most similar images

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10057

