The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Transductive Bounds for the Multi-Class Majority Vote Classifier
Vasilii Feofanov, Emilie Devijver, Massih-Reza Amini
University Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble INP
LIG, CNRS, Grenoble 38000, France
firstname.lastname@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

examples ZL = {(xi , yi )}li=1 ∈ (X × Y)l , identically and
independently distributed (i.i.d.) with respect to a fixed yet
unknown probability distribution D over X × Y, and a set
u
of unlabeled training examples X U = {x0i }l+u
i=l+1 ∈ X
supposed to be drawn i.i.d. from the marginal distribution
PX (x), over the domain X . If XU is empty, then the problem reduces to supervised learning. The other extreme case
is the situation where ZL is empty and which corresponds to
unsupervised learning.
Most studies in semi-supervised learning have focused on
the binary classification problem, whereas just few ones are
devoted to the multi-class framework, i.e. |Y| > 2 with
some recent studies considering the learnability of multiclass semi-supervised learning algorithms under some specific assumptions. For example, Maximov, Amini, and Harchaoui (2018) proved the consistency of the Empirical Risk
Minimization principle in some cases by bounding the true
risk of the trained classifier. However such bounds are not
usable in practice as they are generally too loose.
In this paper, we propose a transductive bound for the
multi-class majority vote classifier, which to the best of our
knowledge, is a first attempt in this direction. The bound is
based on the risk of the associated Gibbs classifier and by
considering the class confusion matrix as an error indicator
as proposed in Morvant, Koço, and Ralaivola (2012). This
bound is obtained by analytically solving a linear program
and it comes out that in the case where the bound over the
risk of the Gibbs classifier is tight and when the Bayes classifier makes most of its errors on low margin examples, the
obtained bound is tight. From this result, we then propose
to automatically find a threshold for which the risk of the
majority vote classifier is the lowest. This finding allows to
consider the output of the Bayes classifier, or its margin, as
an indicator of confidence and to extend self-learning algorithms to the multi-class case. The proposed strategy iteratively learns a Bayes classifier by assigning at each iteration pseudo-labels to unlabeled examples having their margin above a certain threshold obtained from the proposed
transductive bound.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce the problem statement and the proposed framework.
In Section 3 we present a bound over the transductive risk
of the multi-class majority vote classifier. In Section 4 we
present empirical evidence showing that the extended self-

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a transductive bound over the risk
of the majority vote classifier learned with partially labeled
data for the multi-class classification. The bound is obtained
by considering the class confusion matrix as an error indicator and it involves the margin distribution of the classifier
over each class and a bound over the risk of the associated
Gibbs classifier. When this latter bound is tight and, the errors of the majority vote classifier per class are concentrated
on a low margin zone; we prove that the bound over the
Bayes classifier’ risk is tight. As an application, we extend
the self-learning algorithm to the multi-class case. The algorithm iteratively assigns pseudo-labels to a subset of unlabeled training examples that have their associated class margin above a threshold obtained from the proposed transductive bound. Empirical results on different data sets show the
effectiveness of our approach compared to the same algorithm where the threshold is fixed manually, to the extension
of TSVM to multi-class classification and to a graph-based
semi-supervised algorithm.

1

Introduction

In many real-life applications, the labeling of training examples for learning is costly and sometimes even not realistic.
For example, in medical diagnosis or biological data analysis, labeling data may require very expensive tests so that
only small labeled data sets are generally available. In many
other cases, like web oriented applications, huge amount of
observations arrive sequentially and there is not enough time
to label data for different information needs; while unlabeled
data are abundant.
Learning with labeled and unlabeled data, or semisupervised learning, has been a subject of growing interest in the machine learning community over the last twenty
years (Chapelle, Schölkopf, and Zien 2010). In this case, labeled training examples are generally assumed to be very
few, leading to an inefficient supervised model, while unlabeled training examples contain valuable information about
the prediction problem and it is generally expected that their
exploitation leads to an increase of prediction performance.
Considering an input space X ⊂ Rd and a discrete output space Y, we assume available a set of labeled training
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3566

