The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Perceptual-Sensitive GAN for Generating Adversarial Patches
Aishan Liu,§ Xianglong Liu,§∗ Jiaxin Fan,§ Yuqing Ma,§ Anlan Zhang,§
Huiyuan Xie,† Dacheng Tao‡
§

State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
†
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
‡
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, SIT, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
{liuaishan, xlliu, jxfan, mayuqing, zal1506}@buaa.edu.cn, hx255@cam.ac.uk, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples where inputs with imperceptible perturbations mislead DNNs to incorrect results. Recently, adversarial patch,
with noise confined to a small and localized patch, emerged
for its easy accessibility in real-world. However, existing attack strategies are still far from generating visually natural
patches with strong attacking ability, since they often ignore
the perceptual sensitivity of the attacked network to the adversarial patch, including both the correlations with the image context and the visual attention. To address this problem,
this paper proposes a perceptual-sensitive generative adversarial network (PS-GAN) that can simultaneously enhance
the visual fidelity and the attacking ability for the adversarial patch. To improve the visual fidelity, we treat the patch
generation as a patch-to-patch translation via an adversarial process, feeding any types of seed patch and outputting
the similar adversarial patch with high perceptual correlation with the attacked image. To further enhance the attacking ability, an attention mechanism coupled with adversarial
generation is introduced to predict the critical attacking areas for placing the patches, which can help producing more
realistic and aggressive patches. Extensive experiments under semi-whitebox and black-box settings on two large-scale
datasets GTSRB and ImageNet demonstrate that the proposed PS-GAN outperforms state-of-the-art adversarial patch
attack methods.

Figure 1: Traffic signs with scrawls and patches on them in
the real world.

valuable and beneficial to the deep learning models, as they
are able to provide insights into their strengths, weaknesses,
and blind-spots (Tramèr et al. 2017; Ross and Doshivelez
2018).
The straightforward solution is to intentionally add smallmagnitude perturbations to the input instances like images,
generating the maliciously perturbed examples that can fool
DNNs to make wrong predictions. In the past years, various typical techniques have been developed to produce adversarial examples along this direction, such as gradientbased algorithms (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy ; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016), optimization-based
methods (Szegedy et al. 2013; Athalye and Sutskever 2017)
and network-based techniques (Xiao et al. 2018; Poursaeed
et al. 2018). Network-based techniques have achieved satisfying performance owning to their great power for generating high-quality synthetic data. Among them, the generative adversarial networks (GANs) technique is capable to approximate the true data distribution (Goodfellow et al. 2014;
Ma et al. 2018; Song et al. 2018; Pathak et al. 2016), and recently has attracted great attention in producing perceptually
realistic adversarial examples with the state-of-of-the-art attacking performance (Xiao et al. 2018).
Besides the well-designed perturbations, the adversarial
patch serves as an alternative way to generate adversarial
examples, which can be directly localized in the input instance to the deep model (Brown et al. 2017; Karmon, Zoran, and Goldberg 2018). Compared to the traditional perturbation based adversarial examples, the adversarial patch
enjoys the advantages of being input-independent and sceneindependent, and can be easily placed on any input data with
general attack ability. In real world, the patch scenarios often
happen where the patches can be invisible or imperceptible
to human. For example, the traffic signs with scrawls and

Introduction
Recent advances in deep neural networks (DNNs) have enabled researchers to achieve great success in various tasks
handling the massive image (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012), text (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) and
speech (Hinton et al. 2012) data. Despite the successful
progress, deep learning models have been proved to be vulnerable and susceptible to adversarial examples (Szegedy et
al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy ). On one side,
adversarial examples pose potential security threats by attacking or misleading the practical deep learning applications like auto driving and face recognition system, which
may cause pecuniary loss or people death with severe impairment. On the other side, adversarial examples are also
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1028

