The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Neural Relation Extraction within and across Sentence Boundaries
Pankaj Gupta,1,2 Subburam Rajaram,1 Hinrich Schütze,2 Thomas Runkler1
1

Corporate Technology, Machine-Intelligence (MIC-DE), Siemens AG Munich, Germany
2
CIS, University of Munich (LMU) Munich, Germany
{pankaj.gupta, subburam.rajaram}@siemens.com | pankaj.gupta@campus.lmu.de

Abstract

The two sentences together convey the fact that the entity
e1 is associated with e2, which cannot be inferred from either sentence alone. The missed relations impact the system
performance, leading to poor recall. But precision is equally
important; e.g., in high-valued biomedicine domain, significant inter-sentential relationships must be extracted, especially in medicine that aims toward accurate diagnostic testing and precise treatment, and extraction errors can have severe negative consequences. In this work, we present a neural network (NN) based approach to precisely extract relationships within and across sentence boundaries, and show a
better balance in precision and recall with an improved F1 .
Previous work on cross-sentence relation extraction used
coreferences to access entities that occur in a different sentence (Gerber and Chai 2010; Yoshikawa et al. 2011) without modeling inter-sentential relational patterns. Swampillai
and Stevenson (2011) described a SVM-based approach to
both intra- and inter-sentential relations. Recently, Quirk and
Poon (2016) applied distant supervision to cross-sentence
relation extraction of entities using binary logistic regression (non-neural network based) classifier and Peng et al.
(2017) applied sophisticated graph long short-term memory
networks to cross-sentence n-ary relation extraction. However, it still remains challenging due to the need for coreference resolution, noisy text between the entity pairs spanning
multiple sentences and lack of labeled corpora.
Bunescu and Mooney (2005), Nguyen, Matsuo, and
Ishizuka (2007) and Mintz et al. (2009) have shown that
the shortest dependency path (SDP) between two entities
in a dependency graph and the dependency subtrees are the
most useful dependency features in relation classification.
Further, Liu et al. (2015) developed these ideas using Recursive Neural Networks (RecNNs, Socher et al. (2014)) and
combined the two components in a precise structure called
Augmented Dependency Path (ADP), where each word on
a SDP is attached to a dependency subtree; however, limited to single sentences. In this paper, we aspire from these
methods to extend shortest dependency path across sentence
boundary and effectively combine it with dependency subtrees in NNs that can capture semantic representation of the
structure and boost relation extraction spanning sentences.
The contributions are: (1) Introduce a novel dependencybased neural architecture, named as inter-sentential
Dependency-based Neural Network (iDepNN) to ex-

Past work in relation extraction mostly focuses on binary relation between entity pairs within single sentence. Recently,
the NLP community has gained interest in relation extraction in entity pairs spanning multiple sentences. In this paper,
we propose a novel architecture for this task: inter-sentential
dependency-based neural networks (iDepNN). iDepNN models the shortest and augmented dependency paths via recurrent and recursive neural networks to extract relationships
within (intra-) and across (inter-) sentence boundaries. Compared to SVM and neural network baselines, iDepNN is more
robust to false positives in relationships spanning sentences.
We evaluate our models on four datasets from newswire
(MUC6) and medical (BioNLP shared task) domains that
achieve state-of-the-art performance and show a better balance in precision and recall for inter-sentential relationships.
We perform better than 11 teams participating in the BioNLP
shared task 2016 and achieve a gain of 5.2% (0.587 vs 0.558)
in F1 over the winning team. We also release the crosssentence annotations for MUC6.

Introduction
The task of relation extraction (RE) aims to identify semantic relationship between a pair of nominals or entities e1 and
e2 in a given sentence S. Due to a rapid growth in information, it plays a vital role in knowledge extraction from
unstructured texts and serves as an intermediate step in a variety of NLP applications in newswire, web and high-valued
biomedicine (Bahcall 2015) domains. Consequently, there
has been increasing interest in relation extraction, particularly in augmenting existing knowledge bases.
Progress in relation extraction is exciting; however most
prior work (Zhang et al. 2006; Kambhatla 2004; Vu et al.
2016a; Gupta, Schütze, and Andrassy 2016) is limited to
single sentences, i.e., intra-sentential relationships, and ignores relations in entity pairs spanning sentence boundaries,
i.e., inter-sentential. Thus, there is a need to move beyond
single sentences and devise methods to extract relationships
spanning sentences. For instance, consider the sentences:
Paul Allen has started a company and named [Vern Raburnse1
its President. The company, to be called [Paul Allen Group]e2 will
be based in Bellevue, Washington.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6513

