The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Unsupervised Fake News Detection
on Social Media: A Generative Approach
Shuo Yang,†‡ Kai Shu,‡ Suhang Wang,§ Renjie Gu,† Fan Wu,† Huan Liu‡
†

‡

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
School of Computing, Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, USA
§
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University, USA
†
{wnmmxy, grj165, wu-fan}@sjtu.edu.cn; ‡ {kai.shu, huan.liu}@asu.edu; § szw494@psu.edu
Abstract

could inflict damages on social media platforms and also
cause serious impacts on both individuals and society. Thus,
detecting and mitigating fake news has become a crucial
problem in recent social media studies.
Existing work on fake news detection is mostly based
on supervised methods. They aim to build a classification
model considering different sets of features including news
content (Wang 2017), user profiles (Castillo, Mendoza, and
Poblete 2011), message propagation (Wu and Liu 2018), and
social contexts (Ma et al. 2015). Though they have shown
some promising results, these supervised methods suffer
from a critical limitation, i.e., they require a reliably preannotated dataset to train a classification model. However,
obtaining a large number of annotations is time-consuming
and labor-intensive, as the process needs careful checking of
news contents as well as other additional evidence such as
authoritative reports. Leveraging a crowdsourcing approach
to obtain annotations could alleviate the burden of expert
checking, but the quality of annotations may suffer (Kim et
al. 2018). As fake news is intentionally written to mislead
readers, individual human workers alone may not have the
domain expertise to differentiate real news and fake news
(Bond Jr and DePaulo 2006).
In search of an alternative to supervised methods, we consider detecting fake news in an unsupervised manner. Our
key idea is to extract users’ opinions on the news by exploiting the auxiliary information of the users’ engagements
with the news tweets on social media, and aggregate their
opinions in a well-designed unsupervised way to generate
our estimation results. We observe that as news propagates,
users engage differently on social media, such as publishing
a news tweet, liking, forwarding, or replying to a news tweet.
This information can, on a certain level, reflect the users’
opinions on the news. For example, Figure 1 shows two
news tweet examples regarding the aforementioned news.
According to the users’ tweet contexts, we can see that the
user in Figure 1(a) disagreed with the authenticity of the
news, which may indicate the user’s high credibility in identifying fake news. On the other hand, it appears that the
user in Figure 1(b) falsely believed the news or intentionally spread the fake news, implying the user’s deficiency in
the ability to identify fake news. Besides, as for other users
who engaged in the tweets, it is likely that the users who
liked/retweeted the first tweet also doubted the news, while

Social media has become one of the main channels for people to access and consume news, due to the rapidness and low
cost of news dissemination on it. However, such properties of
social media also make it a hotbed of fake news dissemination, bringing negative impacts on both individuals and society. Therefore, detecting fake news has become a crucial
problem attracting tremendous research effort. Most existing
methods of fake news detection are supervised, which require
an extensive amount of time and labor to build a reliably annotated dataset. In search of an alternative, in this paper, we
investigate if we could detect fake news in an unsupervised
manner. We treat truths of news and users’ credibility as latent random variables, and exploit users’ engagements on social media to identify their opinions towards the authenticity
of news. We leverage a Bayesian network model to capture
the conditional dependencies among the truths of news, the
users’ opinions, and the users’ credibility. To solve the inference problem, we propose an efficient collapsed Gibbs sampling approach to infer the truths of news and the users’ credibility without any labelled data. Experiment results on two
datasets show that the proposed method significantly outperforms the compared unsupervised methods.

1

Introduction

The continuous growth of social media has provided users
with more convenient ways to access news than ever before.
According to Pew Research Center (Shearer and Gottfried
2017), about two-thirds of U.S. adults got news from social
media in 2017. As people continue to benefit from the convenience and easy accessibility of social media, they also expose themselves to certain noisy and inaccurate information
spread on social media, especially fake news, which consists
of articles intentionally written to convey false information
for a variety of purposes such as financial or political manipulation (Shu et al. 2017). For example, one of the most
famous fake news is: “Pope Francis shocks world, endorses
Donald Trump for president, releases statement.” This news
was extremely popular and has gained over 960,000 user
engagements on Facebook1 . The wide spread of fake news
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/30/read-all-about-it-thebiggest-fake-news-stories-of-2016.html

5644

