The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Modular Materialisation of Datalog Programs
Pan Hu, Boris Motik, Ian Horrocks
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

Materialisation and all aforementioned incremental algorithms compute rule consequences using seminaı̈ve evaluation (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995). The main benefit of
this approach is that each applicable inference is performed
exactly once. However, all consequences of certain rules or
rule combinations can actually be computed without considering every applicable inference. For example, consider
applying a program that axiomatises a relation R as symmetric and transitive to input facts that describe a connected
graph consisting of n vertices. In Section 3 we show that
computing all consequences using seminaı̈ve evaluation involves O(n3 ) rule applications, whereas a custom algorithm
can achieve the same goal using only O(n2 ) steps. Since
incremental maintenance algorithms are based on the seminaı̈ve algorithm, they can suffer from similar deficiencies.
Approaches that can maintain the closure of specific datalog programs have already been considered in the literature. For example, maintaining transitive closure of a
graph has been studied extensively (Ibaraki and Katoh 1983;
La Poutre and van Leeuwen 1987; King 1999; Demetrescu
and Italiano 2000). Subercaze et al. (2016) presented an algorithm for the materialisation of the transitive and symmetric properties in RDFS-Plus. Dong, Su, and Topor (1995)
showed that insertions into a transitively closed relation can
be maintained by evaluating four nonrecursive first-order
queries. However, these approaches can only handle datalog
programs for which they have been specifically developed—
that is, the programs are not allowed to contain any additional rules. The presence of other rules introduces additional complexity since updates computed by specialised algorithms must be propagated to the remaining rules and vice
versa. Moreover, many of these approaches cannot handle
deletion of input facts, which is a key problem in incremental reasoning. Thus, it is currently not clear whether and how
customised algorithms can be used in general-purpose datalog systems that must handle arbitrary datalog rules and
support incremental additions and deletions.
To address these issues, in this paper we present a modular framework for materialisation computation and incremental materialisation maintenance that can integrate specialised reasoning algorithms with the seminaı̈ve evaluation.
The framework partitions the rules of a datalog program into
disjoint subsets called modules. For each module, four pluggable functions are used to compute certain consequences

The seminaı̈ve algorithm can be used to materialise all consequences of a datalog program, and it also forms the basis for
algorithms that incrementally update a materialisation as the
input facts change. Certain (combinations of) rules, however,
can be handled much more efficiently using custom algorithms. To integrate such algorithms into a general reasoning
approach that can handle arbitrary rules, we propose a modular framework for computing and maintaining a materialisation. We split a datalog program into modules that can be handled using specialised algorithms, and we handle the remaining rules using the seminaı̈ve algorithm. We also present two
algorithms for computing the transitive and the symmetric–
transitive closure of a relation that can be used within our
framework. Finally, we show empirically that our framework
can handle arbitrary datalog programs while outperforming
existing approaches, often by orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Datalog (Abiteboul, Hull, and Vianu 1995) is a prominent
rule language whose popularity is mainly due to its ability to
express recursive definitions such as transitive closure. Datalog captures OWL 2 RL (Motik et al. 2009) ontologies with
SWRL rules (Horrocks et al. 2004), so it supports query answering on the Semantic Web. It has been implemented in
many systems, including but not limited to WebPIE (Urbani
et al. 2012), VLog (Urbani, Jacobs, and Krötzsch 2016), Oracle’s RDF Store (Wu et al. 2008), OWLIM (Bishop et al.
2011a), and RDFox (Nenov et al. 2015).
Datalog reasoning is often realised by precomputing and
storing all consequences of a datalog program and a set of
facts; this process and its output are both called materialisation. A materialisation must be updated when the input
facts change, but doing so ‘from scratch’ can be inefficient
if changes are small. To minimise the overall work, incremental maintenance algorithms have been developed. These
include the well-known Delete/Rederive (DRed) (Gupta,
Mumick, and Subrahmanian 1993; Staudt and Jarke 1996)
and Counting (Gupta, Mumick, and Subrahmanian 1993)
algorithms, and the more recent Backward/Forward (B/F)
(Motik et al. 2015), DRedc , and B/Fc (Hu, Motik, and Horrocks 2018b) algorithms.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2859

