The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Unified Model for Opinion Target Extraction and Target Sentiment Prediction∗
Xin Li,1 Lidong Bing,2 Piji Li,3 Wai Lam1
1

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
R&D Center Singapore, Machine Intelligence Technology,
Alibaba DAMO Academy
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{lixin, wlam}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, l.bing@alibaba-inc.com, pijili@tencent.com
Abstract

2013; 2014; Liu, Joty, and Meng 2015; Yin et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2016a; 2017; He et al. 2017; Li and Lam 2017;
Li et al. 2018b; Xu et al. 2018). The second sub-task, i.e.,
target sentiment classification, performs as a multiplier for
the usefulness of the extracted target mentions, as it can
predict the sentiment polarity of the given opinion targets.
This sub-task has also received a lot of attention in recent years (Dong et al. 2014; Tang, Qin, and Liu 2016;
Wang et al. 2016b; Ma et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017;
Tay, Luu, and Hui 2017; Ma, Peng, and Cambria 2018;
Hazarika et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018a; Wang et al. 2018;
Xue and Li 2018; He et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019). However,
most existing methods solving the second sub-task assume
that the target mentions are given, which limits their practical use. To sum up, all the above works aim at solving only
one of the sub-tasks. In order to apply these existing methods in practical settings, i.e., not only extracting the targets,
but also predicting the target sentiment, one typical way is
to pipeline the methods of the two sub-tasks together.
As observed in some other tasks (Jing et al. 2003; Ng
and Low 2004; Finkel and Manning 2009; Miwa and Sasaki
2014), if two sub-tasks have strong couplings (e.g, NER
and relation extraction), a more integrated model is usually more effective than a pipline solution. For the TBSA
task, previous researchers have attempted two approaches
to a more integrated solution (Mitchell et al. 2013; Zhang,
Zhang, and Vo 2015). One approach is to make the models
of the two sub-tasks jointly trained, which utilizes a set of
target boundary tags (e.g., B, I, E, S and O) and a set of sentiment tags (e.g. POS, NEG, NEU). The “joint” row of Table 1
gives an example of the tagging scheme in this approach.
Another approach is to totally dismiss the boundary of the
two sub-tasks, which utilizes a set of specially-designed tags
(we name it “unified tagging scheme”), namely, B-{POS,
NEG, NEU}, I-{POS, NEG, NEU}, E-{POS, NEG,
NEU}, S-{POS, NEG, NEU}, denoting the beginning of,
inside of, end of, and single-word opinion target with positive, negative or neutral sentiment respectively, and O denoting NULL sentiment. An example is given in the “unified”
row in Table 1. Unfortunately, these initial attempts did not
result in a more integrated model that can outperform the
pipeline approaches.
Although the importance of solving the complete TBSA
task remains significant, existing studies are relatively less

Target-based sentiment analysis involves opinion target extraction and target sentiment classification. However, most of
the existing works usually studied one of these two sub-tasks
alone, which hinders their practical use. This paper aims to
solve the complete task of target-based sentiment analysis in
an end-to-end fashion, and presents a novel unified model
which applies a unified tagging scheme. Our framework involves two stacked recurrent neural networks: The upper one
predicts the unified tags to produce the final output results of
the primary target-based sentiment analysis; The lower one
performs an auxiliary target boundary prediction aiming at
guiding the upper network to improve the performance of the
primary task. To explore the inter-task dependency, we propose to explicitly model the constrained transitions from target boundaries to target sentiment polarities. We also propose
to maintain the sentiment consistency within an opinion target via a gate mechanism which models the relation between
the features for the current word and the previous word. We
conduct extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets
and our framework achieves consistently superior results.

Introduction
Target-Based Sentiment Analysis (TBSA) aims to detect the
opinion targets explicitly mentioned in sentences and predict
the sentiment polarities over the opinion targets (Liu 2012;
Pontiki 2014). For example, in the sentence “USB3 Peripherals are noticably less expensive than the ThunderBolt ones”, the user mentions two opinion targets, namely,
“USB3 Peripherals” and “ThunderBolt ones”, and expresses positive sentiment over the first, and negative sentiment over the second.
Traditionally, this task can be broken into two sub-tasks,
namely, opinion target extraction and target sentiment classification. The goal of opinion target extraction is to detect the opinion target mentions in the text, and it has been
extensively studied (Qiu et al. 2011; Liu, Xu, and Zhao
∗
The work described in this paper was mainly done when Lidong Bing was an employee and Xin Li was an intern at Tencent
AI Lab. It is substantially supported by grants from the Research
Grant Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China (Project Codes: 14203414) and the Direct Grant of the Faculty of Engineering, CUHK (Project Code: 4055093).
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6714

