The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

TransConv: Relationship Embedding in Social Networks
Yi-Yu Lai, Jennifer Neville, Dan Goldwasser
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{lai49, neville, dgoldwas}@purdue.edu

Abstract

entity, relation, tail entity). There has been a surge of interest in learning graph representations of social networks
by simultaneously learning user and relationship embeddings based on the concept of triplet (Bordes et al. 2013;
Ji et al. 2015; Lin et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2014). These
methods have considered both network structure and node
relations to improve the quality of embedding. At the same
time, semantic content of entities can also provide abundant
information for representation learning. (Xie et al. 2016;
Xiao et al. 2017) take the description of entities into account
to incorporate text into embedding learning. However, typically users’ descriptions do not provide much information
about the relationships between pairs of users.
In this work, we make the observation that social network
data often contain textual communications among users, and
that this information is a valuable signal about the types and
strength of relationships between users. However, to date
this information has not been used effectively in network
embedding methods. To address this, we propose a novel relationship embedding model, TransConv.
TransConv is a structural embedding approach using relation hyperplanes, where every relationship can be viewed
as a translation of users in the embedding space. To incorporate textual communication into the learned embeddings, we develop two different types of conversation factors to include in the objective function when learning the
embeddings. Our work was inspired by Word2Vec word embedding model (Mikolov et al. 2013) and knowledge graph
completion models (Bordes et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014).
Word2Vec allows people to use vector arithmetic to work
with word analogies, for instance, King − Man + Woman ≈
Queen. This can be interpreted to mean that the relationship
between King and Queen is similar to the one between Man
and Woman. Instead of working with analogies, our model
will directly learn vector representations of relationships between users in social networks. Therefore, we aim to leverage ideas from the knowledge graph completion problem
to jointly learn representations of entities and relations. We
extend previous approaches by incorporating conversationbased factors to improve the learning process. We evaluate
TransConv on three different classification tasks: social network completion, triplets classification, and multilabel classification. The experimental results show that our approach
outperforms other state-of-the-art models on two real-world

Representation learning (RL) for social networks facilitates
real-world tasks such as visualization, link prediction and
friend recommendation. Traditional knowledge graph embedding models learn continuous low-dimensional embedding of
entities and relations. However, when applied to social networks, existing approaches do not consider the rich textual
communications between users, which contains valuable information to describe social relationships. In this paper, we
propose TransConv, a novel approach that incorporates textual interactions between pair of users to improve representation learning of both users and relationships. Our experiments
on real social network data show TransConv learns better user
and relationship embeddings compared to other state-of-theart knowledge graph embedding models. Moreover, the results illustrate that our model is more robust for sparse relationships where there are fewer examples.

Introduction
Representation learning has been applied widely in different areas to extract useful information from data when
building classifiers for inferring node attributes or predicting links in graphs. Many previous studies proposed lowdimensional network embeddings to learn graph representations (Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015; Grover and Leskovec 2016;
Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Tang et al. 2015; Wang,
Cui, and Zhu 2016). When applied to social networks, these
models project users to a hyperspace to capture the relational
and structural information conveyed by the graph. However
in social networks, because a user often has different roles
for different relationships, learning a single unique representation for all users/relations may not be effective. For example, a user could be close to a one set of friends because
they were college classmates but close to another because
they are colleagues at work. To capture this information, it
is important to consider the characteristics of relationships
between users when learning representations of social networks.
Knowledge graphs are multi-relational graphs that are
composed of entities as nodes and relations as different
types of edges. An edge instance is a triplet of fact (head
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4130

