The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Q UA R EL: A Dataset and Models for
Answering Questions about Qualitative Relationships
Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, Matt Gardner, Wen-tau Yih, Ashish Sabharwal
Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, WA
{oyvindt,peterc,mattg,scottyih,ashishs}@allenai.org

Abstract

Qualitative Story Problem:
Alan noticed that his toy car rolls further on a wood floor
than on a thick carpet. This suggests that:
(A) The carpet has more resistance
(B) The floor has more resistance
Solution: (A) The carpet has more resistance
Identification of worlds being compared:

Many natural language questions require recognizing and reasoning with qualitative relationships (e.g., in science, economics, and medicine), but are challenging to answer with
corpus-based methods. Qualitative modeling provides tools
that support such reasoning, but the semantic parsing task of
mapping questions into those models has formidable challenges. We present Q UA R EL, a dataset of diverse story
questions involving qualitative relationships that characterize these challenges, and techniques that begin to address
them. The dataset has 2771 questions relating 19 different
types of quantities. For example, “Jenny observes that the
robot vacuum cleaner moves slower on the living room carpet than on the bedroom carpet. Which carpet has more
friction?” We contribute (1) a simple and flexible conceptual framework for representing these kinds of questions;
(2) the Q UA R EL dataset, including logical forms, exemplifying the parsing challenges; and (3) two novel models for
this task, built as extensions of type-constrained semantic
parsing. The first of these models (called Q UA SP+) significantly outperforms off-the-shelf tools on Q UA R EL. The second (Q UA SP+Z ERO) demonstrates zero-shot capability, i.e.,
the ability to handle new qualitative relationships without requiring additional training data, something not possible with
previous models. This work thus makes inroads into answering complex, qualitative questions that require reasoning, and
scaling to new relationships at low cost. The dataset and models are available at http://data.allenai.org/quarel.

1

Question Interpretation (Logical Form):
qrel(distance, higher, world1) →
qrel(friction, higher, world2) ;
qrel(friction, higher, world1)?
Figure 1: An example problem from Q UA R EL and its logical form (LF), from which the answer can be inferred
(Section 3). The problem is conceptualized as comparing
two worlds which the semantic parser needs to identify
and track. In the LF, qrel(p, higher|lower, w) denotes that
p is higher/lower in world w (compared with the other
world). Styling shows approximate correspondence between
the question and the LF.

methods struggle, as a single word change (e.g., “more” to
“less”) can flip the answer. Rather, the task appears to require knowledge of the underlying qualitative relations (e.g.,
“more friction implies less speed”).
Qualitative modeling (Forbus 1984; Weld and De Kleer
2013; Kuipers 1994) provides a means for encoding and reasoning about such relationships. Relationships are expressed
in a natural, qualitative way (e.g., if X increases, then so will
Y), rather than requiring numeric equations, and inference
allows complex questions to be answered. However, the semantic parsing task of mapping real world questions into
these models is formidable and presents unique challenges.
These challenges must be solved if natural questions involving qualitative relationships are to be reliably answered.
We make three contributions: (1) a simple and flexible conceptual framework for formally representing these
kinds of questions, in particular ones that express qualitative comparisons between two scenarios; (2) a challenging
new dataset (Q UA R EL), including logical forms, exemplify-

Introduction

Many natural language tasks require recognizing and reasoning with qualitative relationships. For example, we may
read about temperatures rising (climate science), a drug dose
being increased (medicine), or the supply of goods being
reduced (economics), and want to reason about the effects.
Qualitative story problems, of the kind found in elementary
exams (e.g., Figure 1), form a natural example of many of
these linguistic and reasoning challenges, and is the target
of this work.
Understanding and answering such questions is particularly challenging. Corpus-based methods perform poorly in
this setting, as the questions ask about novel scenarios rather
than facts that can be looked up. Similarly, word association
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7063

