The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Words Can Shift: Dynamically Adjusting
Word Representations Using Nonverbal Behaviors
Yansen Wang,1 Ying Shen,2 Zhun Liu,2 Paul Pu Liang,2 Amir Zadeh,2 Louis-Philippe Morency2
1

Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
ys-wang15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {yshen2,zhunl,pliang,abagherz,morency}@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

Original word representation

soft voice

Acoustic

Humans convey their intentions through the usage of both verbal and nonverbal behaviors during face-to-face communication. Speaker intentions often vary dynamically depending on
different nonverbal contexts, such as vocal patterns and facial
expressions. As a result, when modeling human language, it is
essential to not only consider the literal meaning of the words
but also the nonverbal contexts in which these words appear.
To better model human language, we first model expressive
nonverbal representations by analyzing the fine-grained visual
and acoustic patterns that occur during word segments. In
addition, we seek to capture the dynamic nature of nonverbal
intents by shifting word representations based on the accompanying nonverbal behaviors. To this end, we propose the
Recurrent Attended Variation Embedding Network (RAVEN)
that models the fine-grained structure of nonverbal subword
sequences and dynamically shifts word representations based
on nonverbal cues. Our proposed model achieves competitive
performance on two publicly available datasets for multimodal
sentiment analysis and emotion recognition. We also visualize
the shifted word representations in different nonverbal contexts and summarize common patterns regarding multimodal
variations of word representations.

Negative-shifted
word representation
shock

Visual

Positive-shifted
word representation

⋯
t=m

KCU3.*&C

4“T*WX”

SZ*U*K3[
4“T*WX”

Acoustic

t=2

excited voice

raised
eyebrows

Visual

t=1

⋯
t=1

t=2

t=n

RST*.*&C

Word Representation Space

4“T*WX”

Figure 1: Conceptual figure demonstrating that the word representation of the same underlying word “sick” can vary conditioned on different co-occurring nonverbal behaviors. The
nonverbal context during a word segment is depicted by the
sequence of facial expressions and intonations. The speaker
who has a relatively soft voice and frowning behaviors at the
second time step displays negative sentiment.

Introduction
Multimodal language communication happens through both
verbal and nonverbal channels. The verbal channel of communication conveys intentions through words and sentences
while the nonverbal aspect uses gestures and vocal intonations. However, the meaning of words and sentences uttered
by the speaker often varies dynamically in different nonverbal contexts. These dynamic behaviors can arise from
different sources such as cultural shift or different political
backgrounds (Bamler and Mandt 2017). In human multimodal language, these dynamic behaviors are often intertwined with their nonverbal contexts (Burgoon, Guerrero, and
Floyd 2016). Intentions conveyed through uttering a sentence
can display drastic shifts in intensity and direction, leading
to the phenomena that the uttered words exhibit dynamic
meanings depending on different nonverbal contexts.
Previous work in modeling human language often utilizes
word embeddings pretrained on a large textual corpus to represent the meaning of language. However, these methods

are not sufficient for modeling highly dynamic human multimodal language. The example in Figure 1 demonstrates how
the same underlying word can vary in sentiment when paired
with different nonverbal cues. Although the two speakers
are using the same adjective “sick” to describe movies, they
are conveying different sentiments and remarks by showing
opposing facial expressions and intonations. These subtle
nonverbal cues contained in the span of the uttered words,
including facial expressions, facial landmarks, and acoustic
features, are crucial towards determining the exact intent displayed in verbal language. We hypothesize that this “exact
intent” can often be derived from the representation of the
uttered words combined with a shift in the embedding space
introduced by the accompanying nonverbal cues. In this regard, a dynamic representation for words in particular visual
and acoustic background is required.

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7216

