The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Rethinking the Discount Factor in
Reinforcement Learning: A Decision Theoretic Approach
Silviu Pitis
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
Toronto, ON
spitis@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

more flexible value functions that have state, state-action,
or transition dependent discount factors (Sutton et al. 2011;
Silver et al. 2017; White 2017). Practical considerations
aside, which approach, if any, is most sensible from a normative perspective?
We address this question by presenting an axiomatic
framework to characterize rationality in sequential decision
making. After a motivating example in Section 2 and a discussion of related work in Section 3, including an overview
of the relevant work in normative decision theory, we proceed in Section 4 to develop our framework. From a set of
seven axioms we derive a form of utility function that admits
a state-action dependent discount factor that can be greater
than 1, so long as there is long run discounting. Although
this broadens the range of possible preference structures
(vis-à-vis the fixed discount setting), we show that there exists a unique “optimizing MDP” with fixed γ < 1 whose
optimal value function matches the utility of the optimal
policy, and we quantify the difference between value and
utility for suboptimal policies. Section 5 discusses the implications of our work for task specification in RL, inverse
RL and preference-based RL, and highlights an interesting
connection to Dayan’s successor representation (1993).

Reinforcement learning (RL) agents have traditionally been
tasked with maximizing the value function of a Markov decision process (MDP), either in continuous settings, with fixed
discount factor γ < 1, or in episodic settings, with γ = 1.
While this has proven effective for specific tasks with welldefined objectives (e.g., games), it has never been established
that fixed discounting is suitable for general purpose use (e.g.,
as a model of human preferences). This paper characterizes
rationality in sequential decision making using a set of seven
axioms and arrives at a form of discounting that generalizes
traditional fixed discounting. In particular, our framework admits a state-action dependent “discount” factor that is not
constrained to be less than 1, so long as there is eventual long
run discounting. Although this broadens the range of possible preference structures in continuous settings, we show that
there exists a unique “optimizing MDP” with fixed γ < 1
whose optimal value function matches the true utility of the
optimal policy, and we quantify the difference between value
and utility for suboptimal policies. Our work can be seen as
providing a normative justification for (a slight generalization
of) Martha White’s RL task formalism (2017) and other recent departures from the traditional RL, and is relevant to task
specification in RL, inverse RL and preference-based RL.

1

2

Introduction

Motivation

To motivate our work, we show how the traditional fixed γ
value function fails to model a set of preferences. Consider
an agent that is to walk in a single direction on the side of a
cliff forever (the “Cliff Example”). Along the cliff are three
parallel paths—low, middle and high—to which we assign
utilities of 100, 0 and 50, respectively (Figure 1 (left) a-c).
Let us also suppose the agent has the option to jump down
one level at a time from a higher path, but is unable to climb
back up. Thus the agent has many options. Four of them are
shown in Figure 1 (left) d-g with their assigned utilities.
At a glance, there does not appear to be anything irrational about the utility assignments. But it is impossible to
represent this utility structure using a 3-state fixed γ MDP
with infinite time horizon. To see this, consider that for the
Bellman equation to be satisfied with respect to the optimal
policy, paths c-g in Figure 1 (left) imply the reward values
shown in Figure 1 (right) when one assumes γ = 0.9. This
implies that the utilities of paths a and b are -30 and -20,
respectively. Not only is this incorrect, but the order is re-

The field of reinforcement learning (RL) studies agents that
learn to interact “optimally” with a partially known environment (Sutton and Barto 2018). The common environmental model, underlying almost all analysis in the field, is the
Markov decision process (MDP), with optimal behavior defined in terms of the expected sum of future rewards, discounted at a constant rate per time step. The motivation for
this approach has historically been a practical one; e.g., to
enable us to make “precise theoretical statements” (Sutton
and Barto 2018) or because rewards provide “the most succinct, robust, and transferable definition of a task” (Abbeel
and Ng 2004). While this has proven effective for specific
tasks with well-defined objectives (e.g., games), modern RL
is being applied to increasingly general tasks, and it has
never been established that the MDP is a suitable model
for general purpose use. Recently, researchers have adopted
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7949

