The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Adversarial Dropout for Recurrent Neural Networks
Sungrae Park,1∗ Kyungwoo Song,2 Mingi Ji,2 Wonsung Lee,3∗ Il-Chul Moon2
1

2

Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp., Korea
Industrial & Systems Engineering, KAIST, Korea
3
AI Center, SK Telecom, Korea

Abstract

steps, as opposed to dropping different neural units at each
time step. Their approach is similar to the L2 regularization
on the weight parameters in the recurrent connection. After
this suggestion, Semeninuta et al. (Semeniuta, Severyn, and
Barth 2016) and Moon et al.(Moon et al. 2015) explored the
dropout applications within long-short term memory (LSTM)
cells by regulating the gating mechanism. Recently, Merity
et al. (Merity, Keskar, and Socher 2018) proposed the use
of DropConnect (Wan et al. 2013) on the recurrent hiddento-hidden weight matrices. This approach also allows the recurrent units to share the same dropout mask. These dropout
techniques for RNNs have shown that recurrent units should
have the same transition metric to process the sequential information. These results are used in extending the dropout
techniques on RNNs.
Recently, dropout-based ensemble (DE) regularization
(Bachman, Alsharif, and Precup 2015; Ma et al. 2017;
Laine and Aila 2017; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017) has been
established to improve the dropout techniques. DE regularization conceptually consists of two phases: the generation
of the dropout masks and the comparison of the original and
the perturbed networks by the dropout masks. Bachman et al.
(Bachman, Alsharif, and Precup 2015) and Ma et al. (Ma et al.
2017) tried to minimize the distance between the output distributions of the original network and its randomly perturbed
network. Laine and Aila (Laine and Aila 2017) suggested
self-ensembling models, or the Π model, containing a distance term between two randomly perturbed networks. Park
et al. (Park et al. 2018) proposed adversarial dropout that
intentionally deactivates neurons that are dominantly used to
predict the correct target. By utilizing the adversarial dropout,
the regularization consists of the distance between the original and the adversarially perturbed networks. Additionally,
they proved further improvements for supervised and semisupervised image classification tasks. These DE regularizers
are fundamentally developed for all types of neural networks,
but these DE regularizations are not compatible to RNNs
because of the sequential information abstraction.
To investigate the effectiveness of the DE regularization
on RNNs, Zolna et al. (Zolna et al. 2018) proposed fraternal
dropout (FD), an RNN version of self-ensembling (Laine and
Aila 2017). Specifically, two randomly perturbed RNNs by
DropConnect are simultaneously supervised from the true
labels while maintaining the distance between their predic-

Successful application processing sequential data, such as text
and speech, requires an improved generalization performance
of recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Dropout techniques
for RNNs were introduced to respond to these demands, but
we conjecture that the dropout on RNNs could have been
improved by adopting the adversarial concept. This paper
investigates ways to improve the dropout for RNNs by utilizing intentionally generated dropout masks. Specifically, the
guided dropout used in this research is called as adversarial
dropout, which adversarially disconnects neurons that are dominantly used to predict correct targets over time. Our analysis
showed that our regularizer, which consists of a gap between
the original and the reconfigured RNNs, was the upper bound
of the gap between the training and the inference phases of the
random dropout. We demonstrated that minimizing our regularizer improved the effectiveness of the dropout for RNNs on
sequential MNIST tasks, semi-supervised text classification
tasks, and language modeling tasks.

Introduction
Many effective regularization methods have been introduced to address the issue of large-scale neural networks
predisposed to overfitting. Among several regularization
techniques (Bishop 1995; Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; Salimans and Kingma 2016), dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014;
Kingma, Salimans, and Welling 2015) has become a common
methodology because of its simplicity and effectiveness. The
dropout randomly disconnects neural units during training
to prevent the feature co-adaptation. Srivastava et al. (Srivastava et al. 2014) interpreted the dropout as an extreme form
of a model ensemble by sharing the extensive parameters
of a neural network. However, the naive application of the
dropout to hidden states of recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
failed to prove performance gains (Zaremba, Sutskever, and
Vinyals 2015) because it interferes with abstracting long-term
information. This issue is caused by the structural differences
between feed-forward neural networks (FFNNs) and RNNs.
Recent works have investigated the applications of the
dropout on the recurrent connections of RNNs. Gal and
Ghahramani (Gal and Ghahramani 2016) suggested the application of the dropout on the same neural units through time
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4699

