The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Pareto Optimal Allocation under Compact Uncertain Preferences
Haris Aziz

Peter Biro

Ronald de Haan

UNSW Sydney and Data61
Sydney, Australia
haziz@cse.unsw.edu.au

Hungarian Academy of Sciences
Budapest, Hungary
birop@econ.core.hu

ILLC, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
R.deHaan@uva.nl

Baharak Rastegari
University of Southampton, UK
b.rastegari@soton.ac.uk
Abstract

possible reason for uncertain preferences could be that agents’
preferences over items may be based on several criteria, and
that given each individual criterion they may have certain
preferences over items, but they may not be perfectly clear
on how much weight to assign to each criterion (Miyazaki
and Okamoto 2017). Uncertainty in preferences has already
been studied in voting (Dopazo and Martı́nez-Céspedes 2017;
Hazon et al. 2012) and stable matching (Aziz et al. 2016a;
2017a; Miyazaki and Okamoto 2017; Chen et al. 2018). Similarly, in auction theory, it is standard to examine Bayesian
settings in which there is probability distribution over the
types of the agents.
In the context of Pareto optimal allocation, Aziz et
al. (2017b) considered two uncertain preferences models that
are not necessarily compact. In this paper, we significantly
extend their study by considering further compact and natural
uncertain preferences models and examining their computational aspects. An uncertain preference model is compact if
it can be represented in space polynomial in the number of
agents and items. If an assignment is PO (Pareto optimal)
with probability one, we will call it certainly PO. If it is
PO with non-zero probability, we call it possibly PO. We
consider the following compact uncertainty models:

The assignment problem is one of the most well-studied settings in multi-agent resource allocation. Aziz, de Haan, and
Rastegari (2017) considered this problem with the additional
feature that agents’ preferences involve uncertainty. In particular, they considered two uncertainty models neither of which is
necessarily compact. In this paper, we focus on three uncertain
preferences models whose size is polynomial in the number
of agents and items. We consider several interesting computational questions with regard to Pareto optimal assignments.
We also present some general characterization and algorithmic
results that apply to large classes of uncertainty models.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent resource allocation is a widely applicable topic
within multi-agent systems. One of the most fundamental
setting in this domain is the so called assignment problem: n agents express preferences over n items and these
items are then allocated among the agents in a suitable manner (Abdulkadiroǧlu and Sönmez 1999; Aziz et al. 2016b;
Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001; Cechlárová et al. 2015;
Gärdenfors 1973; Svensson 1994; 1999).
When making such an allocation, a social designer may
consider several goals to identify a desirable allocation. One
widely-used goal, that is considered by economists as the
most fundamental requirement for any reasonable solution, is
that the allocation should be Pareto optimal, i.e., there should
not be another allocation in which each agent is weakly better
off and at least one agent is strictly better off.
Pareto optimality is easy to achieve in classical allocation
settings via sequential allocation or other matching algorithms. However, the problem may become more challenging
when there is some uncertainty in the agents’ preferences.
Aziz, de Haan, and Rastegari (Aziz et al. 2017b) initiated
a computational study of Pareto optimality under uncertain
preferences. They discussed several reasons to consider uncertain preferences including lack of information or communication; cost of eliciting further information; a record of changing or mixed choices in the past, or the fact that the agents are
in fact virtual or ‘bidding’ agents who represent the composition of preferences of the real agents they represent. Another

• Compact Indifference Model: Each agent reports a single weak preference list that allows for ties. Each complete
linear order extension of this weak order is assumed to be
equally likely.∗
• Pairwise Model: Each agent reports independent pairwise
probabilities over pairs of items. If i prefers item o over
item o0 with probability p, then she prefers o0 over o with
probability 1 − p.
• Ranking Model: Each agent reports probabilities for each
item being in each rank.† The input for each agent can be
viewed as a bistochastic matrix, i.e, the sum of probabilities of items being in a given rank is 1, and the sum of
∗
This can be viewed as a House Allocation problem with Ties
(HRT), where any preference list obtained by breaking ties arbitrarily is possible, and all possible preferences have the same likelihood
of being realized.
†
Under a linear preference ordering, the most preferred item is
ranked 1st, the second most preferred item is ranked 2nd, and so on,
with the least preferred item being ranked nth.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1740

