The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Label Embedding with Partial Heterogeneous Contexts
Yaxin Shi,† Donna Xu,† Yuangang Pan,† Ivor W. Tsang,† Shirui Pan†
†

Centre for Artificial Intelligence(CAI), University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{Yaxin.Shi, Donna.Xu, Yuangang.Pan}@student.uts.edu.au, {Ivor.Tsang, Shirui.Pan}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Label embedding plays an important role in many real-world
applications. To enhance the label relatedness captured by
the embeddings, multiple contexts can be adopted. However,
these contexts are heterogeneous and often partially observed
in practical tasks, imposing significant challenges to capture
the overall relatedness among labels. In this paper, we propose a general Partial Heterogeneous Context Label Embedding (PHCLE) framework to address these challenges. Categorizing heterogeneous contexts into two groups, relational
context and descriptive context, we design tailor-made matrix factorization formula to effectively exploit the label relatedness in each context. With a shared embedding principle
across heterogeneous contexts, the label relatedness is selectively aligned in a shared space. Due to our elegant formulation, PHCLE overcomes the partial context problem and can
nicely incorporate more contexts, which both cannot be tackled with existing multi-context label embedding methods. An
effective alternative optimization algorithm is further derived
to solve the sparse matrix factorization problem. Experimental results demonstrate that the label embeddings obtained
with PHCLE achieve superb performance in image classification task and exhibit good interpretability in the downstream
label similarity analysis and image understanding task.

Figure 1: Motivation figure of PHCLE. Stars represent different label embeddings. 1 denotes the label embedding for
full contexts label; 2 presents that of partial context label.
to learn the label embeddings so that it can well capture the
label relatedness in multiple aspects.
However, learning label embedding from multiple contexts is challenging, due to the heterogeneous nature of the
contexts. Generally, based on the relational properties, aforementioned label contexts can be grouped into two basic but
heterogeneous categories: relational context and descriptive
context. Examples for the heterogeneous contexts is given
in Figure 1. The relational context conveys direct information on label relations. Label hierarchy, class co-occurrence
statistics can be grouped into this category. The descriptive
context, e.g. attributes and tags, provides the associations between labels and semantic descriptions. Label relatedness is
reflected by the sharing descriptions. These two basic categories are universal for existing label contexts. For example, in word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013), word-context pairs
of noun-noun belong to relational context; pairs of nounadjective and noun-verb belong to descriptive contexts. Universality of the two heterogeneous categories makes it reasonable to formulate multi-context label embedding learning
as a general heterogeneous contexts embedding problem.
To solve the heterogeneous contexts embedding problem,
we will have the following challenges:

Introduction
Label embedding, providing representations for labels, has
been widely used in object classification (Akata et al. 2016),
image retrieval (Siddiquie, Feris, and Davis 2011) and novelty detection (Wah and Belongie 2013) tasks. Context information, such as label hierarchy (Miller et al. 1990),
class co-occurrence statistics (Mensink, Gavves, and Snoek
2014), semantic attributes (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009), tags and text descriptions (Mikolov et al. 2013)
have all been exploited to learn label embeddings. As these
contexts provide label relatedness in different aspects, they
are in good complement to each other for overall understanding of the labels. For example, weasels, a mammal of
the genus Mustela, are considered to be related to cats as
they share similar visual attributes. While from the perspective of label hierarchy, weasels should be much more related to the skunks as they belong to the same animal family. Therefore, it is necessary to leverage multiple contexts

• Challenge 1: How to effectively exploit the label relatedness conveyed in each type of the heterogeneous contexts?
• Challenge 2: How to align the label relatedness reflected
in the heterogeneous contexts?

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4926

