The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Complexity of Abstract
Argumentation under a Claim-Centric View
Wolfgang Dvořák, Stefan Woltran
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
{dvorak,woltran}@dbai.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

γ1

Abstract argumentation frameworks have been introduced by
Dung as part of an argumentation process, where arguments
and conflicts are derived from a given knowledge base. It is
solely this relation between arguments that is then used in
order to identify acceptable sets of arguments. A final step
concerns the acceptance status of particular statements by
reviewing the actual contents of the acceptable arguments.
Complexity analysis of abstract argumentation so far has neglected this final step and is concerned with argument names
instead of their contents, i.e. their claims. As we outline in
this paper, this is not only a slight deviation but can lead to
different complexity results. We, therefore, give a comprehensive complexity analysis of abstract argumentation under
a claim-centric view and analyse the four main decision problems under seven popular semantics. In addition, we also address the complexity of common sub-classes and introduce
novel parameterisations – which exploit the nature of claims
explicitly – along with fixed-parameter tractability results.

c

α

a

β

b

γ2

c

Figure 1: The AF FP from Example 1. The claims of the
arguments are given in the labels next to the argument.
argumentation framework (AF). Semantics for AFs then deliver a collection of sets of arguments which are understood
as jointly acceptable; these sets are commonly referred to as
extensions.
Example 1 (Instantiating AFs from Logic Programs). Let
P = {r1 : a ← not b.; r2 : b ← not a.; r3 : c ←
not a.; r4 : c ← not b.} be a logic program (LP). The
instantiation approach from (Caminada et al. 2015) yields
an AF FP = (A, R) with arguments A = {α, β, γ1 , γ2 },
where α represents rule r1 and has claim a; β represents
rule r2 with claim b; γ1 and γ2 represent rules r3 and r4
respectively, and both have as their claim c. The attack relation R is constructed, such that an argument representing rule r attacks an argument representing rule r0 if the
head of r occurs negated in the rule body of r0 . Hence,
R = {(α, β), (β, α), (α, γ1 ), (β, γ2 )}; see Figure 1.
Under this construction, stable model semantics of LPs
corresponds to stable extensions of AFs (we omit technical
details, they are not important for the sake of the argument;
stable extensions of AFs will be formally introduced in the
next section). In our example, the two stable models S1 =
{a, c} and S2 = {b, c} of P are given via the two stable
extensions E1 = {α, γ2 } and E2 = {β, γ1 } of FP . Note
that the claims of E1 yield S1 and those of E2 yield S2 . ♦

Introduction
Formal argumentation is a vibrant field within AI. On the
one hand it provides genuine methods to model discourses
or legal cases (Atkinson et al. 2017). On the other hand, it
is closely related to – and gives an orthogonal view on –
several formalisms from the AI domain, e.g. logic programming or nonmonotonic reasoning principles (Dung 1995;
Wu, Caminada, and Gabbay 2009; Caminada et al. 2015).
For both applications, a particular model is widely used
which is known as instantiation-based argumentation (see
e.g. (Gorogiannis and Hunter 2011)).
This instantiation process starts from a knowledge base
(KB), which is potentially inconsistent. From KB, all possible arguments are constructed first. An argument typically
contains a claim and a support which is a subset of KB and
derives the claim. Next, the relationship between arguments
is analysed. A standard model is to consider that argument
α attacks argument β if the claim of α contradicts (parts
of) the support of β. As soon as all arguments and attacks
between arguments are given, one abstracts away from the
contents of the arguments and it is only the remaining attack network that is evaluated, which is thus termed abstract

Having computed the extensions, the instantiation process is completed by re-interpreting these sets of arguments
in terms of their claims. Typical are credulous and skeptical acceptance queries, which can be posed on argument
names or their claims. For instance, for skeptical acceptance one might be interested whether a particular argument
α is contained in all extensions (we will refer to this kind
of reasoning as argument-centric). However, in the light of
the above discussion the following question (which gives a
claim-centric view) appears more appropriate
(SKEPT): is a particular claim c covered by all extensions, i.e. does every extension contain at least one ar-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2801

