The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Meta-Path Augmented Response Generation
Yanran Li, Wenjie Li
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{csyli,cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

M OCHA is able to generate entities by firstly comparing the
context representation with each of the meta-path vectors,
and then attending on the candidate entities that follow the
most similar meta-path. On the movie corpus we build, our
M OCHA significantly outperforms the compared models.

We propose a chatbot, namely M OCHA to make good use of
relevant entities when generating responses. Augmented with
meta-path information, M OCHA is able to mention proper entities following the conversation flow.

Meta-path Embedding

Introduction

Given the entity types from A, a meta-path P is denoted as
A1 → A2 → . . . → AL+1 , which defines a semantic relation
between types A1 and AL+1 , where L is the path length.
To augment response generation, we summarize 10 popular meta-paths according to the statistics of the conversation
corpus. Each meta-path connects 3 entity types (length of
2), formed by entity mentions in their original order from
a same conversation. We depict these 10 meta-paths in the
Supplementary Material (Suppl. in short).1
After defining these meta-paths, we generate path instances and embed each 2-length instances using a GRU
following (Dong, Chawla, and Swami ). Since a meta-path
can produce multiple instances, we aggregate all the instance
embeddings into a single vector using a max-pooling operation. As a result, for each of 10 meta-paths, we obtain a
vector representation pm , where ∀m ∈ {1, . . . , 10}.

Recent years have witnessed a rise in building automatic
chit-chat conversational systems (a.k.a. chatbots). To generate informative responses, these chatbots need to be aware of
conversation-related knowledge. For example, when talking
about a film, it is natural to mention its director and actors.
We thus endow the chatbots with the entity reasoning
mechanism, i.e., the ability to mention proper entities with
reference to an associated knowledge base (KB) when generating responses. To ensure response quality, the generated entities should not only be relevant, but also coherent
to the conversation flow. When previous conversation had
focused on the actors of a film, it would be weird to suddenly mention the film’s writer. Inspired by (Dong, Chawla,
and Swami ), we capture conversation flow using meta-paths
over the mentioned entities. A meta-path is a sequence of
object types modeling a particular semantic relationship. An
example meta-path of entity mentions is actor→film→film.
Since meta-path information greatly reflects the conversation flow, it is better to mention entities following the metapath when generating responses.
In this work, we develop a Meta-path augmented
KnOwledge-grounded CHAtbot, namely M OCHA. Given a
conversation, our M OCHA firstly collects relevant entities
as candidates to benefit response generation. Then, M OCHA
captures the conversation context and generates responses
based on an devised encoder-decoder architecture. The encoder compresses the input utterance(s) into a context vector. The decoder is augmented with a pointer gate (Vinyals,
Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015) to decide when to mention an
entity and conduct entity reasoning over the pre-collected
candidate entities based on meta-path information. Particularly, we define 10 most popular meta-paths observed in our
conversation data, and encode them into vectors using metapath2vec approach (Dong, Chawla, and Swami ). Finally,

Model: Mocha
Formally, a conversation consists of utterance sequences
x = {u1 , . . . , uT }, where T is the turn number. Each utterance is a sequence of words. Hence, the input of chatbot
is a word sequence x = {x1 , . . . , xNx }, and the output is
a response y = {y1 , . . . , yNy }, where Nx and Ny are the
token numbers. M OCHA is a knowledge-grounded chatbot,
consisting of three main components, as follows:
Entity Collector. M OCHA firstly shortlists a set of
conversation-related entities E from KB, which is detailed described in Suppl. For decoder use, we employ
TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) to transform the entities into
dense embeddings as E = {en }, where ∀n ∈ {1, . . . , Ne }.
Context Encoder. We then embed the input utterances x
using a bi-directional GRU.2 The resulting representation at
each time step is the concatenation of each direction’s state,
←
− −
→
i.e., ht = [ht , ht ], which is then fed to the decoder.
1

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2

9971

yanran.li/mocha
We did not see clear improvements using hierarchical encoder.

