The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Network Structure and Transfer Behaviors Embedding via Deep Prediction Model
Xin Sun,1 Zenghui Song,1 Junyu Dong,1 Yongbo Yu,1 Claudia Plant,2,3 Christian Böhm4
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China
2
Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
3
Data Science @ University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
4
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany
{sunxin, dongjunyu}@ouc.edu.cn, {szh, yuyongbo}@stu.ouc.edu.cn, claudia.plant@univie.ac.at, boehm@ifi.lmu.de
Abstract

network. Once the vectorized representation is obtained, the
data mining tasks for large networks can be well solved by
state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms. Therefore, the
issue of how to transfer the link-connected nodes of the huge
network into feature representations is critical.
Intuitively the widely studied graph embedding approaches including IsoMap (Tenenbaum, De Silva, and
Langford 2000), LLE (Roweis and Saul 2000), and Laplacian Eigenmaps (Belkin and Niyogi 2001) seem to be good
solutions for the network feature learning problem. Nevertheless, the graph representation, which is the core of these
approaches, is directly derived from the data itself and perfectly reflects the global and local structure of the data.
On the contrary, natural networks encountered in the real
world are sparse and have many undiscovered and noisy
links (Tang and Liu 2012). We cannot get a full view of
the authentic relationship between any two nodes. So it is
unpractical to get features from the network itself by traditional graph embedding approaches. One typical solution
is to form hand-engineering features for each node by observing its interaction behavior with neighbors (Perozzi, AlRfou, and Skiena 2014), such as first-order proximity and
second-order proximity (Tang et al. 2015). However, the
neighbor context information is still not enough to well describe the node due to the undiscovered and noisy links. The
networks from the real world exhibit significant dynamic
evolution behavior. It is impossible to catch the network evolution process from the structured data itself. Fortunately,
the dynamic evolution process can be reflected by the transfer behaviors among the nodes, such as rumor propagation
and reputation transmission.
Previous work did not systematically consider local and
global structure with its dynamical behaviors, so this paper
proposes a Deep Network Embedding framework to solve
this issue in two aspects. One is how to capture the network structure and neighborhood context information from
the network structured data. The other is how to embed the
complex and non-linear network structural data into lowdimensional vector representations, while preserving the
transfer possibilities among the nodes.
Our contributions are as follows:

Network-structured data is becoming increasingly popular in
many applications. However, these data present great challenges to feature engineering due to its high non-linearity
and sparsity. The issue on how to transfer the link-connected
nodes of the huge network into feature representations is critical. As basic properties of the real-world networks, the local
and global structure can be reflected by dynamical transfer
behaviors from node to node. In this work, we propose a deep
embedding framework to preserve the transfer possibilities
among the network nodes. We first suggest a degree-weight
biased random walk model to capture the transfer behaviors
of the network. Then a deep embedding framework is introduced to preserve the transfer possibilities among the nodes.
A network structure embedding layer is added into the conventional Long Short-Term Memory Network to utilize its sequence prediction ability. To keep the local network neighborhood, we further perform a Laplacian supervised space optimization on the embedding feature representations. Experimental studies are conducted on various real-world datasets
including social networks and citation networks. The results
show that the learned representations can be effectively used
as features in a variety of tasks, such as clustering, visualization and classification, and achieve promising performance
compared with state-of-the-art models.

Introduction
Nowadays structured data in the form of networks is ubiquitous in our daily lives and has an astonishing growth. Especially the pervasive use of online social networks, such
as Facebook and Twitter, generates huge network data continuously at unprecedented rates. New applications, such as
node classification (Sen et al. 2008), link prediction (LibenNowell and Kleinberg 2007), and social role discovering
(Henderson et al. 2012), arise in various areas. For example,
node classification and link prediction are generally used for
similar user searching and advertisement recommendation.
However, the vast majority of existing machine learning algorithms for classification and prediction are feature-based,
which means informative and discriminating attribute-value
entities are required. Rather than developing special learning algorithms for network data, it is more practical to learn
feature vector representations for nodes and edges of the

• We propose a degree-weight biased random walk model
to preserve the global network context information. It captures the node’s roles and the information transfer behav-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5041

