The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Belief Change and Non-Monotonic Reasoning Sans Compactness
Jandson S. Ribeiro

Abhaya Nayak

Renata Wassermann

Macquarie University, Australia
University of São Paulo, Brazil
jandson.santos-ribeiro-sant@hdr.mq.edu.au
jandson@ime.usp.br

Macquarie University, Australia
abhaya.nayak@mq.edu.au

University of São Paulo, Brazil
renata@ime.usp.br

Abstract

angle, non-monotonic reasoning appears to be closely connected to accounts of rational belief change, such as the classic AGM account, (Alchourrón, Gärdenfors, and Makinson
1985), further developed in many works such as (Gärdenfors
1988; Hansson 1999; Rott 2001). Indeed it has been argued that belief dynamics and non-monotonic reasoning are
different perspectives on the same phenomenon (Makinson and Gärdenfors 1991): I am licensed to (commonsensically/non-monotonically) infer sentence y from sentence x if it is rational on my part to believe y after accepting
evidence x. This idea is concisely captured in the standard
notation:
BRNM: x |∼K y if and only if y ∈ K ∗ x
where K represents a contextually fixed background knowledge, |∼K is the non-monotonic inference operation that employs K in the background, and ∗ is a belief revision operation that yields the new “belief set” K ∗ x from the old
belief set K in light of evidential input x. Oftentimes the
subscript K from the relation |∼K is dropped for notational
convenience when the intention is clear from the context.
The connection between belief revision and nonmonotonic reasoning captured by BRNM comes out handy
in going back and forth between these two systems. Consider for instance a constraint on belief revision, that revision of a set of beliefs K by evidence x should not license
one to believe in something that does not follow from K and
x together, that is,
Inclusion: K ∗ x ⊆ Cn(K ∪ {x})
where the consequence operation Cn represents the background (classical) logic. Assuming Cn satisfies Deduction,
this constraint on belief revision can be rewritten as:
If y ∈ K ∗ x, then x → y ∈ K.
Now, since a tautology > brings in no new information, we
can take K ∗ > to be equivalent to K, which allows us to
rewrite Inclusion as:
If y ∈ K ∗ x, then x → y ∈ K ∗ >.
Since this version of Inclusion is of the same syntactic form
as BRNM, we get
Weak Conditionalisation: If x |∼ y, then > |∼ x → y
which says that if y is a non-monotonic consequence of x,
then the material conditional x → y should be a theorem

Belief change and non-monotonic reasoning are arguably different perspectives on the same phenomenon, namely, jettisoning of currently held beliefs in response to some incompatible evidence. Investigations in this area typically assume,
among other things, that the underlying (background) logic
is compact, that is, whatever can be inferred from a set of
sentences X can be inferred from a finite subset of X. Recent research in the field shows that this compactness assumption can be dispensed without inflicting much damage on the
AGM paradigm of belief change. In this paper we investigate the impact of such relaxation on non-monotonic logics
instead. In particular, we show that, when compactness is not
guaranteed, while the bridge from the AGM paradigm of belief change to expectation logics remains unaffected, the “return trip” from expectation logics to AGM paradigm is no
longer guaranteed. We finally explore the conditions under
which such guarantee can be given.

1

Introduction

Classical logics are monotonic: accumulation of new information (in form of additional premises) does not invalidate
old conclusions. For instance, since from All birds fly and
Tweety is a bird we can infer Tweety flies, acquiring another
piece of information, Tweety is a penguin is not going to
invalidate that inference – we will, classically, still be able
to infer that Tweety flies. However, commonsense dictates
that in light the new piece of information, that Tweety is a
penguin, we should no longer be able to infer that Tweety
flies since we “know” that penguins, though birds, cannot fly.
Commonsense reasoning is non-monotonic: although some
set of premises ∆ entails some conclusion x, the inference
of x from ∆0 may not be guaranteed even if ∆ ⊆ ∆0 . This
realisation has led to the development of a number of approaches to non-monotonic logics, including, default logics
(Besnard 2013), defeasible logics (Nute 1994) and expectation logics (Gärdenfors and Makinson 1994).
One may attribute the non-monotonic behaviour of the
commonsense inference to our tendency to “deactivate”
some premises in light of some conflicting information – it is
as if the new information, Tweety is a penguin, triggers deactivation of the premise, All birds fly. When viewed from this
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3019

