The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Bias-Variance Trade-Off in Hierarchical
Probabilistic Models Using Higher-Order Feature Interactions
Simon Luo∗

Mahito Sugiyama

The University of Sydney
Data61, CSIRO
sluo4225@uni.sydney.edu.au

National Institute of Informatics
JST, PRESTO
mahito@nii.ac.jp

Abstract

{1, 2, 3, 4}

Hierarchical probabilistic models are able to use a large number of parameters to create a model with a high representation
power. However, it is well known that increasing the number of parameters also increases the complexity of the model
which leads to a bias-variance trade-off. Although it is a classical problem, the bias-variance trade-off between hidden layers and higher-order interactions have not been well studied.
In our study, we propose an efficient inference algorithm for
the log-linear formulation of the higher-order Boltzmann machine using a combination of Gibbs sampling and annealed
importance sampling. We then perform a bias-variance decomposition to study the differences in hidden layers and
higher-order interactions. Our results have shown that using
hidden layers and higher-order interactions have a comparable error with a similar order of magnitude and using higherorder interactions produce less variance for smaller sample
size.

{1, 2, 3} {1, 2, 4} {1, 3, 4} {2, 3, 4}

h1

v1

h2

v2

{1, 2}

h3

v3

{1, 3}

{1, 4}

{2, 3}

{2, 4}

{1}

{2}

{3}

{4}

{3, 4}

v4
∅

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Example of Boltzmann machine modeling highfeature interactions. (a) A restricted Boltzmann machine
with a configuration of 4 visible nodes and 3 hidden nodes.
(b) The outcome space of the Higher-Order Boltzmann machine with 4 visible nodes. The green, blue, red and white
nodes show first, second, third and fourth order interactions
respectively. The bottom node (black) is used to normalize
the Boltzmann machine.

Introduction
Hierarchical machine learning models can be used to identify higher-order feature interactions. They include a wide
range of models used in machine learning such as graphical
models and deep learning because they can be easily generalized for many different applications. Hierarchical models
are widely used as they can use a large number of parameters
to create a high representative power for modeling interactions between features. However, tuning towards the optimal
model includes a classical machine learning problem known
as the bias-variance trade-off (Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2001). Despite the prevalence of hierarchical models,
the bias-variance trade-off for higher-order feature interactions have not been well studied.
In this paper, we study the differences in using hidden layers and higher-order interactions to achieve higher
representation power in hierarchical models. In our study,
we focus on the Boltzmann Machine (BM) (Ackley, Hinton, and Sejnowski 1987), one of the fundamental machine
learning models. The family of BMs has been used in a

wide range of machine learning models including graphical models and deep learning. The Restricted Boltzmann
Machine (RBM) (Hinton 2012) (Figure 1a) and the HigherOrder Boltzmann Machine (HBM) (Sejnowski 1986; Min et
al. 2014) (Figure 1b) are fundamental models for learning
higher-order feature interactions. However, the two models
have different methods for achieving a higher representation
power. The RBM is represented by a bipartite graph consisting of two groups, the “visible layer” and the “hidden
layer”. The visible layer represents the direct observations
of the data, while the hidden layer is used to identify latent
features. The bias and the edge weights between the visible
nodes and hidden nodes are tuned to model the interaction
between the features. The HBM is represented using a finite
partially ordered set (poset) using a Hasse diagram (Davey
and Priestley 2002; Gierz et al. 2003). The poset is used
to represent the outcome space of the HBM. A weight is
placed on each of the nodes in the outcome space to model
the higher-order feature interactions. From a theoretical perspective, both the RBM and HBM are capable models in
modeling higher-order feature interactions (Le Roux and
Bengio 2008).
In our study, we empirically perform a bias-variance de-

∗

This work was accomplished when the first author was at National Institute of Informatics. The code for our implementation of
the HBM is available at https://github.com/sjmluo/HBM
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4488

