The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

BiHMP-GAN: Bidirectional 3D Human Motion Prediction GAN
Jogendra Nath Kundu,∗ Maharshi Gor,∗ R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
jogendrak@iisc.ac.in, maharshigor18@gmail.com, venky@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Human motion prediction model has applications in various
fields of computer vision. Without taking into account the inherent stochasticity in the prediction of future pose dynamics,
such methods often converges to a deterministic undesired
mean of multiple probable outcomes. Devoid of this, we propose a novel probabilistic generative approach called Bidirectional Human motion prediction GAN, or BiHMP-GAN. To
be able to generate multiple probable human-pose sequences,
conditioned on a given starting sequence, we introduce a random extrinsic factor r, drawn from a predefined prior distribution. Furthermore, to enforce a direct content loss on the
predicted motion sequence and also to avoid mode-collapse,
a novel bidirectional framework is incorporated by modifying the usual discriminator architecture. The discriminator is
trained also to regress this extrinsic factor r, which is used
alongside with the intrinsic factor (encoded starting pose sequence) to generate a particular pose sequence. To further
regularize the training, we introduce a novel recursive prediction strategy. In spite of being in a probabilistic framework,
the enhanced discriminator architecture allows predictions of
an intermediate part of pose sequence to be used as a conditioning for prediction of the latter part of the sequence. The
bidirectional setup also provides a new direction to evaluate
the prediction quality against a given test sequence. For a fair
assessment of BiHMP-GAN, we report performance of the
generated motion sequence using (i) a critic model trained to
discriminate between real and fake motion sequence, and (ii)
an action classifier trained on real human motion dynamics.
Outcomes of both qualitative and quantitative evaluations, on
the probabilistic generations of the model, demonstrate the
superiority of BiHMP-GAN over previously available methods.

Figure 1: Mean average prediction error on Human 3.6M
for different motion prediction methods. The blue and green
band for BiHMP-GAN and HP-GAN respectively, show uncertainty in the prediction of future motion as compared to
other deterministic approaches.

prevent potential accidents. Other examples include interaction of robots with humans; such as handshaking, catching or holding objects thrown by other person etc. Moreover the artificial systems must develop the ability to understand the general trends of human pose dynamics for effective and coherent interactions (Koppula and Saxena 2013).
Humans develop such ability by observing actions or pose
dynamics of other persons over time. Creating a system
which models such diverse human actions is the prime motive towards achieving an efficient human motion prediction
model (Mainprice and Berenson 2013).
The goal is to develop a model, which can predict plausible 3D human pose sequence from a given past dynamics of
a certain time period. However, prediction of future pose sequence should not be modeled as a deterministic approach as
there can be multiple plausible limb variations conditioned
on the past motion dynamics. Since, the uncertainty in probable future pose increases with increase in time, a deterministic model cannot be considered reliable for long-term predictions. For example a person running may slow down to
stop or keep running at a different speed. Although such
variations are present in the available human motion dataset,
some pose dynamics are more probable than other. Hence,
the model should have the flexibility to model such stochasticity in the prediction of future pose sequence.
With the advent of deep learning for sequence-tosequence (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) modeling, many
recent works use variants of deep recurrent neural net-

Introduction
Seamless interaction of robot or AI systems with urban environment dominated by human beings requires certain behaviour prediction abilities. In this work, the focus is on
understanding the dynamics of human pose. For example,
the ability to predict pedestrian behaviour in an urban road
scene is very crucial for autonomous driving systems to
∗

equal contribution - listed alphabetically by first names
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8553

