The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Gated Residual Recurrent Graph Neural Networks for Traffic Prediction
Cen Chen,? Kenli Li,? * Sin G. Teo,† Xiaofeng Zou,? Kang Wang?
Jie Wang,† Zeng Zeng† *
?

College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan University, China
†
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
{chencen, lkl, zouxiaofeng, zztwk}@hnu.edu.cn, {teosg, wangjie, zengz}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

r1

Abstract
Traffic prediction is of great importance to traffic management and public safety, and very challenging as it is affected by many complex factors, such as spatial dependency
of complicated road networks and temporal dynamics, and
many more. The factors make traffic prediction a challenging
task due to the uncertainty and complexity of traffic states.
In the literature, many research works have applied deep
learning methods on traffic prediction problems combining
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), which CNNs are utilized for spatial dependency and RNNs for temporal dynamics. However, such
combinations cannot capture the connectivity and globality
of traffic networks. In this paper, we first propose to adopt
residual recurrent graph neural networks (Res-RGNN) that
can capture graph-based spatial dependencies and temporal
dynamics jointly. Due to gradient vanishing, RNNs are hard
to capture periodic temporal correlations. Hence, we further
propose a novel hop scheme into Res-RGNN to utilize the periodic temporal dependencies. Based on Res-RGNN and hop
Res-RGNN, we finally propose a novel end-to-end multiple
Res-RGNNs framework, referred to as “MRes-RGNN”, for
traffic prediction. Experimental results on two traffic datasets
have demonstrated that the proposed MRes-RGNN outperforms state-of-the-art methods significantly.

r2

r3

Figure 1: Three roads in the directed road network
roads r2 and r1 are not. Even r2 is closer in the distance
to r1 than r3 , traffic conditions of r2 have greater effect
on r3 , rather than on r1 .
• Factor 2: Multiple temporal dependencies. Traffic conditions usually involve a mixture of the repeating time patterns. For example, the traffic jam of a road occurring at 6
pm will affect the same road’s traffic condition in the following hour, i.e., 7 pm. We also utilize the patterns such
as on daily and weekly basis to predict traffic conditions
of the road, e.g., using peak hour patterns for traffic prediction.
• Factor 3: External factor. Traffic conditions can be significantly affected by external factors such as vehicle accidents, road maintenance, weather conditions, holidays
and other special events, and so on.

Introduction

Many statistical approaches have been widely used in
predicting traffic conditions. In recent years, deep learning based methods outperform many traditional statistical
approaches (e.g., k-nearest neighbours and support vector
machines) in various prediction tasks, including traffic prediction. Convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Zeng et al.
2018) have been proven be good spatial feature extractors.
Many methods (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017; Du et al. 2018;
Yu et al. 2017; Yao et al. 2018b; Chen et al. 2018) that have
combined CNNs with long short-term memory (LSTM) networks to capture spatial-temporal features from traffic data
have outperformed many traditional machine learning methods (Hong 2011; Xia et al. 2016).
However, one of the main limitations of the above combination is that normal convolutional operations can capture
the spatial features of regular grid structures existing in images or videos, rather than the features of general graph
forms. The traffic network is a non-Euclidean and directional topology that makes the convolution operation less

Traffic prediction is one of the most challenging tasks in
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) (Jabbarpour et al.
2018). This task is important and critical for many transportation services, such as vehicle flow control, road trip
planning and navigation and so on. The goal of traffic prediction is to predict future traffic states of road networks using
sequential traffic historical states. Three key complex factors
that can affect traffic conditions are investigated as follows.
• Factor 1: Spatial dependencies on a directed road network. Spatial correlation such as geographic distance and
connectivity in directed road network can affect traffic
prediction performance. For example, given three roads
r1 , r2 and r3 in the directed road network as depicted in
Figure 1, Roads r2 and r3 are obviously correlated, while
* They are corresponding author of this paper.
Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

485

