The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Latent Multi-Task Architecture Learning
Sebastian Ruder,1,2 Joachim Bingel,3 Isabelle Augenstein,3 Anders Søgaard3
1

Insight Research Centre, National University of Ireland, Galway
2
Aylien Ltd., Dublin, Ireland
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
sebastian@ruder.io, {bingel | augenstein | soegaard}@di.ku.dk

Abstract

is fixed and the model learns the optimal latent connections
and pathways for each task. Recently, a few authors have considered multi-task architecture learning (Misra et al. 2016;
Meyerson and Miikkulainen 2018), but these papers only
address a subspace of the possible architectures typically
considered in neural multi-task learning, while other approaches at most consider a couple of architectures for sharing (Søgaard and Goldberg 2016; Peng and Dredze 2016;
Martı́nez Alonso and Plank 2017). In contrast, we introduce
a framework that unifies previous approaches by introducing
trainable parameters for all the components that differentiate
multi-task learning approaches along the above dimensions.

Multi-task learning (MTL) allows deep neural networks to
learn from related tasks by sharing parameters with other
networks. In practice, however, MTL involves searching an
enormous space of possible parameter sharing architectures
to find (a) the layers or subspaces that benefit from sharing,
(b) the appropriate amount of sharing, and (c) the appropriate
relative weights of the different task losses. Recent work has
addressed each of the above problems in isolation. In this work
we present an approach that learns a latent multi-task architecture that jointly addresses (a)–(c). We present experiments
on synthetic data and data from OntoNotes 5.0, including four
different tasks and seven different domains. Our extension
consistently outperforms previous approaches to learning latent architectures for multi-task problems and achieves up to
15% average error reductions over common approaches to
MTL.

Contributions We present a novel meta-architecture
(shown in Figure 1) that generalizes several previous multitask architectures, with an application to sequence tagging
problems. Our meta-architecture enables multi-task architecture learning, i.e., learning (a) what layers to share between
deep recurrent neural networks, but also (b) which parts of
those layers to share, and with what strength, as well as (c) a
mixture model of skip connections at the architecture’s outer
layer. We show that the architecture is a generalization of various multi-task (Caruana 1998; Søgaard and Goldberg 2016;
Misra et al. 2016) and transfer learning algorithms (Daumé
III 2007). We evaluate it on four tasks and across seven domains on OntoNotes 5.0 (Weischedel et al. 2013), where
it consistently outperforms previous work on multi-task architecture learning, as well as common MTL approaches.
Moreover, we study the task properties that predict gains and
those that correlate with learning certain types of sharing.

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) in deep neural networks is typically a result of parameter sharing between two networks
(of usually the same dimensions) (Caruana 1993). If you
have two three-layered, recurrent neural networks, both with
an embedding inner layer and each recurrent layer feeding
the task-specific classifier function through a feed-forward
neural network, we have 19 pairs of layers that could share
parameters. With the option of having private spaces, this
gives us 519 =19,073,486,328,125 possible MTL architectures. If we additionally consider soft sharing of parameters,
the number of possible architectures grows infinite. It is obviously not feasible to search this space. Neural architecture
search (NAS) (Zoph and Le 2017) typically requires learning
from a large pool of experiments with different architectures. Searching for multi-task architectures via reinforcement learning (Wong and Gesmundo 2018) or evolutionary
approaches (Liang, Meyerson, and Miikkulainen 2018) can
therefore be quite expensive. In this paper, we jointly learn a
latent multi-task architecture and task-specific models, paying a minimal computational cost over single task learning
and standard multi-task learning (5-7% training time). We
refer to this problem as multi-task architecture learning. In
contrast to architecture search, the overall meta-architecture

Multi-task Architecture Learning
We introduce a meta-architecture for multi-task architecture
learning, which we refer to as a sluice network, sketched in
Figure 1 for the case of two tasks. The network learns to
share parameters between M neural networks—in our case,
two deep recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997). The network can be seen as an end-toend differentiable union of a set of sharing architectures with
parameters controlling the sharing. By learning the weights
of those sharing parameters (sluices) jointly with the rest of
the model, we arrive at a task-specific MTL architecture over
the course of training.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4822

