The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Recurrent Poisson Process Unit for Speech Recognition
Hengguan Huang,1 Hao Wang,2 Brian Mak1
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{hhuangaj,mak}@cse.ust.hk, hwang87@mit.edu

Abstract

recurrent neural network hidden Markov model (LSTM RNNHMM) is still the dominant model used in industry (Yu and
Li 2018). It is beneficial for an acoustic model to capture
long-term dependencies of the observations at different times.
However, the sequential gates computation of LSTM limits
its parallelization potential. Simple recurrent unit (Lei and
Zhang 2017) and quasi-RNN (Bradbury et al. 2016), simplify the implementation of LSTM-RNN, and increase the
speed of computation for each processing step by dropping
the connections between the hidden states and the LSTM
gates, allowing them to be computed in parallel.
The hybrid RNN-HMM in acoustic modeling is essentially a generalized version of a dynamic Bayesian network
(DBN), which is usually characterized by discretizing the
time series data and capturing the dependency of those discretized items. According to the research in speech production and neuroethology, human speech signals may be
encoded in point patterns involving acoustic events in the
speech signal and neural spikes in the brain (Stevens 2000;
Esser et al. 1997). Such points in time are referred to as
acoustic event landmarks in (Stevens 2002). Based on this
hypothesis, it may pose some challenges for RNN-HMM
acoustic modeling: firstly, it arbitrarily discretizes the continuous input into the interval features at a fixed frame rate,
which may introduce discretization errors and have a negative
impact on the model performance accordingly; secondly, the
occurrences of such acoustic events are unknown and such
data are unavailable. Further more, the training targets of
RNN-HMM are usually obtained from the recognition results
of other (usually inferior) DBN models and misalignments
are inevitable.
On the other hand, the temporal point process is a powerful mathematical tool to describe the latent mechanisms
governing the occurrences of observed random events. It is a
random process whose realization consists of a sequence of
isolated events with their time-stamps. Due to their generality,
point processes have been widely used for modeling phenomena such as earthquakes (Hawkes 1971a), human activities
(Malmgren et al. 2008), financial data (Bacry et al. 2015),
context-aware recommendations (Du et al. 2015), etc. A common property of the problems above is that the precise event
time intervals can carry important information about the underlying dynamics, which otherwise are not available from
the sequence of interval features that are evenly sampled from

Over the past few years, there has been a resurgence of
interest in using recurrent neural network-hidden Markov
model (RNN-HMM) for automatic speech recognition (ASR).
Some modern recurrent network models, such as long shortterm memory (LSTM) and simple recurrent unit (SRU), have
demonstrated promising results on this task. Recently, several scientific perspectives in the fields of neuroethology and
speech production suggest that human speech signals may be
represented in discrete point patterns involving acoustic events
in the speech signal. Based on this hypothesis, it may pose
some challenges for RNN-HMM acoustic modeling: firstly, it
arbitrarily discretizes the continuous input into the interval features at a fixed frame rate, which may introduce discretization
errors; secondly, the occurrences of such acoustic events are
unknown. Furthermore, the training targets of RNN-HMM are
obtained from other (inferior) models, giving rise to misalignments. In this paper, we propose a recurrent Poisson process
(RPP) which can be seen as a collection of Poisson processes
at a series of time intervals in which the intensity evolves according to the RNN hidden states that encode the history of the
acoustic signal. It aims at allocating the latent acoustic events
in continuous time. Such events are efficiently drawn from
the RPP using a sampling-free solution in an analytic form.
The speech signal containing latent acoustic events is reconstructed/sampled dynamically from the discretized acoustic
features using linear interpolation, in which the weight parameters are estimated from the onset of these events. The above
processes are further integrated into an SRU, forming our final
model, called recurrent Poisson process unit (RPPU). Experimental evaluations on ASR tasks including ChiME-2, WSJ0
and WSJ0&1 demonstrate the effectiveness and benefits of the
RPPU. For example, it achieves a relative WER reduction of
10.7% over state-of-the-art models on WSJ0.

Introduction
Recently, recurrent neural network (RNN) has been successfully applied to diverse machine learning problems such as
automatic speech recognition (ASR) (Graves, r. Mohamed,
and Hinton 2013), machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015) and computer vision (Vinyals et al. 2015). Although end-to-end encoder-decoder approaches are getting
more popular in ASR, the hybrid long short-term memory
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6538

