The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partial Multi-Label Learning by Low-Rank and Sparse Decomposition
Lijuan Sun, Songhe Feng,∗ Tao Wang, Congyan Lang, Yi Jin
School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
{17112082, shfeng, twang, cylang, yjin}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-Label Learning (MLL) aims to learn from the training data where each example is represented by a single instance while associated with a set of candidate labels. Most
existing MLL methods are typically designed to handle the
problem of missing labels. However, in many real-world scenarios, the labeling information for multi-label data is always
redundant , which can not be solved by classical MLL methods, thus a novel Partial Multi-label Learning (PML) framework is proposed to cope with such problem, i.e. removing
the the noisy labels from the multi-label sets. In this paper,
in order to further improve the denoising capability of PML
framework, we utilize the low-rank and sparse decomposition scheme and propose a novel Partial Multi-label Learning by Low-Rank and Sparse decomposition (PML-LRS) approach. Specifically, we first reformulate the observed label
set into a label matrix, and then decompose it into a groundtruth label matrix and an irrelevant label matrix, where the
former is constrained to be low rank and the latter is assumed
to be sparse. Next, we utilize the feature mapping matrix to
explore the label correlations and meanwhile constrain the
feature mapping matrix to be low rank to prevent the proposed method from being overfitting. Finally, we obtain the
ground-truth labels via minimizing the label loss, where the
Augmented Lagrange Multiplier (ALM) algorithm is incorporated to solve the optimization problem. Enormous experimental results demonstrate that PML-LRS can achieve superior or competitive performance against other state-of-the-art
methods.

Figure 1: An example of partial multi-label learning.
and Zhou 2014), i.e., each training instance has been precisely annotated with all of its relevant labels. However, in
many real-world applications, precise labeling is too scarce
to obtain, which makes it infeasible to learn a robust multilabel classifier. Thus, many state-of-the-art studies are designed to handle the problem that the label matrix has missing entries, including treating missing labels as negative labels directly (Wu et al. 2015) (Sun, Zhang, and Zhou 2010)
(Bucak, Jin, and Jain 2011), employing matrix completion
technique to fill in missing labels (Goldberg et al. 2010)
(Cabral et al. 2011), etc. Recently, as the annotation crowdsourcing increasingly becomes popular, redundant labeling
information gradually appears in these multi-label data, i.e.
annotators may roughly assign each instance with a set of
candidate labels, which include both related labels and unrelated labels. For example, as we observed in Figure 1, the
image is partially labeled by noisy annotators. Among the
candidate labels, mountain, lake, grass, sky, house, and tree
are ground-truth labels while clouds, boat, and people are
irrelevant labels.
To overcome the above problem, (Xie and Huang 2018)
proposes a novel framework called Partial Multi-Label
Learning (PML) to learn from the multi-label data with redundant labeling information, where they utilize the label
confidence to measure the probability of being the groundtruth label for each candidate label, and obtain the groundtruth labels according to label ranking. However, this approach suffers from some shortcomings, i.e. it only simply utilizes the prior knowledge to obtain the label correlation or directly uses redundant labeling information to ob-

Introduction
As a popular machine learning framework, Multi-Label
Learning (MLL) aims to learn a robust classification model
from the training data, where each instance is associated
with a set of labels instead of a single label (Zhang and Zhou
2014). In recent years, such framework has been widely
used in many real-world scenarios, such as image annotation (Sanden and Zhang 2011), web mining (Tang, Rajan, and Narayanan 2009), information retrieval (Gopal and
Yang 2010), etc.
Typically multi-label learning methods usually require
complete labeling information for training examples (Zhang
∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5016

