The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

The Curse of Concentration in Robust Learning:
Evasion and Poisoning Attacks from Concentration of Measure
Saeed Mahloujifar

Dimitrios I. Diochnos

Mohammad Mahmoody

University of Virginia
saeed@virginia.edu

University of Virginia
diochnos@virginia.edu

University of Virginia
mohammad@virginia.edu

of h with respect to the ground truth c. Due to the explosive use of learning algorithms in real-world systems (e.g.,
using neural networks for image classification) a more modern approach to the classification problem aims at making
the learning process, from training till testing, more robust.
Namely, even if the instance x is perturbed in a limited way
into x0 by an adversary A, we would like to have the hypothesis h still predict the right label for x0 ; hence, minimizing
the “adversarial risk”

Abstract
Many modern machine learning classifiers are shown to be
vulnerable to adversarial perturbations of the instances. Despite a massive amount of work focusing on making classifiers robust, the task seems quite challenging. In this work,
through a theoretical study, we investigate the adversarial risk
and robustness of classifiers and draw a connection to the
well-known phenomenon of “concentration of measure” in
metric measure spaces. We show that if the metric probability space of the test instance is concentrated, any classifier
with some initial constant error is inherently vulnerable to
adversarial perturbations.
One class of concentrated metric probability spaces are the
so-called Lévy families that include many natural distributions. In this special case, our √
attacks only need to perturb
the test instance by at most O( n) to make it misclassified,
where n is the data dimension. Using our general result about
Lévy instance spaces, we first recover as special case some of
the previously proved results about the existence of adversarial examples. However, many more Lévy families are known
(e.g., product distribution under the Hamming distance) for
which we immediately obtain
√ new attacks that find adversarial examples of distance O( n).
Finally, we show that concentration of measure for product
spaces implies the existence of forms of “poisoning” attacks
in which the adversary tampers with the training data with
the goal of degrading the classifier. In particular, we show
that for any learning algorithm that uses m training examples,
there is an adversary who can increase the probability of any
“bad property” (e.g., failing on a particular test instance) that
initially happens with non-negligible probability to ≈ 1 by
e √m) of the examples with other (still
substituting only O(
correctly labeled) examples.

1

Pr [h(x0 ) 6= c(x0 ) for some x0 “close” to x]

x←µ

of the hypothesis h under such perturbations, where “close”
is defined by a metric. An attack to increase the risk is
called an “evasion attack” (see e.g., (Biggio, Fumera, and
Roli 2014; Carlini and Wagner 2017)) due to the fact that
x0 “evades” the correct classification. One major motivation
behind this problem comes from scenarios such as image
classification, in which the adversarially perturbed instance
x0 would still “look similar” to the original x, at least in
humans’ eyes, even though the classifier h might now misclassify x0 (Goodfellow, McDaniel, and Papernot 2018). In
fact, starting with the work of Szegedy et al. (Szegedy et
al. 2014) an active line of research investigated various attacks and possible defenses to resist such attacks. The race
between attacks and defenses in this area motivates a study
of whether or not such robust classifiers could ever be found.
A closely related notion of robustness for a learning algorithm deals with the training phase. Here, we would like to
know how much the risk of the produced hypothesis h might
increase, if an adversary A tampers with the training data T
with the goal of increasing the “error” (or any “bad” event
in general) during the test phase. Such attacks are referred
to as poisoning attacks (Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012),
and the line of research on the power and limitations of poisoning attacks contains numerous attacks and many defenses
designed against them.
The state of affairs in attacks and defenses with regard to
the robustness of learning systems in both the evasion and
poisoning contexts leads us to our main question:

Introduction

Learning how to classify instances based on labeled examples is a fundamental task in machine learning. The goal
is to find, with high probability, the correct label c(x) of a
given test instance x coming from a distribution µ. Thus, we
would like to find a good-on-average “hypothesis” h (also
called the trained model) that minimizes the error probability Prx←µ [h(x) 6= c(x)], which is referred to as the risk

What are the inherent limitations of defense mechanisms for evasion and poisoning attacks? Equivalently,
what are the inherent power of such attacks?

Copyright © 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4536

