The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Partial Awareness
Joseph Y. Halpern

Evan Piermont

Computer Science Department
Cornell University
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

Economics Department
Royal Holloway, University of London
evan.piermont@rhul.ac.uk

radar screen”.1 Consider an agent who is in the market for
a new computer. She might be completely unaware of quantum computers, never having heard of one at all. Such an
agent cannot reason about her value for having a quantum
computer, nor think about for which tasks a quantum computer would be useful. But this is an extreme case. A slightly
more aware agent might be aware of (the concept of) quantum computers, having read a magazine article about them.
She might understand some properties of quantum computers, for example, that they can factor integers faster than a
conventional computer, but be unaware of the notion of qubit
state on which quantum computing is based. Such an agent
may well be able to reason about her value of a quantum
computer despite her less then full awareness.
To capture such partial awareness more formally, we consider a logic with three building blocks: objects, properties,
and concepts. We take a property to be a unary predicate, so
it denotes a subset of objects in the domain;2 a concept is
a Boolean combination of properties. In each state (possible
world), each agent is aware of a subset of objects, properties,
and concepts.
The use of concepts in the context of awareness, which is
(to the best of our knowledge) original to this paper, is critical in our approach, and is how we capture partial awareness. For a simple example of how we use it, suppose that
a quantum computer (Q) is defined as a computer (C) that
possesses an additional “quantum property” QP . That is,
Q is defined to be C ∧ QP (more precisely, we will have
∀x(Q(x) ⇔ C(x) ∧ QP (x)) as a domain axiom). A “partially aware” agent might be aware of the concept of a quantum computer but unaware of the specific Boolean combination of properties that characterizes it. Contrast this to the
cases where the agent is fully unaware (she is unaware of
even the concept of a quantum computer) or fully aware (she
is aware of both the concept of a quantum computer and also
what it means to be one, i.e., the properties C and QP ).
Once we have awareness in the language, we need to con-

Abstract
We develop a modal logic to capture partial awareness. The
logic has three building blocks: objects, properties, and concepts. Properties are unary predicates on objects; concepts are
Boolean combinations of properties. We take an agent to be
partially aware of a concept if she is aware of the concept
without being aware of the properties that define it. The logic
allows for quantification over objects and properties, so that
the agent can reason about her own unawareness. We then
apply the logic to contracts, which we view as syntactic objects that dictate outcomes based on the truth of formulas. We
show that when agents are unaware of some relevant properties, referencing concepts that agents are only partially aware
of can improve welfare.

1

Introduction

Standard models of epistemic logic assume that agents are
logically omniscient: they know all valid formulas and logical consequences of their knowledge. There have been many
attempts to find models of knowledge that do not satisfy
logical omniscience. One of the most common approaches
involves awareness. Roughly speaking, an agent i cannot
know a valid formula ϕ if i is unaware of ϕ. For example, an agent cannot know that either quantum computers
are faster than conventional computers or they are not if she
is not aware of the notion of quantum computer.
There have been many attempts to capture unawareness
in the computer science, economics, and philosophy literature, ranging from syntactic approaches (Fagin and Halpern
1988), to semantic approaches involving lattices (Heifetz,
Meier, and Schipper 2006), to identifying the lack of awareness of ϕ with an agent neither knowing ϕ nor knowing
that she does not know ϕ (Modica and Rustichini 1994;
1999). Most of the attempts involved propositional (modal)
logics, although there are papers that use first-order quantification as well (Board and Chung 2009; Sillari 2008). However, none of these approaches are rich enough to capture
what we will call partial unawareness.
Perhaps the most common interpretation of lack of awareness identifies the lack of awareness of ϕ with the sentiment “ϕ is not on my radar screen”. With this interpretation,
partial awareness becomes “some aspects of ϕ are on my

1
Lack of awareness of ϕ has also been identified with the inability of compute whether ϕ is true (due to computational limitations). We do not consider this interpretation in this paper, but
partial awareness makes sense for it as well—now partial awareness becomes “I can compute whether some aspects of ϕ are true.”
2
We could easily extend our approach to allow arbitrary k-ary
predicates, but this would complicate the presentation.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2851

