The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Energy Confused Adversarial Metric
Learning for Zero-Shot Image Retrieval and Clustering
Binghui Chen, Weihong Deng
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
chenbinghui@bupt.edu.cn, whdeng@bupt.edu.cn

Unseen Classes

Seen Classes

Abstract
Deep metric learning has been widely applied in many computer vision tasks, and recently, it is more attractive in zeroshot image retrieval and clustering (ZSRC) where a good
embedding is requested such that the unseen classes can be distinguished well. Most existing works deem this ’good’ embedding just to be the discriminative one and thus race to devise
powerful metric objectives or hard-sample mining strategies
for leaning discriminative embedding. However, in this paper,
we first emphasize that the generalization ability is a core ingredient of this ’good’ embedding as well and largely affects
the metric performance in zero-shot settings as a matter of fact.
Then, we propose the Energy Confused Adversarial Metric
Learning (ECAML) framework to explicitly optimize a robust
metric. It is mainly achieved by introducing an interesting
Energy Confusion regularization term, which daringly breaks
away from the traditional metric learning idea of discriminative objective devising, and seeks to ’confuse’ the learned
model so as to encourage its generalization ability by reducing
overfitting on the seen classes. We train this confusion term
together with the conventional metric objective in an adversarial manner. Although it seems weird to ’confuse’ the network,
we show that our ECAML indeed serves as an efficient regularization technique for metric learning and is applicable to
various conventional metric methods. This paper empirically
and experimentally demonstrates the importance of learning
embedding with good generalization, achieving state-of-theart performances on the popular CUB, CARS, Stanford Online
Products and In-Shop datasets for ZSRC tasks. Code available
at http://www.bhchen.cn/.

Metric
Learning
A

B

C? D?

Learning on head is enough
for distinguishing the seen categories

(a)

Seen Classes
confu

But fail in distinguishing
the unseen categories

Unseen Classes

se

confus

e

Energy Confused
Adversarial
Metric Learning
C

confuse

A

D

B

Head learning is confused by Energy Confusion
and body learning is then encouraged implicitly

(b)

Generalize well to
unseen categories

Figure 1: Comparisons of conventional metric learning methods and our Energy Confused Adversarial Metric Learning
(ECAML). In (a), the deep model optimized by conventional
metric learning will selectively learn head knowledge which
is the easiest one to reduce the current training error and
omit other helpful concepts, but the testing instances cannot be distinguished well by the head. In (b), the Energy
Confusion(EC) term among different classes is introduced
so as to make the biased head-based metric confused about
itself, then as the training going, EC will regularize this metric to explore other complementary knowledge (even if this
knowledge is not discriminative enough for the seen classes,
it might be helpful for the unseen classes) and thus improve
the generalization ability.

1. Introduction
and cluster the unseen classes, most existing works employ Deep Metric Learning to optimize a good embedding, such as exploring tuple-based loss functions (Sun et
al. 2014; Yuan, Yang, and Zhang 2017; Wu et al. 2017;
Schroff 2015; Oh Song et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017;
Huang, Loy, and Tang 2016; Sohn 2016) and proposing efficient hard-sample mining strategies (Kumar et al. 2017;
Wu et al. 2017; Schroff 2015), etc. However, the above methods deem this ’good’ embedding just to be the discriminative
one and then concentrate on the discriminative learning over
the seen classes, but neglect the importance of the generalization ability of the learned metric which is significant in ZSRC
as well, as a result, without robustness constraining they are

Since zero-shot learning (ZSL) removes the limitation of
category-consistency between training and testing sets, it
turns to be more attractive where the model is required
to learn concepts from seen classes and then enables to
distinguish the unseen classes. ZSL has been widely explored in image classification (Changpinyo et al. 2016;
Fu et al. 2015) and retrieval tasks (Dalton, Allan, and Mirajkar 2013; Shen et al. 2018; Oh Song et al. 2016), etc.
In this paper, we focus on zero-shot image retrieval and
clustering tasks (ZSRC). In order to accurately retrieve
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8134

