The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Geometric Multi-Model Fitting by Deep Reinforcement Learning
Zongliang Zhang, Hongbin Zeng, Jonathan Li,* Yiping Chen, Chenhui Yang, Cheng Wang
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, School of Information Science and Engineering
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China (*Corresponding author)
{zhangzongliang, hbzeng}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {junli, chenyiping, chyang, cwang}@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract

In this paper, we propose a reinforcement learning approach for optimization in multi-model fitting. Our insight
is as follows. The selection of variable values for a model
can be seen as a decision. The fitting of multiple models
is a process that consists of a sequence of decisions. Such
decision making process can be efficiently optimized by reinforcement learning.
The work similar to ours can be found in (Teboul et
al. 2013), which uses a traditional reinforcement learning
method to control binary split shape grammar for parsing
facade images. Their method works under the assumption
that the split grammar has discrete variables. However, the
variables involved in model fitting usually are continuous,
which are challenging for a traditional reinforcement learning method to handle (Lillicrap et al. 2015). In contrast,
our work is based on recently developed deep reinforcement
learning (DRL), which has made remarkable progress for
a number of challenging tasks including continuous control
(Lillicrap et al. 2015).

This paper deals with the geometric multi-model fitting from
noisy, unstructured point set data (e.g., laser scanned point
clouds). We formulate multi-model fitting problem as a sequential decision making process. We then use a deep reinforcement learning algorithm to learn the optimal decisions
towards the best fitting result. In this paper, we have compared our method against the state-of-the-art on simulated
data. The results demonstrated that our approach significantly
reduced the number of fitting iterations.

Introduction
Geometric model fitting aims to reconstruct underlying
models (e.g., lines, circles, characters, and buildings) from
given data (e.g., images or laser scanning point clouds).
With the reconstructed rich model information (e.g., shape,
scale, rotation, and location), the data can be comprehensively understood. With such merit, model fitting has constantly attracted research interests for a long time. However,
the model fitting problem is far from being solved, at least
in terms of computational speed, because of increasing complexity of encountered data and thus models. A common
case of complex data is that data conceive multiple models.
For example, a CAPTCHA image usually contains multiple
characters (George et al. 2017). A multi-model fitting technique is needed to handle such data.
A recent trend for addressing model fitting problem is to
formulate it as an optimization problem (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015), such that it can be conveniently
tackled by an existing optimization algorithm. Our previous
method (Zhang et al. 2019) uses the cuckoo search (CS)
algorithm (Yang and Deb 2010) to solve the optimization
problem in model fitting, and notably achieves the new stateof-the-art in the challenging few-shot character recognition
tasks (George et al. 2017). CS can approach the optimum
with high precision. However, it usually takes many iterations to converge to the optimum, especially when the fitting involves a large number of variables, which is the case
of multi-model fitting. The number of variables involved in
n-model fitting is as large as n times that in single-model
fitting. In other words, it is time-consuming to use CS to
perform multi-model fitting.

Method
A geometric model M is a k-dimensional point set, i.e.,
M ⊂ Rk . In this paper, k = 3. Give a data point set
D ⊂ Rk , the goal of model fitting is to find a model M
that is most similar to D. For multi-modelSfitting, M is the
n
union set of multiple models, i.e., M = i=1 Mgθi , where
n is the number of models, and Mgθ is the model defined by
a given parametric rule g which is parameterized by variable θ. Formally, multi-model fitting can be formulated as
the following maximization problem:
[n
max
f (θ1 , θ2 , · · · , θn ) = s(
Mgθi , D), (1)
(θ1 ,θ2 ,··· ,θn )

i=1

where s(·, ·) is the geometric similarity estimator defined
in (Zhang et al. 2019). The pseudo-code of our method is
shown in Algorithm 1, where the DRL actor q is based on
(Lillicrap et al. 2015), and Ni is exploration noise (Lillicrap et al. 2015). Our method follows a hypothesis and verify paradigm to solve the maximization problem Eq. (1). In
each iteration, for each model, a hypothesis value θi is proposed according to the actor and exploration noise. Then the
hypothesis is verified through computing the reward in order
to update the actor.

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10081

