The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning and the Unknown: Surveying Steps toward Open World Recognition
T. E. Boult,1 S. Cruz,1 A.R. Dhamija,1 M. Gunther,1 J. Henrydoss,1 W.J. Scheirer2
1

University of Colorado Colorado Springs, Colorado Springs, CO 80918
2
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556

Abstract
As science attempts to close the gap between man and machine
by building systems capable of learning, we must embrace
the importance of the unknown. The ability to differentiate
between known and unknown can be considered a critical
element of any intelligent self-learning system. The ability
to reject uncertain inputs has a very long history in machine
learning, as does including a background or garbage class
to account for inputs that are not of interest. This paper explains why neither of these is genuinely sufficient for handling
unknown inputs – uncertain is not unknown, and unknowns
need not appear to be uncertain to a learning system. The
past decade has seen the formalization and development of
many open set algorithms, which provably bound the risk
from unknown classes. We summarize the state of the art, core
ideas, and results and explain why, despite the efforts to date,
the current techniques are genuinely insufficient for handling
unknown inputs, especially for deep networks.

1

(a) Example four-class model (b) Zooming out to show
from closed set point of view.
some open space.

Figure 1: The issue of open space can be seen by zooming
out from around the training data. Open space is the region
far from training samples. A traditional classifier, e.g., NCM
shown here, will label everything including the unknown “?”
inputs. Even points infinitely far away are labeled.

Introduction

the system could reason using what was observed as well as
what was not. Even back in the early 80s (Hewitt and Jong
1983) noted, “At first glance, it might seem that the closed
world assumption, almost universal in the A.I. and database
literature, is smart because it provides a ready default answer
for any query. Unfortunately, the default answers provided
become less realistic as the Open System increases in size.”
The closed world assumption led to fragile systems that failed,
and so fell out of favor as researchers tried to move out of the
lab and into the open world.
To help visualize the key issue of open set recognition
(OSR), consider the four-class problem shown in Fig. 1a,
with a Nearest Class Mean (NCM) model (Mensink et al.
2012), where the star is the NCM. Then consider what is
labeled when zoomed out (Fig.1b).
By the turn of the century, most A.I. systems stopped
explicitly exploiting the closed world assumptions, many
moving to probabilistic Bayesian reasoning. More recently
systems have turned to using learning-based models. Unfortunately, almost all machine-learning-based system have
implicitly continued to make that assumption because they
classify all inputs into one of their training classes. Similarly,
Bayesian reasoning implicitly retains the closed world assumption. Research often seek closed set classifiers, that
approximate the Bayesian optimal posterior probability,

“Intelligence comes with hard work and curiosity for
the unknown.” - Roberto Llamas
With the advent of rich classification models and high
computational power, recognition systems are finding many
operational applications. Recognition in the real world poses
multiple challenges that are not apparent in controlled lab
environments. At prediction time, an operating system has
to deal with myriad unseen categories. Consider the goal of
“A.I.” for autonomous driving. While we might train such
a system with terabytes of data, it is impossible to anticipate and train with all possible inputs. However, with a
critical safety system, even a small fraction of errors on unknown inputs could be, quite literally, deadly. Most real data
is inherently dynamic, and the world unpredictable; novel
inputs/categories must be handled by designing systems that
can ignore/reject them or designing systems that continuously
detect novel inputs and do something with unknown inputs.
Ideally, the system needs to label and add novel detected
objects as a new item to be learned.
Early A.I. systems and papers often involved the “closed
world assumption,” i.e. the system model was complete, and
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9801

