The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Semantic Relationships Guided
Representation Learning for Facial Action Unit Recognition
Guanbin Li,1 Xin Zhu,1 Yirui Zeng,1 Qing Wang,1,2 Liang Lin1,2∗
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Dark Matter AI Inc.
liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, zhux33@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
zengyr5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wangq79@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org
Abstract
Facial action unit (AU) recognition is a crucial task for facial expressions analysis and has attracted extensive attention in the field of artificial intelligence and computer vision.
Existing works have either focused on designing or learning complex regional feature representations, or delved into
various types of AU relationship modeling. Albeit with varying degrees of progress, it is still arduous for existing methods to handle complex situations. In this paper, we investigate how to integrate the semantic relationship propagation
between AUs in a deep neural network framework to enhance the feature representation of facial regions, and propose
an AU semantic relationship embedded representation learning (SRERL) framework. Specifically, by analyzing the symbiosis and mutual exclusion of AUs in various facial expressions, we organize the facial AUs in the form of structured
knowledge-graph and integrate a Gated Graph Neural Network (GGNN) in a multi-scale CNN framework to propagate
node information through the graph for generating enhanced
AU representation. As the learned feature involves both the
appearance characteristics and the AU relationship reasoning, the proposed model is more robust and can cope with
more challenging cases, e.g., illumination change and partial
occlusion. Extensive experiments on the two public benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms the previous
work and achieves state of the art performance.

Happiness

Surprise

Disgust

Sadness

Figure 1: Coupling effect of multiple AUs caused by a variety of facial expressions.

cations in the field of human-robot interaction and computer vision. As defined in the Facial Action Coding System
(FACS) (Friesen and Ekman 1978), which is the most widely
used and versatile method for measuring and describing facial behaviors, the facial action units (AUs) refer to the local
facial muscle actions and plays a paramount role in expressing comprehensive facial expressions. AU recognition has
thus become a long-standing research topic in the field of
artificial intelligence and computer vision (Li et al. 2017b;
Li, Abtahi, and Zhu 2017; Zhao, Chu, and Zhang 2016).
Facial action unit recognition has been mainly treated as
a multi-label classification problem that is independent of
each other. Most of the traditional methods focus on the design of more discriminative hand-crafted features (e.g. shape
or appearance features) or more effective discriminative
learning methods (Valstar and Pantic 2006; Zhao et al. 2015;
Jiang, Valstar, and Pantic 2011). In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks have been widely used in AU
recognition due to their powerful feature representation and
end-to-end efficient learning scheme, and have greatly promoted the development of this field (Zhao, Chu, and Zhang
2016; Li, Abtahi, and Zhu 2017; Bishay and Patras 2017;
Chu, De la Torre, and Cohn 2016). However, recent efforts
based on deep convolutional neural networks are indulged
in designing deeper and more complex network structures
without exception, learning more robust feature representa-

Introduction
Facial expression and its behavior is one of the most crucial channels for emotional communication between individuals. Intelligent facial expression analysis has recently
attracted wide research interest due to its potential appli∗

Corresponding author is Liang Lin (Email: linliang@ieee.org).
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
No.2018YFC0830103, in part by the NSFC-Shenzhen Robotics
Projects (U1613211), in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.61702565, in part by National
High Level Talents Special Support Plan (Ten Thousand Talents
Program), in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 18lgpy63, and in part by the Science and Technology Plan of Guangdong Province under Grant
No.2015B010128009.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8594

