The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Implementation of Boolean AND and OR Logic Gates with
Biologically Reasonable Time Constants in Spiking Neural Networks
Lakshay Sahni

Debasrita Chakraborty, Ashish Ghosh

Department of Electrical
& Electronics Engineering
Delhi Technological University, India
layshaysahni 2k14@dtu.ac.in
+91-995321150

Machine Intelligence Unit
Indian Statistical Institute,
Kolkata, India
debasritac@gmail.com
ash@isical.ac.in

Abstract

defined as a pre-synaptic neuron and a receiving neuron as a
post-synaptic neuron. With no activity, neurons have a small
electrical charge, known as the resting potential. When a single spike arrives at a post-synaptic neuron, it generates an
excitatory post-synaptic potential (EPSP). The MP at an instant is calculated as the sum of all present PSPs at the neuron inputs. When the MP reaches a critical threshold value,
a post-synaptic spike is sent out. After a refractory period,
the neuron potential returns to its resting value and is ready
to fire a new spike if MP is above the threshold.
Spiking neurons do not fire at each propagation cycle but
only fire based on their membrane potential. The sum of individual spike trains generated by the pre-synaptic neurons
changes the membrane potential of post-synaptic neurons.
In this proposed model, we combine spike encoding, the
neuron membrane model, and the STDP learning. Since energy consumption is a significant cost factor, we use biologically plausible time constants and mechanism such as exponential synapse with STDP which can be easily used on
neural interface circuits (Benjamin et al. 2014). Researchers
(Reljan-Delaney and Wall 2017) have tried to model AND
gates with SNNs but the results were not good. However,
SNN gave good results for XOR problem. We propose that
using biologically plausible time constants, we can build an
SNN model for logical AND and OR gates efficiently. It was
seen that the proposed model can accurately represents both
the AND and OR gates.

Latest developments in the field of power-efficient neural interface circuits provide an excellent platform for applications
where power consumption is the primary concern. Developing neural networks to achieve pattern recognition on such
hardware remains a daunting task owing to substantial computational complexity. We propose and demonstrate a Spiking Neural Network (SNN) with biologically reasonable time
constants to implement basic Boolean Logic Gates. The same
network can be further applied to more complex problem
statements. We employ a frequency spike encoding for data
representation in the model, and a simplified and computationally efficient model of a neuron with exponential synapses
and Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP).

Introduction
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) (also called third generation of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)) are highly inspired by the Natural Computing in the brain. In contrast
to the standard ANNs which utilize integer or real-valued
inputs, SNNs process data in the form of series of very
short impulses or activation potentials, also known as spike
trains. A spike train is a single bit line switching temporally
between logical levels of ‘0’ and ‘1’. SNNs are therefore
known to incorporate spatial as well as temporal information (Petrović 2013).
Electrical models provide an estimated imitation of a neuron cell. The classic leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) model
(Stoliar et al. 2017) and its generalized form, spike response
model (SRM) (Ourdighi and Benyettou 2016) are widely
used to represent neuron cells computationally. These models can be analyzed as analog components of charging and
discharging RC circuit which can be computationally complex when expressed in digital systems. The SNN model presented in this paper is a feed-forward network. Hence the
output of a signal has a different weighted potential contribution as it reaches to the last neuron. The input signal is
encoded as a spike train and supplied to the input neurons.
The main characteristic of a spiking neuron is the membrane potential (MP). The transmission of a single spike
from one neuron to another is mediated by the point where
neurons interact. In neurobiology, a transmitting neuron is

Approach and Model
In the proposed Spiking Neural Network model STDP learning is employed where, there is a weight change if there is a
pre-synaptic spike in the temporal vicinity of a post-synaptic
spike. If the pre-synaptic spike occurs immediately before
the post-synaptic spike, then the change is positive. Otherwise, the change is negative, as illustrated with the biological
data from (Bi and Poo 2001). Thus, our interest lies in this
temporal range only which induces a change in the synaptic
weights. In our network, each connection between the two
neurons is associated with a delay of d time units, which
is the time difference between the post-synaptic firing time
and the time the pre-synaptic potential starts rising. Since
the model is envisioned to be used in digital systems, time
is counted in discrete units. The membrane potential P (t) is
described as a function of time and is increased by a synap-

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10021

