The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Learning Dynamic Generator Model
by Alternating Back-Propagation through Time
Jianwen Xie,1∗ Ruiqi Gao,2∗ Zilong Zheng,2 Song-Chun Zhu,2 Ying Nian Wu 2
1

Hikvision Research Institute, Santa Clara, USA 2 University of California, Los Angeles, USA

duces the D-dimensional image to a d-dimensional state
vector. The transition model is then learned on the sequence
of d-dimensional state vectors by a first order linear autoregressive model.
Given the high approximation capacity of the modern
deep neural networks, it is natural to replace the linear structures in the transition and emission models of (Doretto et
al. 2003) by the neural networks. This leads to the following dynamic generator model that has the following two
components. (1) The emission model, which is a generator
network that maps the d-dimensional state vector to the Ddimensional image via a top-down deconvolution network.
(2) The transition model, where the state vector of the next
frame is obtained by a non-linear transformation of the state
vector of the current frame as well as an independent Gaussian white noise vector that provides randomness in the transition. The non-linear transformation can be parametrized by
a feedforward neural network or multi-layer perceptron. In
this model, the latent random vectors that generate the observed data are the independent Gaussian noise vectors, also
called innovation vectors in (Doretto et al. 2003). The state
vectors and the images can be deterministically computed
from these noise vectors.

Abstract
This paper studies the dynamic generator model for spatialtemporal processes such as dynamic textures and action sequences in video data. In this model, each time frame of the
video sequence is generated by a generator model, which is
a non-linear transformation of a latent state vector, where the
non-linear transformation is parametrized by a top-down neural network. The sequence of latent state vectors follows a
non-linear auto-regressive model, where the state vector of
the next frame is a non-linear transformation of the state vector of the current frame as well as an independent noise vector that provides randomness in the transition. The non-linear
transformation of this transition model can be parametrized
by a feedforward neural network. We show that this model
can be learned by an alternating back-propagation through
time algorithm that iteratively samples the noise vectors and
updates the parameters in the transition model and the generator model. We show that our training method can learn
realistic models for dynamic textures and action patterns.

1
1.1

Introduction

The model

Most physical phenomena in our visual environments are
spatial-temporal processes. In this paper, we study a generative model for spatial-temporal processes such as dynamic
textures and action sequences in video data. The model is
a non-linear generalization of the linear state space model
proposed by (Doretto et al. 2003) for dynamic textures. The
model of (Doretto et al. 2003) is a hidden Markov model,
which consists of a transition model that governs the transition probability distribution in the state space, and an emission model that generates the observed signal by a mapping from the state space to the signal space. In the model
of (Doretto et al. 2003), the transition model is an autoregressive model in the d-dimensional state space, and the
emission model is a linear mapping from the d-dimensional
state vector to the D-dimensional image. In (Doretto et al.
2003), the emission model is learned by treating all the
frames of the input video sequence as independent observations, and the linear mapping is learned by principal component analysis via singular value decomposition. This re-

1.2

The learning algorithm

Such dynamic models have been studied in the computer vision literature recently, notably (Tulyakov et al. 2017). However, the models are usually trained by the generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) with an extra discriminator network that seeks to distinguish between
the observed data and the synthesized data generated by the
dynamic model. Such a model may also be learned by variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014) together with an inference model that infers the sequence of
noise vectors from the sequence of observed frames. Such
an inference model may require a sophisticated design.
In this paper, we show that it is possible to learn the model
on its own using an alternating back-propagation through
time (ABPTT) algorithm, without recruiting a separate discriminator model or an inference model. The ABPTT algorithm iterates the following two steps. (1) Inferential backpropagation through time, which samples the sequence of
noise vectors given the observed video sequence using the
Langevin dynamics, where the gradient of the log posterior

∗

Equal contributions
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5498

