The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Policy Optimization with Model-Based Explorations
Feiyang Pan,∗1,2† Qingpeng Cai,∗3‡ An-Xiang Zeng,4 Chun-Xiang Pan,4 Qing Da,4
Hualin He,4 Qing He,1,2† Pingzhong Tang3‡
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China. {panfeiyang, heqing}@ict.ac.cn
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
3
IIIS, Tsinghua University. cqp14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, kenshinping@gmail.com
4
Alibaba Group. {renzhong, xuanran}@taobao.com, {daqing.dq, hualin.hhl}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

state-action value function (also known as the Q-function),
on the other hand, it optimizes or improves the policy to
maximize its performance measure.
There are two classes of reinforcement learning methods,
model-free and model-based methods. Model-free methods
(Peters and Schaal 2006) estimate and iteratively update the
state-action value with the rollout samples by Temporal Difference learning (Sutton and Barto 1998). It is said that
model-based methods maintain an approximate model including the reward functions and the state transitions, and
then use the approximated rewards and transitions to estimate the value function. Model-based methods are more
efficient than model-free methods (Li and Todorov 2004;
Levine and Koltun 2013; Montgomery and Levine 2016;
Wahlström, Schön, and Desienroth 2015; Watter et al. 2015)
especially in discrete environments by reducing the sample
complexity. Model-free methods are more generally applicable to continuous and complex control problems but may
suffer from high sample complexity (Schulman et al. 2015;
Lillicrap et al. 2015).
Model-free methods directly use the immediate rewards
and next states from rollout samples and estimate the longterm state-action value by Temporal Difference learning,
for example, Sarsa or Q-learning (Sutton and Barto 1998).
Therefore, the target value is unbiased but may induce large
variance due to the randomness of the transition dynamics or the off-policy stochastic exploration strategy. Modelbased methods use the prediction of the immediate reward
and the next state by its own belief of the environment. The
belief of the agent, including the approximate reward function and transition model, is updated after receiving more
signals from the environment. So the estimated target value
in model-based methods is often biased due to the approximation error of the model, but it has low variance compared with model-free methods. Combining model-based
and model-free learning has been an important question in
the recent literature.
We aim to answer the following question: How to incorporate model-based and model-free methods for better control?
The Dyna-Q (Sutton 1990), Normalized Advantage Function (NAF) algorithm (Gu et al. 2016), and Model-Ensemble
Trust-Region Policy Optimization (ME-TRPO) algorithm
(Kurutach et al. 2018) use simulated experiences in a learned

Model-free reinforcement learning methods such as the Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm (PPO) have successfully
applied in complex decision-making problems such as Atari
games. However, these methods suffer from high variances
and high sample complexity. On the other hand, model-based
reinforcement learning methods that learn the transition dynamics are more sample efficient, but they often suffer from
the bias of the transition estimation. How to make use of both
model-based and model-free learning is a central problem in
reinforcement learning.
In this paper, we present a new technique to address the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation, which regards the
difference between model-free and model-based estimations
as a measure of exploration value. We apply this new technique to the PPO algorithm and arrive at a new policy optimization method, named Policy Optimization with Modelbased Explorations (POME). POME uses two components
to predict the actions’ target values: a model-free one estimated by Monte-Carlo sampling and a model-based one
which learns a transition model and predicts the value of the
next state. POME adds the error of these two target estimations as the additional exploration value for each state-action
pair, i.e, encourages the algorithm to explore the states with
larger target errors which are hard to estimate. We compare
POME with PPO on Atari 2600 games, and it shows that
POME outperforms PPO on 33 games out of 49 games.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning focuses on maximizing long-term
return by interacting with the environment sequentially (Sutton and Barto 1998). Generally, a reinforcement learning algorithm has two aspects, on the one hand, it estimates the
∗

These authors contributed equally in this work.
The research was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2017YFB1002104, the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 61602438, 91546122, 61573335, Guangdong provincial science and technology plan projects under Grant
No. 2015 B010109005.
‡
Pingzhong Tang and Qingpeng Cai were supported in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant
61561146398, a China Youth 1000-talent program and an Alibaba
Innovative Research program.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

4675

