The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Deep Cascade Multi-Task Learning for Slot Filling in Online Shopping Assistant
Yu Gong,1∗ Xusheng Luo,1∗ Yu Zhu,1 Wenwu Ou,1 Zhao Li,1 Muhua Zhu,1
Kenny Q. Zhu,2 Lu Duan,3 Xi Chen1
1

Search Algorithm Team, Alibaba Group
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Artificial Intelligence Department, Zhejiang Cainiao Supply Chain Management Co.
{gongyu.gy, lxs140564, zy143829, lizhao.lz, muhua.zmh}@alibaba-inc.com,
{santong.oww, gongda.cx}@taobao.com, kzhu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, duanlu.dl@cainiao.com
Abstract

labeled as Property Key (PK), which is the name of one
product property. “Nike” and “black” are labeled as Property
Value (PV) since they are concrete property values. However, merely labeling as Property Value is not sufficient as
the shopping assistant needs more fine-grained semantics.
Therefore, in the Slot Filling level, we further label “Nike”
as Brand Property (Brand), and “black” as Color Property
(Color). In Table 1, B-CG refers to Begin-Category (the
meaning of other labels can also be inferred). In the meantime, other words in the example utterance that carry no semantic meaning are assigned O label.

Slot filling is a critical task in natural language understanding
(NLU) for dialog systems. State-of-the-art approaches treat
it as a sequence labeling problem and adopt such models as
BiLSTM-CRF. While these models work relatively well on
standard benchmark datasets, they face challenges in the context of E-commerce where the slot labels are more informative and carry richer expressions. In this work, inspired by
the unique structure of E-commerce knowledge base, we propose a novel multi-task model with cascade and residual connections, which jointly learns segment tagging, named entity
tagging and slot filling. Experiments show the effectiveness
of the proposed cascade and residual structures. Our model
has a 14.6% advantage in F1 score over the strong baseline
methods on a new Chinese E-commerce shopping assistant
dataset, while achieving competitive accuracies on a standard
dataset. Furthermore, online test deployed on such dominant
E-commerce platform shows 130% improvement on accuracy
of understanding user utterances. Our model has already gone
into production in the E-commerce platform.

1

Category

Dress

T-shirt

…

Skirt

Property Key

Brand

Color

…

Style

Property Value

Nike,
Adidas,
…

Black,
Red,
…

…

Sexy,
Cute,
…

Introduction
Figure 1: Structure of E-commerce knowledge-base.

An intelligent online shopping assistant offers services such
as pre-sale and after-sale inquiries, product recommendations, and user complaints processing, all of which seek to
give the customers better shopping experience. The core of
such assistant is a task-oriented dialog system which has
the ability to understand natural language utterances from
a user and then give natural language responses (Yan et al.
2017). Natural Language Understanding (NLU), which aims
to interpret the semantic meanings conveyed by input utterances, is a main component in task-oriented dialog systems.
Slot filling, a sub-problem of NLU, extracts semantic constituents by using the words of input utterance to fill in predefined slots in a semantic frame (Mesnil et al. 2015).
In the case of E-commerce shopping, there are three
named entity types: Category, Property Key and Property
Value, according to typical E-commerce knowledge base
such as the one in Figure 1. We show a real example in
Table 1 with In/Out/Begin (I/O/B) scheme. In the named
entity level, “dress” is a Category (CG), while “brand” is

Traditionally, slot filling problem can be regarded as a sequence labeling task, which assigns an appropriate semantic label to each word in the given input utterance. Stateof-the-art sequence labeling models are typically based on
BiLSTM-CRF (Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015; Reimers and
Gurevych 2017) and evaluated on a commonly used standard dataset ATIS (Price 1990) in the slot filling area. This
dataset is about airline travel in the United States. However,
the vocabulary size of ATIS is small (only 572) and slot labels are not diverse enough (mostly related to only time and
location) since airline travel is a relatively small and specific
domain, such that recent deep learning models can achieve
very high F1 scores (nearly 0.96). Recently, a detailed quantitative and qualitative study of this dataset comes to the
same conclusion that slot filling models should be tested on a
much more real and complex dataset (Béchet and Raymond
2018).
In this paper, we try to tackle a real-world slot filling problem for one of the largest E-commerce platform in China.
The semantic slots are much more diverse and informative

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Equal contribution.

6465

