The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A Generative Model for Dynamic Networks with Applications
Shubham Gupta, Gaurav Sharma, Ambedkar Dukkipati
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore - 560012, India
email: {shubhamg, ambedkar}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract

given node) and gradually evolving networks. Many real
world networks such as friendship networks, communication networks etc., fall in this category.
We propose a generative model, which we call Evolving Latent Space Model (ELSM), for dynamic networks
of the type mentioned above. The main advantage of our
model over existing models (Xing, Fu, and Song 2010;
Foulds et al. 2011; Heaukulani and Ghahramani 2013;
Kim and Leskovec 2013; Xu and Hero 2014), is that our
model uses a more flexible, continuous latent space and we
allow the number of communities to vary over time (also
supported by (Kim and Leskovec 2013)). It also allows one
to generate a dynamic graph with a temporally stable community structure. The purpose of proposing this generative
model is three-folds: (i) it will help in understanding how
networks evolve over time, (ii) it will provide synthetic data
for other dynamic community detection and link prediction
algorithms to operate on and (iii) it will allow model based
inference for problems like community detection and link
prediction.
Though ELSM can be used both as a generative model
and an inference model, for the inference problem, we propose a simplified version of our model that is computationally less expensive. This model can be used exclusively
for inference and we refer to it as iELSM. Inference in
ELSM is given in supplementary material (Gupta, Sharma,
and Dukkipati 2018). Exact inference in ELSM and iELSM
is intractable, thus we resort to variational techniques for
performing approximate inference. We use a recurrent neural network (RNN) to model various variational parameters.
We also present an extension of our model that deals with
weighted graphs in the experiments section (§5).
Our main contributions are: (i) We propose a generative
model (ELSM) for dynamic networks with fixed number of
nodes that allows the number of communities to vary over
time. (ii) We derive a variational approximation to exact inference in ELSM and iELSM and use a neural network architecture to learn variational parameters. (iii) We outline
a general inference methodology that can be customized in
various ways by using problem specific information. (iv) We
demonstrate the applicability of proposed model and inference methodology by performing experiments on real and
synthetic networks for community detection and link prediction where we obtain state of the art results.

Networks observed in real world like social networks, collaboration networks etc., exhibit temporal dynamics, i.e. nodes
and edges appear and/or disappear over time. In this paper,
we propose a generative, latent space based, statistical model
for such networks (called dynamic networks). We consider
the case where the number of nodes is fixed, but the presence
of edges can vary over time. Our model allows the number of
communities in the network to be different at different time
steps. We use a neural network based methodology to perform
approximate inference in the proposed model and its simplified version. Experiments done on synthetic and real world
networks for the task of community detection and link prediction demonstrate the utility and effectiveness of our model
as compared to other similar existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Many networks encountered in real world evolve with time,
i.e. new nodes and edges appear while some existing ones
disappear. For example, consider the network of people connected via Facebook, where the users and their interactions
change over time. It is interesting to study the underlying
dynamics of such networks to understand what drives these
changes, how communities are formed, how will a network
behave in future and what has lead to the current state of the
network etc.
In static network setting, one of the problems that has
been extensively studied is community detection (Fortunato
2010). In a dynamic setting, this problem becomes more
challenging since communities themselves take birth, meet
death, grow, shrink, split and merge etc. (Rossetti and Cazabet 2017). In this paper, we address the problem of modeling
dynamic networks that exhibit a community structure where
the number of nodes is invariant over time but the presence
of edges is time dependent.
A wide range of dynamic networks with different characteristics can be found in real world. In order to model these
networks in a meaningful way, it is essential to focus on certain specific types of networks. In this paper, we consider
undirected (edges are not directional), assortative (similar
types of nodes have a high probability of connecting), positive influence based (adjacent nodes positively influence a
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7842

