The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Less but Better: Generalization Enhancement
of Ordinal Embedding via Distributional Margin
Ke Ma,1,2 Qianqian Xu,3 Zhiyong Yang,1,2 Xiaochun Cao1,2∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{make, yangzhiyong, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
Abstract

ature has emerged, which is the comparison-based embedding. Instead of evaluating similarity directly, we collect the
similarity comparisons as follows:
“Is the similarity between object i and j larger than the
similarity between l and k?”
The corresponding problem is ordinal embedding. These
two types of supervision information, numerical similarities and relative comparisons, are all generated by human
beings. Nevertheless, the latter one provides similarity estimates on a relative scale instead of the absolute scale. The
comparison-based setting is a special case of the observation
that humans are better at comparing two stimuli than at identifying a single one (Stewart, Brown, and Chater 2005). Consequently, the relative comparison is a more reliable form for
incorporating human knowledge with artificial intelligence
tasks.
The ordinal embedding problem was firstly studied by
(Shepard 1962a; 1962b; Kruskal 1964a; 1964b) in the psychometric society. In recent years, it has drawn a lot of attention (Schultz and Joachims 2003; Agarwal et al. 2007;
Tamuz et al. 2011; van der Maaten and Weinberger 2012;
Terada and Luxburg 2014; Amid and Ukkonen 2015; Heim
et al. 2015; Jain, Jamieson, and Nowak 2016; Ma et al.
2018). One class of these typical methods is margin-based
ordinal embedding which solves the problem under the classification framework. The well-known Generalized NonMetric Multidimensional Scaling (GNMDS) (Agarwal et al.
2007) aims at finding a Gram matrix G such that the pairwise distances of embedded points satisfy the partial order constraints. Stochastic Triplet Embedding (STE/TSTE)
(van der Maaten and Weinberger 2012) is proposed to jointly
penalize the violated constraints and reward the satisfied
constraints via logistic loss. Multi-view Triplet Embedding
(MTE) (Amid and Ukkonen 2015) decomposes the STE
objective function as different components and re-weights
them for a better explanation. The other class of ordinal
embedding methods uses the nearest neighbor graphs to
model the similarity comparisons. Structure Preserving Embedding (SPE) (Shaw and Jebara 2009) and Local Ordinal
Embedding (LOE) (Terada and Luxburg 2014) embed unweighted nearest neighbor graphs to Euclidean spaces with
convex and non-convex objective functions. The nearest
neighbor adjacency matrix can be transformed into ordinal
constraints, but it is not a standard equipment in comparison-

In the absence of prior knowledge, ordinal embedding methods obtain new representation for items in a low-dimensional
Euclidean space via a set of quadruple-wise comparisons.
These ordinal comparisons often come from human annotators, and sufficient comparisons induce the success of classical approaches. However, collecting a large number of labeled data is known as a hard task, and most of the existing work pay little attention to the generalization ability with insufficient samples. Meanwhile, recent progress in
large margin theory discloses that rather than just maximizing the minimum margin, both the margin mean and variance,
which characterize the margin distribution, are more crucial
to the overall generalization performance. To address the issue of insufficient training samples, we propose a margin distribution learning paradigm for ordinal embedding, entitled
Distributional Margin based Ordinal Embedding (DMOE).
Precisely, we first define the margin for ordinal embedding
problem. Secondly, we formulate a concise objective function which avoids maximizing margin mean and minimizing margin variance directly but exhibits the similar effect.
Moreover, an Augmented Lagrange Multiplier based algorithm is customized to seek the optimal solution of DMOE
effectively. Experimental studies on both simulated and realworld datasets are provided to show the effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm.

The problem of analyzing a set of n objects given similarity information is an inherent part in a broad variety of
tasks in artificial intelligence (Heikinheimo and Ukkonen
2013; Wilber, Kwak, and Belongie 2014), machine learning (Jamieson and Nowak 2011; Kleindessner and Luxburg
2014; Arias-Castro 2017; Kleindessner and von Luxburg
2017), information retrieval (Liu et al. 2016), data mining
(Le and Lauw 2016) and computer vision (Wilber et al.
2015). Many algorithms are based on the assumption that
‘similar’ inputs should generate ‘close’ outputs. In a numerical setting of embedding, a similarity function (or, equivalently, a dissimilarity function) quantifies how ‘similar’ objects are to others. The required input is the distance or similarity matrix of items. We calculate a set of embedded points
which aims to preserve such similarities as well as possible.
However, in recent years a whole new branch of the liter∗

The corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2978

