The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Measurement Maximizing Adaptive Sampling with Risk Bounding Functions
Benjamin Ayton, Brian Williams

Richard Camilli

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{aytonb, williams}@mit.edu

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute
rcamilli@whoi.edu

Abstract

Such missions are performed because the environment is
not well understood. New measurements contribute to an
improved understanding as they are received, and impact the
future of the mission. We require an adaptive system that is
capable of updating its plan in response to new measurements to direct it towards high reward locations.
However, disturbances and noises acting on an agent
make safe autonomous exploration difficult. In underwater applications, the seafloor surface is often known relatively well, but uncertainty in position accumulates due to
unknown currents and inaccuracy in on-board inertial navigation. Navigating close to obstacles incurs some probability of collision, leading to failure, but it is often impossible
to conduct a mission without accepting some level of risk.
There is therefore a tradeoff between allowed risk and expected reward over which the autonomous system should be
able to reason.
In this paper, we describe a method of planning an adaptive policy that maximizes the expected reward of samples,
while limiting the probability of failure of the policy. We
define a method of specifying tolerance for failure as a function of reward through a risk bounding function, and enforce the chance constraint that the expected rate of failure
is bounded by the risk bounding function applied to the expected reward. Our method is based on Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS), which allows a solution to be found in an
anytime manner, making it suitable for on-board autonomy
or missions with tight time constraints. Furthermore, we are
able to provably enforce the chance constraint without planning for all measurements explicitly, and without limiting
allowed probability of failure based only on observations.

In autonomous exploration a mobile agent must adapt to new
measurements to seek high reward, but disturbances cause a
probability of collision that must be traded off against expected reward. This paper considers an autonomous agent
tasked with maximizing measurements from a Gaussian Process while subject to unbounded disturbances. We seek an
adaptive policy in which the maximum allowed probability
of failure is constrained as a function of the expected reward.
The policy is found using an extension to Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) which bounds probability of failure. We apply MCTS to a sequence of approximating problems, which
allows constraint satisfying actions to be found in an anytime manner. Our innovation lies in defining the approximating problems and replanning strategy such that the probability of failure constraint is guaranteed to be satisfied over the
true policy. The approach does not need to plan for all measurements explicitly or constrain planning based only on the
measurements that were observed. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the first to enforce probability of failure constraints in adaptive sampling. Through experiments on
real bathymetric data and simulated measurements, we show
our algorithm allows an agent to take dangerous actions only
when the reward justifies the risk. We then verify through
Monte Carlo simulations that failure bounds are satisfied.

Introduction
A common mission in environment exploration is identification and confirmation of high reward regions. In underwater exploration, for example, autonomous vehicles may be
tasked with locating regions with high temperatures, algal
and plankton blooms, or high concentrations of pollutants
or hydrocarbons for the purpose of identifying suitable locations for follow-up studies. When these follow-up studies
are expensive and time consuming, for example involving
the transportation and setup of expensive equipment, it is insufficient to minimize global uncertainty because the costs
associated with performing the follow-up study at a location
falsely believed to be valuable may exceed the costs of the
initial autonomous sampling mission. Instead, samples must
be taken at potential sites to confirm their importance, with
a higher measurement being more valuable.

Related Work
Adaptive sampling tasks an agent with exploring an environment that is unknown. The environment is either characterized by a known uncertainty field (Hollinger and Sukhatme
2014; Yilmaz et al. 2008), or described by a stochastic
process such as a Gaussian Process (GP) (Binney, Krause,
and Sukhatme 2010; Krause, Singh, and Guestrin 2008;
Low, Dolan, and Khosla 2009). It is typical to discretize
available actions and perform discrete space search, though
notable exceptions exist, including using Rapidly Exploring
Random Trees (Hollinger and Sukhatme 2014) or genetic algorithms (Hitz et al. 2017). We will assume a GP model and

Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7511

