The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Towards Task Understanding in Visual Settings
Sebastin Santy, Wazeer Zulfikar

Rishabh Mehrotra

Emine Yilmaz

BITS Pilani KK Birla Goa Campus, India
f20150{357, 003}@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in
+1(412)708-5517, +91-7774031034

Spotify Research
London, United Kingdom
rishabhm@spotify.com

University College London
London, United Kingdom
emine.yilmaz@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

task present in the scene while simultaneously preserving the
context, as opposed to synthesizing a verbose description.
We jointly leverage insights from recent advancements in
deep convolutional architectures and hierarchical task ontologies, and propose a two phase model to suggest scene task
descriptions. The convolutional architecture generates contextual labels from the image, while the task extractor maps
these labels to real world tasks. We leverage the TaskHierarchy138K 1 ontology which contains ‘tasks’ and keywords associated with each of these ‘tasks’ in a hierarchical structure,
with a complex task often decomposed into simpler sub-tasks.
Detailed experiments based on both qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that our method not only helps
in extracting task information, but also provides more useful descriptions when compared with state-of-the-art image
description approaches.

We consider the problem of understanding real world tasks depicted in visual images. While most existing image captioning
methods excel in producing natural language descriptions of
visual scenes involving human tasks, there is often the need
for an understanding of the exact task being undertaken rather
than a literal description of the scene. We leverage insights
from real world task understanding systems, and propose a
framework composed of convolutional neural networks, and
an external hierarchical task ontology to produce task descriptions from input images. Detailed experiments highlight the
efficacy of the extracted descriptions, which could potentially
find their way in many applications, including image alt text
generation.

Introduction
A substantial portion of real world images depict a human
task; for example, Figure 2 shows tasks like pitching a baseball, building lego toys or playing a guitar. While humans are
efficient at understanding and describing the task intent by
just a quick glance at a visual scene, most image captioning
systems are only able to generate plain description of the
different visual elements in the image. Especially in the cases
of highly complex tasks, predicting task intent may involve
more than just generating a plain description of the scene.
Understanding the task context in visual scenes is indeed important in a number of application settings, including image
alt text generation, image suggestions or image search.
While a lot of work has gone into generating image descriptions, most prior work (Bernardi and Cakici 2016) have
used visual and multi-modal space to assist the generation
of a dense natural language description which allow for a
more expressive prediction. Often times such detailed descriptions of the different visual elements are not required but
a minimal explanation as to what is happening in the image
suffices.Such task-based captions help in keeping the description more technical and contextual. For example, “Pitch a
Baseball” is an apt minimal replacement to “baseball player
is throwing ball in game.” in Figure 2, while being more
technical, contextual and maintaining brevity. Our method
primarily aims to improve existing methods by specifically
overcoming this limitation by trying to precisely predict the
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Approach
In order to extract the tasks depicted in an image, we propose
a two phased model: i) Multi-label classification of scenes to
generate input labels for the task extractor and ii) Leveraging
external hierarchical ontology for task identification by task
extractor.
For image classification, we train the deep Inception v4
architecture (Szegedy et al. 2017) which is capable of detecting 1000 categories and fine-tune the network for multi-label
contextual classification of the scene. The input image is fed
to this classifier to obtain contextual labels along with their
respective confidence scores. The labels generated by the
classifier is further processed to filter out redundant information, and the resulting filtered set of labels is then passed to
the task extractor module. Given the labels of the image, the
task extractor will probe into a task hierarchy to suggest tasks.
In order to infer the task, we leverage TaskHierarchy138K,
which is an external task ontology that uses Wikihow articles
to provide task information for over 100k real world tasks.
Each node in this hierarchy represents a WikiHow category,
with its children nodes representing its subcategories. A node
k contains a Representative embedding hRk and an Average
Embedding hAk . hRk is an average embedding of the articles
Pn=|children(k)|
present in node k. hAk is n1 i=1
hAi which is
1

10027

https://usercontext.github.io/TaskHierarchy138K/

