The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

Template-Based Math Word Problem Solvers with Recursive Neural Networks
Lei Wang,1 Dongxiang Zhang,1,2∗ Jipeng Zhang,1 Xing Xu,1,2 Lianli Gao,1 Bing Tian Dai,3 Heng Tao Shen1
1

Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science & Engineering, UESTC
2
Afanti Research
3
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University
{demolwang,zhangjipeng20}@std.uestc.edu.cn, {zhangdo,xing.xu,lianli.gao}@uestc.edu.cn
btdai@smu.edu.sg, shenhengtao@hotmail.com
Abstract
The design of automatic solvers to arithmetic math word
problems has attracted considerable attention in recent years
and a large number of datasets and methods have been published. Among them, Math23K is the largest data corpus that
is very helpful to evaluate the generality and robustness of
a proposed solution. The best performer in Math23K is a
seq2seq model based on LSTM to generate the math expression. However, the model suffers from performance degradation in large space of target expressions. In this paper, we
propose a template-based solution based on recursive neural
network for math expression construction. More specifically,
we first apply a seq2seq model to predict a tree-structure template, with inferred numbers as leaf nodes and unknown operators as inner nodes. Then, we design a recursive neural
network to encode the quantity with Bi-LSTM and self attention, and infer the unknown operator nodes in a bottom-up
manner. The experimental results clearly establish the superiority of our new framework as we improve the accuracy by
a wide margin in two of the largest datasets, i.e., from 58.1%
to 66.9% in Math23K and from 62.8% to 66.8% in MAWPS.

Figure 1: An example of math word problem.

can achieve satisfactory results on small-scale datasets, yet
they require considerable manual efforts for feature extraction and template annotation. Furthermore, as evaluated
by (Huang et al. 2016), these methods exhibit low generality
and robustness. They suffer from sharp performance degradation when handling large and diversified datasets.
To reduce human intervention and enable the automatic
extraction of discriminative features, applying deep learning
(DL) models in MWPs has become a promising research direction. (Wang, Liu, and Shi 2017) proposed an end-to-end
framework that converts the input of question text into the
output of math expression. It is then a natural idea to apply a
seq2seq model to encode the text input and decode the hidden features into a math expression. The drawback is that
the seq2seq model is a black-box that lacks interpretability
and it cannot guarantee the output is in valid math format
and normally requires a post-processing step. (Wang et al.
2018b) modeled the math expression as a tree structure and
made the first attempt to apply deep reinforcement learning
for iterative tree construction. However, it still requires manual feature extraction to design the state representation.
In this paper, we propose a new math problem solver
that combines the merits of (Wang, Liu, and Shi 2017) and
(Wang et al. 2018b), i.e., we apply deep neural networks
for discriminative feature extraction and leverage the concept of expression tree for answer generation. In this way,
we can avoid human intervention and leverage expression

Introduction
Developing computer systems to automatically solve math
word problems (MWPs) has been studied by NLP researchers since the 1960s (Feigenbaum and Feldman 1963;
Bobrow 1964). It requires mapping the human-readable
words into machine-understandable logic forms, followed
by an inference procedure to derive the numeric answer. An
example of math word problem is illustrated in Figure 1.
The unknown variable x refers to the weight of an apple and
the math expression involves basic arithmetic operators such
as − and /. To solve the problem, we need to identify the
relevant quantities from the text and determine the correct
operators and computation order among these numbers.
Previous research efforts have been mainly based on
statistical machine learning (Kushman et al. 2014; Amnueypornsakul and Bhat 2014; Zhou, Dai, and Chen 2015;
Mitra and Baral 2016; Roy and Roth 2018) and semantic parsing (Shi et al. 2015; Koncel-Kedziorski et al. 2015;
Roy and Roth 2015; Huang et al. 2017). These methods
∗

Corresponding Author: Dongxiang Zhang
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7144

