The Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-19)

A2 -Net: Molecular Structure Estimation from Cryo-EM Density Volumes
Kui Xu,1 Zhe Wang,2 Jianping Shi,2 Hongsheng Li,3 Qiangfeng Cliff Zhang1
1

Tsinghua University
SenseTime Research
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xuk16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {wangzhe, shijianping}@sensetime.com, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, qczhang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

EMD: 6551

Abstract
Constructing of molecular structural models from CryoElectron Microscopy (Cryo-EM) density volumes is the critical last step of structure determination by Cryo-EM technologies. Methods have evolved from manual construction
by structural biologists to perform 6D translation-rotation
searching, which is extremely compute-intensive. In this paper, we propose a learning-based method and formulate this
problem as a vision-inspired 3D detection and pose estimation task. We develop a deep learning framework for amino
acid determination in a 3D Cryo-EM density volume. We also
design a sequence-guided Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
to thread over the candidate amino acids to form the molecular structure. This framework achieves 91% coverage on our
newly proposed dataset and takes only a few minutes for a
typical structure with a thousand amino acids. Our method is
hundreds of times faster and several times more accurate than
existing automated solutions without any human intervention.

3D
Reconstruction

Cryo-EM Images

CorA (PDB: 3JCF)

Molecular Model
Building

Density Volume

Atomic Structure

Figure 1: The overview of resolving 3D atomic structures.

this process include Rosetta (Wang et al. 2015) (we named
as Rosetta-denovo), RosettaES (Frenz et al. 2017), Phinex
(Adams et al. 2010) and EMAN2 (Tang et al. 2007). However, their accuracy and coverage remain quite limited, often
take hundreds of hours and frequently require human intervention.
We approached this task from a novel perspective, inspired by the great success of deep learning applications
in image recognition (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012), we choose to approach this task from a totally novel
perspective. The molecular structure determination problem,
in our view, can be considered as three sub-problems: 1)
amino acid detection in the density volumes, 2) atomic coordinates assignment to determine the atomic coordinates of
each amino acid and, 3) main chain threading to resolve the
sequential order of amino acids that form each protein chain.
Leveraging the power of deep Convolutional Neural Network (Srivastava, Greff, and Schmidhuber 2015), we reformulated the problem and developed a novel framework
for amino acid detection that learns the distribution of conformational densities of individual amino acids. Moreover,
we designed a sequence-guided neighbor loss in training
step to encode prior knowledge of protein sequences into
amino acid detection. We also propose an MCTS algorithm
to search and thread over the amino acids to form the full
molecular structure. Our approach to molecular structure determination does not require human intervention and, when
tested on a newly proposed large-scale dataset, it runs hundreds of times faster, and more accurately than existing
methods. Finally, to the best of our knowledge, there remains
no publicly available large-scale labeled dataset for the research of molecular structure determination from Cryo-EM
density volumes. The dataset we collected and used in this

Introduction
Resolving the 3D atomic structures of macro molecules is
of fundamental importance to biological and medical research. Single particle Cryo-EM has emerged as a revolutionary technique that images biomolecules frozen in their
native (or native-like) states. With Cryo-EM, 2D projection
images are firstly collected and then reconstructed into a volumetric data, i.e., density volume, by software tools such as
Relion (Scheres 2012) and cryoSparc (Punjani et al. 2017;
Punjani, Brubaker, and Fleet 2017; Brubaker, Punjani, and
Fleet 2015). Next, a molecular model that represents the
atomic coordinates of each amino acid, the building blocks
of protein molecules, is constructed and fitted into the 3D
density volume (Fig. 1).
Despite the steady progresses towards automatic CryoEM structure determination, molecular model building remains a bottleneck. This step is difficult to automate since
it relies substantially on human expertise. Structural biology experts are needed to manually assign specific amino
acids to a density volume, with the help of 3D visualization tools, such as Chimera (Pettersen et al. 2004) and Coot
(Emsley et al. 2010). These manual operations are also timeconsuming and inevitably error-prone. Attempts to automate
c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Copyright ⃝
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1230

